 The Allman Brothers Band placed more emphasis on their live performances rather than albums . " We get kind of frustrated doing the [ studio ] records , " said Duane Allman in 1970 . Consequently , this listing includes all studio albums and major live releases ( several other live releases have been issued retrospectively ) . 
 The Allman Brothers Band ( 1969 ) 
 Idlewild South ( 1970 ) 
 At Fillmore East ( 1971 ) 
 Eat a Peach ( 1972 ) 
 Brothers and Sisters ( 1973 ) 
 Win , Lose or Draw ( 1975 ) 
 Wipe the Windows , Check the Oil , Dollar Gas ( 1976 ) 
 Enlightened Rogues ( 1979 ) 
 Reach for the Sky ( 1980 ) 
 Brothers of the Road ( 1981 ) 
 Seven Turns ( 1990 ) 
 Shades of Two Worlds ( 1991 ) 
 An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band : First Set ( 1992 ) 
 Where It All Begins ( 1994 ) 
 An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band : 2nd Set ( 1995 ) 
 <unk> ' at the Beacon ( 2000 ) 
 Hittin ' the Note ( 2003 ) 
 One Way Out ( 2004 ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Members 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = Kim Ki @-@ young = 
 Kim Ki @-@ young ( October 10 , 1919 – February 5 , 1998 ) was a South Korean film director , known for his intensely psychosexual and melodramatic horror films , often focusing on the psychology of their female characters . Kim was born in Seoul during the colonial period , raised in Pyongyang , where he became interested in theater and cinema . In Korea after the end of World War II , he studied dentistry while becoming involved in the theater . During the Korean War , he made propaganda films for the United States Information Service . In 1955 , he used discarded movie equipments to produce his first two films . With the success of these two films Kim formed his own production company and produced popular melodramas for the rest of the decade . 
 Kim Ki @-@ young 's first expression of his mature style was in his The Housemaid ( 1960 ) , which featured a powerful femme fatale character . It is widely considered to be one of the best Korean films of all time . After a " Golden Age " during the 1960s , the 1970s were a low @-@ point in the history of Korean cinema because of governmental censorship and a decrease in audience attendance . Nevertheless , working independently , Kim produced some of his most eccentric cinematic creations in this era . Films such as Insect Woman ( 1972 ) and <unk> ( 1977 ) were successful at the time and highly influential on the younger generations of South Korean filmmakers both at their time of release , and with their rediscovery years later . By the 1980s , Kim 's popularity had gone into decline , and his output decreased in the second half of the decade . Neglected by the mainstream during much of the 1990s , Kim became a cult figure in South Korean film Internet forums in the early 1990s . Widespread international interest in his work was stimulated by a career retrospective at the 1997 Pusan International Film Festival . Kim 's films , previously little @-@ known or totally unknown outside South Korea , were shown and gained enthusiastic new audiences in the United States , Germany , France and elsewhere . He was preparing a come @-@ back film when he and his wife were killed in a house fire in 1998 . The Berlin International Film Festival gave Kim a posthumous retrospective in 1998 , and the French Cinémathèque screened 18 of Kim 's films , some newly rediscovered and restored , in 2006 . Through the efforts of the Korean Film Council ( KOFIC ) , previously lost films by Kim Ki @-@ young continue to be rediscovered and restored . Many current prominent South Korean filmmakers , including directors Im Sang @-@ soo , Kim Ki @-@ duk , Bong Joon @-@ ho and Park Chan @-@ wook , claim Kim Ki @-@ young as an influence on their careers . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Kim Ki @-@ young was born in the Gyo @-@ dong neighborhood of Seoul — now part of <unk> @-@ dong in <unk> @-@ gu — on October 10 , 1922 . His family had lived in Seoul for several generations , and his grandfather was a guard at <unk> . Kim 's family was well @-@ educated and artistically inclined . His father , Kim Seok @-@ jin , was an English teacher , and his mother , Han Jin @-@ cho , was also a teacher and a graduate of Gyeonggi Women 's College . Both painted as a hobby . The family had two daughters , and Kim Ki @-@ young was their only son . One of his sisters graduated as an art major from Seoul National University , and the other majored in dance at Ewha Womans University . His sisters encouraged the young Kim to develop his own creativity . The family moved to Pyongyang in 1930 , where they stayed for the next 10 years . At Pyongyang National High School , Kim showed exceptional talent in music , painting and writing , and his studious nature earned him the nickname " Professor of Physics " . While still a student , one of Kim 's poems was published in a Japanese newspaper , and he was awarded first prize in a painting competition . 
 Despite his artistic talents , Kim 's main interest was medicine , and he applied for entrance into medical school upon graduation from high school in 1940 . When he failed to gain admittance , Kim moved to Japan , planning to study and save up money to reapply for medical school . The theater and cinema grew into lifetime interests at this time . Kim often went to Kyoto , where he attended many stage productions and saw many international films . Josef von Sternberg 's Morocco ( 1930 ) and Fritz Lang 's M ( 1931 ) made a particularly strong impression on him , and their influence was to show in his mature film style . 
 Kim returned to Korea in 1941 , initially planning to work as a dentist , but instead immersing himself in the study of drama . At this time he was particularly interested in classical Greek theater , Ibsen and Eugene O 'Neill . To avoid conscription by the Japanese into the military , Kim returned to Japan briefly before 1945 . He returned to Pyongyang where he studied Stanislavsky 's theories of acting and founded a theatrical group called " The Little Orchid " . In 1946 Kim enrolled in Seoul Medical School , Seoul National University , and graduated with a major in dentistry in 1950 . While attending university , his theatrical activities continued . He founded the National University Theater in 1949 , and with this group staged many works of the Western theater , including Ibsen 's Ghosts , Čapek 's Robots , Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice , and works by Chekhov and O 'Neill . The main actress Kim worked with while at the university was Kim Yu @-@ bong , who would later become his wife . 
 = = = Film career = = = 
 Kim was working as an intern at Seoul University Medical Clinic when the Korean War broke out . He went to Pusan on June 1 , 1951 , the day the North Korean army retreated . In Pusan , Kim met Oh Young @-@ jin , a fellow Pyongyang National High School graduate . Oh , who would later write the screenplay to the popular film The Wedding Day ( 1956 ) , was producing newsreels for the Korean News through the Bureau of Public Information , and helped Kim get a job writing screenplays with this organization . With Oh 's help , Kim was able to get a job working for the United States Information Service in <unk> . The job helped shape Kim 's life in several ways . With the increase in pay he received from the U.S.I.S. , he was able to marry Kim Yu @-@ bong in 1951 , and their first son , Kim Dong @-@ won , was born in 1952 . They would have a daughter born in 1955 and a second son , Kim Dong @-@ yang , born in 1958 . The two remained married for the rest of their lives . Kim Yu @-@ bong supported her husband 's filmmaking career through her dental practice , giving him a unique degree of independence among Korean filmmakers of his era to pursue his own personal visions . At a career retrospective during the last year of his life , Kim commented , " My wife 's support has been unflagging over the years , even if , at times , she has seen one of my films and cried ' What have you done with my money ? ' But at rare moments like this retrospective , she becomes very emotional , recognizing that finally it has all been worthwhile . " 
 Kim filmed about 20 documentaries for the U.S.I.S. with such titles as Diary of the Navy and I Am a Truck for " Liberty News " . The latter title was given an award by the U.S. State Department . The training and equipment Kim gained while working on these propaganda newsreels for the U.S.I.S. also enabled him to direct his first commercial film , Box of Death ( 1955 ) . Kim used expired film stock and a manually operated camera from the U.S.I.S. to make this debut feature , an anti @-@ communist melodrama about war orphans . The film , now lost , showed stylistic influences from the Italian neo @-@ realists and was the first Korean film to employ synchronous sound . 
 With the success of this first film , Kim was able to direct his second feature , the historical costume drama Yangsan Province ( also 1955 ) , again using primitive equipment obtained from the U.S.I.S. Although Kim claimed to have based the film on a traditional song he learned from his mother , no exact source for the story has been found . It is suspected that the director made up the story himself , modeling it on traditional stories such as Chunhyangjeon , Lee Kyu @-@ hwan 's remake of which had recently become a major success , stimulating a rebirth in Korean cinema . After Lee 's Chunhyangjeon , Yangsan Province was the second most successful Korean film of 1955 . Though a popular success , critics of the time were not kind to Yangsan Province . Yoo Do @-@ yeon called the film a " work of bad taste , " and <unk> Baek @-@ <unk> said that it " <unk> the dignity of Korean cinema . " As his only surviving film of the 1950s , Yangsan Province sheds considerable light on Kim Ki @-@ young 's early career . In an era in which Korean film critics considered realism to be important , the now @-@ lost ending to Yangsan Province , in which two dead lovers ascend to heaven on a beam of light , was harshly criticized . In light of Kim 's later career , critics today believe that this cut scene displays some of the most recognizable characteristics of Kim 's mature style such as an interest in the fantastic , and a jarring blending of genres . Other motifs that were to be explored in depth in Kim 's later work can also be found in Yangsan Province , such as animal imagery , particularly the use of hens as a representation of fertility and sexuality . 
 In 1956 Kim started Kim Ki @-@ young Productions , and began making melodramas , the most popular film genre in South Korea at the time . His first independent production was Touch @-@ Me @-@ Not ( 1956 ) . In 1957 , Kim was living near the red @-@ light district of Yongsan , and the atmosphere of this neighborhood influenced his films , A Woman 's War and Twilight Train ( both 1957 ) . With First Snow ( 1958 ) , Kim moved from melodrama to a more socially conscious realism . Defiance of a Teenager ( 1959 ) and Sad Pastorale ( 1960 ) followed in this style . Defiance of a Teenager was one of Kim 's most successful and respected early works , and he attended the San Francisco International Film Festival in 1960 for a showing of this film . 
 = = = The Housemaid = = = 
 1960 was a critical year for South Korea , marking the end of the rule of Syngman Rhee through the civilian April Revolution . In 1962 , another military authoritarian , General Park Chung @-@ Hee , would ascend to power and rule South Korea for nearly two decades . The short period of relative freedom between these two administrations was known as the Second Republic . During this time , filmmakers took advantage of the relaxation of governmental control over the film industry to create several boldly experimental works . Director Yu Hyun @-@ mok 's film <unk> Bullet ( 1960 ) dates from this period , as does Kim Ki @-@ young 's major breakthrough , The Housemaid ( also 1960 ) . A lurid , expressionistic melodrama set in an eerie house , involving sexual obsessions , murder and rats , this is the first film in which Kim 's mature style is fully evident , and is widely regarded as one of the greatest Korean films ever made . 
 The film is a domestic thriller telling of a family 's destruction by the introduction of a sexually predatory femme fatale into the household . A composer has just moved into a two @-@ story house with his wife and two children . When his wife becomes exhausted from working at a sewing machine to support the family , the composer hires a housemaid to help with the work around the house . The new housemaid behaves strangely , catching rats with her hands , spying on the composer , seducing him and eventually becoming pregnant by him . The composer 's wife convinces the housemaid to induce a miscarriage by falling down a flight of stairs . After this incident , the housemaid 's behavior becomes increasingly more erratic . She kills the composer 's son , and then persuades the composer to commit suicide with her by swallowing rat poison . The film ends with the composer reading the story from a newspaper with his wife . The narrative of the film has apparently been told by the composer , who then warns the film audience that this is just the sort of thing could happen to anyone . 
 The Housemaid marked Kim 's full break with realism , the main style of Korean cinema at the time , into his own version of expressionism . The plot , themes and even character names set out in The Housemaid were to be revisited by Kim repeatedly in his later career . Besides the first film , the official " Housemaid Trilogy " consists of Woman of Fire ( 1971 ) and Woman of Fire ' 82 ( 1982 ) . Also , at least two other later films — Insect Woman ( 1972 ) and Beasts of Prey ( 1985 ) — are , in some ways , remakes of The Housemaid . By using the story as a template , Kim was able to emphasize different aspects of the scenario , and to concentrate on different details and aspects of the central situation with each new re @-@ telling . 
 = = = Mid @-@ career = = = 
 Kim solidified his break with cinematic realism by following The Housemaid with two more films exploring styles and mixing genres , radically new for Korean cinema at the time . The Sea Knows ( 1961 ) transcended its roots in the standard anti @-@ Japanese World War II film to become a distinctive examination of humanity , sadism , greed , lust for power and sexuality . The box @-@ office success of this film enabled Kim to buy his first house , in the Namsan district of Seoul . <unk> ( 1963 ) , dealt with a similar subject matter as The Ballad of Narayama ( 1983 ) , directed by Shohei Imamura , a filmmaker with whom Kim has often been compared . Kim 's version of the story is marked by his mixing of genres . For example , he frames the story — which deals with an ancient tradition in which elders were abandoned to die — within a modern lecture on birth control . 
 Some of the characteristic traits of Kim 's mature style , first seen in these three films , are gothic excess , surrealism , horror , perversions and sexuality . Although in stark contrast to the realism , harmony , balance and sentimentality typical of Korean cinema of the time , Kim 's films , in an eccentric and metaphorical way , deal with the realities of postwar , industrializing South Korean society and psychology . After having firmly established his auteur status with these films , Kim 's unique vision began to wane in his films of the later 1960s . 
 During the 1970s , South Korea 's film industry was at a low point due to government censorship and underfunding . Because of the poor state of the local film industry , cinema attendance in South Korea had dropped drastically since its high @-@ point in the 1960s . Kim Ki @-@ young , however , working independently in B @-@ movie @-@ like genre films , began to produce some of his most innovative and personal works at this time . Kim fully regained his auteurist spirit with Woman of Fire ( 1971 ) , the second of his Housemaid trilogy . The use of color , particularly reds and blues to express the anxiety and desires of the film 's characters , distinguished this film from the original Housemaid 's dark , shadowy black @-@ and @-@ white photography . For this film , Kim was named Best Director at the Blue Dragon Film Awards and actress Youn Yuh @-@ jung was given Special Mention for Best Actress at the Festival de Cine de Sitges . Not only popular with the critics , Kim 's independently produced films were box @-@ office successes during this era in which most films were harmed through heavy governmental interference . In 1972 Kim 's Insect Woman was the only film to sell more than 100 @,@ 000 tickets in Seoul and won Kim the Best Director prize at the <unk> Arts Awards in 1973 . 
 Although a critically acclaimed , financially successful independent filmmaker , Kim was not immune from governmental pressure . He filmed Ban <unk> @-@ <unk> in 1975 , but it was banned at the time , and not released until 1981 , with 40 minutes of footage censored . The government also coerced Kim into making an anti @-@ Communist propaganda film . The resulting film , Love of Blood Relations ( 1976 ) , transcended the bounds of propaganda by portraying the communist agent as one of Kim 's typical femme fatale characters . Kim later commented , " North or south , capitalist or communist , ideology is far less interesting to me than the things that divide the sexes . " 
 Film professor and programmer for the Pusan International Film Festival , Lee Yong @-@ kwan calls <unk> ( 1977 ) Kim 's best film , and Variety 's Seoul @-@ correspondent Darcy Paquet calls it " one of Korean cinema 's most compelling , unnerving depictions of the primal forces that motivate humankind . " An examination of environmental , religious , social and sexual taboos , the film culminates in a scene of necrophilia that Paquet calls " one of the most shocking , brazen sequences ever shot by a Korean filmmaker " . 
 = = = Rediscovery and later life = = = 
 Kim 's associates characterize the director as an eccentric individual . Tokyo International Film Festival programming director Kenji Ishizaka recalls that Kim 's way of writing a screenplay was to walk away from home for three months . He would shut himself up in a cheap hotel , listen to neighborhood gossip , and write all night in the dark . South Korean film critic Lee Young @-@ il remembers that Kim 's shoes were never shined , and that one of his few material pleasures was high @-@ quality coffee . Kim Ki @-@ young 's unconventional and nonconformist nature also prevented him from participating in South Korea 's mainstream film industry . The only official title he held within the film community was member of The National Academy of Arts , which he joined in 1997 , and he did not cultivate friendships with journalists who could further his career . 
 Nevertheless , since the early 1960s , Kim Ki @-@ young 's status as one of the greatest and most original Korean film directors had never been in doubt . His stylistic preoccupation with sexuality , horror and melodrama had earned Kim the nickname , " Mister Monster " from his admirers . However , by the 1980s Kim 's career had fallen into neglect . His continued fascination with B @-@ movie exploitation themes as well as the increasingly obsessive and subversive nature of his films resulted in his isolation from the film community , and in financial failures at the box @-@ office . The last of the Housemaid trilogy , Woman of Fire ' 82 ( 1982 ) is an even more radicalized and baroque retelling of the same basic story he had filmed numerous times in the previous two decades . By the mid @-@ 1980s , Kim 's film output had slowed and finally stopped . 
 In the early 1990s Kim 's work began to be rediscovered by South Korean cult film fans who discussed his films through the Internet and exchanged hard @-@ to @-@ find copies by videotape . Noticing this growing domestic Kim Ki @-@ young cult , the <unk> Cinematheque , an art @-@ house theater in Seoul , programmed a retrospective showing of Kim 's films . With his profile again high in Korean film society , Kim 's work began to attract international attention . Five of his films were screened at the Tokyo International Film Festival in 1996 . When Kim Ki @-@ young 's career was highlighted at the second Pusan International Film Festival in 1997 , his work found enthusiastic new audiences in the international film community . The strongly positive reception of Kim 's work by international audiences surprised the festival organizers , who immediately began receiving requests for overseas retrospectives of Kim 's career . With this renewed interest , Kim began work on a comeback film to be titled Diabolical Woman . The Berlin International Film Festival invited him to attend a showing of his films in 1998 . Before Kim started work on the film or attended the festival , he and his wife were killed in a house fire caused by an electrical short circuit on February 5 , 1998 . 
 Kim Ki @-@ young 's death did not stop the revival of interest in his films . A six @-@ film retrospective of Kim 's career was shown in San Francisco twice in 1998 . Within the year , Kim 's films were screened at the Belgrade International Film Festival , the London Pan @-@ Asian Film Festival , the Estate Romana and the Paris <unk> . Few prints of Korean films before the 1970s survive , and at one point 90 % of Kim 's output was considered lost . Under the " Kim Ki @-@ young Renaissance Project " , the Korean Film Council ( KOFIC ) has worked to find Kim 's lost films and to restore those that are damaged . In 2006 , the French Cinémathèque presented 18 of Kim 's films , many of them newly rediscovered and restored through the efforts of the KOFIC . 
 During his lifetime , Kim gained many supporters among the younger generation of South Korean directors . Park Kwang @-@ su reportedly admires Kim Ki @-@ young above all other directors , and Lee Chang @-@ ho is another of Kim 's followers . In the years since his death , Kim 's influence on Korean cinema has continued to be seen through the work of the current generation of South Korean filmmakers , including such prominent directors as Im Sang @-@ soo and Kim Ki @-@ duk . Bong Joon @-@ ho calls Kim his mentor and favorite director . Park Chan @-@ wook names The Housemaid as one of the films which most influenced his career , and says of Kim Ki @-@ young , " He is able to find and portray beauty in destruction , humor in violence and terror . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Daspletosaurus = 
 Daspletosaurus ( / <unk> / das @-@ <unk> @-@ o @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ; meaning " frightful lizard " ) is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived in western North America between 77 and 74 million years ago , during the Late Cretaceous Period . Fossils of the only named species ( D. torosus ) were found in Alberta , although other possible species from Alberta and Montana await description . Including these undescribed species makes Daspletosaurus the most species @-@ rich genus of tyrannosaur . 
 Daspletosaurus is closely related to the much larger and more recent Tyrannosaurus . Like most known tyrannosaurids , it was a multi @-@ tonne bipedal predator equipped with dozens of large , sharp teeth . Daspletosaurus had the small forelimbs typical of tyrannosaurids , although they were proportionately longer than in other genera . 
 As an apex predator , Daspletosaurus was at the top of the food chain , probably preying on large dinosaurs like the ceratopsid Centrosaurus and the hadrosaur Hypacrosaurus . In some areas , Daspletosaurus coexisted with another tyrannosaurid , Gorgosaurus , though there is some evidence of niche differentiation between the two . While Daspletosaurus fossils are rarer than other tyrannosaurids ' , the available specimens allow some analysis of the biology of these animals , including social behavior , diet and life history . 
 = = Description = = 
 While very large by the standard of modern predators , Daspletosaurus was not the largest tyrannosaurid . Adults could reach a length of 8 – 9 meters ( 26 – 30 ft ) from snout to tail . Mass estimates have centered on 2 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 75 short tons ) but have ranged between 1 @.@ 8 and 3 @.@ 8 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 0 and 4 @.@ 1 short tons ) . 
 Daspletosaurus had a massive skull that could reach more than 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in length . The bones were heavily constructed and some , including the nasal bones on top of the snout , were fused for strength . Large fenestrae ( openings ) in the skull reduced its weight . An adult Daspletosaurus was armed with about six dozen teeth that were very long but oval in cross section rather than blade @-@ like . Unlike its other teeth , those in the premaxilla at the end of the upper jaw had a D @-@ shaped cross section , an example of heterodonty always seen in tyrannosaurids . Unique skull features included the rough outer surface of the maxilla ( upper jaw bone ) and the pronounced crests around the eyes on the lacrimal , postorbital , and jugal bones . The orbit ( eye socket ) was a tall oval , somewhere in between the circular shape seen in Gorgosaurus and the ' keyhole ' shape of Tyrannosaurus . Split carinae have been found on Daspletosaurus teeth . 
 Daspletosaurus shared the same body form as other tyrannosaurids , with a short , S @-@ shaped neck supporting the massive skull . It walked on its two thick hindlimbs , which ended in four @-@ toed feet , although the first digit ( the hallux ) did not contact the ground . In contrast , the forelimbs were extremely small and bore only two digits , although Daspletosaurus had the longest forelimbs in proportion to body size of any tyrannosaurid . A long , heavy tail served as a counterweight to the head and torso , with the center of gravity over the hips . 
 = = Classification and systematics = = 
 Daspletosaurus belongs in the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae within the family Tyrannosauridae , along with Tarbosaurus , Tyrannosaurus and Alioramus . Animals in this subfamily are more closely related to Tyrannosaurus than to Albertosaurus and are known – with the exception of Alioramus – for their robust build with proportionally larger skulls and longer femora than in the other subfamily , the Albertosaurinae . 
 Daspletosaurus is usually considered to be closely related to Tyrannosaurus rex , or even a direct ancestor through anagenesis . Gregory Paul reassigned D. torosus to the genus Tyrannosaurus , creating the new combination Tyrannosaurus torosus , but this has not been generally accepted . Many researchers believe Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus to be sister taxa or even to be the same genus , with Daspletosaurus a more basal relative . On the other hand , Phil Currie and colleagues find Daspletosaurus to be more closely related to Tarbosaurus and other Asian tyrannosaurids like Alioramus than to the North American Tyrannosaurus . The systematics ( evolutionary relationships ) of Daspletosaurus may become clearer once all the species have been described . 
 Below is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen et al. in 2013 . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 The type specimen of Daspletosaurus torosus ( CMN 8506 ) is a partial skeleton including the skull , the shoulder , a forelimb , the pelvis , a femur and all of the vertebrae from the neck , torso and hip , as well as the first eleven tail vertebrae . It was discovered in 1921 near Steveville , Alberta , by Charles Mortram Sternberg , who thought it was a new species of Gorgosaurus . It was not until 1970 that the specimen was fully described by Dale Russell , who made it the type of a new genus , Daspletosaurus , from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> , stem and connective vowel resulting in <unk> ~ ) ( " frightful " ) and σαυρος / sauros ( " lizard " ) . The type species is Daspletosaurus torosus , the specific name torosus being Latin for ' muscular ' or ' brawny ' . Aside from the type , there is only one other well @-@ known specimen , RTMP 2001 @.@ 36 @.@ 1 , a relatively complete skeleton discovered in 2001 . Both specimens were recovered from the Oldman Formation in the Judith River Group of Alberta . The Oldman Formation was deposited during the middle Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous , from about 77 to 76 Ma ( million years ago ) . A specimen from the younger Horseshoe Canyon Formation in Alberta has been reassigned to Albertosaurus sarcophagus . 
 = = = Unnamed species = = = 
 Two or three additional species have been assigned to the genus Daspletosaurus over the years , although as of 2007 none of these species have received a proper description or scientific name . In the meantime , all are designated as Daspletosaurus spp ; this does not imply that they all are the same species . 
 Along with the holotype , Russell designated a specimen collected by Barnum Brown in 1913 as the paratype of D. torosus . This specimen ( AMNH <unk> ) consists of parts of the hindleg , the pelvis and some of its associated vertebrae . It was discovered in the Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta . The Dinosaur Park Formation was formerly known as the Upper Oldman Formation and dates back to the middle Campanian , between 76 @.@ 5 and 74 @.@ 8 million years ago . Daspletosaurus fossils are known specifically from the middle to upper section of the formation , between 75 @.@ 6 and 75 @.@ 0 million years ago . In 1914 , Brown collected a nearly complete skeleton and skull ; forty years later his American Museum of Natural History sold this specimen to the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago . It was mounted for display in Chicago and labeled as Albertosaurus libratus for many years , but after several skull features were later found to be modeled in plaster , including most of the teeth , the specimen ( FMNH <unk> ) was reassigned to Daspletosaurus . A total of eight specimens have been collected from the Dinosaur Park Formation over the years since , most of them within the boundaries of Dinosaur Provincial Park . Phil Currie believes that the Dinosaur Park specimens represent a new species of Daspletosaurus , distinguished by certain features of the skull . Pictures of this new species have been published , but it still awaits a name and full description in print . 
 A new tyrannosaurid specimen ( OMNH <unk> ) , including skull fragments , ribs and parts of the hindlimb , was reported from New Mexico in 1990 and assigned to the now @-@ defunct genus Aublysodon . Many later authors have reassigned this specimen , along with a few others from New Mexico , to yet another unnamed species of Daspletosaurus . However , research published in 2010 showed that this species , from the Hunter Wash Member of the Kirtland Formation , is actually a more primitive tyrannosauroid , and was classified in the genus Bistahieversor . There is currently disagreement over the age of the Kirtland Formation , with some workers claiming a late Campanian age , while others suggest a younger age in the early Maastrichtian stage . 
 In 1992 , Jack Horner and colleagues published an extremely preliminary report of a tyrannosaurid from the upper parts of the Campanian Two Medicine Formation in Montana , which was interpreted as a transitional species between Daspletosaurus and the later Tyrannosaurus . Another partial skeleton was reported from the Upper Two Medicine in 2001 , preserving the remains of a juvenile hadrosaur in its abdominal cavity . This specimen was assigned to Daspletosaurus but not to any particular species . The remains of at least three more Daspletosaurus have also been described in a Two Medicine bonebed . These specimens have not been described in detail , but Currie believes all of the Two Medicine material represents an as @-@ yet @-@ unnamed third species of Daspletosaurus . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Coexistence with Gorgosaurus = = = 
 In the late Campanian of North America , Daspletosaurus was a contemporary of the albertosaurine tyrannosaurid Gorgosaurus . This is one of the few examples of two tyrannosaur genera coexisting . In modern predator guilds , similar @-@ sized predators are separated into different ecological niches by anatomical , behavioral or geographical differences that limit competition . Several studies have attempted to explain niche differentiation in Daspletosaurus and Gorgosaurus . 
 Dale Russell hypothesized that the more lightly built and more common Gorgosaurus may have preyed on the abundant hadrosaurs of the time , while the more robust and less common Daspletosaurus may have specialized on the less prevalent but better @-@ defended ceratopsids , which may have been more difficult to hunt . However , a specimen of Daspletosaurus ( OTM 200 ) from the Two Medicine Formation preserves the digested remains of a juvenile hadrosaur in its gut region . The higher and broader muzzles of tyrannosaurines like Daspletosaurus are mechanically stronger than the lower snouts of albertosaurines like Gorgosaurus , although tooth strengths are similar between the two groups . This may indicate a difference in feeding mechanics or diet . 
 Other authors have suggested that competition was limited by geographical separation . Unlike some other groups of dinosaurs , there appears to be no correlation with distance from the sea . Neither Daspletosaurus nor Gorgosaurus was more common at higher or lower elevations than the other . However , while there is some overlap , Gorgosaurus appears to be more common at northern latitudes , with species of Daspletosaurus more abundant to the south . The same pattern is seen in other groups of dinosaurs . Chasmosaurine ceratopsians and hadrosaurine hadrosaurs are also more common in the Two Medicine Formation and in southwestern North America during the Campanian . Thomas Holtz has suggested that this pattern indicates shared ecological preferences between tyrannosaurines , chasmosaurines and hadrosaurines . Holtz notes that , at the end of the later Maastrichtian stage , tyrannosaurines like Tyrannosaurus rex , hadrosaurines and chasmosaurines like Triceratops were widespread throughout western North America , while albertosaurines and centrosaurines became extinct , and lambeosaurines were very rare . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 A young specimen of the Dinosaur Park Daspletosaurus species ( TMP 94 @.@ 143 @.@ 1 ) shows bite marks on the face that were inflicted by another tyrannosaur . The bite marks are healed over , indicating that the animal survived the bite . A full @-@ grown Dinosaur Park Daspletosaurus ( TMP 85 @.@ 62 @.@ 1 ) also exhibits tyrannosaur bite marks , showing that attacks to the face were not limited to younger animals . While it is possible that the bites were attributable to other species , intraspecific aggression , including facial biting , is very common among predators . Facial bites are seen in other tyrannosaurs like Gorgosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , as well as in other theropod genera like Sinraptor and Saurornitholestes . Darren Tanke and Phil Currie hypothesize that the bites are due to intraspecific competition for territory or resources , or for dominance within a social group . 
 Evidence that Daspletosaurus lived in social groups comes from a bonebed found in the Two Medicine Formation of Montana . The bonebed includes the remains of three Daspletosaurus , including a large adult , a small juvenile , and another individual of intermediate size . At least five hadrosaurs are preserved at the same location . Geologic evidence indicates that the remains were not brought together by river currents but that all of the animals were buried simultaneously at the same location . The hadrosaur remains are scattered and bear numerous marks from tyrannosaur teeth , indicating that the Daspletosaurus were feeding on the hadrosaurs at the time of death . The cause of death is unknown . Currie speculates that the <unk> formed a pack , although this cannot be stated with certainty . Other scientists are skeptical of the evidence for social groups in Daspletosaurus and other large theropods ; 
 Brian Roach and Daniel Brinkman have suggested that Daspletosaurus social interaction would have more closely resembled the modern Komodo dragon , where non @-@ cooperative individuals mob carcasses , frequently attacking and even cannibalizing each other in the process . Evidence of cannibalism in Daspletosaurus was published in 2015 . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Paleontologist Gregory Erickson and colleagues have studied the growth and life history of tyrannosaurids . Analysis of bone histology can determine the age of a specimen when it died . Growth rates can be examined when the age of various individuals are plotted against their size on a graph . Erickson has shown that after a long time as juveniles , tyrannosaurs underwent tremendous growth spurts for about four years midway through their lives . After the rapid growth phase ended with sexual maturity , growth slowed down considerably in adult animals . Erickson only examined Daspletosaurus from the Dinosaur Park Formation , but these specimens show the same pattern . Compared to albertosaurines , Daspletosaurus showed a faster growth rate during the rapid growth period due to its higher adult weight . The maximum growth rate in Daspletosaurus was 180 kilograms ( 400 lb ) per year , based on a mass estimate of 1800 kilograms ( 2 tons ) in adults . Other authors have suggested higher adult weights for Daspletosaurus ; this would change the magnitude of the growth rate but not the overall pattern . 
 By tabulating the number of specimens of each age group , Erickson and his colleagues were able to draw conclusions about life history in a population of Albertosaurus . Their analysis showed that while juveniles were rare in the fossil record , subadults in the rapid growth phase and adults were far more common . While this could be due to preservation or collection biases , Erickson hypothesized that the difference was due to low mortality among juveniles over a certain size , which is also seen in some modern large mammals like elephants . This low mortality may have resulted from a lack of predation , since tyrannosaurs surpassed all contemporaneous predators in size by the age of two . Paleontologists have not found enough Daspletosaurus remains for a similar analysis , but Erickson notes that the same general trend seems to apply . 
 A 2009 study found evidence of Trichomonas gallinae @-@ like infection in the jaws of various specimens of Daspletosaurus . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 All known Daspletosaurus fossils have been found in formations dating to the middle to late Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous Period , between 77 and 74 million years ago . Since the middle of the Cretaceous , North America had been divided in half by the Western Interior Seaway , with much of Montana and Alberta below the surface . However , the uplift of the Rocky Mountains in the Laramide Orogeny to the west , which began during the time of Daspletosaurus , forced the seaway to retreat eastwards and southwards . Rivers flowed down from the mountains and drained into the seaway , carrying sediment along with them that formed the Two Medicine Formation , the Judith River Group , and other sedimentary formations in the region . About 73 million years ago , the seaway began to advance westwards and northwards again , and the entire region was covered by the Bearpaw Sea , represented throughout the western United States and Canada by the massive Bearpaw Shale . 
 Daspletosaurus lived in a vast floodplain along the western shore of the interior seaway . Large rivers watered the land , occasionally flooding and blanketing the region with new sediment . When water was plentiful , the region could support a great deal of plant and animal life , but periodic droughts also struck the region , resulting in mass mortality as preserved in the many bonebed deposits found in Two Medicine and Judith River sediments , including the Daspletosaurus bonebed . Similar conditions exist today in East Africa . Volcanic eruptions from the west periodically blanketed the region with ash , also resulting in large @-@ scale mortality , while simultaneously enriching the soil for future plant growth . It is these ash beds that allow precise radiometric dating as well . Fluctuating sea levels also resulted in a variety of other environments at different times and places within the Judith River Group , including offshore and nearshore marine habitats , coastal wetlands , deltas and lagoons , in addition to the inland floodplains . The Two Medicine Formation was deposited at higher elevations farther inland than the other two formations . 
 The excellent vertebrate fossil record of Two Medicine and Judith River rocks resulted from a combination of abundant animal life , periodic natural disasters , and the deposition of large amounts of sediment . Many types of freshwater and estuarine fish are represented , including sharks , rays , sturgeons , gars and others . The Judith River Group preserves the remains of many aquatic amphibians and reptiles , including frogs , salamanders , turtles , Champsosaurus and crocodilians . Terrestrial lizards , including whiptails , skinks , monitors and alligator lizards have also been discovered . Azhdarchid pterosaurs , and birds like Apatornis and Avisaurus flew overhead , while several varieties of mammals coexisted with Daspletosaurus and other types of dinosaurs in the various formations that make up the Judith River wedge . 
 In the Oldman Formation ( the geological equivalent of the Judith River formation ) , Daspletosaurus torosus could have preyed upon the hadrosaur species Brachylophosaurus canadensis , the ceratopsians Coronosaurus <unk> and Albertaceratops <unk> , pachycephalosaurs , ornithomimids , therizinosaurs and possibly ankylosaurs . Other predators included troodontids , oviraptorosaurs , the dromaeosaurid Saurornitholestes and possibly an albertosaurine tyrannosaur ( genus currently unknown ) . The younger Dinosaur Park and Two Medicine Formations had faunas similar to the Oldman , with the Dinosaur Park in particular preserving an unrivaled array of dinosaurs . The albertosaurine Gorgosaurus lived alongside unnamed species of Daspletosaurus in the Dinosaur Park and Upper Two Medicine environments . Young tyrannosaurs may have filled the niches in between adult tyrannosaurs and smaller theropods , which were separated by two orders of magnitude in mass . A Saurornitholestes dentary has been discovered in the Dinosaur Park Formation that bore tooth marks left by the bite of a young tyrannosaur , possibly Daspletosaurus . 
 = Tracy Does Conan = 
 " Tracy Does Conan " is the seventh episode of NBC 's first season of 30 Rock . It was written by the series ' creator and executive producer , Tina Fey and it was directed by one of the season 's supervising producers , Adam Bernstein . It first aired on December 7 , 2006 in the United States and November 29 , 2007 in the United Kingdom . Guest stars in the episode included Katrina Bowden , Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Rachel Dratch , Dave Finkel , Steve Hollander , Johnnie May , Maulik Pancholy , Chris Parnell , Aubrey Plaza , Keith Powell , R. N. Rao and Dean Winters . Conan O 'Brien appeared as himself in this episode . The episode marks the first appearance of Chris Parnell as recurring character , Dr. Leo Spaceman . 
 This episode revolves around Liz Lemon ( played by Tina Fey ) and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) trying to get Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to make a successful appearance on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , a late night talk show . These attempts are complicated when Tracy has a bad reaction to pills prescribed by Dr. Leo Spaceman and he temporarily goes crazy . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is preparing to give a speech at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While giving a blood donation , Liz reveals that she plans to break up with her boyfriend , Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) . On the way to her office , she runs into Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) who reveals that Jack has " bumped " her from appearing on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . He has decided to put Tracy on in her place instead . When Liz can 't change Jack 's mind , Jenna threatens to quit her job . In this scene , Jenna discusses her upcoming and hard to pronounce film " The Rural Juror . " 
 As the taping time , 6 pm , is fast approaching , Tracy begins acting strangely . Liz and Pete discover that he has not been taking his medication correctly . Liz calls Tracy 's doctor , Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) , who gives her instructions regarding the medication . Liz gives the instructions to Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) who has to visit multiple identical pharmacies until he finds the correct one , which will have Tracy 's new medication . Liz and Pete 's attempts to get Tracy to the Late Night stage on time are further complicated as Jack persistently calls Liz to his office to ask for her advice on a speech he is going to read at The Waldorf Astoria . Tracy eventually appears on Late Night only to immediately fall asleep after sitting down . 
 Liz walks into her apartment after the Conan incident and Dennis is sitting on their bed playing Halo . He told Liz he got her a cheeseburger . She takes one bite and falls asleep listening to him playing the video game . 
 = = Production = = 
 Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live alumna of Fey , was originally cast to portray Jenna . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In this episode , she played a hallucination of Tracy 's , which he called Blue Dude . 
 Chris Parnell , who played Dr. Leo Spaceman in this episode , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Tina Fey was the head writer on Saturday Night Live from 1999 until 2006 . Various other cast members of Saturday Night Live have appeared on 30 Rock . These cast members include : Rachel Dratch , Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis and Molly Shannon . Tina Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of Saturday Night Live . Alec Baldwin has also hosted Saturday Night Live sixteen times , the highest number of episodes of any host of the series . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode where Tracy Jordan is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz Lemon admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger , and saying she dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four Halloweens . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to Robert Carlock , who she described as " the resident expert " . Star Wars is referenced in this episode when Tracy Jordan takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . 
 The episode briefly features actress Aubrey Plaza , who would later appear on the NBC show Parks and Recreation , as an NBC page – a job she actually held at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tracy Does Conan " brought in an average of 6 @.@ 84 million American viewers . This episode achieved a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 in the key 18 – 49 demographic , a series high in that category . The 3 @.@ 2 refers to 3 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. and the 8 refers to 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast , in the U.S .. In the United Kingdom , the episode attracted 400 @,@ 000 viewers which was a 3 % share of the viewing audience at the time of the broadcast . 
 Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide said that although " 30 Rock gave us yet another riff on what a wild and crazy guy Tracy Jordan is " , the series was really finding its footing . Mitovich enjoyed the appearances of Dratch and Parnell , labeling the latter as the highlight of the episode . Robert Canning of IGN said that the episode " failed to deliver the comic gold we were hoping for . " Canning had hoped that Tracy 's storyline would be a " subtle , fairly straightforward plot " , in contrast to the wackiness the series had a reputation for , but found it unfunny . The reviewer did not enjoy the appearances of Dratch and Winters , and felt Conan O 'Brien was not used to his full potential . Canning rated the episode 5 out of 10 . 
 Tina Fey 's writing for this episode earned her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series , but lost the award to Greg Daniels of The Office for the episode " Gay Witch Hunt " . 
 = TCG Heybeliada ( F @-@ 511 ) = 
 TCG Heybeliada ( F @-@ 511 ) is the lead ship of the Ada class ASW corvettes of the Turkish Navy . TCG Heybeliada was named after Heybeliada Island , where the Turkish Naval High School is located . Heybeliada Island is part of the Prince Islands archipelago in the Sea of Marmara , to the southeast of Istanbul . 
 Designed , developed and built by the Tuzla ( Istanbul ) Naval Shipyard as a part of the <unk> project , it was laid down on 22 January 2007 , launched on 27 September 2008 , and commissioned on 27 September 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 Istanbul Naval Shipyard Command started construction of the TCG Heybeliada on 22 January 2007 . Sailed out for initial sea trials in 2008 , she was officially commissioned by the Turkish Navy and entered navy service on 27 September 2011 . Since her commissioning , her longest voyage has been 2013 Mediterranean cruise . This journey took the vessel to the ports of Alexandria , Tripoli , Libya , Algiers , La Goulette , Casablanca , and <unk> . Throughout the vagaries of her service career , the vessel has received the moniker the " Ghost of the Seas " . 
 = = Description = = 
 TCG Heybeliada has a displacement of 2 @,@ 300 tons , is 99 @.@ 56 metres ( 326 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , 14 @.@ 4 metres ( 47 ft ) in beam , and has a draft of 3 @.@ 89 metres ( 12 @.@ 8 ft ) . She is powered by two diesel engines and a gas turbine , with a power of 30 @,@ 000 kilowatts ( 40 @,@ 000 hp ) , driving two propellers , and is capable of speeding up to 29 knots . She has a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at 15 knots , and has an endurance of 21 days with logistical support and ten days while operating autonomously . She has a crew of 93 , with space for up to 106 . 
 TCG Heybeliada is equipped with GENESIS combat management system that controls search and navigation radars , electronic warfare suits , weapons , countermeasures , communication devices , underwater and onboard sensors . The ship is armed with a single <unk> 76 mm gun , two <unk> <unk> 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) guns , eight Harpoon missiles , 21 Rolling Airframe Missiles and two 324 @-@ millimetre ( 12 @.@ 8 in ) Mark 32 triple launchers for Mark 46 torpedoes . Electronic warfare systems include a dedicated EW radar , laser / RF systems , ASW jammers , and an <unk> system . Communication and navigation systems involve satellite communication , X @-@ band , navigation , fire control and LPI radar , <unk> , GPS and LAN infrastructure . The radar suite is the SMART @-@ S Mk2 , built by Thales . The ship is fitted with sonar developed by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey . The whole platform is managed by an advanced integrated platform management system . 
 The ship is capable of carrying Sikorsky S @-@ 70 helicopter or unmanned aircraft , along with the associated armaments , 20 tons of JP @-@ 5 aircraft fuel , aerial refueling systems and maintenance facilities . 
 The ship serves as the lead vessel of the Ada class ASW corvettes . She derives her name from Heybeliada Island , a part of the Prince Islands archipelago in the Sea of Marmara , to the southeast of Istanbul . 
 = Colony collapse disorder = 
 Colony collapse disorder ( CCD ) is the phenomenon that occurs when the majority of worker bees in a colony disappear and leave behind a queen , plenty of food and a few nurse bees to care for the remaining immature bees and the queen . While such disappearances have occurred throughout the history of apiculture , and were known by various names ( disappearing disease , spring dwindle , May disease , autumn collapse , and fall dwindle disease ) , the syndrome was renamed colony collapse disorder in late 2006 in conjunction with a drastic rise in the number of disappearances of western honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) colonies in North America . European beekeepers observed similar phenomena in Belgium , France , the Netherlands , Greece , Italy , Portugal , and Spain , Switzerland and Germany , albeit to a lesser degree , and the Northern Ireland Assembly received reports of a decline greater than 50 % . 
 Colony collapse disorder causes significant economic losses because many agricultural crops ( although no staple foods ) worldwide are pollinated by western honey bees . According to the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Department of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the worth of global crops with honey bee 's pollination was estimated to be close to $ 200 billion in 2005 . Shortages of bees in the US have increased the cost to farmers renting them for pollination services by up to 20 % . 
 In the six years leading up to 2013 , more than 10 million beehives were lost , often to CCD , nearly twice the normal rate of loss . 
 Several possible causes for CCD have been proposed , but no single proposal has gained widespread acceptance among the scientific community . Suggested causes include : infections with Varroa and <unk> mites ; malnutrition ; various pathogens ; genetic factors ; immunodeficiencies ; loss of habitat ; changing beekeeping practices ; or a combination of factors . A large amount of speculation has surrounded a family of pesticides called neonicotinoids as having caused CCD . 
 = = History = = 
 Limited occurrences resembling CCD have been documented as early as 1869 and this set of symptoms has , in the past several decades , been given many different names ( disappearing disease , spring dwindle , May disease , autumn collapse , and fall dwindle disease ) . Most recently , a similar phenomenon in the winter of 2004 / 2005 occurred , and was attributed to varroa mites ( the " vampire mite " scare ) , though this was never ultimately confirmed . The cause of the appearance of this syndrome has never been determined . Upon recognition that the syndrome does not seem to be seasonally restricted , and that it may not be a " disease " in the standard sense — that there may not be a specific causative agent — the syndrome was renamed . 
 A well @-@ documented outbreak of colony losses spread from the Isle of Wight to the rest of the UK in 1906 . These losses later were attributed to a combination of factors , including adverse weather , intensive apiculture leading to inadequate forage , and a new infection , the chronic bee paralysis virus , but at the time , the cause of this agricultural beekeeping problem was similarly mysterious and unknown . 
 Reports show this behavior in hives in the US in 1918 and 1919 . Coined " mystery disease " by some , it eventually became more widely known as " disappearing disease " . Oertel , in 1965 , reported that hives afflicted with disappearing disease in Louisiana had plenty of honey in the combs , although few or no bees were present , discrediting reports that attributed the disappearances to lack of food . 
 From 1972 to 2006 , dramatic reductions continued in the number of feral honey bees in the U.S. and a significant though somewhat gradual decline in the number of colonies maintained by beekeepers . This decline includes the cumulative losses from all factors , such as urbanization , pesticide use , tracheal and Varroa mites , and commercial beekeepers ' retiring and going out of business . However , in late 2006 and early 2007 , the rate of attrition was alleged to have reached new proportions , and the term " colony collapse disorder " began to be used to describe this sudden rash of disappearances ( sometimes referred to as " spontaneous hive collapse " or the " Mary Celeste syndrome " in the United Kingdom ) . 
 Losses had remained stable since the 1990s at 17 % – 20 % per year attributable to a variety of factors , such as mites , diseases , and management stress . The first report of CCD was in mid @-@ November 2006 by a Pennsylvania beekeeper overwintering in Florida . By February 2007 , large commercial migratory beekeepers in several states had reported heavy losses associated with CCD . Their reports of losses varied widely , ranging from 30 % to 90 % of their bee colonies ; in some cases , beekeepers reported losses of nearly all of their colonies with surviving colonies so weakened that they might no longer be able to pollinate or produce honey . 
 Losses were reported in migratory operations wintering in California , Florida , Oklahoma , and Texas . In late February , some larger <unk> beekeepers in the mid @-@ Atlantic and Pacific Northwest regions also reported significant losses of more than 50 % . Colony losses also were reported in five Canadian provinces , several European countries , and countries in South and Central America and Asia . In 2010 , the USDA reported that data on overall honey bee losses for 2010 indicated an estimated 34 % loss , which is statistically similar to losses reported in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 . Fewer colony losses occurred in the U.S. over the winter of 2013 @-@ 2014 than in recent years . Total losses of managed honey bee colonies from all causes were 23 @.@ 2 % nationwide , a marked improvement over the 30 @.@ 5 % loss reported for the winter of 2012 @-@ 2013 and the eight @-@ year average loss of 29 @.@ 6 % . 
 After bee populations dropped 23 % in the winter of 2013 , the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Agriculture formed a task force to address the issue . In the six years leading up to 2013 , more than 10 million beehives were lost , often to CCD , nearly twice the normal rate of loss . However , according to Syngenta , the total number of beehives worldwide continues to grow . An insecticide produced by Syngenta was banned by the European Commission in 2013 for use in crops pollinated by bees . Syngenta together with Bayer is challenging this ban in court . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 In collapsed colonies , CCD is suspected when a complete absence of adult bees is found in colonies , with little or no buildup of dead bees in the hive or in front of the hive . A colony which has collapsed from CCD is generally characterized by all of these conditions occurring simultaneously : 
 Presence of capped brood in abandoned colonies : Bees normally will not abandon a hive until the capped brood have all hatched . 
 Presence of food stores , both honey and bee pollen : 
 which are not immediately robbed by other bees 
 which when attacked by hive pests such as wax moth and small hive beetle , the attack is noticeably delayed 
 Presence of the queen bee : If the queen is not present , the hive died because it was queenless , which is not considered CCD . 
 Precursor symptoms that may arise before the final colony collapse are : 
 Insufficient workforce to maintain the brood that is present 
 Workforce seems to be made up of young adult bees 
 The colony members are reluctant to consume provided feed , such as sugar syrup and protein supplement . 
 = = Scope and distribution = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 The National Agriculture Statistics Service reported 2 @.@ 44 million honey @-@ producing hives were in the United States in February 2008 , down from 4 @.@ 5 million in 1980 , and 5 @.@ 9 million in 1947 , though these numbers underestimate the total number of managed hives , as they exclude several thousand hives managed for pollination contracts only , and also do not include hives managed by beekeepers owning fewer than five hives . This under @-@ representation may be offset by the practice of counting some hives more than once ; hives that are moved to different states to produce honey are counted in each state 's total and summed in total counts . 
 Non @-@ CCD winter losses as high as 50 % have occurred in some years and regions ( e.g. , 2000 – 2001 in Pennsylvania ) . Normal winter losses are typically considered to be in the range of 15 – 25 % . In many cases , beekeepers reporting significant losses of bees did not experience true CCD , but losses due to other causes . 
 In 2007 in the US , at least 24 different states had reported at least one case of CCD . In a 2007 survey of 384 responding beekeepers from 13 states , 23 @.@ 8 % met the specified criterion for CCD ( that 50 % or more of their dead colonies were found without bees and / or with very few dead bees in the hive or apiary ) . 
 In the US in 2006 – 2007 , CCD @-@ suffering operations had a total loss of 45 % compared to the total loss of 25 % of all colonies experienced by non @-@ CCD suffering beekeepers . 
 A 2007 – 2008 survey of over 19 % of all colonies revealed a total loss of 35 @.@ 8 % . Operations that pollinated almonds lost , on average , the same number of colonies as those that did not . The 37 @.@ 9 % of operations that reported having at least some of their colonies die with a complete lack of bees had a total loss of 40 @.@ 8 % of colonies compared to the 17 @.@ 1 % loss reported by beekeepers without this symptom . Large operations were more likely to have this symptom , suggesting a contagious condition may be a causal factor . About 60 % of all colonies that were reported dead in this survey died without the presence of dead bees in the hive , thus possibly suffered from CCD . 
 In 2010 , the USDA reported that data on overall honey bee losses for the year indicate an estimated 34 % loss , which is statistically similar to losses reported in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 . In 2011 , the loss was 30 % . In 2012 – 2013 , CCD was blamed for the loss of about half of the US honey bee hives , far more than the 33 % losses observed on average over previous years . 
 During the spring of 2015 , President Barack Obama unveiled the very first national strategy for improving the health of bees and other key pollinators . The plan calls for restoring 7 million acres of bee habitat with a variety of different plants for bees to eat . The administration is also proposing spending $ 82 @.@ 5 million for honey bee research . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 According to the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , in 2007 , the United Kingdom had 274 @,@ 000 hives , Italy had 1 @,@ 091 @,@ 630 , and France 1 @,@ 283 @,@ 810 . In 2008 , the British Beekeepers Association reported the bee population in the United Kingdom dropped by around 30 % between 2007 and 2008 , and an EFSA study revealed that in Italy the mortality rate was 40 – 50 % . However , EFSA officials point out the figures are not very reliable because before the bees started dying , no harmonisation was used in the way different countries collected statistics on their bee populations . At that time ( 2008 ) , the reports blamed the high death rate on the varroa mite , two seasons of unusually wet European summers , and some pesticides . 
 In 2009 , Tim Lovett , president of the British Beekeepers ' Association , said : " Anecdotally , it is hugely variable . There are reports of some beekeepers losing almost a third of their hives and others losing none . " John Chapple , chairman of the London Beekeepers ' Association , put losses among his 150 members at between a fifth and a quarter . " There are still a lot of mysterious disappearances ; we are no nearer to knowing what is causing them . " The government 's National Bee Unit continued to deny the existence of CCD in Britain ; it attributes the heavy losses to the varroa mite and rainy summers that stop bees foraging for food . 
 In 2010 , David Aston of the British Beekeepers ’ Association stated , " We still do not believe CCD ( which is now better defined ) is a cause of colony losses in the UK , however we are continuing to experience colony losses , many if not most of which can be explained " . He feels recent studies suggest " further evidence to the evolving picture that there are complex interactions taking place between a number of factors , pathogens , environmental , beekeeping practices and other stressors , which are causing honey bee losses described as CCD in the US " . 
 Beekeepers in Scotland also reported losses for the past three years . Andrew Scarlett , a Perthshire @-@ based bee farmer and honey packer , lost 80 % of his 1 @,@ 200 hives during the 2009 winter . He attributed the losses to a virulent bacterial infection that quickly spread because of a lack of bee inspectors , coupled with sustained poor weather that prevented honey bees from building up sufficient pollen and nectar stores . 
 In Germany , where some of the first reports of CCD in Europe appeared , and where , according to the German national association of beekeepers , 40 % of the honey bee colonies died , there was no scientific confirmation ; in early May 2007 , the German media reported no confirmed CCD cases seemed to have occurred in Germany . 
 At the end of May 2012 , the Swiss government reported about half of the bee population had not survived the winter . The main cause of the decline was thought to be the parasite Varroa destructor . 
 = = Possible causes = = 
 The mechanisms of CCD are still unknown , but many causes are currently being considered , such as pesticides , mites , fungi , beekeeping practices ( such as the use of antibiotics or long @-@ distance transportation of beehives ) , malnutrition , poor quality queens , starvation , other pathogens , and immunodeficiencies . The current scientific consensus is that no single factor is causing CCD , but that some of these factors in combination may lead to CCD either additively or synergistically . 
 In 2006 , the Colony Collapse Disorder Working Group , based primarily at Pennsylvania State University , was established . Their preliminary report pointed out some patterns , but drew no strong conclusions . A survey of beekeepers early in 2007 indicated most hobbyist beekeepers believed that starvation was the leading cause of death in their colonies , while commercial beekeepers overwhelmingly believed invertebrate pests ( Varroa mites , honey bee tracheal mites , and / or small hive beetles ) were the leading cause of colony mortality . A scholarly review in June 2007 similarly addressed numerous theories and possible contributing factor , but left the issue unresolved . 
 In July 2007 , the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) released its " CCD Action Plan " , which outlined a strategy for addressing CCD consisting of four main components : survey and data collection ; analysis of samples ; hypothesis @-@ driven research ; mitigation and preventive action . The first annual report of the U.S. Colony Collapse Disorder Steering Committee was published in 2009 . It suggested CCD may be caused by the interaction of many agents in combination . The same year , the CCD Working Group published a comprehensive descriptive study that concluded : " Of the 61 variables quantified ( including adult bee physiology , pathogen loads , and pesticide levels ) , no single factor was found with enough consistency to suggest one causal agent . Bees in CCD colonies had higher pathogen loads and were co @-@ infected with more pathogens than control populations , suggesting either greater pathogen exposure or reduced defenses in CCD bees . " 
 The second annual Steering Committee report was released in November 2010 . The group reported , although many associations , including pesticides , parasites , and pathogens have been identified throughout the course of research , " it is becoming increasingly clear that no single factor alone is responsible for [ CCD ] " . Their findings indicated an absence of damaging levels of the parasite Nosema or parasitic Varroa mites at the time of collapse . They did find an association of sublethal effects of some pesticides with CCD , including two common miticides in particular , coumaphos and fluvalinate , which are pesticides registered for use by beekeepers to control varroa mites . Studies also identified sublethal effects of neonicotinoids and fungicides , pesticides that may impair the bees ' immune systems and may leave them more susceptible to bee viruses . 
 A 2015 review examined 170 studies on colony collapse disorder and stressors for bees , including pathogens , agrochemicals , declining biodiversity , climate change and more . The review concluded that " a strong argument can be made that it is the interaction among parasites , pesticides , and diet that lies at the heart of current bee health problems . " Furthermore : 
 " Bees of all species are likely to encounter multiple stressors during their lives , and each is likely to reduce the ability of bees to cope with the others . A bee or bee colony that appears to have succumbed to a pathogen may not have died if it had not also been exposed to a sublethal dose of a pesticide and / or been subject to food stress ( which might in turn be due to drought or heavy rain induced by climate change , or competition from a high density of honey bee hives placed nearby ) . Unfortunately , conducting well @-@ replicated studies of the effects of multiple interacting stressors on bee colonies is exceedingly difficult . The number of stressor combinations rapidly becomes large , and exposure to stressors is hard or impossible to control with free @-@ flying bees . Nonetheless , a strong argument can be made that it is the interaction among parasites , pesticides , and diet that lies at the heart of current bee health problems . " 
 = = = Pesticides = = = 
 According to the USDA , pesticides may be contributing to CCD . A 2013 peer @-@ reviewed literature review concluded neonicotinoids in the amounts typically used harm bees and safer alternatives are urgently needed . At the same time , other sources suggest the evidence is not conclusive , and that clarity regarding the facts is hampered by the role played by various issue advocates and lobby groups . 
 Scientists have long been concerned that pesticides , including possibly some fungicides , may have sublethal effects on bees , not killing them outright , but instead impairing their development and behavior . Of special interest is the class of insecticides called neonicotinoids , which contain the active ingredient imidacloprid , and other similar chemicals , such as clothianidin and thiamethoxam . Honey bees may be affected by such chemicals when they are used as a seed treatment because they are known to work their way through the plant up into the flowers and leave residues in the nectar . The doses taken up by bees are not lethal , but possible chronic problems could be caused by long @-@ term exposure . Most corn grown in the US is treated with neonicotinoids , and a 2012 study found high levels of clothianidin in pneumatic planter exhaust . In the study , the insecticide was present in the soil of <unk> fields near those planted with corn and on dandelions growing near those fields . Another 2012 study also found clothianidin and imidacloprid in the exhaust of pneumatic seeding equipment . 
 A 2010 survey reported 98 pesticides and metabolites detected in aggregate concentrations up to 214 ppm in bee pollen ; this figure represents over half of the individual pesticide incidences ever reported for apiaries . It was suggested that " while exposure to many of these <unk> elicits acute and sublethal reductions in honey bee fitness , the effects of these materials in combinations and their direct association with CCD or declining bee health remains to be determined . " 
 Evaluating pesticide contributions to CCD is particularly difficult for several reasons . First , the variety of pesticides in use in the different areas reporting CCD makes it difficult to test for all possible pesticides simultaneously . Second , many commercial beekeeping operations are mobile , transporting hives over large geographic distances over the course of a season , potentially exposing the colonies to different pesticides at each location . Third , the bees themselves place pollen and honey into long @-@ term storage , effectively meaning a delay may occur from days to months before contaminated provisions are fed to the colony , negating any attempts to associate the appearance of symptoms with the actual time at which exposure to pesticides occurred . 
 Pesticides used on bee forage are far more likely to enter the colony by the pollen stores rather than nectar ( because pollen is carried externally on the bees , while nectar is carried internally , and may kill the bee if too toxic ) , though not all potentially lethal chemicals , either natural or man @-@ made , affect the adult bees ; many primarily affect the brood , but brood die @-@ off does not appear to be happening in CCD . Most significantly , brood are not fed honey , and adult bees consume relatively little pollen ; accordingly , the pattern in CCD suggests , if contaminants or toxins from the environment ' are ' responsible , it is most likely to be via the honey , as the adults are dying ( or leaving ) , not the brood ( though possibly effects of contaminated pollen consumed by juveniles may only show after they have developed into adults ) . 
 To date , most of the evaluation of possible roles of pesticides in CCD have relied on the use of surveys submitted by beekeepers , but direct testing of samples from affected colonies seems likely to be needed , especially given the possible role of systemic insecticides such as the neonicotinoid imidacloprid ( which are applied to the soil and taken up into the plant 's tissues , including pollen and nectar ) , which may be applied to a crop when the beekeeper is not present . The known effects of imidacloprid on insects , including honey bees , are consistent with the symptoms of CCD ; for example , the effects of imidacloprid on termites include apparent failure of the immune system , and disorientation . 
 In Europe , the interaction of the phenomenon of " dying bees " with imidacloprid has been discussed for quite some time . A study from the " Comité Scientifique et Technique ( CST ) " was at the center of discussion , and led to a partial ban of imidacloprid in France . The imidacloprid pesticide Gaucho was banned in 1999 by the French Minister of Agriculture Jean <unk> , primarily due to concern over potential effects on honey bees . Subsequently , when fipronil , a <unk> insecticide and in Europe mainly labeled " Regent " , was used as a replacement , it was also found to be toxic to bees , and banned partially in France in 2004 . 
 In February 2007 , about 40 French deputies , led by Jacques <unk> of the UMP , requested the creation of a parliamentary investigation commission on <unk> of bees , underlining that honey production had decreased by 1 @,@ 000 tons a year for a decade . By August 2007 , no investigation had opened . Five other insecticides based on fipronil were also accused of killing bees . However , the scientific committees of the European Union are still of the opinion " that the available monitoring studies were mainly performed in France and EU @-@ member @-@ states should consider the relevance of these studies for the circumstances in their country . " 
 Around the same time French beekeepers succeeded in banning neonicotinoids , the Clinton administration permitted pesticides which were previously banned , including imidacloprid . In 2004 , the Bush administration reduced regulations further and pesticide applications increased . 
 In 2005 , a team of scientists led by the National Institute of Beekeeping in Bologna , Italy , found pollen obtained from seeds dressed with imidacloprid contain significant levels of the insecticide , and suggested the polluted pollen might cause honey bee colony death . Analysis of maize and sunflower crops originating from seeds dressed with imidacloprid suggest large amounts of the insecticide will be carried back to honey bee colonies . <unk> doses of imidacloprid in sucrose solution have also been documented to affect homing and foraging activity of honey bees . <unk> in sucrose solution fed to bees in the laboratory impaired their communication for a few hours . <unk> doses of imidacloprid in laboratory and field experiment decreased flight activity and olfactory discrimination , and olfactory learning performance was impaired . 
 Research , in 2008 , by scientists from Pennsylvania State University found high levels of the pesticides fluvalinate and coumaphos in samples of wax from hives , as well as lower levels of 70 other pesticides . These chemicals have been used to try to eradicate varroa mites , a bee pest that itself has been thought to be a cause of CCD . Researchers from Washington State University , under entomology professor Steve Sheppard in 2009 , confirmed high levels of pesticide residue in hive wax and found an association between it and significantly reduced bee longevity . 
 The WSU work also focused on the impact of the microsporidian pathogen Nosema ceranae , the build @-@ up of which was high in the majority of the bees tested , even after large doses of the antibiotic fumagillin . Penn State 's Dr. Maryann Frazier said , " Pesticides alone have not shown they are the cause of CCD . We believe that it is a combination of a variety of factors , possibly including mites , viruses and pesticides . " 
 In 2010 , fipronil was blamed for the spread of CCD among bees , in a study by the Minutes @-@ Association for Technical Coordination Fund in France , which found that even at very low nonlethal doses , this pesticide still impairs the ability to locate the hive , resulting in large numbers of foragers lost with every pollen @-@ finding expedition , though no mention was made regarding any of the other symptoms of CCD ; other studies , however , have shown no acute effect of fipronil on honey bees . <unk> is designed to eliminate insects similar to bees , such as yellowjackets ( Vespula germanica ) and many other colonial pests by a process of ' toxic baiting ' , whereby one insect returning to the hive spreads the pesticide among the brood . 
 A large 2010 survey of healthy and CCD @-@ affected colonies also revealed elevated levels of pesticides in wax and pollen , but the amounts of pesticides were similar in both failing and healthy hives . They also confirmed suspected links between CCD and poor colony health , inadequate diet , and long @-@ distance transportation . Studies continue to show very high levels of pathogens in CCD @-@ affected samples and lower pathogen levels in unaffected samples , consistent with the empirical observation that healthy honey bee colonies normally fend off pathogens . These observations have led to the hypothesis that bee declines are resulting from immune suppression . 
 In 2010 , a sequencing of the honey bee genome provided a possible explanation for the sensitivity of bees to pesticides . Its genome is deficient in the number of genes encoding detoxification enzymes , including cytochrome P450 <unk> ( <unk> ) , glutathione @-@ S @-@ transferases , and <unk> . 
 In 2012 , researchers announced findings that sublethal exposure to imidacloprid rendered honey bees significantly more susceptible to infection by the fungus Nosema , thereby suggesting a potential link to CCD , given that Nosema is increasingly considered to contribute to CCD . 
 <unk> may interfere with bees ' natural homing abilities , causing them to become disoriented and preventing them from finding their way back to the hive . 
 Also , in 2012 , researchers in Italy published findings that the pneumatic drilling machines that plant corn seeds coated with clothianidin and imidacloprid release large amounts of the pesticide into the air , causing significant mortality in foraging honey bees . According to the study , " Experimental results show that the environmental release of particles containing neonicotinoids can produce high exposure levels for bees , with lethal effects compatible with colony losses phenomena observed by beekeepers . " Commonly used pesticides , such as the imidacloprid , reduce colony growth and new queen production in experimental exposure matched to field levels . Lu et al . ( 2012 ) reported they were able to replicate CCD with imidacloprid . Another neonicotinoid , thiamethoxam , causes navigational homing failure of foraging bees , with high mortality . 
 A 2012 in situ study provided strong evidence that exposure to sublethal levels of imidacloprid in high fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) used to feed honey bees when forage is not available causes bees to exhibit symptoms consistent to CCD 23 weeks after imidacloprid dosing . The researchers suggested , " the observed delayed mortality in honey bees caused by imidacloprid in HFCS is a novel and plausible mechanism for CCD , and should be validated in future studies . " 
 In March 2013 , two studies were published showing that neonicotinoids affect bee long @-@ term and short @-@ term memory , suggesting a cause of action resulting in failure to return to the hive . In another study done in 2013 , scientists reported that experiments suggested that exposure to the neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin and <unk> results in increased levels of a particular protein in bees that inhibits a key molecule involved in the immune response , making the insects more susceptible to attack by harmful viruses . Growth in the use of neonicotinoid pesticides has roughly tracked rising bee deaths . In 2015 , an 11 @-@ year British study showed a definitive relationship between increasing agricultural use of neonicotinoid and escalating honey bee colony losses at a landscape level . This is the first field study to establish a link between neonicotinoids and CCD . 
 In July 2013 , scientists from the University of Maryland and the US Department of Agriculture found that a combination of pesticides has been contaminating the pollen bees use to feed their hives . When researchers collected pollen from hives on the east coast , they discovered that it was contaminated ( on average ) with 9 different fungicides and pesticides , although scientists found a blend of 21 different agricultural chemicals in one sample of pollen . Eight ag chemicals were identified to be associated with increased risk of infection by Nosema ceranae . 
 A meta @-@ analysis study published in February 2016 strongly suggests a pattern linking imidacloprid to sublethal effects on honey bees , stating : " trace dietary imidacloprid at field @-@ realistic levels in nectar will have no lethal effects , but will reduce expected performance in honey bees by between 6 and 20 % . Statistical power analysis showed that published field trials that have reported no effects on honey bees from neonicotinoids were incapable of detecting these predicted sublethal effects with conventionally accepted levels of certainty . " 
 = = = = European Food Safety Authority statement = = = = 
 In 2012 , several peer @-@ reviewed independent studies were published showing that neonicotinoids had previously undetected routes of exposure affecting bees including through dust , pollen , and nectar and that <unk> toxicity resulted in failure to return to the hive without immediate lethality , one primary symptom of CCD . Research also showed environmental persistence in agricultural irrigation channels and soil . These reports prompted a formal peer review by the European Food Safety Authority , which stated in January 2013 that some neonicotinoids pose an unacceptably high risk to bees , and identified several data gaps not previously considered . Their review concluded , " A high acute risk to honey bees was identified from exposure via dust drift for the seed treatment uses in maize , oilseed rape and cereals . A high acute risk was also identified from exposure via residues in nectar and / or pollen . " Dave Goulson , an author of one of the studies which prompted the EFSA review , has suggested that industry science pertaining to neonicotinoids may have been deliberately deceptive , and the UK Parliament has asked manufacturer Bayer <unk> to explain discrepancies in evidence they have submitted to an investigation . 
 = = = = <unk> banned by European Union = = = = 
 Early in 2013 , the European Food Safety Authority issued a declaration that three specific neonicotinoid pesticides pose an acute risk to honey bees , and the European Commission ( EC ) proposed a two @-@ year ban on them . David Goulson , who led one of the key 2012 studies at the University of Stirling , said the decision " begs the question of what was going on when these chemicals were first approved . " The chemical manufacturer Bayer said it was " ready to work with " the EC and member states . In April 2013 , the European Union voted for a two @-@ year restriction on neonicotinoid insecticides . The ban will restrict the use of imidacloprid , clothianidin , and thiamethoxam for use on crops that are attractive to bees . Eight nations voted against the motion , including the British government , which argued that the science was incomplete . The ban can be seen as an application of the " precautionary principle " , established at the 1992 Rio Conference on the Environment and Development , which advocates that " lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost @-@ effective measures to prevent environmental degradation . " 
 = = = = Initiatives to ban neonicotinoids in the United States = = = = 
 In March 2013 , professional beekeepers and environmentalists jointly filed a lawsuit against the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) for continuing to allow the use of neonicotinoids in the United States . The suit specifically asks for suspension of clothianidin and thiamethoxam . The lawsuit follows a dramatic die off of bees in the United States , with some beekeepers losing 50 % of their hives . The EPA responded to the suit by issuing a report blaming the Varroa mite for the decline in bees and claiming the role of neonicotinoids in bee extinction has been overstated . 
 Also in 2013 , the Save America 's Pollinators Act of 2013 ( H.R. <unk> ) was introduced in Congress . The proposed act asks that neonicotinoids be suspended until a full review of their impacts has occurred . The bill was reintroduced on 4 March 2015 as the Saving America 's Pollinators Act ( H.R. 1284 ) , where it is currently being debated by the House Subcommittee on Biotechnology , Horticulture , and Research . 
 = = = Pathogens and immunodeficiency theories = = = 
 Early researchers commented that the pathway of propagation functions in the manner of a contagious disease ; however , some sentiment existed that the disorder may involve an immunosuppressive mechanism , potentially linked to " stress " leading to a weakened immune system . Specifically , according to research done in 2007 at the Pennsylvania State University : " The magnitude of detected infectious agents in the adult bees suggests some type of immunosuppression " . These researchers initially suggested a connection between Varroa destructor mite infestation and CCD , suggesting that a combination of these bee mites , deformed wing virus ( which the mites transmit ) and bacteria work together to suppress immunity and may be one cause of CCD . Parasites , such as varroa mites ( Varroa destructor ) , honey bee tracheal mites ( <unk> <unk> ) , fungal , bacterial and viral diseases , and kleptoparasites such as small hive beetles ( <unk> <unk> ) , are all problems that have been introduced within the last 20 years in the continental U.S. , and are faced by beekeepers . 
 When a colony is dying , for whatever cause , and other healthy colonies are nearby ( as is typical in a bee yard ) , those healthy colonies often enter the dying colony and rob its provisions for their own use . If the dying colony 's provisions were contaminated ( by natural or man @-@ made toxins ) , the resulting pattern ( of healthy colonies becoming sick when in proximity to a dying colony ) might suggest to an observer that a contagious disease is involved . However , it is typical in CCD cases that provisions of dying colonies are not being robbed , suggesting that at least this particular mechanism ( toxins being spread via robbing , thereby mimicking a disease ) is not involved in CCD . Additional evidence that CCD is an infectious disease came from the following observations : the hives of colonies that had died from CCD could be reused with a healthy colony only if they were first treated with DNA @-@ destroying radiation , and the CCD Working Group report in 2010 indicated that CCD @-@ exhibiting hives tended to occur in proximity to one another within apiaries . 
 <unk> , an organophosphate , is lipophilic , and so accumulates in wax . Increased levels of compound in wax have been shown to decrease survivorship of developing queens . 
 = = = = Varroa mites = = = = 
 According to a 2007 article , the mite Varroa destructor remains the world 's most destructive honey bee killer , due in part to the viruses it carries , including deformed wing virus and acute bee paralysis virus , which have both been implicated in CCD . Affliction with Varroa mites also tends to weaken the immune system of the bees . Dr. <unk> Guzman , an entomological researcher at the University of Guelph in Canada , studied 413 Ontario bee colonies in 2007 – 08 . About 27 % of hives did not survive the winter , and the Varroa mite was identified as the cause in 85 % of the cases . Varroa mites also affect the queen 's ability to reproduce which is detrimental to the survival of the hive . As such , Varroa mites have been considered as a possible cause of CCD , though not all dying colonies contain these mites . 
 = = = = Israeli acute paralysis virus = = = = 
 In 2004 , Israeli acute paralysis virus ( IAPV ) , was discovered in Israel and at one time it was considered the cause of CCD . It was named after the place it was first identified ; its place of origin is unknown . In September 2007 , results of a large @-@ scale statistical RNA sequencing study of afflicted and <unk> colonies were reported . RNA from all organisms in a colony was sequenced and compared with sequence databases to detect the presence of pathogens . All colonies were found to be infected with numerous pathogens , but only the IAPV virus showed a significant association with CCD : the virus was found in 25 of the 30 tested CCD colonies , and only in one of the 21 tested non @-@ CCD colonies . 
 Research in 2009 has found that an indicator for an impaired protein production is common among all bees affected by CCD , a pattern consistent with IAPV infection . It is conjectured that <unk> , like the IAPV , cause degradation of the ribosomes , which are responsible for protein production of cells , and that this reduced ribosomal function weakens the bees , making them more vulnerable to factors that might not otherwise be lethal . 
 = = = = Nosema = = = = 
 Some have suggested the syndrome may be an inability by beekeepers to correctly identify known diseases such as European <unk> or the microsporidian fungus Nosema apis . The testing and diagnosis of samples from affected colonies ( already performed ) makes this highly unlikely , as the symptoms are fairly well known and differ from what is classified as CCD . A high rate of Nosema infection was reported in samples of bees from Pennsylvania , but this pattern was not reported from samples elsewhere . 
 When healthy bees are fed pollen filled with fungicides , insecticides and other agriculture chemicals , they are more likely to be infected by Nosema ceranae , a parasitic microsporidian fungus associated with widespread death of honey bees . Hives of western honey bees infected with Nosema ceranae are wiped out within eight days indicating that CCD may be caused by N. ceranae . A research team claim to have ruled out many other potential causes , however , a 2009 survey of US CCD @-@ affected bee populations found only about half of the colonies sampled , both in CCD and control populations , were infected with N. ceranae . 
 The primary antifungal agent used against Nosema is fumagillin , which has been used in a German research project to reduce the microsporidian 's impact , and is mentioned as a possible remedy by the <unk> . <unk> also claims to have successfully cured colonies with fumagillin . A review of these results described these results as promising , but cautioned " N. ceranae may not be to blame for all cases of colony collapse " . Various areas in Europe have reported this fungus , but no direct link to CCD has yet been established . 
 In 2007 , N. ceranae was reported in a few hives in California . The researcher did not , however , believe this was conclusive evidence of a link to CCD ; " We don 't want to give anybody the impression that this thing has been solved " . A USDA bee scientist has similarly stated , " while the parasite Nosema ceranae may be a factor , it cannot be the sole cause . The fungus has been seen before , sometimes in colonies that were healthy " . 
 N. ceranae has been detected in honey bees from several states using PCR of the 16S gene . In New York , N. ceranae was detected in 49 counties , and of the 1 @,@ 200 honey bee samples collected , 528 ( 44 % ) were positive for Nosema , from which , PCR analysis of 371 spore positive samples revealed 96 % were N. ceranae , 3 % had both N. ceranae and N. apis , and 1 % had N. apis only . 
 = = = = Viral and fungal combination = = = = 
 A University of Montana and Montana State University team of scientists headed by Jerry Bromenshenk and working with the US Army 's Edgewood Chemical Biological Center published a paper in October 2010 saying that a new DNA virus , invertebrate iridescent virus or <unk> , and the fungus Nosema ceranae were found in every killed colony the group studied . In their study , they found neither agent alone seemed deadly , but a combination of the virus and N. ceranae was always 100 % fatal . Information about the study was released to the public in a front page article in The New York Times . A few days later , an article was published in Fortune Magazine with the title , " What a scientist didn 't tell the New York Times about his study on bee deaths " . Professor of entomology at Penn State University James Frazier , who is currently researching the sublethal impact of pesticides on bees , said that while Bromenshenk 's study generated some useful data , Bromenshenk has a conflict of interest as CEO of a company developing scanners to diagnose bee diseases . A few months later , the methods used to interpret the mass spectrometry data in the Bromenshenk study were called into question , raising doubts as to whether <unk> was ever correctly identified in any of the samples examined . 
 = = = Fungicides = = = 
 In 2013 , researchers collected pollen from hives and fed it to healthy bees . The pollen had an average of nine different pesticides and fungicides . Further , the researchers discovered that bees that ate pollen with fungicides were three times more likely to be infected by parasites . Their study shows that fungicides , thought harmless to bees , may actually play a significant role in CCD . Their research also showed that spraying practices may need to be reviewed because the bees sampled by the authors foraged not from crops , but almost exclusively from weeds and wildflowers , suggesting that bees are more widely exposed to pesticides than thought . 
 Dennis <unk> , an entomologist at the University of Maryland , has been quoted as saying " Fungicides , which we didn 't expect to harm insects , seem to have a sub @-@ lethal effect on bee health " . He went on further to state this is important because fungicides are not heavily regulated . 
 = = = Antibiotics and miticides = = = 
 Most beekeepers affected by CCD report that they use antibiotics and miticides in their colonies , though the lack of uniformity as to which particular chemicals are used makes it seem unlikely that any single such chemical is involved . However , it is possible that not all such chemicals in use have been tested for possible effects on honey bees , and could therefore potentially be contributing to the CCD phenomenon . 
 = = = = <unk> / coumaphos = = = = 
 In 2008 high levels of the pesticides fluvalinate and coumaphos were found in samples of wax from hives , as well as lower levels of 70 other pesticides . These chemicals have been used to try to eradicate varroa mites , a bee pest that itself has been thought to be a cause of CCD . A 2009 study confirmed high levels of pesticide residue in hive wax and found an association between the pesticide and reduced bee longevity . Nosema ceranae , was found in high concentrations in the majority of the bees tested , even after administering large doses of the antibiotic fumagillin . Maryann Frazier commented , " Pesticides alone have not shown they are the cause of CCD . We believe that it is a combination of a variety of factors , possibly including mites , viruses and pesticides . " 
 = = = Climate Change = = = 
 Studies in Europe and North America have shown dramatic declines in bee colonies . The U.S. has lost 59 % of its bee colonies since 1947 , and Europe has lost over 25 % since 1985 . Determining the causes of bee colony collapse is crucial to the global economy , as bee pollination assists with 9 @.@ 5 % of the global agricultural production worth billions of dollars . 
 Through ecological modeling and retrospective studies , research has shown a link between bee colony collapse and climate change . Although the shifting weather conditions themselves negatively affect bees , the link between colony collapse and climate change is also closely tied to the interaction between bees ’ climatic niches and food @-@ plant reductions . Climate change affects the floral environment by stunting flower development and nectar production , which in turn directly impacts colonies ’ abilities to collect pollen and sustain themselves . 
 As weather conditions shift due to climate change , bees change their behaviors . When it rains , bees do not go out and during extremely hot weather they try to gather water to keep the colony cool . <unk> have predicted that the occurrence of extreme weather events ( such as intense rainy seasons and prolonged drought ) will increase as the climate continues to change . Additionally , in regions that experience increasingly more rain , pollen will be washed away more easily making it more difficult for bees to provide for their colonies . Meanwhile , in environments experiencing prolonged drought , flower environments may dwindle with dry weather . These patterns lead to less suitable and viable environments in which bees can thrive . A British journal published projections of plant diversity loss against spatial sensitivity ; the researchers found major species loss in the southern part of the UK forcing bee colonies further north . 
 Since it can take decades of studying climate change and tracking bee colonies to find correlations between them , many researchers have turned to ecological modeling . In a Brazilian study , researchers investigated the impact that climate change will have on ten endemic bee species in various future climatic scenarios . It is known that moderate temperatures and high relative humidity impacts flight activity and foraging behavior in bee species such as <unk> and <unk> . As a result , the scientists predict that in scenarios where temperatures continue to increase and humidity continues to decrease the only suitable climates for bees in Brazil will be in the more mountainous environments . The most optimistic scenario estimated climate change would still lead to a five percent reduction in these species ’ populations . While this may not seem like a large change , bees are very sensitive to the effects of small population size ; small populations can lead to reduced genetic variability and decreased fitness . As a result of this sensitivity , fragmented habitat are less likely to support a viable population and may lead to additional colony collapse . 
 From these models , researchers also predict that bee populations will start declining most significantly in the southern latitudes with lagging range expansion in the north . Kerr and his colleagues found that as the climate has shifted and bumblebees have been forced to operate outside of their thermal ranges , causing range losses along the species ’ southern limits . However , the study also found that while other flora and fauna have expanded their northerly ranges to account for the climate shifts , bumblebees have not expanded farther north . The most important findings in this study came from statistical models built to study whether or not these range shifts were due to confounding factors such as pesticide use or changes in land cover . The researchers found that climate change had the most meaningful impact on range shifts and bee distributions . To support these findings , the scientists note that failure for the bumblebee to respond to thermal changes and expand their northern range underscores the idea that bumblebees are susceptible to climate change . 
 One of the most significant studies on climate change and bees examined the species , B. <unk> and B. sylvarum between 2000 and 2006 in the UK . The study showed that as the climate of western Europe warmed , these two bee species experienced range declines and narrower climatic niches pushing them to the fringes of their environments . Geographically and climatically we expect this , as climate change continues bees will move and abandon areas of drought and migrate towards the fringes , as this has already been seen within desert oases . Europe has done significant work in tracking bee colony changes within the regions . Additional longitudinal surveillance needs to be conducted in other regions of the globe among a wider array bee species in order to build the body of research surrounding the impact of climate change on bees . 
 = = = Bee rentals and migratory beekeeping = = = 
 Since U.S. beekeeper Nephi Miller first began moving his hives to different areas of the country for the winter of 1908 , migratory beekeeping has become widespread in America . Bee rental for pollination is a crucial element of U.S. agriculture , which could not produce anywhere near its current levels with native pollinators alone . U.S. beekeepers collectively earn much more from renting their bees out for pollination than they do from honey production . 
 Researchers are concerned that trucking colonies around the country to pollinate crops , where they intermingle with other bees from all over , helps spread viruses and mites among colonies . Additionally , such continuous movement and re @-@ settlement is considered by some a strain and disruption for the entire hive , possibly rendering it less resistant to all sorts of systemic disorder . 
 = = = Selective commercial breeding and lost genetic diversity in industrial apiculture = = = 
 Most of the focus on CCD has been toward environmental factors . CCD is a condition recognised for greatest impact in regions of ' industrial ' or agricultural use of commercially bred bee colonies . Natural breeding and colony reproduction of wild bees is a complex and highly selective process , leading to a diverse genetic makeup in large populations of bees , both within and between colonies . Genetic diversity through sexual reproduction is a significant evolutionary factor in resistance to parasites and infectious diseases . Many artificially bred species , especially domestic and agricultural species , suffer from lack of genetic <unk> resulting in increased risk of <unk> diseases , loss of vitality or vigour , and heightened uniform susceptibility to infectious diseases . There may be an analogy in artificially introduced invasive ants , which displace native species by their ecological release and <unk> ( a manifestation of genetic homogeneity ) , only to suffer collapse of colonies attributed to lack of genetic diversity . Displaced indigenous species rebounded from residual populations . 
 Industrial apiculture has adopted simple breeding programs for uniform desired traits , and seasonal transportation of colonies over vast distances causes increased infectious exposures from mixing of these domestic and residual displaced wild populations . Brood incubation conditions may be stressful with respect to deficient nutrition , temperature and other basics . This combination of ecological factors , especially the host factor of loss of genetic variation and hybrid vigor , may account for the apparent multifactorial environmental ' causes ' of CCD including concurrent infections . 
 = = = Malnutrition = = = 
 In 2007 , one of the patterns reported by the CCD Study Group at Pennsylvania State was that all producers in a preliminary survey noted a period of " extraordinary stress " affecting the colonies in question prior to their die @-@ off , most commonly involving poor nutrition and / or drought . This was the only factor that all of the cases of CCD had in common in the report ; accordingly , there appeared to be at least some significant possibility that the phenomenon was correlated to nutritional stress that may not manifest in healthy , well @-@ nourished colonies . This was similar to the findings of another independent survey done in 2007 in which small @-@ scale beekeeping operations ( up to 500 colonies ) in several states reported their belief that malnutrition and / or weak colonies was the factor responsible for their bees dying in over 50 % of the cases , whether the losses were believed to be due to CCD or not . 
 Some researchers have attributed the syndrome to the practice of feeding high @-@ fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) to supplement winter stores . The variability of HFCS may be relevant to the apparent inconsistencies of results . One European writer has suggested a possible connection with HFCS produced from genetically modified corn . 
 Other researchers state that colony collapse disorder is mainly a problem of feeding the bees a monoculture diet when they should receive food from a variety of sources / plants . In winter , these bees are given a single food source such as corn syrup ( high @-@ fructose or other ) , sugar and pollen substitute . In summer , they may only pollinate a single crop ( e.g. , almonds , cherries , or apples ) . The monoculture diet is attributed to bee rentals and migratory bee keeping . Honey bees are only being introduced to select commercial crops such as corn . These single pollen diets are greatly inferior to mixed pollen diets . However , there are a few <unk> that are acceptable for honey bees to be introduced to exclusively , including sweet clover and mustard . 
 A study published in 2010 found that bees that were fed pollen from a variety of different plant species showed signs of having a healthier immune system than those eating pollen from a single species . Bees fed pollen from five species had higher levels of glucose oxidase than bees fed pollen from one species , even if the pollen had a higher protein content . The authors hypothesised that CCD may be linked to a loss of plant diversity . Researches found a proper diet that does lead to a healthy honey bee population . " The authors recommended a diet containing 1000 ppm potassium , 500 ppm calcium , 300 ppm magnesium and 50 ppm each of sodium , zinc , manganese , iron and copper . " 
 The lack of variance in plant pollen does not appear to affect a healthy colony of honey bees however . Once a fungus or parasite invades a colony , research has proven that honey bees introduced to a wider variety of pollen are much more likely to survive longer due to receiving key nutrients and alkaloids like zinc . 
 A 2013 study found that p @-@ <unk> acid , which is normally present in honey , assists bees in detoxifying certain pesticides . Its absence in artificial nutrients fed to bees may therefore contribute to CCD . 
 = = = Electromagnetic radiation = = = 
 A study on the non @-@ thermal effects of radio frequency ( RF ) on honey bees ( Apis mellifera <unk> ) reported there were no changes in behavior due to RF exposure from <unk> cordless phone base stations operating at 1 @,@ 880 – 1 @,@ 900 MHz however , a later study established that close @-@ range electromagnetic field ( EMF ) may reduce the ability of bees to return to their hive . In the course of their study , one half of their colonies broke down , including some of their controls which did not have <unk> base stations embedded in them . In April 2007 , news of this study appeared in various media outlets , beginning with an article in The Independent , which stated that the subject of the study included mobile phones and had related them to CCD . Though cellular phones were implicated by other media reports at the time , they were not covered in the study . Researchers involved have since stated that their research did not include findings on cell phones , or their relationship to CCD , and indicated that the Independent article had misinterpreted their results and created " a horror story " . 
 A review of 919 peer @-@ reviewed scientific studies investigating the effects of EMF on wildlife , humans and plants included seven studies involving honey bees ; six of these reported negative effects from exposure to EMF radiation , but none specifically demonstrated any link to CCD . The review noted that according to one study , when active mobile phones were kept inside beehives , worker bees stopped coming to the hives after 10 days . The same study also found drastic decrease in the egg production of queen bees in these colonies and stated " electromagnetic radiation exposure provides a better explanation for Colony Collapse Disorder ( CCD ) than other theories " . The review authors concluded : " existing literature shows that the <unk> are interfering with the biological systems in more ways than one " and recommended recognising EMF as a pollutant . However , they also noted that " these studies are not representative of the real life situations or natural levels of EMF exposure . More studies need to be taken up to scientifically establish the link , if any , between the observed abnormalities and disorders in bee hives such as Colony Collapse Disorder ( CCD ) " . 
 = = = Parasitic phorid fly = = = 
 In 2012 , a parasitic fly ( <unk> borealis ) larva , known to prey on bumble bees and wasps , was found in a test tube containing a dead honey bee believed to have been affected by CCD , possibly indicating the phorid fly may be one cause of CCD . The mature fly lays eggs in the bee 's abdomen , which feed on the bee after hatching . Infected bees behave abnormally , foraging at night and gathering around lights like moths . Eventually the bee leaves the colony to die . The phorid fly larvae then emerge from the neck of the bee . 
 = = = Genetically modified crops = = = 
 In 2008 a meta @-@ analysis of 25 independent studies assessing effects of Bt Cry proteins on honeybee survival ( mortality ) showed that Bt proteins used in commercialized GE crops to control lepidopteran and <unk> pests do not negatively impact the survival of honeybee larvae or adults . Additionally , larvae consume only a small percent of their protein from pollen , and there is also a lack of geographic correlation between GM crop locations and regions where CCD occurs . 
 = = Management = = 
 As of 1 March 2007 , the Mid @-@ Atlantic <unk> Research and Extension Consortium ( <unk> ) offered the following tentative recommendations for beekeepers noticing the symptoms of CCD : 
 Do not combine collapsing colonies with strong colonies . 
 When a collapsed colony is found , store the equipment where you can use preventive measures to ensure that bees will not have access to it . 
 If you feed your bees sugar syrup , use <unk> . 
 If you are experiencing colony collapse and see a secondary infection , such as European <unk> , treat the colonies with <unk> , not <unk> . 
 Another proposed remedy for farmers of pollinated crops is simply to switch from using beekeepers to the use of native bees , such as bumble bees and mason bees . Native bees can be helped to establish themselves by providing suitable nesting locations and some additional crops the bees could use to feed from ( e.g. when the pollination season of the commercial crops on the farm has ended ) . 
 A British beekeeper successfully developed a strain of bees that are resistant to varroa mites . Russian honey bees also resist infestations of varroa mites but are still susceptible to other factors associated with colony collapse disorder , and have detrimental traits that limit their relevance in commercial apiculture . 
 In the United Kingdom , a national bee database was set up in March 2009 to monitor colony collapse as a result of a 15 % reduction in the bee population that had taken place over the previous two years . In particular , the register , funded by the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs and administered by the National Bee Unit , will be used to monitor health trends and help establish whether the honey industry is under threat from supposed colony collapse disorder . Britain 's 20 @,@ 000 beekeepers have been invited to participate . In October 2010 , David Aston of the British Beekeepers ’ Association stated , " We still do not believe CCD is a cause of colony losses in the UK , however we are continuing to experience colony losses , many if not most of which can be explained . The approach being taken in UK beekeeping is to raise the profile of integrated bee health management , in other words identifying and trying to eliminate factors which reduce the health status of a colony . This incorporates increasing the skill level of beekeepers through training and education , raising the profile of habitat destruction and its effect of forage ( nectar and pollen ) availability , and of course research on the incidence and distribution of diseases and conditions in the UK together with more applied research and development on providing solutions . " 
 = = Economic and ecological impact = = 
 Honey bees are not native to the Americas , therefore their necessity as pollinators in the U.S. and other regions in the Western Hemisphere is limited to strictly agricultural / ornamental uses , as no native plants require honey bee pollination , except where concentrated in monoculture situations — where the pollination need is so great at bloom time that pollinators must be concentrated beyond the capacity of native bees ( with current technology ) . 
 The phenomenon is particularly important for crops such as almond growing in California , where honey bees are the predominant pollinator and the crop value in 2011 was $ 3 @.@ 6 billion . In 2000 , the total U.S. crop value that was wholly dependent on honey bee pollination was estimated to exceed $ 15 billion . Because of such high demand in pollinators , the cost of renting honey bees has increased significantly , and California 's almond industry rents approximately 1 @.@ 6 million honey bee colonies during the spring to pollinate their crop . Worldwide , honeybees yield roughly $ 200 billion in pollination services . 
 They are responsible for pollination of approximately one third of the United States ' crop species , including such species as almonds , peaches , apples , pears , cherries , raspberries , blackberries , cranberries , watermelons , <unk> , cucumbers , and strawberries . Many , but not all , of these plants can be ( and often are ) pollinated by other insects in the U.S. , including other kinds of bees ( e.g. , squash bees on cucurbits ) , but typically not on a commercial scale . While some farmers of a few kinds of native crops do bring in honey bees to help pollinate , none specifically need them , and when honey bees are absent from a region , there is a presumption that native pollinators may reclaim the niche , typically being better adapted to serve those plants ( assuming that the plants normally occur in that specific area ) . 
 However , even though on a per @-@ individual basis , many other species are actually more efficient at pollinating , on the 30 % of crop types where honey bees are used , most native pollinators cannot be mass @-@ utilized as easily or as effectively as honey bees — in many instances they will not visit the plants at all . <unk> can be moved from crop to crop as needed , and the bees will visit many plants in large numbers , compensating via saturation pollination for what they lack in efficiency . The commercial viability of these crops is therefore strongly tied to the beekeeping industry . In China , hand pollination of apple orchards is labor @-@ intensive , time consuming , and costly . 
 In regions of the Old World where they are indigenous , honeybees ( Apis mellifera ) are among the most important pollinators , vital to sustain natural habitats there in addition to their value for human societies ( to sustain food resources ) . Where honeybee populations decline , there is also a decline in plant populations . In agriculture , some plants are completely dependent on honeybees to pollinate them to produce fruit , while other plants are only dependent on honeybees to enhance their capacity to produce better and healthier fruits . <unk> also help plants to reduce time between flowering and fruit set , which reduces risk from harmful factors such as pests , diseases , chemicals , weather , etc . Specialist plants that require honeybees will be at more risk if honeybees decline , whereas generalist plants that use other animals as pollinators ( or wind pollinating or self @-@ pollinating ) will suffer less because they have other sources of pollination . 
 With that said , honeybees perform some level of pollination of nearly 75 % of all plant species directly used for human food worldwide . Catastrophic loss of honeybees could have significant impact , therefore ; it is estimated that seven out of the 60 major agricultural crops in North American economy would be lost , and this is only for one region of the world . Farms that have intensive systems ( high density of crops ) will be impacted the most compared to non @-@ intensive systems ( small local gardens that depend on wild bees ) because of dependence on honeybees . These types of farms have a high demand for honeybee pollination services , which in the U.S. alone costs $ 1 @.@ 25 billion annually . This cost is offset , however , as honeybees as pollinators generate 22 @.@ 8 to 57 billion Euros globally . 
 = = Media = = 
 Silence of the Bees ( October 2007 ) is a part of the Nature television series and covers several recent investigative discoveries . 
 The 2009 documentary Vanishing of the Bees pointed to neonicotinoid pesticides as being the most likely culprit , though the experts interviewed concede that no firm data yet exists . 
 The 2010 feature @-@ length documentary Queen of the Sun : What are the bees telling us ? features interviews with beekeepers , scientists , farmers , and philosophers . 
 The 2012 documentary , Nicotine Bees , argues that neonicotinoid pesticides are principally responsible for Colony Collapse Disorder . 
 More than Honey , a 2012 documentary , examines the relationship between humans and bees and explores the possible causes of CCD . 
 = Reginald Fitz Jocelin = 
 Reginald fitz Jocelin ( sometimes Reginald Italus , Richard the Lombard , or Reginald <unk> ; died 26 December 1191 ) was a medieval Bishop of Bath and an Archbishop of Canterbury @-@ elect in England . A member of an Anglo @-@ Norman noble family , he was the son of a bishop , and was educated in Italy . He was a household clerk for Thomas Becket , but by 1167 he was serving King Henry II of England . He was also a favourite of King Louis VII of France , who had him appointed abbot of the Abbey of Corbeil . After Reginald angered Becket while attempting to help negotiate a settlement between Becket and the king , Becket called him " that offspring of fornication , that enemy to the peace of the Church , that traitor . " When he was elected as a bishop , the election was challenged by King Henry 's eldest son , Henry the Young King , and Reginald was forced to go to Rome to be confirmed by Pope Alexander III . He attended the Third Lateran Council in 1179 , and spent much of his time administering his diocese . He was elected Archbishop of Canterbury in 1191 , but died before he could be installed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reginald was the son of Josceline de Bohon , the Bishop of Salisbury , although he was possibly born before his father became a priest . Reginald was a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Humphrey de Bohun , one of the companions of William the Conqueror . Some sources say that he was born while his father was studying law in Italy . His uncle Richard de Bohon was Bishop of Coutances from 1151 to 1180 . He was also related to Robert , Earl of Gloucester . Savaric FitzGeldewin , Reginald 's successor at Bath , was Reginald 's father 's second cousin . Reginald 's mother may have a member of the family of the counts of Maurienne . He was born and brought up in Italy , which led to him sometimes being referred to as Reginald Italus , Reginald <unk> or Reginald the Lombard . He was appointed Archdeacon of Wiltshire by his father before 8 December 1161 , when he first signed a document as archdeacon . He served in Thomas Becket 's household after Becket became archbishop , and by June 1164 was serving Becket 's interests in France at both the court of the French King Louis VII and the papal Curia . It was probably in November 1164 that Louis named Reginald abbot of the Abbey of Corbeil . 
 Reginald probably studied at Paris sometime during 1163 or 1164 , as he had a letter of introduction from Pope Alexander III to Hugues de Champfleury , Bishop of Soissons , the chancellor of Louis VII . Reginald did not complete his studies for the title of master , however , as he was in service with the King of England by 1167 . He served King Henry II as a royal messenger to Rome during the crisis with Becket in 1167 . For the next four years , Reginald would be embroiled in the dispute and with trying to find a diplomatic solution to it . While serving Henry , Reginald incurred Becket 's displeasure enough that Becket called Reginald " that offspring of fornication , that enemy to the peace of the Church , that traitor . " However , John of Salisbury always maintained friendly relations with both Reginald and his father , even though John was a partisan of Becket 's . 
 Reginald took part in the negotiations in August and September 1169 that attempted to reach a settlement between Henry and Becket . These negotiations included papal <unk> and most of the Norman bishops and prominent abbots , as well as the royal clerks . However , the negotiations came to nothing , and led to Becket 's <unk> of Reginald . Reginald was one of the main clerics working for King Henry during the dispute with Becket , along with John of Oxford , Richard of Ilchester , and Geoffrey Ridel . Henry 's plans to reward the four with bishoprics in late 1170 probably precipitated the final crisis that led to Becket 's murder . 
 = = Bishop of Bath = = 
 Reginald was elected Bishop of Bath in late April 1173 , and was consecrated 23 June 1174 . However , Henry the Young King challenged the election , on the grounds of illegitimacy and an uncanonical election . Reginald went to Rome in the company of Richard of Dover , who had just been elected Archbishop of Canterbury and was facing a challenge from the Young King to his election . Reginald was confirmed by Pope Alexander III on 18 April 1174 with Walter Map alleging bribery as the only reason the election was confirmed . Ralph de Diceto , however , states that Reginald swore an oath that he was uninvolved in the death of Becket and that his birth took place before his father became a priest . During the dispute , Reginald 's friend Peter of Blois wrote him a letter , which is still extant , encouraging him to persevere . 
 As a bishop , Reginald was kept busy attending the king 's councils and the royal court , but also took part in the 1178 mission to Toulouse , led by Cardinal Pierre of San Crisogono , which attempted to deal with the Cathar heretics there . He attended the Third Lateran Council in 1179 . During the 1180s , he was more active in the affairs of his diocese , and appears less often in the secular affairs of the kingdom , but in 1189 he took part in the coronation of King Richard I of England . In April 1191 he was one of the persons selected to arbitrate between the chancellor William Longchamp and Prince John of England . He also attended the trial of William Longchamp on 5 October 1191 at Loddon Bridge between Reading and Windsor that dismissed Longchamp from his offices . He may have been an unsuccessful candidate for the chancellorship of England . He was active as a bishop : some 122 acta from his time as bishop survive . He built the hospital of St. John in Bath , as well as building extensively at Wells Cathedral and starting the construction of the Bishop 's Palace . He also issued a confirmation of the status of the town of Wells . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 Baldwin of Forde , the archbishop of Canterbury , died in 1190 , while on Crusade in Palestine . Early in 1191 , King Richard wrote to the cathedral chapter of Canterbury , which was composed of monks , not regular clergy , to recommend the election of William , who was Archbishop of <unk> , but this idea was not acted upon by the monks . In the autumn , William Longchamp , the chancellor , was driven from the kingdom by Walter de Coutances , who had been sent by the king to deal with the issue of Longchamp 's misgovernment , and Prince John . Walter then turned to the issue of the vacant see of Canterbury , and ordered an election to take place on 2 December , and several bishops as well as Prince John and Walter arrived early at Canterbury . But Reginald was elected to the Archbishopric of Canterbury on 27 November 1191 , by the monks . His election was an attempt by the monks to prevent a candidate unacceptable to them being forced on them , and his election was contested by Walter , who appealed to the papacy , and the monks <unk> . Reginald 's death on 26 December 1191 stopped the controversy and appeals . Reginald was probably chosen by the monks because he had supported the monks of Canterbury against their archbishop Baldwin of Forde in their dispute over the foundation of a church dedicated to Saint Thomas Becket . He died at Dogmersfield , Hampshire , and was buried at Bath . Before his death , he was admitted as a <unk> of Christ Church Priory , Canterbury , and was buried in the habit of a Benedictine monk . According to a monk of Eynsham Abbey , after Reginald 's death " he performed miraculous cures for certain weak and sick people . " The same source claimed Reginald wore a hair shirt under his episcopal vestments . 
 = Walt Disney Animation Studios = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios , headquartered at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , California , is an American animation studio that creates animated feature films , short films , and television specials for The Walt Disney Company . Founded on October 16 , 1923 , it is a division of The Walt Disney Studios . The studio has produced 55 feature films , from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) to Zootopia ( 2016 ) . 
 Originally founded as Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio in 1923 and incorporated as Walt Disney Productions in 1929 , the studio was exclusively dedicated to producing short films until it expanded into feature production in 1934 . In 1983 , Walt Disney Productions named its live @-@ action film studio Walt Disney Pictures . During a corporate restructuring in 1986 , Walt Disney Productions was renamed The Walt Disney Company and the animation division , renamed Walt Disney Feature Animation , became a subsidiary of its film division , The Walt Disney Studios . In 2006 , Walt Disney Feature Animation took on its current name , Walt Disney Animation Studios after Pixar Animation Studios was acquired by Disney in the same year . 
 For much of its existence , the studio was recognized as the premier American animation studio ; it developed many of the techniques , concepts , and principles that became standard practices of traditional animation . The studio also pioneered the art of storyboarding , which is now a standard technique used in both animated and live @-@ action filmmaking . The studio 's catalog of animated features is among Disney 's most notable assets , with the stars of its animated shorts – Mickey Mouse , Donald Duck , Goofy , and Pluto – becoming recognizable figures in popular culture and mascots for The Walt Disney Company as a whole . 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios , today managed by Edwin Catmull and John Lasseter ( who also manage Pixar ) , continues to produce films using both traditional animation and computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1923 – 29 : Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio = = = 
 Kansas City , Missouri , natives Walt Disney and Roy O. Disney founded the Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio in Los Angeles in 1923 , and got their start producing a series of silent Alice Comedies short films featuring a live @-@ action child actress in an animated world . The Alice Comedies were distributed by Margaret J. Winkler 's Winkler Pictures , which later also distributed a second Disney short subject series , the all @-@ animated Oswald the Lucky Rabbit , through Universal Pictures starting in 1927 . Upon relocating to California , the Disney brothers initially started working in their uncle Robert Disney 's garage at 4406 Kingswell Avenue in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles , then in October 1923 formally launched their studio in a small office on the rear side of a real estate agency 's office at <unk> Kingswell Avenue . In February 1924 , the studio moved next door to office space of its own at <unk> Kingswell Avenue . In 1925 , Disney put down a deposit on a new location at <unk> Hyperion Avenue in the nearby Silver Lake neighborhood , which came to be known as the Hyperion Studio to distinguish it from the studio 's other locations , and in January 1926 the studio moved there and took on the name the Walt Disney Studio . 
 Meanwhile , after the first year 's worth of Oswalds , Walt Disney attempted to renew his contract with Winkler Pictures , but Charles Mintz , who had taken over Margaret Winkler 's business after marrying her , wanted to force Disney to accept a lower advance payment for each Oswald short . Disney refused , and as Universal owned the rights to Oswald rather than Disney , Mintz set up his own animation studio to produce Oswald cartoons . Most of Disney 's staff was hired away by Mintz to move over , once Disney 's Oswald contract was done in mid @-@ 1928 . 
 Working in secret while the rest of the staff finished the remaining Oswalds on contract , Disney and his head animator Ub Iwerks led a small handful of loyal staffers in producing cartoons starring a new character named Mickey Mouse . The first two Mickey Mouse cartoons , Plane Crazy and The Galloping Gaucho , were previewed in limited engagements during the summer of 1928 . For the third Mickey cartoon , however , Disney produced a soundtrack , collaborating with musician Carl Stalling and businessman Pat Powers , who provided Disney with his bootlegged " Cinephone " sound @-@ on @-@ film process . Subsequently , the third Mickey Mouse cartoon , Steamboat Willie , became Disney 's first cartoon with synchronized sound , and was a major success upon its November 1928 debut at the West 57th Theatre in New York City . The Mickey Mouse series of sound cartoons , distributed by Powers through Celebrity Productions , quickly became the most popular cartoon series in the United States . A second Disney series of sound cartoons , the Silly Symphonies , debuted in 1929 with The Skeleton Dance . 
 = = = 1929 – 40 : <unk> , Silly Symphonies and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs = = = 
 In 1930 , disputes over finances between Disney and Powers led to Disney 's studio , reincorporated on December 16 , 1929 , as Walt Disney Productions , signing a new distribution contract with Columbia Pictures . Powers in return signed away Ub Iwerks , who began producing cartoons at his own studio . 
 Columbia distributed Disney 's shorts for two years before the Disney studio entered a new distribution deal with United Artists in 1932 . The same year , Disney signed a two @-@ year exclusive deal with Technicolor to utilize its new 3 @-@ strip color film process , which allowed for fuller @-@ color reproduction where previous color film processors could not . The result was the Silly Symphony Flowers and Trees , the first film commercially released in full Technicolor . Flowers and Trees was a major success , and all Silly Symphonies were subsequently produced in Technicolor . 
 By the early 1930s , Walt Disney had realized that the success of animated films depended upon telling emotionally gripping stories that would grab the audience and not let go , and this realization led him to create a separate " story department " with storyboard artists dedicated to story development . With well @-@ developed characters and an interesting story , the 1933 Technicolor Silly Symphony Three Little Pigs became a major box office and pop culture success , with its theme song " Who 's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf ? " becoming a popular chart hit . 
 In 1934 , Walt Disney gathered several key staff members and announced his plans to make his first feature animated film . Despite derision from most of the film industry , who dubbed the production " Disney 's Folly , " Disney proceeded undaunted into the production of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , which would become the first animated feature in English and Technicolor . Considerable training and development went into the production of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , and the studio greatly expanded with established animators , artists from other fields , and recent college graduates joining the studio to work on the film . The training classes , supervised by the head animators such as Les Clark , Norm Ferguson , and Art Babbit and taught by Donald W. Graham , an art teacher from the nearby Chouinard Art Institute , had begun at the studio in 1932 and were greatly expanded into orientation training and continuing education classes . In the course of teaching the classes , Graham and the animators created or formalized many of the techniques and processes that became the key tenets and principles of traditional animation . Silly Symphonies such as The Goddess of Spring ( 1934 ) and The Old Mill ( 1937 ) served as experimentation grounds for new techniques such as the animation of realistic human figures , special effects animation , the use of the multiplane camera , an invention which split animation artwork layers into several planes , allowing the camera to appear to move dimensionally through an animated scene . 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs cost Disney a then @-@ expensive sum of $ 1 @.@ 4 million to complete ( including $ 100 @,@ 000 on story development alone ) , and was an unprecedented success when released in February 1938 by RKO Radio Pictures , which had assumed distribution of Disney product from United Artists in 1937 . Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was briefly the highest grossing film of all time before the success of Gone with the Wind two years later , grossing over $ 8 million on its initial release , the equivalent of $ 134 @,@ 487 @,@ 000 in 1999 dollars . 
 During the production of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , work had continued on the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series of shorts . Mickey Mouse switched to Technicolor in 1935 , by which time the series had added several major supporting characters , among them Mickey 's dog Pluto and their friends Donald Duck and Goofy . Donald , Goofy , and Pluto would all be appearing in series of their own by 1940 , and the Donald Duck cartoons eclipsed the Mickey Mouse series in popularity . The Silly Symphonies , which garnered seven Academy Awards , ended in 1939 . 
 = = = 1940 – 48 : New features , strike , World War II = = = 
 The success of Snow White allowed Disney to build a new , larger studio on Buena Vista Street in Burbank , where The Walt Disney Company remains headquartered to this day . Walt Disney Productions had its initial public offering on April 2 , 1940 , with Walt Disney as president and chairman and Roy Disney as CEO . 
 The studio launched into the production of new animated features , the first of which was Pinocchio , released in February 1940 . Pinocchio was not initially a box office success . The box office returns from the film 's initial release were both below Snow White 's unprecedented success and below studio expectations . Of the film 's $ 2 @.@ 289 million cost – twice of Snow White – Disney only recouped $ 1 million by late 1940 , with studio reports of the film 's final original box office take varying between $ 1 @.@ 4 million and $ 1 @.@ 9 million . However , Pinocchio was a critical success , winning the Academy Award for Best Original Song and Best Original Score , making it the first film of the studio to win not only either Oscar , but both at the same time . 
 Fantasia , an experimental film produced to an accompanying orchestral arrangement conducted by Leopold Stokowski , was released in November 1940 by Disney itself in a series of limited @-@ seating roadshow engagements . The film cost $ 2 million to produce , and although the film earned $ 1 @.@ 4 million in its roadshow engagements , the high cost ( $ 85 @,@ 000 per theater ) of installing Fantasound placed Fantasia at an even greater loss than Pinocchio . RKO assumed distribution of Fantasia in 1941 , later reissuing it in severely edited versions over the years . Despite its financial failure , Fantasia was the subject of two Academy Honorary Awards on February 26 , 1942 – one for the development of the innovative Fantasound system used to create the film 's stereoscopic soundtrack , and the other for Stokowski and his contributions to the film . 
 Much of the character animation on these productions and all subsequent features until the late 1970s was supervised by a brain @-@ trust of animators Walt Disney dubbed the " Nine Old Men , " many of whom also served as directors and later producers on the Disney features : Frank Thomas , Ollie Johnston , Woolie Reitherman , Les Clark , Ward Kimball , Eric Larson , John <unk> , Milt Kahl , and Marc Davis . Other head animators at Disney during this period included Norm Ferguson , Bill Tytla , and Fred Moore . The development of the feature animation department created a caste system at the Disney studio : lesser animators ( and feature animators in @-@ between assignments ) were assigned to work on the short subjects , while animators higher in status such as the Nine Old Men worked on the features . Concern over Walt Disney accepting credit for the artists ' work as well as debates over compensation led to many of the newer and lower @-@ ranked animators seeking to unionize the Disney studio . 
 A bitter union strike began in May 1941 , which was resolved without the angered Walt Disney 's involvement in July and August of that year . As Walt Disney Productions was being set up as a union shop , Walt Disney and several studio employees were sent by the US government on a Good Neighbor policy trip to Central and South America . The Disney strike and its aftermath led to an exodus of several animation professionals from the studio , from top @-@ level animators such as Art Babbitt and Bill Tytla , to artists better known for their work outside the Disney studio such as Frank Tashlin , Maurice Noble , Walt Kelly , Bill Meléndez , and John Hubley . Hubley , with several other Disney strikers , went on to found the United Productions of America studio , Disney 's key animation rival in the 1950s . 
 Dumbo , in production during the midst of the animators ' strike , premiered in October 1941 , and proved to be a financial success . The simple film only cost $ 950 @,@ 000 to produce , half the cost of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , less than a third of the cost of Pinocchio , and two @-@ fifths of the cost of Fantasia . Dumbo eventually grossed $ 1 @.@ 6 million during its original release . In August 1942 , Bambi was released , and as with Pinocchio and Fantasia , did not perform well at the box office . Out of its $ 1 @.@ 7 million budget , it only grossed $ 1 @.@ 64 million . 
 Production of full @-@ length animated features was temporarily suspended after the release of Bambi . Given the financial failures of some of the recent features and World War II cutting off much of the overseas cinema market , the studio 's financiers at the Bank of America would only loan the studio working capital if it temporarily restricted itself to shorts production . Then in @-@ production features such as Peter Pan , Alice in Wonderland , and Lady and the Tramp were therefore put on hold until after the war . Other issues affecting the studio at the time included the drafting of several Disney animators to fight in World War II , and the necessity for the studio to focus on producing wartime content for the U.S. Army , particularly military training and civilian propaganda films . From 1942 to 1943 , 95 percent of the studio 's animation output was for the military . During the war , Disney produced the live @-@ action / animated military propaganda feature Victory Through Air Power ( 1943 ) , and a series of Latin culture @-@ themed shorts resulting from the 1941 Good Neighbor trip were compiled into two features , <unk> Amigos ( 1942 ) and The Three Caballeros ( 1944 ) . 
 <unk> and Caballeros set the template for several other 1940s Disney releases of " package films " : low @-@ budgeted films composed of animated short subjects with animated or live @-@ action bridging material . These films were Make Mine Music ( 1946 ) , Fun and Fancy Free ( 1947 ) , Melody Time ( 1948 ) , and The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad ( 1949 ) . The studio also produced two features , Song of the South ( 1946 ) and So Dear to My Heart ( 1948 ) , which used more expansive live @-@ action stories which still included animated sequences and sequences combining live @-@ action and animated characters . Shorts production continued during this period as well , with Donald Duck , Goofy , and Pluto cartoons being the main output accompanied by cartoons starring Mickey Mouse , Figaro , and in the 1950s , Chip ' n Dale and Humphrey the Bear . 
 In addition , Disney began reissuing the previous features , beginning with re @-@ releases of Snow White in 1944 , Pinocchio in 1945 , and Fantasia in 1946 . This led to a tradition of reissuing the Disney films every seven years , which lasted into the 1990s before being translated into the studio 's handling of home video releases . 
 = = = 1948 – 59 : Return of features , end of shorts , layoffs = = = 
 In 1948 , Disney returned to the production of full @-@ length features with Cinderella , a full @-@ length film based on the fairy tale by Charles Perrault . At a cost of nearly $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , the future of the studio depended upon the success of this film . Upon its release in 1950 , Cinderella proved to be a box office success , with the profits from the film 's release allowing Disney to carry on producing animated features throughout the 1950s . Following its success , production on the in @-@ limbo features Alice in Wonderland , Peter Pan , and Lady and the Tramp was resumed . In addition , an ambitious new project , an adaptation of the fairy tale " Sleeping Beauty " set to Tchaikovsky 's classic score , was begun but took much of the rest of the decade to complete . 
 Alice in Wonderland , released in 1951 , met with a lukewarm response at the box office and was a sharp critical disappointment in its initial release . Peter Pan , released in 1953 , was , on the other hand , a commercial success and the highest @-@ grossing film of the year . In 1955 , Lady and the Tramp was released to higher box office success than any other Disney feature from the studio since Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , earning an estimated $ 7 @.@ 5 million in rentals at the North American box office in 1955 . Lady is significant as Disney 's first widescreen animated feature , produced in the CinemaScope process , and was the first Disney animated feature to be released by Disney 's own distribution company , Buena Vista Distribution . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s , with Walt Disney 's attention primarily set on new endeavour such as live @-@ action films , television , and the Disneyland theme park , production of the animated films was left primarily in the hands of the " Nine Old Men " trust of head animators and directors . This led to several delays in approvals during the production of Disney 's Sleeping Beauty , which was finally released in 1959 . At $ 6 million , it was Disney 's most expensive film to date , produced in a heavily stylized art style devised by artist <unk> Earle and presented in large @-@ format Super Technirama 70 with six @-@ track stereophonic sound . However , the film 's large production costs and underperformance at the box office resulted in the studio posting its first annual loss in a decade for fiscal year 1960 , leading to massive layoffs throughout the studio . 
 By the end of the decade , the Disney short subjects were no longer being produced on a regular basis , with many of the shorts divisions ' personnel either leaving the company or begin reassigned to work on Disney television programs such as The Mickey Mouse Club and Disneyland . While the Disney shorts had dominated the Academy Award for Best Short Subject ( Cartoons ) during the 1930s , its reign over the award had been ended by MGM 's Tom and Jerry cartoons , Warner Bros ' Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies , and the works of United Productions of America ( UPA ) , whose flat art style and stylized animation techniques were lauded as more modern alternatives to the older Disney style . During the 1950s , only one Disney short , the stylized Toot , Whistle , <unk> and Boom , won the Best Short Subject ( Cartoons ) Oscar . 
 The Mickey Mouse , Pluto , and Goofy shorts had all ceased regular production by 1953 , with Donald Duck and Humphrey continuing and converting to widescreen CinemaScope before the shorts division was shut down in 1956 . After that , all future shorts were produced by the feature films division until 1969 . The last Disney short of the golden age of animation was It 's Tough to Be a Bird . Disney shorts would only be produced on a sporadic basis from this point on , with notable later shorts including Runaway Brain ( 1995 , starring Mickey Mouse ) , and Paperman ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = 1959 – 66 : Reduced feature animation , Walt Disney 's final years = = = 
 Despite the 1959 layoffs and competition for Walt Disney 's attention from the company 's grown live @-@ action film , TV , and theme park departments , production continued on feature animation productions at a reduced level . In 1961 , the studio released One Hundred and One Dalmatians , an animated feature which popularized the use of xerography during the process of inking and painting traditional animation cels . Using xerography , animation drawings could be photo @-@ chemically transferred rather than traced from paper drawings to the clear acetate sheets ( " cels " ) used in final animation production . The resulting art style – a <unk> line which revealed the construction lines in the animators ' drawings – typified Disney films into the 1980s . The film was a success , being the tenth highest grossing film of 1961 with rentals of $ 6 @.@ 4 million . 
 The Disney animation training program started at the studio before the development of Snow White in 1932 eventually led to Walt Disney helping found the California Institute of the Arts ( CalArts ) . This university , formed via the merger of Chouinard Art Institute and the Los Angeles Conservatory of Music , included a Disney @-@ developed animation program of study among its degree offerings . CalArts became the alma mater of many of the animators who would work at Disney and other animation studios from the 1970s to the present . 
 The Sword in the Stone was released in 1963 , and was the sixth highest grossing film of the year in North America with estimated rentals of $ 4 @.@ 75 million . A featurette adaptation of one of A. A. Milne 's Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh stories , Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree , was released in 1966 , to be followed by several other Pooh featurettes over the years and a full @-@ length compilation feature , The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh , which was released in 1977 . 
 Walt Disney died in December 1966 , ten months before the studio 's next film , The Jungle Book , was completed and released . The film was a success , finishing 1967 as the fourth highest @-@ grossing movie of the year . 
 = = = 1966 – 84 : Decline in popularity , Bluth 's entrance and departure , " rock bottom " = = = 
 Following Walt Disney 's passing , Woolie Reitherman continued as both producer and director of the features . The studio began the 1970s with the release of The <unk> , the last film project to be approved by Walt Disney himself . In 1971 , Roy O. Disney , the studio co @-@ founder , died and Walt Disney Productions was left in the hands of Donn Tatum and Card Walker , who alternated as chairman and CEO in overlapping terms for the rest of the decade . The next feature , Robin Hood ( 1973 ) , was produced with a significantly reduced budget and animation repurposed from previous features . Both The <unk> and Robin Hood were minor box office and critical successes . 
 The Rescuers , released in 1977 , was a success exceeding the achievements of the previous two Disney features . Receiving broad critical acclaim , commercial returns , and an Academy Award nomination , it ended up being the third highest grossing film in 1977 and the most successful and acclaimed Disney animated film since The Jungle Book . The film was reissued in 1983 , accompanied by a new Disney featurette , Mickey 's Christmas Carol . 
 The production of The Rescuers signaled the beginning of a changing of the guard process in the personnel at the Disney animation studio : as veterans such as Milt Kahl and Les Clark retired , they were gradually replaced by new talents such as Don Bluth , Ron Clements , John Musker , and Glen Keane . The new animators , culled from the animation program at CalArts and trained by Eric Larson , Frank Thomas , Ollie Johnston , and Woolie Reitherman got their first chances to prove themselves as a group with the animated sequences in Disney 's live @-@ action / animated hybrid feature Pete 's Dragon ( 1977 ) , the animation for which was directed by Don Bluth . In September 1979 , dissatisfied with what they felt was a stagnation in the development of the art of animation at Disney , Bluth and several of the other new guard animators quit to start their own studio , Don Bluth Productions , which became Disney 's chief competitor in the animation field during the 1980s . 
 Delayed half a year by the defection of the Bluth group , The Fox and the Hound was released in 1981 after four years in production . The film was considered a financial success by the studio , and development continued on The Black Cauldron , a long @-@ gestating adaptation of the Chronicles of Prydain series of novels by Lloyd Alexander produced in Super Technirama 70 . 
 The Black Cauldron was intended to expand the appeal of Disney animated films to older audiences and to showcase the talents of the new generation of Disney animators from CalArts . Besides Keane , Musker , and Clements , this new group of artists included other promising animators such as Andreas Deja , Mike Gabriel , John Lasseter , and Tim Burton . Lasseter was fired from Disney in 1983 for pushing the studio to explore computer animation production , but went on to become the creative head of Pixar , a pioneering computer animation studio that would begin a close association with Disney in the late 1980s . Similarly , Burton was fired in 1984 after producing a live @-@ action short shelved by the studio , Frankenweenie , then went on to become a high @-@ profile producer and director of live @-@ action and stop motion animated features for Disney and other studios . Some of Burton 's high @-@ profile projects for Disney would include the stop @-@ motion The Nightmare Before Christmas ( 1993 ) , a live @-@ action adaptation of Alice in Wonderland ( 2010 ) , and a stop @-@ motion feature remake of Frankenweenie ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = 1984 – 89 : Michael Eisner takeover , restructuring , return to prominence = = = 
 Ron Miller , Walt Disney 's son @-@ in @-@ law , became president of Walt Disney Productions in 1980 and CEO in 1983 . That year , he expanded the company 's film and television production divisions , creating the Walt Disney Pictures banner under which future films from the feature animation department would be released . After a series of corporate takeover attempts in 1984 , Roy E. Disney , son of Roy O. and nephew of Walt , resigned from the company 's board of directors and launched a campaign called " SaveDisney " , successfully convincing the board to fire Miller . Roy E. Disney brought in Michael Eisner as Disney 's new CEO , and Frank Wells as president . Eisner in turn named Jeffrey Katzenberg chairman of the film division , The Walt Disney Studios . Near completion when the Eisner regime took over Disney , The Black Cauldron would come to represent what would later be referred to as the " rock bottom " point for Disney animation . The studio 's most expensive feature to that point at $ 44 million , The Black Cauldron was a critical and commercial failure . The film 's $ 21 million box office gross led to a loss for the studio , putting the future of the animation division in jeopardy . 
 Between the 1950s and 1980s , the significance of animation to Disney 's bottom line was significantly reduced as the company expanded into further live @-@ action production , television , and theme parks . As new CEO , Michael Eisner strongly considered shuttering the feature animation studio and outsourcing future animation . Roy E. Disney intervened , offering to head the feature animation division and turn its fortunes around , while Eisner established the Walt Disney Pictures Television Animation Group to produce lower @-@ cost animation for television . Named Chairman of feature animation by Eisner , Roy E. Disney appointed Peter Schneider president of animation to run the day @-@ to @-@ day operations in 1985 . : 3 
 In February 1985 , Disney executives moved the animation division from the Disney studio lot in Burbank to a variety of warehouses , hangars , and trailers located about two miles east ( 3 @.@ 2 kilometers ) in nearby Glendale , California . The animation division 's first feature animation at its new location was The Great Mouse Detective , begun by John Musker and Ron Clements as Basil of Baker Street after both left the Black Cauldron production . The Great Mouse Detective was enough of a critical and commercial success to instill executive confidence in the animation studio . Later the same year , however , Universal Pictures and Steven Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment released Don Bluth 's An American Tail , which outgrossed The Great Mouse Detective at the box office and became the highest @-@ grossing first @-@ issue animated film to that point . 
 Katzenberg , Schneider , and Roy E. Disney set about changing the culture of the studio , increasing staffing and production so that a new animated feature would be released every year instead of every two to four . The first of the releases on the accelerated production schedule was Oliver & Company in 1988 , which featured an all @-@ star cast including Billy Joel and Bette Midler and an emphasis on a modern pop soundtrack . Oliver & Company opened in the theaters on the same day as another Bluth / Amblin / Universal animated film , The Land Before Time ; however , Oliver outgrossed Time and went on to become the most successful animated feature to that date . 
 At the same time in 1988 , Disney 's started entering into Australia 's long standing animation industry , by purchasing Hanna @-@ Barbera 's Australian studio to start Disney Animation Australia . 
 While Oliver & Company and next feature animation , The Little Mermaid , were in production , Disney collaborated with Steven Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment and master animator Richard Williams to produce Who Framed Roger Rabbit , a groundbreaking live action / animation hybrid directed by Robert Zemeckis which featured licensed animated characters from other animation studios . Disney set up a new animation studio under Williams ' supervision in London to create the cartoon characters for Roger Rabbit , with many of the artists from the California studio traveling to England to work on the film . A significant critical and commercial success , Roger Rabbit won three Academy Awards for technical <unk> and was key in renewing mainstream interest in American animation . Other than the film itself , the studio also produced three Roger Rabbit shorts during the late 1980s and early 1990s . 
 = = = 1989 – 94 : Beginning of the Disney Renaissance , successful releases , impact on the animation industry = = = 
 A second satellite studio , Walt Disney Feature Animation Florida , opened in 1989 with 40 employees . Its offices were located within the Disney @-@ MGM Studios theme park at Walt Disney World in Bay Lake , Florida , and visitors were allowed to tour the studio and observe animators at work . The same year , the studio released The Little Mermaid , which became a keystone achievement in Disney 's history as its largest critical and commercial success in decades . Directed by John Musker and Ron Clements , who 'd been co @-@ directors on The Great Mouse Detective , The Little Mermaid earned $ 84 million at the North American box office , a record for the studio . The film was built around a score from Broadway songwriters Alan Menken and Howard Ashman , who was also a co @-@ producer and story consultant on the film . Mermaid won two Academy Awards , for Best Original Song and for Best Original Score . 
 The Little Mermaid vigorously relaunched a profound new interest in the animation and musical film genres . Mermaid was also the first to feature the use of Disney 's Computer Animation Production System ( CAPS ) . Developed for Disney by Pixar , which had grown into a commercial computer animation and technology development company , CAPS would become significant in allowing future Disney films to more seamlessly integrate computer @-@ generated imagery and achieve higher production values with digital ink and paint and compositing techniques . The Little Mermaid was the first of a series of blockbusters that would be released over the next decade by Walt Disney Feature Animation , a period later designated by the term Disney Renaissance . 
 Accompanied in theaters by the Mickey Mouse featurette The Prince and the Pauper , The Rescuers Down Under ( 1990 ) was Disney 's first animated feature sequel and the studio 's first film to be fully colored and composited via computer using the CAPS system . However , the film did not duplicate the success of The Little Mermaid . The next Disney animated feature , Beauty and the Beast , had begun production in London , but was moved back to Burbank after Disney decided to shutter the London satellite office and retool Beauty into a musical @-@ comedy format similar to Mermaid . Alan Menken and Howard Ashman were retained to write the song score , though Ashman died before production was completed . 
 Debuting first in a work @-@ in @-@ progress version at the 1991 New York Film Festival before its November 1991 wide release , Beauty , directed by Kirk Wise & Gary Trousdale , was an unprecedented critical and commercial success , and would later be seen as one of the studio 's best films . The film earned six Academy Award nominations , including one for Best Picture , a first for an animated work , winning for Best Song and Best Original Score . Its $ 145 million box office gross set new records , and merchandising for the film – including toys , cross @-@ promotions , and soundtrack sales – was also lucrative . 
 The successes of Mermaid and Beauty established the template for future Disney releases during the 1990s : a musical @-@ comedy format with Broadway @-@ styled songs and tentpole action sequences , buoyed by cross @-@ promotional marketing and merchandising , all carefully designed to pull audiences of all ages and types into theatres . In addition to John Musker , Ron Clements , Kirk Wise , and Gary Trousdale , the new guard of Disney artists creating these films included story artists / directors Roger Allers , Rob Minkoff , Chris Sanders , and Brenda Chapman , and lead animators Glen Keane , Andreas Deja , Eric Goldberg , Nik Ranieri , Will Finn , and many others . 
 Aladdin , released in November 1992 , continued the upward trend in Disney 's animation success , earning $ 504 million worldwide at the box office , and two more Oscars for Best Song and Best Score . Featuring songs by Menken , Ashman , and Tim Rice ( who replaced Ashman after his passing ) and starring the voice of Robin Williams , Aladdin also established the trend of hiring celebrity actors and actresses to provide the voices of Disney characters , which had been explored to some degree with The Jungle Book and Oliver & Company , but now became standard practice . 
 In June 1994 , Disney released The Lion King , directed by Roger Allers and Rob Minkoff . An all @-@ animal adventure set in Africa , The Lion King featured an all @-@ star voice cast which included James Earl Jones , Matthew Broderick , and Jeremy Irons , and songs written by Tim Rice and pop star Elton John . The Lion King earned $ 768 million at the worldwide box office , to this date a record for a traditionally animated film , earning millions more in merchandising , promotions , and record sales for its soundtrack . 
 Aladdin and The Lion King had been the highest @-@ grossing films worldwide in each of their respective release years . With animation becoming again an increasingly important and lucrative part of Disney 's business , the company began to expand its operations . The flagship California studio was split into two units and expanded , and ground was broken on a new Disney Feature Animation building adjacent to the main Disney lot in Burbank , which was dedicated in 1995 . The Florida satellite , officially incorporated in 1992 , was expanded as well , and one of Disney 's television animation studios in the Paris , France suburb of Montreuil – the former Brizzi Brothers studio – became Walt Disney Feature Animation Paris , where A Goofy Movie ( 1995 ) and significant parts of later Disney films were produced . Also , Disney began producing lower cost direct to video sequels for its successful animated films using the services of its television animation studios under the name Disney <unk> . The Return of Jafar ( 1994 ) , a sequel to Aladdin and a pilot for the Aladdin television show spin @-@ off , was the first of these productions . Walt Disney Feature Animation was also heavily involved in the adaptations of both Beauty and the Beast in 1994 and The Lion King in 1997 into Broadway musicals . 
 Jeffrey Katzenberg and the Disney story team were heavily involved in the development and production of Toy Story , the first fully computer @-@ animated feature ever produced . Toy Story was produced for Disney by Pixar and directed by former Disney animator John Lasseter , whom Peter Schneider had unsuccessfully tried to hire back after his success with Pixar shorts such as Tin Toy ( 1988 ) . Released in 1995 , Toy Story opened to critical acclaim and commercial success , leading to Pixar signing a five @-@ film deal with Disney , which bore critically and financially successful computer animated films such as A Bug 's Life ( 1998 ) , Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) , and Monsters , Inc . ( 2001 ) . 
 In addition , the successes of Aladdin and The Lion King spurred a significant increase in the number of American @-@ produced animated features throughout the rest of the decade , with the major film studios establishing new animation divisions such as Fox Animation Studios , Turner Feature Animation , and Warner Bros. Animation being formed to produce films in a Disney @-@ esque musical @-@ comedy format such as Thumbelina ( 1994 ) , The Swan Princess ( 1994 ) , Anastasia ( 1997 ) , Cats Don 't Dance ( 1997 ) , Quest for Camelot ( 1998 ) , and The King and I ( 1999 ) respectively . 
 = = = 1994 – 99 : End of the Disney Renaissance , declining returns = = = 
 Concerns arose internally at Disney , particularly from Roy E. Disney , about studio chief Jeffrey Katzenberg taking too much credit for the success of Disney 's early 1990s releases . Disney president Frank Wells was killed in a helicopter accident in 1994 , and Katzenberg lobbied CEO Michael Eisner for the vacant president position . Instead , tensions between Katzenberg , Eisner , and Disney resulted in Katzenberg being forced to resign from the company that October , with Joe Roth taking his place . Katzenberg went on to become one of the founders of DreamWorks SKG , whose 's animation division became Disney 's key rival in feature animation with both computer animated films such as Antz ( 1998 ) , and traditionally animated films such as The Prince of Egypt ( 1998 ) . 
 In contrast to the early 1990s productions , the mid @-@ 1990s Disney animated features presented a trend of diminishing returns . Pocahontas , released in summer 1995 , was a critical and commercial disappointment compared to its predecessors , earning $ 346 million worldwide while still winning two Academy Awards for its music by Alan Menken and Stephen Schwartz . The next film , The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , partially produced at the Paris studio , performed better critically but grossed only $ 325 million worldwide . The following summer , Hercules , grossed only $ 252 million worldwide and received positive reviews , but it was responsible for beginning the decline of traditional animated films . The declining box office success became doubly concerning inside the studio as wage competition from DreamWorks had significantly increased the studio 's overhead , with production costs increasing from $ 79 million in total costs ( production , marketing , and overhead ) for The Lion King in 1994 to $ 179 million for Hercules three years later . Moreover , Disney depended upon the popularity of its new features in order to develop merchandising , theme park attractions , direct @-@ to @-@ video sequels , and television programming in its other divisions . The production schedule was scaled back , and a larger number of creative executives were hired to more closely supervise production , a move that was not popular among the animation staff . 
 Mulan ( 1998 ) , the first film produced primarily at the Florida studio , earned $ 305 million in worldwide box office . The next summer 's Tarzan , directed by Kevin Lima and Chris Buck , had a high production cost of $ 150 million , but earned $ 448 million at the box office . The Tarzan song score by pop star Phil Collins resulted in significant record sales and an Academy Award for Best Song . 
 In October 1999 , Dream Quest Images , a special effects studio previously purchased by The Walt Disney Company in April 1996 to replace Buena Vista Visual Effects , was merged with the computer @-@ graphics operation of Walt Disney Feature Animation to form a division called The Secret Lab . The Secret Lab produced one feature film , Dinosaur ( 2000 ) , which featured CGI prehistoric creatures against filmed live @-@ action backgrounds . The $ 128 million production earned $ 349 million worldwide , below studio expectations , and the Secret Lab was closed in 2001 . 
 = = = 2000 – 05 : Slump , downsizing and conversion to computer animation , corporate issues = = = 
 Fantasia 2000 , a sequel to the 1940 film that had been a pet @-@ project of Roy E. Disney 's since 1990 , was released on January 1 , 2000 . Produced in pieces when artists were available between productions , Fantasia 2000 was the first animated feature produced for and released in IMAX format . A standard theatrical release followed in June , but the film 's $ 90 million worldwide box office total against its $ 90 million production cost resulted in it losing $ 100 million for the studio . Peter Schneider left his post as president of Walt Disney Feature Animation in 1999 to become president of The Walt Disney Studios under Joe Roth . Thomas Schumacher , who had been Schneider 's vice president of animation for several years , became the new president of Walt Disney Feature Animation . By this time , competition from other studios had driven animators ' incomes to all @-@ time highs , making traditionally animated features even more costly to produce . Schumacher was tasked with cutting costs , and massive layoffs began to cut salaries and bring the studio 's staff – which peaked at 2 @,@ 200 people in 1999 – down to approximately 1 @,@ 200 employees . 
 That December saw the release of The Emperor 's New Groove , which had originally been a musical epic called Kingdom of the Sun before being revised mid @-@ production into a smaller comedy , New Groove earned $ 169 million worldwide when released in December 2000 , though it was well reviewed and performed better on video . Atlantis : The Lost Empire ( 2001 ) , an attempt to break the Disney formula by moving into action @-@ adventure , received mixed reviews and earned $ 186 million worldwide against production costs of $ 120 million . 
 By 2001 , the notable successes of computer @-@ animated films from Pixar and DreamWorks such as Monsters , Inc. and Shrek , respectively , against Disney 's lesser returns for The Emperor 's New Groove and Atlantis led to a growing perception that hand @-@ drawn animation was becoming outdated and falling out of fashion . In March 2002 , just after the successful release of Blue Sky Studios ' computer @-@ animated feature Ice Age , Disney laid off most of the employees at the Feature Animation studio in Burbank , downsizing it to one unit and beginning plans to move into fully computer animated films . A handful of employees were offered positions doing computer animation . Morale plunged to a low not seen since the start of the studio 's ten @-@ year exile to Glendale in 1985 . The Paris studio was also closed in 2003 . 
 The Burbank studio 's remaining hand @-@ drawn productions , Treasure Planet ( 2002 ) and Home on the Range ( 2004 ) , continued production . Treasure Planet was a retelling of Treasure Island in space that was a pet project of writer @-@ directors Ron Clements & John Musker . It received generally positive reviews and an IMAX release but was financially unsuccessful upon release , resulting in a $ 74 million writedown for The Walt Disney Company in fiscal year 2003 . The Burbank studio 's 2D departments closed at the end of 2002 following completion of Home on the Range , a long @-@ in @-@ production feature originally known as Sweating Bullets . 
 Meanwhile , hand @-@ drawn feature animation production continued at the Feature Animation Florida studio , where the films could be produced at lower costs . Lilo & Stitch , an offbeat comedy written and directed by Chris Sanders and Dean DeBlois , became the studio 's first bonafide hit since Tarzan upon its summer 2002 release , earning $ 273 million worldwide against a $ 80 million production budget . 
 Most of the 1990s Disney features had been spun off into direct @-@ to @-@ video sequels , television series , or both , produced by the Disney Television Animation unit . Beginning with Return to Never Land , a 2002 sequel to 1953 's Peter Pan , Disney began releasing lower @-@ budgeted sequels to earlier films , originally intended for video premieres , in theaters , a process derided by some of the Disney animation staff and fans of the Disney films . 
 In 2003 , Tom Schumacher was appointed president of Buena Vista Theatrical Group , Disney 's stageplay and musical theater arm , and David Stainton , then president of Walt Disney Television Animation , was appointed as his replacement . Stainton continued to oversee Disney 's direct @-@ to @-@ video division , DisneyToon Studios , which had been part of the television animation department , though transferred at this time to Walt Disney Feature Animation management . 
 Under Stainton , the Florida studio completed Brother Bear ( 2003 ) , which did not perform as well as Lilo & Stitch critically or financially . Disney announced the closing of the Florida studio on January 12 , 2004 , with the then in @-@ progress feature My Peoples left unfinished when the studio closed two months later . Upon the unsuccessful April 2004 release of Home on the Range , Disney , led by executive Bob Lambert , officially announced its conversion of Walt Disney Feature Animation into a fully CGI studio – a process begun two years prior – now with a staff of 600 people and began selling off all of its traditional animation equipment . 
 Just after Brother Bear 's November 2003 release , Feature Animation chairman Roy E. Disney had resigned from The Walt Disney Company , launching with business partner Stanley Gold a second external " SaveDisney " campaign similar to the one that had forced Ron Miller out in 1984 , this time to force out Michael Eisner . Two of their arguing points against Eisner included his handling of Feature Animation and the souring of the studio 's relationship with Pixar . 
 Talks between Michael Eisner and Pixar CEO Steve Jobs over renewal terms for the highly lucrative Pixar @-@ Disney distribution deal broke down in January 2004 . Jobs in particular disagreed with Eisner 's insistence that sequels such as the then in @-@ development Toy Story 3 ( 2010 ) would not count against the number of films required in the studio 's new deal . To that end , Disney announced the launching of Circle 7 Animation , a division of Feature Animation which would produce sequels to the Pixar films , while Pixar began shopping for a new distribution deal . 
 In 2005 , Disney released its first fully computer @-@ animated feature , Chicken Little . The film was a moderate success at the box office , earning $ 315 million worldwide , but was not well @-@ received critically . Later that year , after two years of Roy E. Disney 's " SaveDisney " campaign , Michael Eisner announced that he would resign and named Bob Iger , then president of The Walt Disney Company , his successor as chairman and CEO . 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : Rebound , Disney 's acquisition of Pixar , renaming = = = 
 With Iger in place as the new CEO of Disney , Steve Jobs resumed negotiations for Pixar with Disney . On January 24 , 2006 , Disney announced that it would acquire Pixar for $ 7 @.@ 4 billion , with the deal closing that May . As part of the acquisition , Pixar executives Edwin Catmull and John Lasseter assumed control of Walt Disney Feature Animation as President and Chief Creative Officer , respectively , and the Circle 7 studio launched to produce Toy Story 3 was shut down , with most of its employees returning to Feature Animation and Toy Story 3 returning to Pixar 's control . 
 While Disney executives had originally discussed closing Feature Animation as redundant , Catmull and Lasseter refused and instead resolved to try to turn things around at the studio . Lasseter and Catmull set about rebuilding the morale of the Feature Animation staff , and rehired a number of its 1980s " new guard " generation of star animators who had left the studio , including Ron Clements , John Musker , Eric Goldberg , Mark Henn , Andreas Deja , Bruce W. Smith , and Chris Buck . To maintain the separation of Disney and Pixar despite their now common ownership and management , Catmull and Lasseter " drew a hard line " that each studio was solely responsible for its own projects and would not be allowed to borrow personnel from or lend tasks out to the other . 
 Catmull and Lasseter also brought to Disney the Pixar model of a " filmmaker @-@ driven studio " as opposed to an " executive @-@ driven studio " ; they abolished Disney 's prior system of requiring directors to respond to " mandatory " notes from development executives ranking above the producers in favor of a system roughly analogous to peer review , in which non @-@ mandatory notes come primarily from fellow producers , directors , and writers . Most of the layers of " gatekeepers " ( midlevel executives ) were stripped away , and Lasseter established a routine of personally meeting weekly with filmmakers on all projects in the last year of production and delivering feedback on the spot . 
 Lasseter renamed Walt Disney Feature Animation to Walt Disney Animation Studios , and re @-@ positioned the studio as an animation house that produced both traditional and computer @-@ animated projects . In order to keep costs down on hand @-@ drawn productions , animation , design , and layout were done in @-@ house at Disney while clean @-@ up animation and digital ink @-@ and @-@ paint were farmed out to vendors and freelancers . 
 In 2007 , the studio released Meet the Robinsons , its second all @-@ CGI film , earning $ 169 @.@ 3 million worldwide . That year , DisneyToon Studios was also restructured and began to operate as a separate unit under Lasseter and Catmull 's control . John Lasseter 's direct intervention with the studio 's next film , American Dog , resulted in the departure of director Chris Sanders , who went on to become a director at DreamWorks Animation . The film was retooled by new directors Byron Howard and Chris Williams as Bolt ( 2008 ) , which had the best critical reception of any Disney animated feature since Lilo & Stitch , and became a moderate financial success . 
 The Princess and the Frog , directed by Ron Clements & John Musker , was the studio 's first hand @-@ drawn animated film in five years . A return to the musical @-@ comedy format of the 1990s with songs by Randy Newman , the film was released in 2009 to a positive reception and was also nominated for three Academy Awards , including two for Best Song . The box office performance of The Princess and the Frog – a total of $ 267 million earned worldwide against a $ 105 million production budget – was seen as an underperformance due to competition with Avatar . In addition , the " Princess " aspect of the title was blamed , resulting in future Disney films then in production about princesses being given neutral / symbolic titles : Rapunzel became Tangled and The Snow Queen became Frozen . In 2014 , however , Disney animator Tom <unk> compared the film 's box office performance to that of The Great Mouse Detective ( 1986 ) , which was a step @-@ up from the theatrical run of the 1985 film The Black Cauldron . In 2009 , the studio also produced the computer @-@ animated Prep & Landing holiday special for the Disney @-@ owned ABC television network . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Continued resurgence = = = 
 After The Princess and the Frog , the studio released Tangled , a musical CGI adaptation of the Brothers Grimm 's Rapunzel tale with songs by Alan Menken and Glenn Slater . In active development since 2002 under Glen Keane , Tangled , directed by Byron Howard and Nathan Greno , was released in November 2010 and became a significant critical and commercial success , and was nominated for several accolades . The film earned $ 591 million in worldwide box office revenue , becoming the studio 's third most successful release to date . 
 The hand @-@ drawn feature Winnie the Pooh , a new feature film based on the A.A. Milne characters , followed in 2011 to positive reviews but under @-@ performed at the box office . Winnie the Pooh remains to date the studio 's most recent hand @-@ drawn feature . Wreck @-@ It Ralph , directed by Rich Moore , was released in 2012 , to critical acclaim and commercial success . A comedy @-@ adventure about a video @-@ game villain who redeems himself as a hero , it won numerous awards , including the Annie , Critics ' Choice , and Kids ' Choice Awards for Best Animated Feature Film and received Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations . The film earned $ 471 million in worldwide box office revenue . In addition , the studio won its first Academy Award for a short film in forty @-@ four years with Paperman . Directed by John Kahrs , Paperman utilized new software developed in house at the studio called Meander , which merges hand @-@ drawn and computer animation techniques within the same character to create a unique " hybrid . " According to Producer Kristina Reed , the studio is continuing to develop the technique for future projects , including an animated feature . 
 In 2013 , the studio laid off nine of its hand @-@ drawn animators , including Nik Ranieri and Ruben Aquino , leading to speculation on animation blogs that the studio was abandoning traditional animation , an idea that the studio dismissed . That same year , Frozen , a CGI musical film inspired by Hans Christian Andersen 's The Snow Queen , was released to widespread acclaim and became a blockbuster hit . Directed by Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee with songs by the Broadway team of Robert Lopez & Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez , it was the first Disney animated film to earn over $ 1 billion in worldwide box office revenue and is currently the highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time , surpassing Pixar 's Toy Story 3 . Frozen also became the first film from Walt Disney Animation Studios to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature ( a category started in 2001 ) , as well as the first feature @-@ length motion picture from the studio to win an Academy Award since Tarzan and the first to win multiple Academy Awards since Pocahontas . It was released in theaters with Get a Horse ! , a new Mickey Mouse cartoon combining black @-@ and @-@ white hand @-@ drawn animation and full @-@ color CGI animation . The studio 's next feature , Big Hero 6 , a CGI comedy @-@ adventure film inspired by Marvel 's Big Hero 6 comics , was released on November 7 , 2014 . For the film , the studio developed new light rendering software called Hyperion , which the studio continued to use on all subsequent films . Big Hero 6 received critical acclaim and was the highest @-@ grossing animated film of 2014 , and it also won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature . The film was accompanied in theaters by the animated short Feast , which won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film . In March 2016 , the studio released Zootopia , a CGI buddy @-@ comedy film set in a modern world inhabited by anthropomorphic animals . Zootopia was a critical and commercial success . 
 = = Studio = = 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios is currently managed by Edwin Catmull ( President , Walt Disney and Pixar Animation Studios ) , John Lasseter ( Chief Creative Officer ) and Andrew Millstein ( President ) . Since 2006 , while continuing to live in the San Francisco Bay Area ( where they manage Pixar ) , Catmull and Lasseter have regularly commuted to Burbank every week to spend at least two days ( usually Tuesdays and Wednesdays ) at Disney Animation . They initially appointed Millstein as general manager and executive vice president to handle day @-@ to @-@ day business operations on their behalf . Millstein was promoted to the title of president in November 2014 , along with his counterpart at Pixar , general manager Jim Morris . Both Millstein and Morris continue to report to Catmull , who retains the title of president of both studios . 
 Former presidents of the studio include David Stainton ( January 2003 – January 2006 ) , Thomas Schumacher ( January 2000 – December 2002 ) and Peter Schneider ( 1985 – December 1999 ) . 
 Other Disney executives who also exercised much influence within the studio were Roy E. Disney ( 1985 – 2003 , Chairman , Walt Disney Feature Animation ) , Jeffrey Katzenberg ( 1984 – 94 , Chairman , The Walt Disney Studios ) , Michael Eisner ( 1984 – 2005 , CEO , The Walt Disney Company ) , and Frank Wells ( 1984 – 94 , President and COO , The Walt Disney Company ) . Following Roy Disney 's passing in 2009 , the <unk> headquarters in Burbank was re @-@ dedicated as The Roy E. Disney Animation Building in May 2010 . 
 = = = Locations = = = 
 Since 1995 , Walt Disney Animation Studios has been headquartered in the Roy E. Disney Animation Building in Burbank , California , across Riverside Drive from The Walt Disney Studios , where the original Animation building ( now housing corporate offices ) is located . The Disney Animation Building 's lobby is capped by a large version of the famous hat from the Sorcerer 's Apprentice segment of Fantasia ( 1940 ) , and the building is informally called the " hat building " for that reason . Disney Animation shares its site with ABC Studios , whose building is located immediately to the west . 
 Until the mid @-@ 1990s , Disney Animation previously operated out of the Air Way complex , a cluster of old hangars , office buildings , and trailers in the Grand Central Business Centre , an industrial park on the site of the former Grand Central Airport about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east in the city of Glendale . Today , the DisneyToon Studios unit is currently based in Glendale . Disney Animation 's archive , formerly known as " the morgue " ( based on an analogy to a morgue file ) and today known as the Animation Research Library , is also located in Glendale . Unlike the Burbank buildings , DisneyToon Studios and the ARL are located in nondescript office buildings near Disney 's Grand Central Creative Campus . The 12 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ARL is home to over 64 million items of animation artwork going back to 1924 ; because of its importance to the company , it requires visitors to agree to not disclose its exact location within Glendale . 
 Previously , feature animation satellite studios were located around the world in Montreuil , Seine @-@ Saint @-@ Denis , France ( a suburb of Paris ) , and in Bay Lake , Florida ( near Orlando , at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , one of the four theme parks at Walt Disney World ) . The Paris studio was shut down in 2002 , while the Florida studio was shut down in 2004 . The Florida building survives as a show and tour called The Magic of Disney Animation . 
 In November 2014 , Disney Animation commenced a 16 @-@ month upgrade of the Roy E. Disney Animation Building , in order to fix what Catmull has called its " dungeon @-@ like " interior . For example , the interior was so cramped that it could not easily accommodate " town hall " meetings with all employees in attendance . Disney did not disclose the renovation 's cost , but Lasseter revealed that " [ t ] he whole center of the second floor will have an atrium that will go up two stories [ ; ] we want to make this building so beautiful that it 's worthy of the artistic talent that 's there . " In addition , it was revealed that the large sorcerer 's hat will become the building 's main entrance . Lasseter stated , " There will be a gorgeous stairway that goes up into the hat , it 's a really great symbol , like you 're entering the building through the magic of Mickey Mouse 's hat . " Due to the renovation , the studio 's employees have been temporarily moved from Burbank into the closest available Disney @-@ controlled studio space – the DisneyToon Studios building in the industrial park in Glendale and the old Imagineering warehouse in North Hollywood under the western approach to Bob Hope Airport ( the Tujunga Building ) . Director Don Hall analogized the studio 's relocation to the end of The Empire Strikes Back , where " you know they 're going to get back together . " 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = Feature films = = = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios has produced animated features in a series of animation techniques , including traditional animation , computer animation , and animation combined with live @-@ action scenes . The studio 's first film , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , was released on December 21 , 1937 , and their most recent film , Zootopia , was released on March 4 , 2016 . 
 = = = Short films = = = 
 Since Alice Comedies in the 1920s , Walt Disney Animation Studios has produced a series of prominent short films , including the Mickey Mouse cartoons and the Silly Symphonies series . Many of these shorts provided a medium for the studio to experiment with new technologies that they would use in their filmmaking process , such as the synchronization of sound in Steamboat Willie ( 1928 ) , the integration of the three strip Technicolor process in Flowers and Trees ( 1932 ) , the multiplane camera in The Old Mill ( 1937 ) , the xerography process in Goliath II ( 1960 ) , and the hand @-@ drawn / CGI hybrid animation in Off His Rockers ( 1992 ) , Paperman ( 2012 ) , and Get a Horse ! ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Collaborations = = 
 = = = Parks and resorts = = = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios has occasionally collaborated with Walt Disney Creative Entertainment and Walt Disney Imagineering to create attractions for various Disney theme parks and resorts . Some of these attractions are : 
 Gran Fiesta Tour Starring The Three Caballeros , at Epcot 
 Mickey 's PhilharMagic , at the Magic Kingdom , Hong Kong Disneyland and Tokyo Disneyland 
 Stitch 's Great Escape ! , at the Magic Kingdom 
 Stitch Encounter , at Hong Kong Disneyland and Tokyo Disneyland , and Walt Disney Studios Park as " Stitch Live ! " 
 Fantasmic ! , at Disneyland , Disney 's Hollywood Studios and Tokyo DisneySea 
 World of Color , at Disney California Adventure 
 Disney Dreams ! , at Disneyland Park Paris 
 Seven Dwarfs Mine Train , at the Magic Kingdom 
 Frozen Ever After , at Epcot 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios has also collaborated and put input through the company 's Disney Interactive unit for several games . Some of these games are : 
 Disney Infinity series ( Developed by Avalanche Software ) 
 Kingdom Hearts III ( Co @-@ Published / Developed by Square Enix ) 
 = = = Associated productions = = = 
 Walt Disney Animation Studios has occasionally collaborated with other studios to assist in the production of some animated and live @-@ action features . These films are : 
 The Reluctant Dragon , providing the animated segments 
 Victory Through Air Power , providing the animated segments 
 Song of the South , providing the animated segments 
 So Dear to My Heart , providing the animated segments 
 Mary Poppins , providing the animated segments 
 Sesame Street ( television show ) , providing the animated segments 
 <unk> and <unk> , providing the animated segments 
 Pete 's Dragon , providing animation 
 The Brave Little Toaster , providing development 
 Who Framed Roger Rabbit , providing animation , layout , animatics and storyboards ( animation unit only ) , and special effects 
 The Nightmare Before Christmas , providing second @-@ layering traditional animation 
 A Goofy Movie , providing story , development , and pre @-@ production 
 Toy Story , providing development 
 James and the Giant Peach , providing second @-@ layering traditional animation 
 Saving Mr. Banks , providing animation for a short scene recreating an episode of the Disneyland TV show 
 = = = Documentary films about Disney animation = = = 
 A Trip Through the Walt Disney Studios ( 1937 , short ) 
 The Reluctant Dragon ( 1941 , a staged " mockumentary " ) 
 Frank and Ollie ( 1995 ) 
 Dream on Silly Dreamer ( 2005 ) 
 Waking Sleeping Beauty ( 2009 ) 
 = Interim Committee = 
 The Interim Committee was a secret high @-@ level group created in May 1945 by United States Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson at the urging of leaders of the Manhattan Project and with the approval of President Harry S. Truman to advise on matters pertaining to nuclear energy . Composed of prominent political , scientific and industrial figures , the Interim Committee had broad terms of reference which included advising the President on wartime controls and the release of information , and making recommendations on post @-@ war controls and policies related to nuclear energy , including legislation . Its first duty was to advise on the manner in which nuclear weapons should be employed against Japan . Later , it advised on legislation for the control and regulation of nuclear energy . It was named " Interim " in anticipation of a permanent body that would later replace it after the war , where the development of nuclear technology would be placed firmly under civilian control . The Atomic Energy Commission was enacted in 1946 to serve this function . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Stimson himself was chairman . The other members were : James F. Byrnes , former US Senator and soon to be Secretary of State , as President Truman 's personal representative ; Ralph A. Bard , Under Secretary of the Navy ; William L. Clayton , Assistant Secretary of State ; Vannevar Bush , Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development and president of the Carnegie Institution ; Karl T. Compton , Chief of the Office of Field Service in the Office of Scientific Research and Development and president of Massachusetts Institute of Technology ; James B. Conant , Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee and president of Harvard University ; and George L. Harrison , an assistant to Stimson and president of the New York Life Insurance Company . Harrison chaired the committee when Stimson was absent , but Byrnes , as the President 's personal representative , was probably its most influential member . 
 The Interim Committee held its first meeting on 9 May 1945 . Stimson began by outlining its broad terms of reference , which included advising the President on wartime controls and the release of information , and making recommendations on post @-@ war controls and policies related to nuclear energy , including legislation . The Interim Committee was not specifically charged with making recommendations on the military use of nuclear weapons but the composition of the committee and the close relationship between the wartime use of nuclear weapons and post @-@ war policies regarding them inevitably led to the Interim Committee 's involvement . 
 = = Decision on use of atomic bombs = = 
 The most immediate of the committee 's tasks , one that has been the focus of much subsequent controversy , was to make recommendations concerning the use of the atomic bomb against Japan . The committee 's consensus , arrived at in a meeting held June 1 , 1945 , is described as follows in the meeting 's log : 
 Mr. Byrnes recommended , and the Committee agreed , that the Secretary of War should be advised that , while recognizing that the final selection of the target was essentially a military decision , the present view of the Committee was that the bomb should be used against Japan as soon as possible ; that it be used on a war plant surrounded by workers ’ homes ; and that it be used without prior warning . 
 One member , Bard , later dissented from this decision and in a memorandum to Stimson laid out a case for a warning to Japan before using the bomb . 
 In arriving at its conclusion , the committee was advised by a Scientific Panel of four physicists from the Manhattan Project : Enrico Fermi and Arthur H. Compton of the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago ; Ernest O. Lawrence of the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley ; and J. Robert Oppenheimer , who directed the bomb assembly program at Los Alamos . Reinforcing the decision arrived at on June 1 , the scientists wrote in a formal report on June 16 : 
 The opinions of our scientific colleagues on the initial use of these weapons are not unanimous : they range from the proposal of a purely technical demonstration to that of the military application best designed to induce surrender . Those who advocate a purely technical demonstration would wish to outlaw the use of atomic weapons , and have feared that if we use the weapons now our position in future negotiations will be prejudiced . Others emphasize the opportunity of saving American lives by immediate military use , and believe that such use will improve the international prospects , in that they are more concerned with the prevention of war than with the elimination of this specific weapon . We find ourselves closer to these latter views ; we can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an end to the war ; we see no acceptable alternative to direct military use . 
 Although the committee 's recommendation was addressed to Stimson , Byrnes went directly from the June 1 meeting to brief Truman , who reportedly concurred with the committee 's opinion . Reviewing the Scientific Panel 's report on June 21 , the committee reaffirmed its position 
 ... that the weapon be used against Japan at the earliest opportunity , that it be used without warning , and that it be used on a dual target , namely , a military installation or war plant surrounded by or adjacent to homes or other buildings most susceptible to damage . 
 = = Press releases = = 
 The Interim Committee was given responsibility for the preparation of separate prepared statements for the President and the Secretary of War to be released when nuclear weapons were used . The job of drafting them was given to William Laurence . Laurence submitted them to Arthur W. Page for review , and he in turn passed them on to the Interim Committee . At its meeting on July 6 , the Interim Committee considered and adopted a set of British suggestions . The final draft of President Truman 's speech was handed to him at the Potsdam Conference on August 1 . Following the dropping of an atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima on August 6 , Truman read out the press release , which declared that : 
 With this bomb we have now added a new and revolutionary increase in destruction to supplement the growing power of our armed forces . In their present form these bombs are now in production and even more powerful forms are in development . 
 It is an atomic bomb . It is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe . The force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the Far East . 
 = = Post @-@ war legislation = = 
 In July 1944 , before the Interim Committee was formed , Bush , Conant and Irvin Stewart had produced a proposal for legislation to control nuclear energy . Conant submitted the proposals to the Interim Committee at its meeting on July 9 , 1945 . Harrison brought in two experienced lawyers , Kenneth Royall and William L. Marbury to take up the job of drafting the legislation . Their draft bill would have created a nine @-@ man commission consisting of five civilian and four military members . It granted the commission broad powers to acquire property , to operate facilities , to conduct research and to regulate all forms of nuclear energy . The Royall @-@ Marbury bill was reviewed by the Interim Committee at its July 19 meeting and revised in line with their suggestions . The bill was forwarded to the President in August . The Interim Committee met again on September 28 to discuss legislative strategy . The Royall @-@ Marbury bill was introduced into the United States Congress by the chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee , Andrew J. May , and the ranking member of the Senate Committee on Military Affairs , Senator Edwin C. Johnson on October 3 . It then became known as the May @-@ Johnson bill . 
 The May @-@ Johnson bill soon ran into difficulties . Although the Interim Committee was discharged in November , it met one more time in December to discuss amendments to the May @-@ Johnson bill . On December 20 , 1945 , Senator Brien McMahon introduced an alternative Senate bill on atomic energy , which quickly became known as the McMahon bill . This was initially a very liberal bill towards the control of scientific research , and was broadly supported by scientists . McMahon framed the controversy as a question of military versus civilian control of atomic energy , although the May @-@ Johnson bill also provided for civilian control of atomic energy . In 1946 , several major revisions were made to the McMahon bill in order to appease the more conservative elements in the Senate . The resulting bill passed both the Senate and the House without major modifications . On August 1 , 1946 , Truman signed the McMahon bill into law as the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . 
 = Operation Bribie = 
 Operation Bribie ( 17 – 18 February 1967 ) , also known as the Battle of Ap My An , was fought during the Vietnam War in Phuoc Tuy province between Australian forces from the 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 6 RAR ) and two companies of Viet Cong from D445 Battalion , likely reinforced by North Vietnamese regulars . During the night of 16 February the Viet Cong attacked a South Vietnamese Regional Force compound at Lang Phuoc Hai , before withdrawing the following morning after heavy fighting with South Vietnamese forces . Two hours later a Viet Cong company was subsequently reported to have formed a tight perimeter in the rainforest 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of Lang Phuoc Hai , near the abandoned hamlet of Ap My An . In response the Australians mounted a quick reaction force operation . Considering that the Viet Cong would attempt to withdraw as they had during previous encounters , forces from 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) would subsequently be inserted into blocking positions on the likely withdrawal route in an attempt to intercept and destroy them . 
 On the afternoon of 17 February 6 RAR deployed into the area north @-@ west of Hoi My by American UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopters and M113 armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) in an attempt to cut off the anticipated Viet Cong withdrawal , establishing blocking and assault forces . Following an airmobile assault into an unsecured landing zone at 13 : 45 , A Company 6 RAR was subsequently surprised by a strong , well @-@ sited and dug @-@ in Viet Cong force , which , rather than withdrawing , had likely remained in location as part of an attempt to ambush any reaction force sent to the area . The Australians were soon contacted by heavy small arms fire , with a third of the lead platoon falling wounded in the initial volleys . A Company subsequently broke contact and withdrew under heavy fire from what appeared to be a Viet Cong base area . Initially believing they were opposed by only a company , 6 RAR subsequently launched a quick attack by two companies . However , unknown to the Australians the Viet Cong had been reinforced and they now faced a battalion @-@ sized force in well prepared positions . 
 With A Company providing fire support , B Company assaulted the position at 15 : 35 with artillery , air strikes and armour in support . From the outset the lead elements came under constant Viet Cong sniper fire from the trees , and from machine @-@ guns that had not previously been detected by the Australians . The assault soon faltered with steadily increasing casualties as the Viet Cong resisted strongly , withstanding multiple frontal assaults , including bayonet charges by two separate platoons . Surrounded and receiving fire from all sides , the lead Australian elements from B Company could advance no further against a determined and well dug @-@ in force , and all attempts to regain momentum were unable to dislodge the defenders . Initially the Australians had used their APCs to secure the landing zone at the jungle 's edge , however with the infantry in trouble they were subsequently dispatched as a relief force . Fighting their way forward , the M113s finally arrived by 18 : 15 and began loading the most badly wounded as darkness approached . The Viet Cong subsequently launched two successive counter @-@ attacks , yet both were repulsed by the Australians . During the fighting one of the APCs was subsequently disabled by a recoilless rifle at close range , killing the driver . 
 Finally , by 19 : 00 B Company was able break contact and withdrew after a five @-@ hour battle , moving into a night harbour near the landing zone with the remainder of the battalion . Mortars , artillery fire and airstrikes covered the Australian withdrawal , and then proceeded to pound the battlefield into the evening . After a tense night the Australians returned the next morning only to find that the Viet Cong had left the area during the night , successfully avoiding a large blocking force while dragging most of their dead and wounded with them . A hard fought affair at close range , the Viet Cong had lost heavily during the fighting , yet the disciplined force had matched the Australians as both sides stood their ground , inflicting numerous casualties on the other before each fell back . Although 6 RAR had ultimately prevailed , if only by default , the vicious fighting at Ap My An was probably the closest that the Australian Army came to defeat in a major battle during the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 The Australian victory at the Battle of Long Tan on 18 August 1966 proved to be a major local set back for the Viet Cong , indefinitely forestalling an imminent movement against the Australian base at Nui Dat and challenging their previous domination of Phuoc Tuy province . In the months that followed the two infantry battalions of the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) — 5th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 5 RAR ) and 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 6 RAR ) — had conducted a number of search and destroy , village cordon and search , and route security operations in an attempt to further extend their control , and to separate the local people from the influence of the Viet Cong . Such operations usually resulted in contacts between the Australians and small groups of Viet Cong , while during cordon and search operations of Binh Ba and Hoa Long a number of villagers suspected of sympathising with the communists were apprehended and handed over to the South Vietnamese authorities . Several search operations were also conducted by the Australians in areas suspected of containing Viet Cong base camps , and these often resulted in the discovery of recently used and quickly evacuated camps , hospitals and logistic bases which had then been destroyed . Meanwhile , both battalions had also continued an extensive patrolling and ambushing program around the task force base at Nui Dat . 
 By December 1966 some Australian officers , including Lieutenant Colonel John Warr , the 5 RAR commanding officer , had begun to reassess their operational aims . Warr argued that they should move away from conventional operations and instead focus on population control and disrupting communist supply lines and freedom of movement . Assessing that with just two infantry battalions 1 ATF did not have the strength to destroy the Viet Cong forces then in Phuoc Tuy , Warr favoured cordon and search operations to eliminate cadres and block the supply of rice from the villages . On 7 January 1967 , Brigadier David Jackson was replaced as Commander 1 ATF by Brigadier Stuart Graham , and he subsequently approved Warr 's proposed concept of operations . Two days later 5 RAR conducted a successful cordon and search of the village of Binh Ba as part of Operation Caloundra , screening 1 @,@ 500 villagers and interrogating 591 . Nine confirmed members of the Viet Cong were captured , while five draft dodgers were also detained . By mid @-@ afternoon the operation had concluded without a shot being fired . 
 The Australians considered the operation a complete success and its results were largely seen to vindicate their evolving tactics , techniques and procedures . In the following months 5 RAR continued to develop cordon and search procedures as 1 ATF attempted to extend its influence , with such operations proving significant in weakening the Viet Cong infrastructure and removing a number of villages from their control . In this manner the Australians had continued to operate independently within Phuoc Tuy province , and while the war had become a series of big unit search and destroy operations in a war of attrition for the Americans , they had pursued their own counter @-@ insurgency campaign . Regardless , differences of opinion between Australian and American methods had produced friction , and increasingly impatient with the Australian approach , in early @-@ 1967 the Commander US Military Assistance Command Vietnam , General William Westmoreland , had complained to the Commander Australian Forces Vietnam , Major General Tim Vincent , demanding a more aggressive approach . However , the Australians were convinced that deliberate patrolling techniques were more effective in separating the Viet Cong from the population in the villages while working towards slowly extending government control , and such urgings went largely unheeded . 
 In February 1967 1 ATF focused on the Dat Do area and the south @-@ east of Phuoc Tuy province , initiating a program of conventional operations and pacification , with 5 RAR concentrating on cordon and search and civic action against Viet Cong cadres in the villages , while 6 RAR was tasked with search and destroy missions targeting the Viet Cong D445 Battalion . During the first week 6 RAR conducted ambushes along Route 23 between Dat Do and the Suoi Tre river , pre @-@ empting Viet Cong attacks in the area during the Tet holiday . The results of this operation were modest , and the Australians suffered a number of casualties from a misplaced fire mission from the 161st Battery , Royal New Zealand Artillery which killed four and wounded 13 , including Warrant Officer Class Two Jack Kirby , who had earlier received the Distinguished Conduct Medal for his actions at Long Tan , and was among the dead . Meanwhile , 5 RAR continued its cordon and search operations . On 13 – 14 February the battalion completed a cordon and search of An Nhut , just west of Dat Do , with South Vietnamese forces , apprehending 14 Viet Cong suspects , five communist sympathisers , two South Vietnamese Army ( ARVN ) deserters and a draft dodger . The Australians again suffered heavy casualties after the officer commanding C Company , his second @-@ in @-@ command , and a New Zealand artillery forward observer were killed by an unrecorded ARVN mine . Regardless , these operations met with some success , and over a six @-@ day period the battalion captured 40 Viet Cong . Yet even as Graham continued to refine his strategy the Viet Cong struck , and this sudden initiative would force the Australians into the type of conventional engagement that Westmoreland had been advocating . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 Based at Nui Dat in the III Corps Tactical Zone as part of US II Field Force , Vietnam , 1 ATF included two infantry battalions plus armour , aviation , engineers and artillery support , with total Australian troop strength in Vietnam reaching 6 @,@ 300 men . Logistic arrangements were provided by the 1st Australian Logistic Support Group based at the port of Vung Tau . Meanwhile , People 's Army of Vietnam ( PAVN ) units operating in the province in early @-@ 1967 included Main Forces from the 5th Division , which consisted of the 274th and 275th Regiments , each of three infantry battalions under the command of Senior Colonel Nguyen The <unk> . Supporting this force were a number of artillery , engineer , medical and logistic units . Group 89 ( Artillery ) was equipped with recoilless rifles , medium mortars and heavy machine @-@ guns . Local Forces included D445 Battalion , a provincial unit normally operating in the south of the province and in Long Khanh , while guerrilla forces included two companies in the Chau Duc district , one in Long Dat and a platoon in Xuyen Moc ; in total around 4 @,@ 500 men . Australian intelligence assessed the division as capable of conducting a regimental @-@ sized harassing raid against Nui Dat , while at the same time using its second regiment for ambushes , decoys or other supporting tasks . 274th Regiment was believed capable of inflicting heavy casualties on units up to a battalion , while 275th Regiment was assessed as only having the capability to attack isolated outposts or conduct limited ambushes and was unlikely to attempt a major attack without the support of 274th Regiment . Overall , it lacked the ability to conduct a protracted division @-@ sized operation , although one regiment could likely reinforce the other within a period of eight hours . Yet even while the possibility of a divisional attack against Nui Dat was considered remote , the threat of raids up to regimental strength forced Graham to maintain a defensive posture . Yet lacking a third infantry battalion , 1 ATF 's operational strength was limited . D445 Battalion was thought capable of mortaring , harassing fire and quick raids and was likely to be able to inflict heavy casualties on forces up to company size . 
 During the night of 16 / 17 February 1967 a Viet Cong force , likely from D445 Battalion , had attacked a South Vietnamese Regional Force ( RF ) post occupied by 612 RF Company , located 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) south @-@ east of Nui Dat near Hoi My , in the vicinity of the coastal village of Lang Phuoc Hai on the South China Sea . 1 ATF was first alerted to the Viet Cong movement against Lang Phuoc Hai in the early hours of the following morning by the senior American advisor in Phuoc Tuy , Lieutenant Colonel Jack Gilham . At 02 : 30 , Major Gordon Murphy , Officer Commanding A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment , was woken to be informed that the RF post there was under attack from a Viet Cong force of at least one company . A reaction force was likely to be requested from 1 ATF , and Murphy 's armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) would also be required . Shortly after 05 : 00 Gilham advised that the Viet Cong — now estimated at two companies — had occupied Lang Phuoc Hai and had subsequently entered the nearby hamlet of Lo Gom , and were attempting to collect boats in order to withdraw from the area by sea . Murphy was warned to have a troop of APCs ready by 06 : 00 to move the task force standby rifle company from 5 RAR to the area in order to relieve the South Vietnamese outpost . 3 Troop was immediately reacted to collect the company . Only recently arrived in Vietnam , Murphy had taken over command just the previous evening . Regardless , he believed that it would be unwise to send a reaction force down Route 44 as it would be too predictable , while in the near darkness the APC crews would be unable to effectively respond to any Viet Cong ambush . Graham subsequently agreed with Murphy 's objections , and the Australians began planning a more deliberate response . 
 At 05 : 30 Gilham urgently requested the Australian APCs be at a compound in Dat Do by 06 : 45 in order to transport an ARVN company . However , as the events unfolded A Squadron was not required for this operation , while 3 Troop was also recalled and the original order to load the task force standby rifle company was rescinded . As reports of the fighting around Lang Phuoc Hai continued , Headquarters 1 ATF struggled to respond amid delays and confusion . Difficulties in obtaining American assault helicopters and intelligence reports of a possible attack on the task force base by the Viet Cong 5th Division further hampered planning . Meanwhile , Operation Renmark — a 5 RAR operation planned to begin in the Long Hai hills the following day — was postponed , while arrangements were made to move the guns of the 101st Field Battery by CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters to a temporary fire support base near Dat Do , in order to provide fire support to the reaction force which would be out of range of the guns at Nui Dat . Meanwhile , heavy fighting ensured between the Viet Cong and South Vietnamese near Lo Gom , as 615 RF Company from Xa Phuoc Loi and an ARVN battalion from Dat Do — the 3 / 43rd Infantry Battalion , entered the battle . By 09 : 35 the RF company was surrounded by the Viet Cong , now in battalion strength . However , supported by American airstrikes and artillery , the South Vietnamese successfully fought their way out , and by 10 : 10 the Viet Cong were reported to have withdrawn north @-@ east to the clear rainforest strip known to the Australians as the " Light Green " , after suffering heavy casualties during five hours of fighting . 
 Two hours later , a Viet Cong company was reported to have formed a tight perimeter in the jungle 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of Lang Phuoc Hai , near the abandoned hamlet of Ap My An . Believed to be from D445 Battalion , in spite of repeated airstrikes the force had remained in location and appeared to be attempting to cover the withdrawal of the main Viet Cong force to the east with heavy machine @-@ gun fire . The Australians assessed that , after having extended their night attack into daylight , the Viet Cong would now attempt to leave the battlefield in small parties before pulling @-@ back to their jungle bases . Yet Graham hoped to inflict a heavy defeat on the Viet Cong to boost the morale of the South Vietnamese territorial forces by demonstrating that they could not be attacked with impunity . Considering that the Viet Cong would attempt to withdraw as they had during previous encounters , forces from the 1 ATF would subsequently be inserted into blocking positions on the likely withdrawal route in an attempt to intercept and destroy them . A swift reaction was required in order to prevent the anticipated withdrawal and Graham subsequently decided on a full battalion operation with APCs in support , aimed at cutting @-@ off the Viet Cong 's likely withdrawal route to the east . Yet incomplete information and the need to conform to timings dictated by the limited availability of American helicopters for the insertion resulted in further delays . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Encounter battle at the landing zone , 17 February 1967 = = = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Colin Townsend , the commanding officer of 6 RAR , was called to the task force command post for a briefing at 10 : 20 . Townsend subsequently issued verbal orders to deploy the battalion at 11 : 30 , and 6 RAR subsequently launched a quick reaction force code named Operation Bribie . The plan envisioned C Company , under the command of Major Brian McFarlane , being inserted by M113 APCs from A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment to secure a helicopter landing zone — known as LZ Amber — 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) east of Hoi My , just north of the hamlet of Ap My An . A , B and D Companies would then be flown into LZ Amber by American UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopters . The battalion would then link up and establish a blocking position to prevent the Viet Cong withdrawing east , before patrolling westward to contact . In direct support were 105 mm M2A2 howitzers from the 101st Field Battery at the airstrip at Dat Do , which would subsequently be secured by A Company 5 RAR , while also supporting the operation were Bell H @-@ 13 Sioux light observation helicopters from the 161st Reconnaissance Flight and elements of the US 1st Battalion , 83rd Artillery Regiment . A New Zealand forward observation party was attached to the battery and would accompany B Company , 6 RAR . Due to the need to secure the task force base , 6 RAR would be required to return to Nui Dat before dark and this restriction would later impact heavily on the operation . 
 Over seven hours after Gilham 's original request , at 12 : 35 the Australian APCs had finally departed Nui Dat under Murphy 's command with C Company and the Mortar Platoon . Suspecting a Viet Cong ambush , Murphy had prudently avoided following the obvious route to Lang Phuoc Hai , travelling cross @-@ country instead , moving through Long Dien and into the paddy fields parallel to Route 326 . Yet the initial lack of artillery cover had slowed the movement of the 35 @-@ vehicle column , while the continual need to reduce speed while traversing the numerous paddy bunds en route was not appreciated beforehand and further hampered their progress . Indeed , while Murphy had correctly calculated that the rice fields would be dry and hard at that time of year , he found that the main obstacle to rapid movement was a 1 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high paddy @-@ bund every 30 to 100 metres ( 33 to 109 yd ) at the edge of each rice field . Meanwhile , although the lead company in the air assault — A Company commanded by Major Max Carroll — had departed Nui Dat at 13 : 30 aboard fifteen UH @-@ 1 helicopters from a US Army aviation company , C Company had still not arrived in position to secure the landing zone . 
 Although unknown to the Australians at the time , the earlier attack on Lang Phuoc Hai had been a deliberate attempt by the Viet Cong to provoke a reaction from 1 ATF . As such there would be no withdrawal on this occasion . Anticipating that any relief force would move by road , the Viet Cong had subsequently established an extensive ambush in the buildings alongside Route 44 , which led into the village itself . Although the presence of this trap was not detected by the Australians , Murphy 's evasion had ensured that his APCs had avoided it , moving the infantry by a cross @-@ country route instead . However , with C Company delayed as a result , A Company made their airmobile assault onto an unsecured landing zone at 13 : 45 , supported only by indirect fire from the artillery at Dat Do in suppression , which was initially limited due to delay in setting up the fire support base . Under the command of Major Owen O 'Brien , A Company then began to advance into the fringe of thick rainforest to secure the southern edge of the landing zone for the arrival of B Company and the remainder of the battalion . Finally , over 30 minutes after the lead company had flown in , the APCs began to receive sniper fire as they neared the landing zone . 
 A Company moved south , shaking out into an open formation across a frontage of 150 metres ( 160 yd ) , with 2 Platoon on the right and 3 Platoon on the left , while 1 Platoon was in depth . Already in the dense vegetation , 2 Platoon — under Second Lieutenant Graham Ackland — had only advanced 150 metres when a sniper was spotted in a tree and was subsequently shot by the platoon sergeant . Almost simultaneously , 3 Platoon was engaged with small arms fire , while behind them the company headquarters was engaged by more snipers . 2 Platoon assaulted straight into the main Viet Cong position with grenades and machine @-@ guns . Breaking @-@ in they moved forward , killing a number of Viet Cong in their weapon pits but suffering six casualties in less than a minute , with a third of the lead platoon falling wounded in the initial volleys . Pinned down and in trouble , Ackland realised that he was facing a sizable and well dug @-@ in force and he attempted to move his sections into an all @-@ round defensive perimeter in order to defend against any counter @-@ attack ; the Viet Cong did not attack however and instead remained in their pits . In an attempt to relieve 2 Platoon , O 'Brien manoeuvred 1 and 3 Platoons , while requesting B Company support his right flank as soon as they arrived at the landing zone . 
 Arriving shortly after the initial contact , the lead platoon from B Company — 5 Platoon under Second Lieutenant John O 'Halloran — was forced to jump from their helicopters as they were unable to land after taking fire at the landing zone . The platoon quickly formed up and moved into the vegetation on the western edge of the landing zone , with the remainder of the company following them as they landed . Meanwhile , O 'Brien estimated that A Company was facing at least a company dug @-@ in across a 100 to 200 metres ( 110 to 220 yd ) frontage , armed with five or six machine @-@ guns . Unable to use artillery because of the helicopters still flying @-@ in the remainder of the battalion , while the mortars were still with the APCs and had not yet arrived , O 'Brien was without support and any further advance would not be possible . Unlike previous encounters during which the Viet Cong had attempted to avoid battle , the force now confronting A Company appeared to have no intention of withdrawing and was instead mounting an unexpectedly determined defence . The Australians suspected that this uncharacteristic willingness to fight during daylight indicated that the Viet Cong force may have been covering the withdrawal of their command elements . Under heavy fire from what appeared to be a Viet Cong base area , O 'Brien extricated his platoons with difficulty and subsequently broke contact , withdrawing 250 metres ( 270 yd ) with the wounded to the southern edge of the landing zone . 
 Only twenty minutes since the first contact , A Company had returned to its original position on the rainforest fringe , having suffered seven men wounded and using most of their ammunition . O 'Brien subsequently briefed Townsend by radio , again reporting the Viet Cong position as a ' camp ' of at least company @-@ size , and proposing that A Company remain in location while B Company adopted a position on the right flank until the situation could be clarified , to which he agreed . Townsend subsequently arrived by helicopter as A Company 's casualties were being evacuated by an Australian UH @-@ 1 Iroquois from No. 9 Squadron RAAF . Meanwhile , the APCs carrying C Company and the Mortar Platoon began to arrive , while D Company was inserted by helicopter a few minutes later and took up blocking positions in the tree @-@ line north @-@ east of the landing zone . Just after 14 : 30 , B Company — under Major Ian Mackay — began receiving sniper fire in their position just south @-@ west of A Company , and in response Mackay moved the company back before calling @-@ in artillery fire onto the Viet Cong positions . Initially believing that he only faced a company @-@ sized Viet Cong force , with his rifle companies now finally assembled , at 15 : 15 Townsend issued orders for a quick attack by two companies . 
 = = = B Company 6 RAR quick attack fails , 17 February 1967 = = = 
 Townsend 's plan envisioned A Company advancing south approximately 200 metres ( 220 yd ) and engaging the Viet Cong in an attempt to split their fire and provide fire support , while B Company would move around from the right flank to launch the assault . Meanwhile , C Company would occupy a blocking position to the west , while D Company would be kept in reserve . B Company would then assault in a south @-@ east direction on an axis that would take them across the front of A Company , which would require their fire to cut @-@ out as they did so . The scheme of manoeuvre was based on the assumption that the Viet Cong position was a camp as previously reported , and not a defensive position , yet with visibility in the thick vegetation limited to between 10 to 30 metres ( 11 to 33 yd ) , few of the men from A Company had actually seen much of the position during the earlier fighting . Yet the Viet Cong had likely now been reinforced by North Vietnamese regulars from 275th Regiment and unknown to the Australians they now faced a battalion @-@ sized force in well prepared positions . 
 The assault began at 15 : 35 , with A Company beginning their advance into the rainforest with two platoons forward and one back . Meanwhile , B Company began forming up in single file on the right flank , also with two platoons forward in assault formation , while one remained in reserve at the rear . Each of the forward platoons covered a frontage of 100 metres ( 110 yd ) , with 4 Platoon — under the command of Second Lieutenant John Sullivan — on the left , and O 'Halloran 's 5 Platoon on the right . Company headquarters was located centrally , while 6 Platoon — commanded by Sergeant Butch Brady — was to the rear . Each platoon adopted a similar formation , with two sections forward and one back . From the outset the lead elements of B Company came under constant sniper fire from the trees , and from Viet Cong machine @-@ guns that had not previously been detected by the Australians . Even as the company was shaking out they were engaged sporadically by a group of Viet Cong just 50 metres ( 55 yd ) to their front , with one Australian soldier being hit before the attack began and later dying at the landing zone before he could be evacuated . B Company subsequently crossed the line of departure at 15 : 55 , and two minutes later A Company began engaging the Viet Cong positions with small arms from their 7 @.@ 62 mm M60 machine @-@ guns and L1A1 Self Loading Rifles , and 5 @.@ 56 mm M16 assault rifles in support . 
 As B Company moved forward , their left flank was engaged by a machine @-@ gun from a small party of Viet Cong to their front , while sniper fire intensified . The Australians continued to advance with co @-@ ordinated fire and movement , but were now receiving fire from three directions . Ten minutes after stepping off , B Company crossed the front of A Company , forcing them to cease their covering fire . Without support , the Australians were now assaulting a well dug @-@ in and largely unseen Viet Cong force that was disposed in a wide arc . Penetrating the position , the Australian flanks were increasingly exposed to fire , while the dense undergrowth obscured the Viet Cong pits and reduced visibility to just a few metres . Both the lead Australian platoons were soon enveloped , as fire swept across the front of B Company from the Viet Cong engaging them with heavy machine @-@ guns , claymore mines and light mortars . Meanwhile , Viet Cong snipers continued to engage the Australians from the rear , who unsuccessfully attempted to regain the initiative with small arms fire and grenades . The assault soon faltered with steadily increasing casualties . 
 The two forward Australian platoons subsequently lost contact with each other , while the left section of 4 Platoon was engaged by a 12 @.@ 7 mm heavy machine @-@ gun , and began to fall behind . The section on the right was also engaged by a machine @-@ gun , and the frontage of the platoon subsequently broke . The section commander assaulted the Viet Cong position with an M79 grenade launcher , however he was unable to dislodge them . Meanwhile on the right , 5 Platoon pressed their advance , and they subsequently pulled further ahead of the rest of B Company . At 16 : 25 , with 5 Platoon now 40 metres ( 44 yd ) in front and also receiving machine @-@ gun fire from its front and right flank , Mackay finally ordered the platoon to halt as he attempted to manoeuvre the company to regain control of the situation . 6 Platoon was ordered to advance through 4 Platoon to assault the machine @-@ gun on the left flank , before linking up with 5 Platoon and continuing the assault . Brady subsequently directed his men to fix bayonets and charge the Viet Cong positions , yet the attack was soon cut to pieces by machine @-@ guns which engaged them from the centre and left and it was subsequently halted behind O 'Halloran 's rear section . Brady then requested mortar fire in support ; however , the need to request air clearance only resulted in further delay . By 16 : 45 B Company 's assault had bogged down due to the strong Viet Cong resistance . All of its platoons were in contact and unable to move , while company headquarters had advanced behind the lead platoons and was also pinned down . 
 As the fighting continued , D Company remained in a blocking position to the north @-@ east of the landing zone . Meanwhile , after inserting C Company into its blocking position to the west , the APCs from A Squadron had moved into a harbour around the tree line , from where they covered the flanks of the rifle companies in the rainforest . Not included in the assault due to the belief that the terrain was unsuitable for armour , in their location the APCs were occasionally hit by overshooting rounds , but otherwise remained out of the battle . This assumption was later found to be incorrect though , and the APCs would likely have been able to move through the dense undergrowth , while the firepower provided by their .50 calibre machine @-@ guns would have been able to assist B Company , which was pinned down . Regardless , the armament of the M113s would have likely proven inadequate for attacking strong defences and bunkers , and their light aluminium armour was known to be vulnerable to heavy machine @-@ guns and RPGs . With both A and B Company now heavily engaged , Townsend subsequently asked Murphy whether his APCs could move around to the right in another attempt to outflank the Viet Cong ; however , a creek made the ground in that area too boggy for the vehicles and this proved impractical . A close quarters battle then ensued , continuing until night fell with the Australians assaulting the Viet Cong positions using frontal tactics which resulted in heavy casualties on both sides . 
 = = = Final assault and withdrawal overnight , 17 / 18 February 1967 = = = 
 Under orders from Townsend to press on with the assault as fast as possible , Mackay decided to switch the B Company assault to the right flank , ordering O 'Halloran by radio to advance a further 30 metres ( 33 yd ) in order to outflank the Viet Cong machine @-@ gun and allow 6 Platoon to resume its advance on the left flank . However , the machine @-@ gun was soon found to be located a further 30 metres forward than expected , and 5 Platoon would need to assault 60 metres ( 66 yd ) across open scrub under heavy fire in order to silence it . As O 'Halloran relayed orders for the assault , machine @-@ guns and snipers continued to engage them intermittently , and the Australians continued to return fire with small arms and grenades . Again fixing bayonets , on order the Australians rose as one and were almost immediately hit with heavy fire , with the forward line disintegrating as a result . The left forward section under Lance Corporal Kerry Rooney then advanced directly at the machine @-@ gun located to their front , firing as they moved . Rooney then charged the position throwing grenades but was shot and killed within metres of the Viet Cong position . Suffering several more men wounded , the Australian left flank again became pinned down . 
 Meanwhile , the right forward section under Corporal Robin Jones attacked the Viet Cong at close range , inflicting heavy casualties on the defenders with grenades and small arms fire . However , three previously undetected Viet Cong machine @-@ guns subsequently engaged 5 Platoon , which succeeded in breaking up the Australian attack on the right flank with intense enfilade fire which killed three men and wounded five more . Of his section only Jones was left unwounded . For his leadership he was later awarded the Military Medal . The Australian assault stalled having covered just 25 metres ( 27 yd ) . Nearly half of the men in the forward sections had become casualties and the platoon stretcher bearer , Private Richard <unk> repeatedly risked his life dragging men to safety , providing first aid , recovering weapons from the dead , and providing O 'Halloran with information on the disposition of his platoon . For his actions <unk> was also later awarded the Military Medal . Attempting to reinforce his threatened right flank , O 'Halloran ordered the M60 machine @-@ gun from his reserve section forward to support Jones while the wounded were recovered , however both the machine @-@ gunner and his <unk> were killed attempting to move forward . Surrounded by Viet Cong machine @-@ guns and receiving fire from all sides , the lead Australian elements from B Company could advance no further against a determined and well dug @-@ in force , and all attempts to regain momentum were unable to dislodge the defenders . 
 With the Australian and Viet Cong positions now too close to each other , O 'Halloran could neither move forward nor withdraw . Artillery began to fire in support of the Australians , however it initially fell too far to the rear to be effective , and it had to be adjusted by the B Company forward observer , Captain Jim Ryan , himself under heavy fire . 5 Platoon was still in danger of becoming isolated and O 'Brien now suggested he move A Company forward to assist B Company , however this was rejected by Mackay who feared the two companies clashing in the confusion . Meanwhile , O 'Halloran called for the APCs to come forward to provide assistance , while the platoon sergeant — Sergeant Mervyn McCullough — guided a section from 6 Platoon forward to reinforce 5 Platoon , and begin evacuating the casualties . Bolstered by reinforcements and with accurate artillery covering fire O 'Halloran now felt that he was in a position to extract his platoon . Yet at that moment two rounds from one of the howitzers fell short , and while one of the shells harmlessly exploded against a tree , the other landed just to the right of the 5 Platoon headquarters , killing two men and wounding eight others , including six of the seven reinforcements from 6 Platoon . Following an urgent radio call from O 'Halloran , the artillery ceased fire . Shortly afterwards an RPG round hit the same area , wounding McCullough . 
 Townsend subsequently then reported that he was facing a force of at least battalion @-@ strength with support weapons — likely D445 Battalion — while the level of proficiency indicated that it might also include North Vietnamese Army ( NVA ) elements . However , due to earlier warnings that the Viet Cong were preparing to attack Nui Dat that evening , prior to the start of the operation Graham had ordered Townsend to return to base that afternoon , and this restriction remained extant . Likewise , with Operation Renmark scheduled to start the following morning , A Company 5 RAR — then at Dat Do protecting the artillery — would also need to be released before nightfall , adding to the requirement to conclude the operation that afternoon . Regardless , this restriction had only served to make B Company 's task all the more difficult , with Mackay facing demands to complete the action while at the same time not become decisively engaged and unable to withdraw his company . At 16 : 17 Townsend was ordered to prepare his battalion for a helicopter extraction which was due to begin an hour later , while at 17 : 15 he was ordered to break contact immediately , however this proved impossible as 5 Platoon remained in heavy contact . Mackay now estimated that he would be unable to get forward to support the beleaguered platoon for a further 30 minutes ; however , by 17 : 50 he realised that the Viet Cong had moved between them and A Company . Yet even while the Viet Cong continued to heavily engage both A and B Companies , the remainder of the Australian battalion and the APCs were beginning to line up on the landing zone in preparation for returning to Nui Dat . The order was finally rescinded when it became clear that both companies were unable to break @-@ off the engagement . Meanwhile , a number of bush fires were now burning through the area , detonating discarded ammunition and adding to the noise of the battle . 
 Initially the Australians had used their APCs to secure the landing zone at the jungle 's edge , however with the infantry in trouble they were subsequently dispatched as a relief force . Three M113s from 2 Troop under Sergeant Frank Graham entered the rainforest shortly after 17 : 15 ; however , lacking clear directions to B Company 's position 300 metres ( 330 yd ) away , they fumbled around in the dense vegetation before locating A Company instead . Instructed by Mackay to head for the white smoke of the bush fire , in error the APCs then set out towards the most obvious smoke further to the south @-@ east of B Company . A Viet Cong 75 mm recoilless rifle subsequently engaged the lead vehicle twice at close range , though both rounds missed , exploding in the trees nearby . Still unsure of B Company 's location , Graham was unwilling to engage the Viet Cong position with heavy machine @-@ guns for fear of hitting his own men , and the cavalry subsequently withdrew . Later it was discovered that the cavalry had likely been engaged by elements defending the Viet Cong headquarters . Meanwhile , due to the threat posed by the Viet Cong anti @-@ tank weapons the remainder of 2 Troop then arrived under the command Second Lieutenant David Watts to provide added protection ; in total 12 vehicles . A further attempt to reach B Company by the cavalry also failed however , after the A Company guide became disorientated in the thick vegetation . Mackay then threw coloured smoke , while Sioux helicopters arrived overhead to guide the vehicles to their position . B Company 's casualties now amounted to seven men killed and 19 wounded . 
 Fighting their way forward , the M113s finally arrived by 18 : 15 and began loading the most badly wounded as darkness approached . The Viet Cong subsequently launched two successive counter @-@ attacks , assaulting B Company from the east and south @-@ east ; however , both attacks were repulsed by the Australians , as they responded with small arms fire while Mackay called @-@ in an airstrike . During the fighting one of the APCs was subsequently disabled by a recoilless rifle at close range , killing the driver and wounding the crew commander . A second round then struck the open cargo hatch , wounding several more men and re @-@ wounding a number of the Australian casualties . A third round then landed nearby , as the M113s returned fire with their .30 and .50 calibre machine @-@ guns . Under covering fire the Australians attempted to recover the damaged vehicle , yet it became stuck hard against a tree . With the Viet Cong threatening a further attack from the north @-@ east , the Australian cavalry swept the area with a heavy volume of fire and were met by equally heavy return fire . By 18 : 50 the light was fading rapidly , while the bulk of 5 Platoon 's more serious casualties had been evacuated by APC . However , with many of the Australian dead lying in close proximity to the Viet Cong positions , no attempt was made to recover them due to the likelihood of further casualties . Meanwhile , the damaged APC was subsequently destroyed with white phosphorus grenades to prevent its weapons and equipment from being captured . 
 Finally , by 19 : 00 B Company was able break contact and withdrew after a five @-@ hour battle . Both sides then fell back as the Viet Cong also dispersed , evacuating most of their dead and wounded . Meanwhile , under covering fire from the APCs of 2 Troop , B Company boarded the remaining carriers , moving into a night harbour near the landing zone with the remainder of the battalion at 19 : 25 , as the last of their casualties were extracted by helicopter . Mortars , artillery fire and airstrikes covered the Australian withdrawal , and then proceeded to pound the abandoned battlefield into the evening . That night the body of the dead APC driver was evacuated by helicopter , as American AC @-@ 47 Spooky gunships circled overhead , dropping flares to illuminate the battlefield and strafing likely Viet Cong positions , while F @-@ 4 Phantoms dropped napalm . The airstrikes then continued in preparation for a further assault by the Australians planned for the following day . Otherwise there was no further fighting that night , and both sides remained unmolested . Ultimately no attack was made against the Australian base at Nui Dat that night either , while no unusual activity was reported in the area . 
 = = = Return to the battlefield , 18 February 1967 = = = 
 After a tense night the Australians returned to the battlefield the following morning . At 09 : 30 on 18 February 6 RAR assaulted into the area on a broad front , with C and D Companies forward and A Company in reserve , while B Company and the APCs from A Squadron occupied a blocking position to the south . Anxious not to repeat the failure to follow up the retreating Viet Cong after Long Tan , from Saigon Vincent urged Graham to pursue D445 Battalion . Meanwhile , a large American force of over 100 armoured vehicles from the 2nd Battalion , US 47th Mechanised Infantry Regiment , supported by a battery of self @-@ propelled guns and helicopters from the US 9th Division , attempted to cut @-@ off likely Viet Cong escape routes . Having deployed in support of 1 ATF earlier that morning from Bearcat , 42 kilometres ( 26 mi ) north @-@ west of Nui Dat , the Americans subsequently cleared an area along the line of Route 23 , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) north @-@ east of the battle @-@ zone . Although constituting an impressive display of combat power , the Americans had arrived too late to affect the outcome of the battle , and no contacts occurred before they were withdrawn the following day . Meanwhile , the Australians conducted a sweep of the battlefield only to find that the Viet Cong had left the area during the night , successfully avoiding the large blocking force while dragging most of their dead and wounded with them . 
 During the sweep one of the missing Australians — Lance Corporal Vic Otway — was unexpectedly found alive , having spent the night in close proximity to the Viet Cong after being wounded in both legs and falling just metres from the machine @-@ gun he had been assaulting . Unable to answer calls from other members of his platoon for fear of being discovered , he was presumed to have been killed . Lying still for four hours , Otway had managed to crawl 70 metres ( 77 yd ) to the rear after dark , before artillery fire and airstrikes began to fall on the area . Digging a shell scrape for protection from the American napalm strikes , he was subsequently wounded again by shrapnel . After first light he had continued to crawl back towards the Australian lines , but was confronted by a group of Viet Cong soldiers just 6 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 yd ) away . Otway attempted to fire on them , however his weapon jammed , and the Viet Cong had walked past him unaware of his presence . Continuing their search , the Australians then located and recovered the bodies of the six dead from 5 Platoon . Most had been burnt beyond recognition by napalm , while at least one had been stripped of his webbing and equipment . The burnt out APC was also recovered . On the side the Viet Cong had written " DU ME UC DAI LOI " in blood ; loosely translated into English as " Get fucked Australians " . Its destruction was subsequently completed by the cavalry and the burnt out hull was recovered to Nui Dat . At 10 : 35 A Squadron then undertook a thorough search of the area . 
 The bodies of six Viet Cong soldiers were also found by the Australians . Among the dead was the commander of C3 Company , D445 Battalion and his second @-@ in @-@ command , while others were identified as personnel from the command elements of the battalion and the heavy weapons company . Three of the dead were NVA soldiers , possibly from 275th Regiment , although this was not able to be confirmed . Many more bodies were thought to have been carried away , while one AK @-@ 47 assault rifle and a small quantity of ammunition and equipment was also located . The Viet Cong position was found to have been hastily prepared overnight , and consisted of well @-@ sited , but shallow weapon pits rather than bunkers , approximately half of which had overhead protection . <unk> as a good night defensive position rather than a position designed for a deliberate defensive battle , it had been laid out in the shape of a half @-@ moon ; by the fortunes of war B Company had directly assaulted into the centre of the position . Yet the flat terrain had offered good fields of fire , while the dense vegetation provided excellent concealment . The Australians believed that the Viet Cong had withdrawn to the east , and B Company subsequently patrolled through the " Light Green " up to the small village of Ap Gia Thanh , 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) east , supported by the APCs , hooking south along the jungle tracks towards the swamps along the Song Rai river . Although signs of heavy foot traffic were obvious the Viet Cong had long since left the area , while no evidence of blood trails or discarded equipment were found , indicating an orderly retirement from the battlefield . B Company returned to Nui Dat by 17 : 30 , while the remainder of 6 RAR was extracted by helicopter . The last APCs from A Squadron finally returned by 20 : 10 that evening as Operation Bribie concluded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 In the aftermath of the operation Hanoi declared that the Viet Cong had won a decisive victory , claiming to have inflicted heavy losses on the Australians . The Australian higher command also claimed a major triumph , a view later reflected by Graham who believed that the Viet Cong had " got a thrashing " . While in total just eight Viet Cong bodies had been recovered from the battlefield , many more had obviously been removed and later Australian intelligence reports assessed Viet Cong losses as between 50 and 70 killed , with many fresh graves later found on the withdrawal route . Indeed as a result of the fighting D445 Battalion was unable to mount a full battalion operation for the remainder of 1967 , while their losses were increasingly filled by North Vietnamese . Yet the Australians had also suffered heavy casualties , and both sides had matched each other in bravery and determination . The fighting had cost 6 RAR seven killed and 27 wounded , while the cavalry also lost one killed and one wounded , and an APC destroyed . The Viet Cong had proven themselves able to withstand multiple Australian assaults , as well as heavy mortar , artillery , and aerial bombardment , before both sides fell back with their casualties . Although 6 RAR had ultimately prevailed , if only by default , the vicious fighting at Ap My An was probably the closest that the Australian Army came to defeat in a major battle during the war . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 By staying and fighting the Viet Cong had surprised the Australians , who expected them to withdraw rapidly to their jungle bases following their attack on Lang Phuoc Hai as they had on previous occasions . This assumption had led the Australians to commit forces in a piecemeal fashion when the situation required a deliberate battalion attack supported by blocking forces , a co @-@ ordinated indirect fire plan , and APCs . Yet such an operation would have required considerable time to plan and execute , and Townsend had been ordered not to become too heavily engaged . Ad hoc and planned in haste , Operation Bribie went badly for the Australians from the start with delays in deploying the reaction force . Expecting only minor contact , Graham had finally sent the battalion out after midday and ordered it to return before nightfall . Yet this restriction had a significant impact on the operation , and limited the time available to commanders at all levels for planning and reconnaissance , thereby preventing a more deliberate approach . Once committed , the Australians realised that they had struck at least a company from D445 Battalion with elements of a heavy weapons company , possibly supported by North Vietnamese reinforcements and at least five machine @-@ guns , one heavy machine @-@ gun and two recoilless rifles . Graham had intended to land 6 RAR behind the Viet Cong in order to cut @-@ off their withdrawal , yet instead they had almost landed directly on top of them . Further misjudgement and circumstance affected the Australian response once the battle began , with the initial reports that the Viet Cong position was a ' camp ' proving incorrect , as had the belief that the dense scrub made the area unsuitable for cavalry . Meanwhile , A Company 's initial assault had lacked adequate artillery support , while B Company 's final assault had been hampered by the requirement for A Company 's supporting fire to cut @-@ off early . The resulting friction had then culminated in A Squadron 's difficulty linking @-@ up with B Company in the dense vegetation , further delaying their relief . 
 The experience held a number of lessons for the Australians , not least of all was the need for tanks . Although the APCs had been used to support the infantry during the operation , they lacked the firepower and armour to be an effective substitute for tanks which would likely have found the terrain and vegetation no obstacle and may have proven decisive . Meanwhile , the futility and waste of frontal tactics and massed bayonet charges against automatic weapons had once again been demonstrated . Yet such lessons still had not been fully grasped by Australian Army training doctrine , and under pressure from Townsend to press on with the attack Mackay had given the order to fix bayonets and charge due to the proximity of his forward platoons to the Viet Cong . Despite having long since ceased to be a decisive weapon of warfare , when ordered the Australians had unhesitatingly charged towards the Viet Cong machine @-@ guns in the certainty of suffering casualties . As a result of their bravery 5 Platoon became one of the most highly decorated Australian platoons of the war . Yet aggression alone could not overcome concentrated firepower , and many survivors were later bitter about the order and losses suffered in these attempts . Another lesson identified included the need to thoroughly prepare an <unk> landing zone by fire prior to insertion . Likewise , during the initial contact A Company had been unable to call in artillery , and the need for a dedicated command and control helicopter to co @-@ ordinate indirect fire during an airmobile assault was also evident . 
 In attacking Lang Phuoc Hai the Viet Cong had likely intended to draw out and ambush any relief force as it approached the village ; a standard tactic they had employed on previous occasions . Indeed , early on 17 February two companies of Viet Cong had established an ambush between Dat Do and Lang Phuoc Hai . That morning the South Vietnamese had subsequently dispatched 189 RF Company from Hoi My , yet the ambush subsequently failed when the RF company commander elected to move by an indirect route to the east of the road , striking the Viet Cong flank just after first light . Although outnumbered , the South Vietnamese had caught the Viet Cong by surprise and were able to fight their way clear , forcing the communists to withdraw to the north @-@ east . Later that day Murphy had taken a similar precaution , moving A Squadron cross @-@ country over the paddy fields to the LZ Amber . Several days after the battle uncorroborated information was received which suggested that in so doing , the Australians may have also avoided a large area ambush on Route 44 between Hoi My and Lang Phuoc Hai by up to two main force battalions , with the convoy perhaps passing within 200 metres ( 220 yd ) of the Viet Cong command group without realising it . Murphy subsequently deduced that the two @-@ company Viet Cong force that had earlier contacted 189 RF Company may have been flank protection or a blocking force for the larger ambush . By inserting into LZ Amber it was probable that 6 RAR had unknowingly also avoided this ambush , yet had subsequently clashed with a large group of Viet Cong resting in the dense jungle adjacent to the landing zone . This force was likely either a reserve or flank security element , and was not a part of the main force that had attacked Lang Phuoc Hai . 
 During the subsequent fighting at Ap My An the Viet Cong had elected to fight from a hasty but well @-@ prepared position and had displayed good battle discipline , command and control and effective camouflage and concealment . The Australians were later generous in their praise for their performance . In particular their use of snipers had been particularly effective , although overall their individual shooting was of a poor standard and had often been too high . Townsend concluded that the Viet Cong force had most likely been ordered to fight a rearguard action until dark in order to cover the withdrawal a larger force and their command elements . Regardless , despite their strong performance , the battle also held lessons for the Viet Cong themselves . In particular their failure to deploy their machine @-@ guns in the tree line on the edge of the landing zone had allowed the Australians to establish a foothold , despite A Company being forced to assault into an insecure landing zone with only minimal suppression from a single artillery battery . Later during the war the Viet Cong developed the effective tactic of targeting troop helicopters as they arrived at landing zones when they were most vulnerable . 
 The most intense fighting involving 1 ATF since Long Tan , during Operation Bribie the Australians had suffered their highest casualties since August 1966 . In terms of the number of Viet Cong bodies recovered compared to their own losses it was the worst result they had experienced in Vietnam to that point , while the task force had also been unable to destroy D445 Battalion . The results of the fighting continued to be debated long after its conclusion , and while Graham felt that 6 RAR had inflicted severe casualties on the Viet Cong and that the battle later had far reaching effects on the insurgency in Phuoc Tuy province , Vincent believed that any success had only been marginal at best . Certainly to many of the Australian soldiers that fought it , the battle had been no victory . Private Robin Harris of 5 Platoon later wrote : " I think that on this occasion Charlie 's losses were overstated . It was us who had copped a hiding . " This view was shared by APC commander David Clifton when he recalled : " We had been soundly thrashed on Operation Bribie . " Perhaps though , as Mackay later wrote , the " truth of Operation Bribie " was that the Australians and Viet Cong had " thoroughly belted each other " . Overall , the Australians had lost the operational strength of a platoon , while the Viet Cong had effectively lost a company ; arguably though it was questionable if such attrition would achieve any long @-@ term gains in Phuoc Tuy for the Australians . The battle had a lasting effect on 1 ATF , and ultimately resulted in a number of measures to overcome a perceived weakness in firepower , while also confirming the need to limit the Viet Cong 's freedom of movement . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Operation Renmark had been temporarily delayed due to the fighting at Ap My An . Initially it had been planned to begin early on the morning of 18 February , following a pre @-@ planned airstrike on the Long Hais by American B @-@ 52 bombers , which had gone ahead as planned at 06 : 00 . However , 5 RAR could not be released until 6 RAR returned to Nui Dat that afternoon , and they finally departed at 15 : 30 . The first Australian search and destroy operation into the Viet Cong base areas of the Minh Dam Secret Zone — located in the Long Hai hills south of Long Dien and Dat Do , 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) from Nui Dat — the operation continued until 22 February . Heavily defended by mines and booby traps , the area had remained a Viet Cong safe haven despite previous operations by the US 173rd Airborne Brigade in June 1966 and two smaller ARVN operations . During the operation B Company 5 RAR suffered seven killed and 22 wounded in a single mine incident , while contact with the Viet Cong was otherwise limited . Once again the Australians had suffered heavy casualties for only modest gain , and coupled with those of Operation Bribie , their losses were beginning to mount . 
 During February 1967 1 ATF had sustained its heaviest casualties in the war to that point , losing 16 men killed and 55 wounded in a single week . The task force appeared to have lost the initiative and for the first time in nine months of operations the number of Australians killed in battle , or from friendly fire , mines or booby traps , had reversed the task force 's kill ratio . Such losses underscored the need for a third battalion and the requirement for tanks to support the infantry ; a realisation which challenged the conventional wisdom of Australian counter @-@ revolutionary warfare doctrine which had previously allotted only a minor role to armour . Regardless , it would be nearly a year before additional Australian forces would finally arrive in Vietnam . Although Graham had quickly established himself since taking over as Commander 1 ATF in January , and had developed a sound operational concept , the Viet Cong had succeeded in preventing him from implementing it as he had intended . Operation Bribie confirmed in his mind the need to establish a physical barrier to deny the Viet Cong freedom of movement and thereby regain the initiative , and the subsequent decision to establish an 11 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) barrier minefield from Dat Do to the coast increasingly came to dominate task force planning . Yet ultimately this would prove both controversial and costly for the Australians , and despite initial success , the minefield would become a source of munitions for the Viet Cong to use against 1 ATF and later the decision would be made to remove it in 1969 . 
 = Love Profusion = 
 " Love Profusion " is a song by American singer and songwriter Madonna for her ninth studio album American Life ( 2003 ) . Written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï , it was released as the fourth and final single from the album on December 8 , 2003 , by Maverick Records . " Love Profusion " was first premiered during the release of the album on AOL website . It later received a number of remixes , which were also released alongside the single . The song contains rhythm from a four piece bass drum , with guitar riffs of the acoustic guitar and Madonna 's voice backed by a male vocal during the chorus . Ahmadzaï used the stutter edit to create a new groove . Dedicated to director , and Madonna 's then @-@ husband , Guy Ritchie , the song 's lyrics deals with questions , solutions , resurrections and confusions of Madonna about the American culture . 
 After its release , " Love Profusion " received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Reviewers called it as the highlight of American Life , complimenting the dance beats and the acoustic guitar fusion in its composition , although some thought that the tune was repetitive in lieu of the other songs from the album . " Love Profusion " failed to chart in the US Billboard Hot 100 as its predecessors from American Life , but it reached number one on the dance charts and the singles sales chart . The song achieved moderate success internationally , reaching the top five in Canada , Italy , while topping the charts in Spain . 
 The accompanying music video of the song was directed by Luc Besson and was shot at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , California . It featured Madonna in front of a greenscreen effect with her walking through a city , until walking into a surreal background , filled with red flowers , sea and fairies . " Love Profusion " also appeared on Estée Lauder " Beyond Paradise " fragrance television commercial , which was similar to the music video and was directed by Besson , but featured supermodel Carolyn Murphy . The advertisement debuted in more than 10 @,@ 000 cinemas across the country . Madonna has not performed the song during any promotional appearances or on any of her tours . She rehearsed it for the Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) , but it was dropped from the setlist . 
 = = Background and remixes = = 
 According to biographer Lucy O 'Brien , nothingness is the main theme of American Life ; it appears in the titles of songs like " Nobody Knows Me " and " Nothing Fails " and in the repetition of the word " no " in " Love Profusion " . Madonna 's negative tone in this song and throughout the album allowed her to be sarcastic about people 's assumptions about her and to emphasize her knowledge of romantic love . The tracks from American Life were released to AOL for digital download . Since Madonna was the " Artist of the Month " at AOL website , " Love Profusion " was premiered there on April 14 , 2003 , as part of AOL 's First Listen program . Several remixes of the song , done by DJs such as The Passengerz , Craig J. , Blow @-@ Up and Ralphi Rosario , were included on physical releases of the single around the world , released on December 8 , 2003 , in the United Kingdom and March 16 , 2004 in the United States . 
 The remixes were premiered by Warner Bros. Records at the 2003 Winter Music Conference in Miami , where Peter Rauhofer , Rosario and Blow @-@ Up played their remixes of " Love Profusion " . Blow @-@ Up also debuted their own version of " Good Boys " ( 2003 ) by Blondie , and remixes of Madonna 's previous single , " Hollywood " . An extended version of the " Love Profusion " remix , titled " Headcleanr Rock Mix " , was also included on Madonna 's remix album Remixed & Revisited ( 2003 ) . Michael Paoletta of Billboard named the remix ( along with the " Mount Sims Old School Mix " of " Nobody Knows Me " ) as the highlight of Remixed and Revisited , calling it " a new @-@ wave @-@ styled @-@ rock tune " , a " blast of fresh air " and an " essential listening experience " . John Payne from LA Weekly compares the lyrics of the song ( " Only you make me feel good " ) with the cautionary lyrics of " X @-@ Static Process " , in which the protagonist loses herself in her lover 's ego . The " Headcleanr Rock Mix " was included on the setlist during the rehearsals of Madonna 's 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour , but it was ultimately not included in the show . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Love Profusion " was composed and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï . The song is dedicated to Madonna 's then @-@ husband , director Guy Ritchie . The recording sessions for American Life started in late 2001 , but was put on hold as Madonna filmed Swept Away in Malta and starred in the West End play Up for Grabs . She returned to the Olympic Recording Studios in late 2002 and finished the sessions . 
 The mixing for the track was done by Mark " Spike " Stent at the Westlake Recording Studios at West Hollywood , California , and Tim Young did the mastering of the song at Metropolis Studios in London . Tom Hannen and Simon Changer served as assistant engineers during the recording . Ahmadzaï played the guitars and provided its backing vocals . According to the sheet music published at Sheetmusicplus.com , " Love Profusion " is written in common time with a moderately fast tempo of 120 beats per minute . According to a writer from The Arizona Republic , it is an electronica @-@ meets @-@ folk song and is composed in the key of B minor with Madonna 's voice spanning from B3 to F ♯ 5 . 
 Ahmadzai used the technique of making the music freeze <unk> throughout American Life , including " Love Profusion " . One technique was the stutter edit , which Ahmadzaï clarified was not characteristic of his production and recording . " People get upset because they think it is not natural to skip and stutter the music . But I do it because it is natural . The stuttering can help you create a new groove " , he said . The track starts with a " strummy " acoustic guitar introduction , as described by Michael Paoletta from Billboard , on the four @-@ chord progression of Bm – F ♯ m – A – E sequence . The folk rock inspired song has elements of electronica and folk at its core . Its rhythm is produced by a four piece bass drum — which fades in and out abruptly — and atmospheric synth @-@ strings , which are added later in the song . 
 Madonna sings in the first verse : " There are too many options / There is no consolation / I have lost my illusions / What I want is an explanation . " According to Rolling Stone , although not explicitly stated , the lines confirm Madonna 's belief that American culture will not " give her an explanation " , so she had rejected American values , and along with them her own values . She repeats the line " I got you under my skin " while a male voice acts as the backing for the track . The song ends with Madonna singing the final words , " feel good " , performed without any backing instrumental . The lyrics of the song deals with questions , solutions , resurrections , confusions and other broad topics of a neo @-@ philosophical nature . Edna Gundersen of USA Today compared its composition and Madonna 's performance with a love letter . The Advocate called it " a plaintive love letter to her husband " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Love Profusion " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Michael Paoletta from Billboard described the song as a " sparse number " and said that it was a " good fit " for the radio . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly called it " lovely " . Ian Youngs of BBC News commented that " Love Profusion " is one of the highlights from the album , with layers of dance beats and acoustic guitar that made it a more complete song . A writer for Daily Record described it as a " stunningly beautiful ballad " and considered it as one of the many highlights from American Life . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine called it " dull " and wrote that " it was reinvented into a vibrant piece of guitar @-@ driven pop @-@ rock by Ray Carroll . " Ben Ratliff from Rolling Stone deduced that with lyrics like " I got you under my skin " , Madonna conveyed the theme of gaining transcendence through detachment , " but finally American Life comes across as defeatist more than anything else " . Dan Aquilante from New York Post was dismissive of the track , saying that although there was nothing wrong with the guitar @-@ driven composition of the track , it was not different from the strings and orchestration of other tracks from American Life , like " Nothing Fails " or " Easy Ride " . Robert Hilburn , while reviewing American Life for The Press of Atlantic City , listed the track as one of the songs that could " save " the album from being a " profound fail " . Ross Raihala , writing for The Olympian listed the track as a standout on American Life , in contrast to the " dreary , directionless dance numbers and plodding ballads " on the album . 
 Caroline Bansal from musicOMH gave a mixed review for the song , feeling that the singer 's vocals over the Spanish guitar was monotonous . She felt that the chorus was more melodic but it was the lyrics and the dance beats which did not complete the track . Bansal said that " Love Profusion " could have been composed better . Ed Howard from Stylus Magazine wrote that " Love Profusion " , along with the song " Intervention " , " address Madonna 's marriage to director Guy Ritchie " , and " find the once @-@ cynical pop star surprisingly open and emotional , which prompts her to spit out cliché after cliché as she tells us how happy she is " . Alan Braidwood from BBC Music felt that the song was the most straight forward dance track on the album . He added that " this is one of those [ songs ] which could become a favorite and it feels like a classic upbeat Madonna song . It fuses the message behind the song American Life with Mirwais ' beats and acoustic elements really well " . Sean O 'Brien from The People complimented the song for its " great melody and acoustic guitar flavor to it " , and deduced that it would be a hit in the night clubs . Dan Gennoe from Dotmusic website gave a positive review of the track , calling " Love Profusion " , along with " Intervention " and " X @-@ Static Process " from American Life , " gracious " and " beautiful " songs . In 2012 , website AfterElton.com listed " Love Profusion " at number 91 on their list of " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Love Profusion " did not chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 or the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , making it the third consecutive single from American Life to fail to chart in the US . However , the song peaked at number 41 and " The Passengers Mix " topped on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . The song has also topped the Hot Singles Sales and appeared on the Hot Dance Singles Sales charts for five weeks . At the year @-@ end Hot Dance Singles Sales recap , " Love Profusion " was at number three position , while " Me Against the Music " was at number one and " Nothing Fails " was at number two . Billboard reported that Madonna was the first artist in its chart history to have the top three Dance Sales songs . The song also ranked at number 24 on the year @-@ end Dance Club Play tally . In Canada , the song peaked at number three on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at its peak of number eleven on December 20 , 2003 , with sales of 15 @,@ 361 copies , becoming Madonna 's first song to miss the top ten since " One More Chance " ( 1996 ) . The following week , it dropped to number 33 on the chart , ultimately remaining there for six weeks . " Love Profusion " reached a peak of number 33 on the UK Airplay Chart in five weeks , but quickly descended . As of August 2008 , the song had sold 41 @,@ 025 copies according to the Official Charts Company . In Australia , the song debuted at its peak of number 25 on December 28 , 2003 . It remained on the chart for another seven weeks . " Love Profusion " debuted at number 27 on the French Singles Chart on November 30 , 2003 . In its second week , it reached its peak of number 25 . The song was popular in Italy , peaking at number six on the Italian Singles Chart , staying on the chart for a total of sixteen weeks . The song also achieved commercial success in Spain , debuting at number one on its singles chart . On the Swiss Singles Chart , the song peaked at number 31 , falling out of the chart after a total of eleven weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A few weeks before the official music video 's release in November 2003 , Madonna 's manager Caresse Henry confirmed video plans for " Love Profusion " . It was directed by Luc Besson and shot on September 2003 , at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , California . Besson later directed Madonna in the 2007 animated film Arthur and the Invisibles . " There are a lot of special effects . I talked to things that weren 't there – which is what you do when you 're doing green @-@ screen or blue @-@ screen stuff . There 's going to be a lot of fairies dancing around me . Isn 't that exciting ? I always have a lot of fairies dancing around me " , Madonna commented about the music video . The video premiered in the US on February 11 , 2004 on AOL 's First View . After the premiere , it was streamed on Yahoo ! , MSN , Windows Media , Apple , MTV , VH1 , <unk> and <unk> 
 The video begins with Madonna walking at night in the middle of the street of an American city surrounded by skyscrapers and wind . Then she finds herself in another dimension , as moving flowers surround her . As the video advances , Madonna walks on other different kinds of roads . She walks on a path of red flowers in the sky , and then walks on her knees on a deep , blue colored sea , as she is followed by little white fairies . At the end of the video , when there is destruction in the real dimension , Madonna finds peace and is surrounded by the fairies . When they go away , Madonna disappears altogether . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 " Love Profusion " was used on the Estée Lauder " Beyond Paradise " fragrance television advertisement . It was also directed by Luc Besson and shot the same day than the official music video . The Estée Lauder advertisement featured supermodel Carolyn Murphy wandering through a world full of water , and surrounded by flowers and fairies while " Love Profusion " played in the background . The 30 second commercial debuted in more than 10 @,@ 000 cinemas in September , while the television version of the advertisement aired on MTV , VH1 , E ! and Style Network . Estée Lauder group president Patrick Bousquet @-@ <unk> explained that they " wanted the advertising to be groundbreaking for Estée Lauder ... The association of Luc Besson , Madonna and Carolyn Murphy will make for an exceptional visual and acoustic experience for movie and television audiences around the world . " The Olympian 's Ross Raihala wrote that it made sense that " Love Profusion " was used as the soundtrack for the commercial , and felt like it was another attempt by Madonna to " salvage her career " following the commercial disappointment of American Life . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals , songwriter , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – backing vocals , producer , programming , guitar 
 Mike " Spike " Stent – mixing 
 Tim Young – mastering 
 Tom Hannen – assistant engineer 
 Simon Changer – assistant engineer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from American Life album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Bleeding Through = 
 Bleeding Through was an American metalcore band from Orange County , California . Formed in 1999 , the band blended influences stemming from modern hardcore punk , symphonic black metal , and melodic death metal . Although the band was often labeled as simply metalcore , when Brandan Schieppati was asked if he considered Bleeding Through a hardcore band , he said : " I think we 're a hardcore band and I 'll never say we are a metal band , we 're all hardcore kids and we came from the hardcore scene . Ours is just a different version of hardcore , we 're trying to do something which adds a different variety to the hardcore scene , which has been sounding the same way for so long . " 
 In 2004 , Revolver magazine hailed Bleeding Through as one of eight bands ushering in the " Future of Metal " cover story , and Spin called Bleeding Through an " artist to watch " in the magazine 's February 2004 issue . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Dust to Ashes and Portrait of the Goddess ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Bleeding Through was formed in 1999 in <unk> , California . The band 's roots can be traced back to 1998 , when Breakneck was founded by Brandan " <unk> " Schieppati ( Eighteen Visions / Throwdown ) , Javier Van Huss ( Eighteen Visions / The Mistake / Enewetak ) , guitarist Scott Danough , bass guitarist Chad <unk> and drummer Troy Born ( Taken ) . They made their live debut as the supporting act to Throwdown and <unk> . As the band witnessed lineup changes , the departure of Van Huss and subsequent recruitment of Marc Jackson ( Throwdown / Cold War ) to cover bass whilst <unk> reverted to guitar , they decided to expand their current hardcore sound and added elements of death metal to their music . The origin of the band 's name was explained in an interview as follows : " Well , it is summed up by the explanation that whether black , white , red , brown , yellow , religious preference , straight or gay , we all bleed the same , and we bleed through this life the same . Thus Bleeding Through . " 
 Their 2000 's demo was followed by a full @-@ length album released through Prime Directive Records entitled Dust to Ashes in April 2001 . Just prior to entering the studio , Vijay Kumar ( of Roundhouse and Cat Burglar ) took the bass position and Molly Street enrolled as keyboard player . The addition of keyboards was an unconventional move for a metalcore act as it brought some black metal influences into the music . Just as the album saw issue Born quit the band but a quickfire substitute was located in Derek Youngsma of Cast in Stone repute . 
 <unk> ties with both Eighteen Visions and Throwdown , Schieppati opted to pursue Bleeding Through as a priority upon completion of the Indecision Records 2002 offering Portrait of the Goddess . At this juncture the group comprised the guitar pairing of Scott Danough and Brian Leppke , bassist Ryan Wombacher ( replacing Vijay Kumar who played on Portrait of the Goddess ) and drummer Derek Youngsma . 
 = = = This Is Love , This Is Murderous and The Truth ( 2003 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After these two relatively <unk> albums , Bleeding Through signed to a larger label , Trustkill Records in 2003 , releasing their third full @-@ length album in September of the same year . Promoting the Ulrich Wild produced This is Love , This is Murderous they embarked upon US nationwide touring , opening for AFI . These dates had propelled the band to national attention albeit for all the wrong reasons . Traveling from Utah to a show in Colorado the group 's vehicle hit black ice on the highway , spinning out of control and slamming into a truck that was already flipped over . A mobile TV unit , there to report on another crash , caught the entire incident on film as their equipment trailer rolled and exploded , showering their instruments and gear across the road . Fortunately the band escaped with only minor injuries ( Johnson had a minor cut on his head ) , but due to this accident they had to drop off the " Pure Hatred " tour with Chimaira , Soilwork and As I Lay Dying . The KSL @-@ TV footage of the accident taking place can be viewed in Real Media format on the channel 's official site . The dramatic televised footage was broadcast everywhere from CNN Headline News , Good Morning America , NBC News and even The Weather Channel . 
 This Is Love , This Is Murderous received generally favorable reviews from the mainstream media ; Allmusic reviewer , Eduardo Rivadavia wrote that " Bleeding Through 's blindingly technical execution provides a constant source of entertainment " , and Aaron Troy from <unk> called it " the best metalcore release of 2003 " . The metal community praised it as well , even to a greater extent , with <unk> calling it " a very mature offering from still a young band that will only get better and bigger in the future " , <unk> giving it an 85 score out of 100 , The videos for " Love Lost in a Hail of Gun Fire " and " On Wings of Lead " became staples on MTV2 's Headbangers Ball and on Fuse TV 's Uranium as well . It is also Bleeding Through 's most successful album to date with more than 125 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 The following year kicked off with the band 's " Mutilation Tour " , which culminated in a sold @-@ out performance at The Glasshouse , near their Orange County home that was captured on a live DVD , the next major step in Bleeding Through 's career was a spot on Ozzfest 2004 , sharing the second stage alongside headline act Slipknot and fellow supports Unearth , Lamb of God , Every Time I Die , Hatebreed , Lacuna Coil and Atreyu . They earned the direct support position on MTV2 's third " Headbanger 's Ball : The Tour " in November , featuring Cradle of Filth , Arch Enemy and Himsa as touring partners . In an unexpected move , Bleeding Through also donated their rendition of " Rocket Queen " to the Guns N ' Roses tribute album Bring You to Your Knees released by Law of Inertia Records in March 2004 . 
 A 2005 re @-@ issue of This Is Love , This Is Murderous added three bonus live tracks , " Revenge I Seek " , " Rise " and " Our Enemies " , two music videos and a ten @-@ minute documentary . Following this , the band embarked upon European touring in February 2005 , supported by Swedes Cult of Luna . In April the group , working with Rob Caggiano as producer , ensconced themselves in Cherokee Studios , Los Angeles to cut a new album billed The Truth . 
 As This Is Love , This Is Murderous passed the 100 @,@ 000 sales figure in the USA , further touring found the band headlining the second annual " <unk> Fest " in alliance with Darkest Hour , Zao , Misery Signals , and Fight Paris commencing early July . Upon completion of these gigs the group hooked up with the " Warped Tour " tour for a two @-@ week stretch . November saw shows with Day of Contempt , before the group entered the recording studio to lay down cover versions of Black Flag 's " My War " , for use on a tribute album , and Unbroken 's " Fall On <unk> " . 
 Bleeding Through 's The Truth album was released on January 10 , 2006 through Trustkill Records . The album was produced by Rob Caggiano , lead guitarist of Anthrax . The band decided to rebuild their sound from the ground up , quoting to Alternative Press as " Taking out the Metalcore , and then adding the metal into hardcore , if that makes any sense . " ( <unk> Danough , guitarist ) . " I don 't think this album sounds like anything else out there right now . We 're very proud of that fact . " says guitarist Brian Leppke . 
 Kerrang ! magazine declared that " The Truth " " is about to tear 2006 a new arsehole " upon the album 's release in a 4 " KKKK " review ( out of 5 ) while Billboard Magazine hailed the album as " one of the most important " heavy metal albums of the year . A few smaller critics were not so kind : Vik Bansal of musicOMH.com described it as an album that shows " whilst they 're not quite there yet , Bleeding Through do have the ability to become bleeding edge " , Allmusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia 's opinion was that the band " played it safe " this time and emphasized their " infuriatingly one @-@ dimensional reliance on victimized , self @-@ pitying lyrics of a middle school maturity level " . Although some critics praised the improvement of production , recording , and mixing quality by Rob Caggiano , and the melodic approach to song writing . The album entered the Billboard 200 at No. 48 , and No. 1 on the Top Independent Albums . 
 Promoting The Truth , the band opened 2006 with US dates throughout February and March backed by Every Time I Die , Between the Buried and Me and Haste the Day . The band also put in a significant appearance on the second stage at the Tool , Guns N ' Roses and Metallica headlined Download Festival in Castle Donington , UK on June 9 . On July 18 , Bleeding Through appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . Stand @-@ up comedian Mitch <unk> joined the band for a song , Brandan Schieppati called this " surreal in the best possible way " . 
 The group once again played on the second stage at the 2006 Ozzfest , now as part of the non @-@ rotating lineup along with Black Label Society , Unearth , Atreyu and Norma Jean . In addition to their own headline dates , they also filled Ozzfest " off dates " with shows supporting Disturbed , Avenged Sevenfold and Hatebreed . The band members were on a day off from the festival passing through Medford , Oregon , when they pulled into a Taco Bell parking lot to eat . This resulted in a fan recognizing them and then calling over a bunch of his friends . The band talked with the fans , signed autographs , posed for pictures and also asked the kids if there were any shows happening that night they could participate in . They ended up doing a small club concert with local bands , with roughly 150 people in attendance . The show was a benefit with all proceeds going toward cancer research . 
 In April 2007 Danough left the band . " We felt that we had grown apart and it was time for both parties to move on " , the band wrote in a statement . After his departure he wrote on his MySpace blog : " .. Just know that when this all comes out don 't think you 've seen the last of Scott . I 'm on to the next chapter very soon and I 'm excited to see what the future brings . " After Danough 's departure he was quickly replaced by Jona Weinhofen of Australian band I Killed The Prom Queen – one of several factors that led that band to split up . 
 Bleeding Through headlined the Darkness Over Europe 2007 Tour with I Killed The Prom Queen , All Shall Perish , and Caliban from February to March . The band then toured as the opening act for the Slayer and Marilyn Manson summer tour . Following that , the group embarked on a six @-@ week stint across the U.S. and parts of Canada opening for HIM , with the arduous year of touring finally reaching an end with shows in New York City , on December 1 and December 2 , 2007 , while HIM was simply done touring North America and set to move on to Europe . 
 = = = Declaration ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = 
 In March 2008 , Bleeding Through announced Declaration as the title of its fifth studio release , a concept album about the rigors of being away from home . The band 's frontman and lyricist Brandan Schieppati explained to Revolver in the magazine 's May 2008 issue , " There are definitely places when we 're traveling where every time we go there , we 're like , ' Fuck , why do we have to be here ? ' Like , we 'll be in France and all of a sudden we 'll feel totally insignificant . You get the feeling that people 's eyes are just <unk> a hole through you . " The group recorded Declaration between April and May 2008 in Vancouver , Canada with producer Devin Townsend . 
 On June 6 , 2008 , the band released a blog on MTV 's Headbangers Ball website . The blog addressed numerous disappointments the band had with Trustkill Records . These disappointments included unpaid royalties , lack of funding for Declaration , and an unapproved re @-@ release of their 2006 album The Truth . Despite Trustkill 's website saying that the new album , Declaration would be released August 2008 , the band stated that they did not intend to hand over the master recording of the album , until they were paid the minimum fees required to pay back producer Devin Townsend , the band 's management and Schieppati 's father who loaned the band money for recording . In a follow @-@ up blog on their MySpace page , Bleeding Through stated that " Trustkill Records delivered the funds necessary to complete the album and to compensate everyone who had loaned [ us ] cash . " 
 Following the recording of Declaration , the group appeared at the 2008 's Download Festival , which was held from 13 to 15 June at Donington Park , United Kingdom . During the festival , vocalist Brandan Schieppati spoke to Rock Sound TV about the group 's dispute with its record label . During the conversation , Schieppati revealed that Bleeding Through has been contacted by a number of other record companies since the band went public with its Trustkill feud . In July 2008 , Bleeding Through inked a European deal with German record label Nuclear Blast for the release of Declaration . 
 The band performed in the US ' No Fear Music Tour ' with Bullet for My Valentine in August , and continued to support them throughout Europe with Lacuna Coil in November and December 2008 . They also performed in two countries for the first time in 2008 : Mexico and Russia . They performed in Mexico City in August as part of the Warped Tour with Underoath and MxPx and headlined four Russian shows in December . 
 On September 25 , 2008 , Machine Head frontman Robb Flynn joined the band on stage at The Warfield in San Francisco , and performed Bleeding Through 's song " Revenge I Seek " . The next day , Declaration was released in Europe by Nuclear Blast and September 30 in the US by Trustkill . The album sold under 6 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week of release to debut at number 104 on the Billboard 200 chart . 
 Bleeding Through co @-@ headlined along with Darkest Hour the Thrash and Burn European Tour between April and May 2009 . They will also headline " The Declaration Tour " in 2009 along with As Blood Runs Black , Impending Doom , The Acacia Strain . Guitarist Brian Leppke was unable to make it on tour resulting in Demon Hunter 's Patrick Judge temporarily filling in for him . In late May 2009 , Bleeding Through announced that Jona Weinhofen would be leaving the band and No Use for a Name guitarist Dave <unk> would replace him . Jona cited that while he loved his time in Bleeding Through , he decided that he should leave the band and return home to Australia with his family and friends . Following his departure Jona joined Bring Me The Horizon until January 2013 . 
 The band embarked on a special West Coast tour in August to celebrate their ten @-@ year anniversary , with supporters Carnifex , Miss May I , and Motionless in White . In early June 2009 , Bleeding Through inked a deal with the Portland , Oregon @-@ based independent record label Rise Records . <unk> about the band 's previous dispute with its former label Trustkill , Schieppati said , " We 're very excited to align with a record label that has so much momentum and is growing when many seem to be faltering , dropping bands and firing employees . " 
 = = = Bleeding Through ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 On October 12 , 2009 , Bleeding Through issued the statement , " Rest assured that everything is fine as far as The Band is concerned ! We ’ re looking very forward to the Halloween show followed by the creation of our <unk> NEW <unk> , which we can tell you will take place in December and January before our European tour with Machine Head , Hatebreed and All Shall Perish ! That ’ s right , NEW Bleeding Through album in 2010 , " confirming the band will release a new album , which was self @-@ titled and released by Rise Records on April 13 , 2010 in North America and internationally through Roadrunner Records The album was produced by <unk> . 
 The band supported the album with a lengthy tour of Europe , Japan and Australia with Machine Head and Hatebreed in the first part of 2010 . This was followed by their own " Spring Breakdown " headlining tour in the US with Born Of Osiris , Sleeping Giant and more . The band returned to Europe for several festivals and a few headlining shows . The group released a video for the song " Anti @-@ Hero " . In August , 2010 the group headlined the " California United " West Coast tour with Terror and The Ghost Inside . The following month they headlined " The Anti @-@ Hero " tour across the US with support from For Today , After The Burial and more . After that they joined Parkway Drive and Comeback Kid for the European " Never Say Die ! " tour . The band closed out 2010 with an appearance at the " Noise for Toyz " benefit show in Fullerton , California and released an iTunes / digital only single through Rise Records which was recorded during the sessions for the self @-@ titled album . 
 = = = The Great Fire , disbandment announcement and final tours ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 The band planned to write and record their seventh studio album once they returned from touring . They planned to release the yet to be titled album anywhere from mid to late 2011 , which bassist Ryan Wombacher explained in a November 2010 interview : 
 Maybe mid @-@ year ; safe to say towards the end but not at the end , maybe like eight months or something like that . Best thing about it is we ’ re going to do it whenever we want to do it . There is no deadline right now , we don ’ t have any dates set , we don ’ t have the studio , we ’ re going to do the record ourselves . So we will literally go in and record it and it will be probably be done before we sign a contract . 
 On November 14 , 2011 , the band announced that the name of their new record would be called " The Great Fire " . On November 30 , 2011 , the band announced that " The Great Fire " was complete , although no release date has been stated . On December 14 , 2011 , the band revealed The Great Fire 's release date as January 31 , 2012 . 
 On January 3 , 2013 the band announced their upcoming tour in Europe would be their last , leading to rumors that the band would be breaking up . This was later confirmed by a post on the band 's Facebook page that they would be finished at the end of the year . The band also stated that they would like to set up an Australian tour during the summer and singer Brandan Schieppati stated in a reply to an Instagram comment that the band would have a final U.S. tour possibly starting in September . November 2013 the band announced final west coast dates will take place in 2014 . 
 Former guitarist and founding member Scott Danough played with the band on the final tours in Australia , Europe and the U.S. He was added to the band 's current lineup as of July 2014 on their Facebook page , which is lead to believe he has rejoined Bleeding Through . The first show to kick off 2014 was their final appearance at New England Hardcore & Metal Fest at the Palladium in Worcester Massachusetts on April 17 . The line up was made up of Brandan Schieppati , Scott Danough , Ryan Wombacher , Marta Peterson , Derek Youngsma and Dave <unk> 's final appearance with the band in 2014 . In May , the final nine west coast dates were announced with Winds of Plague and Scars of Tomorrow . A majority of the shows the band played were sold out . It was later announced in June that the first three of the west coast dates would be the " This Is Love This Is Murderous " line up which included Brian Leppke on guitar since he hasn 't toured with Bleeding Through since 2010 . Sacramento , Portland and Seattle shows featured Declaration era ex member Jona Weinhofen on guitar . In July another show on August 2 was added at Chain Reaction because the August 3 show sold out fast . The final show was on August 3 . Brandan Schieppati 's podcast he made it clear the final shows were very emotional and he realized how well they all played together . He said something may come from the band in the future . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Like many metalcore @-@ labeled bands , Bleeding Through is influenced by Swedish melodic death metal . It is the most apparent on Dust to Ashes , while with time the band 's music got gradually more and more melodic , with The Truth being the most melodic to date , even containing a power ballad , a novelty for the band . A keyboard player was introduced shortly before the band began performing as an unsigned act . According to former guitarist Scott Danough " it adds a different element " to their music . 
 Former guitarist Scott Danough has said that he is influenced by metal and hardcore bands , like At The Gates , Slayer , Cradle of Filth , Integrity and Earth Crisis . Vocalist Brandan Schieppati has also mentioned American thrash metal bands as an influence on Bleeding Through , e.g. Testament or Exodus . In an interview , guitarist Brian Leppke added Cro @-@ Mags , Entombed , Crowbar and Pantera as well to the list of influences . Lastly , keyboardist Marta Peterson is the one who brings industrial , symphonic black metal , and goth inspirations to the band 's sound . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = DVDs = = = 
 This Is Live , This Is Murderous ( June 15 , 2004 , Kung Fu Records ) 
 Wolves Among Sheep ( November 15 , 2005 , Trustkill Records ) 
 = = = Appearance on compilations = = = 
 MTV2 Headbangers Ball : The Revenge – " Kill to Believe " 
 The Best of Taste of Chaos – " On Wings of Lead " 
 The Best of Taste of Chaos Two . – " Love In Slow Motion " 
 Bring You To Your Knees | Bring You To Your Knees : A Tribute to Guns N ' Roses – " Rocket Queen " 
 Threat : Music That Inspired the Movie – " Number Seven with a Bullet " 
 Threat : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ( Soundtrack ) – " Number Seven with a Bullet " 
 Amp Magazine Presents : Volume 1 : Hardcore 
 Blood , Sweat & Ten Years – " On Wings of Lead " and " Love Lost in a Hale of Gunfire " 
 MTV2 Headbangers Ball , Vol . 2 – " Love Lost in a Hail of Gunfire " ( censored ) 
 Fighting Music 2 
 Our Impact Will Be Felt : A Tribute to Sick of It All – " We Want the Truth " 
 Trustkill Takeover , Vol . II – " One Last Second " 
 2005 Warped Tour Compilation – " Love Lost in a Hail of Gunfire " 
 Punk Goes ' 90s – " Stars " – Hum cover 
 Black on Black : A Tribute to Black Flag – " My War " 
 Metal Hammer 204 – " Anti @-@ Hero " 
 Music videos 
 " Our Enemies " 
 " On Wings of Lead " 
 " Love Lost in a Hale of Gunfire " 
 " Kill to Believe " 
 " Line in the Sand " 
 " Love in Slow Motion " 
 " Death Anxiety " 
 " Germany " 
 " Anti @-@ Hero " 
 = Italian battleship Napoli = 
 Napoli was a Regina Elena @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in 1903 – 08 . She was the last member of the four @-@ ship class , which included the lead ship Regina Elena , Vittorio Emanuele , and Roma . Napoli was armed with a main battery of two 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) and twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns , and was capable of a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Napoli saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 and 1912 ; she took part in the attack on Derna , Libya , and the amphibious assaults on the islands of Rhodes and the Dodecanese in the Aegean Sea . Napoli remained in service during World War I in 1915 – 18 , but saw no action as a result of the cautious policies of both the Italian and Austro @-@ Hungarian navies . She remained in the Italian inventory until she was stricken from the naval register in August 1926 and was subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Napoli was 144 @.@ 6 meters ( 474 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 4 m ( 73 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 58 m ( 28 @.@ 1 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 774 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 556 long tons ; 15 @,@ 183 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical four @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines rated at 19 @,@ 618 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 629 kW ) . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 22 @.@ 15 knots ( 41 @.@ 02 km / h ; 25 @.@ 49 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Napoli had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with two 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty @-@ four 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . She was also equipped with two 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Napoli was protected with Krupp steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) thick , and the deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 250 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick plating , and the 8 @-@ inch gun turrets had 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Napoli was laid down at Castellammare di Stabia on 21 October 1903 . She was launched on 10 September 1905 , and completed on 1 August 1908 . Napoli served in the active duty squadron through 1910 , which included her three sisters and the two Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships . At the time , these six battleships represented Italy 's front @-@ line battle fleet . The active duty squadron was typically in service for seven months of the year for training ; the rest of the year they were placed in reserve . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . For the duration of the conflict , Napoli served in the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron with her three sister ships , under the command of Vice Admiral Augusto Aubry . After the outbreak of war , Napoli , her sister Roma , and the armored cruisers Pisa and Amalfi , were sent to blockade Tripoli in North Africa . On 2 October , the battleship Benedetto Brin and the training squadron arrived to relieve Napoli and the other ships , which thereafter left to rejoin the flagship , Vittorio Emanuele . 
 On 15 October , Napoli , which had been detached to reinforce the armored cruisers in the 2nd Division , 1st Squadron , arrived in Derna , Libya in company with several troopships . After a request sent to the defending Ottoman garrison to surrender was rejected , Napoli and the armored cruisers bombarded the town . In the span of 30 minutes , they had razed the town . At 14 : 00 , the Italians attempted to land a contingent of 500 infantry , but heavy Turkish fire repulsed the assault , which prompted further bombardment from the Italian fleet . On 18 October , the Turks retreated from the town , which was thereafter occupied by the Italian army . In the meantime , Napoli had rejoined the 1st Division , and on 18 October , the unit had escorted a convoy of troopships to Benghazi . The Italian fleet bombarded the city the next morning after the Ottoman garrison refused to surrender . During the bombardment , parties from the ships and the infantry from the troopships went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . 
 In November , the Ottomans launched a major attempt to retake the town . Toward the end of the month , the Italians launched a counter @-@ attack that consisted of three battalions of infantry and 150 men from Napoli . By December , Napoli and the other ships of the 1st Squadron were dispersed in the ports of Cyrenaica ; Napoli remained in Derna . In early 1912 , most of the fleet , including Napoli , withdrew to Italy for repairs and refit , leaving only a small force of cruisers and light craft to patrol the North African coast . On 13 April , the 1st Division left Taranto , bound for the island of Rhodes . Meanwhile , the 3rd Division escorted a convoy of troopships from Tobruk to the island . The Italian heavy ships demonstrated off the city of Rhodes while the transports landed the expeditionary force 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the south on 4 May ; the soldiers quickly advanced on the city , supported by artillery fire from the Italian fleet . The Turks surrendered the city the following day . 
 Between 8 and 20 May , Napoli was involved in the seizure of several islands in the Dodecanese between Crete , Rhodes , and Samos . In June , Napoli and the rest of the 1st Division was stationed at Rhodes . Over the next two months , the ships cruised in the Aegean to prevent the Turks from attempting to launch their own amphibious operations to retake the islands Italy had seized in May . The 1st Division returned to Italy in late August for repairs and refitting , and were replaced by the battleships of the 2nd Squadron . The 1st Division left port on 14 October , but was recalled later that day , when the Ottomans had agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . Italy 's traditional naval rival , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , was the primary opponent in the conflict , and lay directly across the narrow Adriatic Sea . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian Naval Chief of Staff , understood that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines presented too serious a threat to his capital ships for him to mount an active fleet policy . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . As a result , the ship was not particularly active during the war . 
 During the war , Napoli and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division . They spent much of the war rotating between the bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona , but did not see combat . On 14 – 15 May 1917 , three light cruisers of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy raided the Otranto Barrage ; in the ensuring Battle of the Strait of Otranto , Napoli and her sisters raised steam to assist the Allied warships , but the Italian commander refused to permit them to join the battle for fear of risking their loss in the submarine @-@ infested Adriatic . 
 In early 1922 , the world 's major navies , including Italy , signed the Washington Naval Treaty . According to the terms of the treaty , Italy could keep Napoli and her three sisters , along with the newer dreadnought battleships . Due to the small size and age of the ships , particularly in comparison to the modern dreadnoughts , the Italians could have kept the ships in service indefinitely . They could not , however , be replaced by new battleships under the normal practice of the Treaty system , which provided for replacements after a ship was 20 years old . Napoli was retained for a few years , but was stricken from the naval register on 3 August 1926 and sold for scrap . 
 = New Age = 
 The New Age is a term applied to a range of spiritual or religious beliefs and practices that developed in Western nations during the 1970s . Precise scholarly definitions of the movement differ in their emphasis , largely as a result of its highly eclectic structure . Although analytically often considered to be religious , those involved in it typically prefer the designation of " spiritual " and rarely use the term " New Age " themselves . Many scholars of the subject refer to it as the New Age movement , although others contest this term , believing that it gives a false sense of homogeneity to the phenomenon . 
 As a form of Western esotericism , the New Age movement drew heavily upon a number of older esoteric traditions , in particular those that emerged from the occultist current that developed in the eighteenth century . Such prominent occult influences include the work of Emanuel Swedenborg and Franz Mesmer , as well as the ideas of Spiritualism , New Thought , and the Theosophical Society . A number of mid @-@ twentieth century influences , such as the UFO religions of the 1950s , the Counterculture of the 1960s , and the Human Potential Movement , also exerted a strong influence on the early development of the New Age movement . Although the exact origins of the movement remain contested , it is agreed that it developed in the 1970s , at which time it was centred largely in the United Kingdom . It expanded and grew largely in the 1980s and 1990s , in particular within the United States . 
 Despite its highly eclectic nature , a number of beliefs commonly found within the New Age movement have been identified . Theologically , the movement typically adopts a belief in a holistic form of divinity which imbues all of the universe , including human beings themselves . There is thus a strong emphasis on the spiritual authority of the self . This is accompanied by a common belief in a wide variety of semi @-@ divine non @-@ human entities , such as angels and masters , with whom humans can communicate , particularly through the form of channeling . Typically viewing human history as being divided into a series of distinct ages , a common New Age belief is that whereas once humanity lived in an age of great technological advancement and spiritual wisdom , it has entered a period of spiritual degeneracy , which will be remedied through the establishment of a coming Age of Aquarius , from which the movement gets its name . There is also a strong focus on healing , particularly using forms of alternative medicine , and an emphasis on a " New Age science " which seeks to unite science and spirituality . 
 Those involved in the New Age movement have been primarily from middle and upper @-@ middle @-@ class backgrounds . The degree to which New Agers are involved in the movement varied considerably , from those who adopted a number of New Age ideas and practices to those who fully embraced and dedicated their lives to it . The movement has generated criticism from established Christian organisations as well as contemporary Pagan and indigenous communities . From the 1990s onward , the movement became the subject of research by academic scholars of religious studies . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The New Age phenomenon has proved difficult to define , with much scholarly disagreement as to how this can be done . Religious studies scholar Paul Heelas characterised the New Age movement as " an eclectic hotch @-@ potch of beliefs , practices , and ways of life " which can be identified as a singular phenomenon through their use of " the same ( or very similar ) lingua franca to do with the human ( and planetary ) condition and how it can be transformed " . Similarly , historian of religion Olav Hammer termed it " a common denominator for a variety of quite divergent contemporary popular practices and beliefs " which have emerged since the late 1970s and which are " largely united by historical links , a shared discourse and an air de famille " . Sociologist of religion Michael York described the New Age movement as " an umbrella term that includes a great variety of groups and identities " but which are united by their " expectation of a major and universal change being primarily founded on the individual and collective development of human potential " . 
 The religious studies scholar Wouter Hanegraaff adopted a different approach by asserting that " New Age " was " a label attached indiscriminately to whatever seems to fit it " and that as a result it " means very different things to different people " . He thus argued against the idea that the New Age movement could be considered " a unified ideology or <unk> " , although believed that it could be considered a " more of less unified " movement " " . Conversely , while echoing the view that the " New Age " phenomenon was not " even a homogenous entity at all " , the religious studies scholar Steven J. Sutcliffe rejected the idea of a " New Age movement " , deeming it to be " a false etic category " . 
 Many of those groups and individuals who could analytically be categorised as part of the New Age movement reject the term " New Age " when in reference to themselves . Rather than term themselves " New Agers " , those involved in this milieu commonly describe themselves as spiritual " seekers " . In 2003 , Sutcliffe observed that the use of the term was " optional , episodic and declining overall " , adding that among the very few individuals who did use it , they usually did so with qualification , for instance by placing it in inverted commas . Hence , although the religious studies scholar James R. Lewis acknowledged that " New Age " was a problematic term , he asserted that " there exists no comparable term which covers all aspects of the movement " and that thus it remained a useful etic category for scholars to use . 
 Those involved in the movement rarely consider it to be " religion " – negatively associating the latter solely with organized religion – and instead describe their practices as " spirituality " . Religious studies scholars however have repeatedly referred to the movement as a " religion " . The New Age movement is a form of Western esotericism . Hanegraaff considered the New Age to be a form of " popular culture criticism " , in that it represented a reaction against the dominant Western values of Judeo @-@ Christian religion and rationalism , adding that " New Age religion formulates such criticism not at random , but falls back on " the ideas of earlier Western esoteric groups . 
 York described the New Age movement as a new religious movement ( NRM ) . Conversely , both Heelas and Sutcliffe rejected this categorisation ; he believed that while elements of the New Age movement represented <unk> , this was not applicable to every New Age group . Hammer identified much of the New Age movement as corresponding to the concept of " folk religions " in that it seeks to deal with existential questions regarding subjects like death and disease in " an unsystematic fashion , often through a process of bricolage from already available narratives and rituals " . York also <unk> divides the New Age movement into three broad trends . The first , the " social camp " , represents groups which primarily seek to bring about social change , while the second , " occult camp " , instead focus on contact with spirit entities and channeling . York 's third group , the " spiritual camp " , represents a middle ground between these two camps , and which focuses largely on individual development . 
 = = = Terminology of the " New Age " = = = 
 The term " new age " , along with related terms like " new era " and " new world " , long predate the emergence of the New Age movement , and have widely been used to assert that a better way of life for humanity is dawning . It has , for instance , widely been used in political contexts ; the Great Seal of the United States , designed in 1782 , proclaims a " new order of ages " , while in the 1980s the Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed that " all mankind is entering a new age " . The term has also appeared within Western esoteric schools of thought , having a scattered use from the mid @-@ nineteenth century onward . In 1864 the American Swedenborgian Warren Felt Evans published The New Age and its Message , while in 1907 Alfred Orage and Holbrook Jackson began editing a weekly journal of Christian liberalism and socialism titled The New Age . The concept of a coming " new age " that would be inaugurated by the return to Earth of Jesus Christ was a theme in the poetry of Wellesley Tudor Pole and Johanna Brandt , and then also appeared in the work of the American Theosophist Alice Bailey , who used the term prominently in such titles as <unk> in the New Age ( 1944 ) and Education in the New Age ( 1954 ) . 
 Between the 1930s and 1960s a small number of groups and individuals became preoccupied with the concept of a coming " New Age " and prominently used the term accordingly . The term had thus become a recurring motif in the esoteric spirituality milieu . Sutcliffe therefore expressed the view that while the term " New Age " had originally been an " apocalyptic emblem " , it would only be later that it became " a tag or codeword for a ' spiritual ' idiom " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antecedents = = = 
 According to scholar Nevill Drury , the New Age has a " tangible history " , although Hanegraaff expressed the view that most New Agers were " surprisingly ignorant about the actual historical roots of their beliefs " . As a form of Western esotericism , the New Age has antecedents that stretch back to southern Europe in Late Antiquity . Following the Age of Enlightenment in 18th century Europe , new esoteric ideas developed in response to the development of scientific rationality . This new esoteric trend is termed occultism by scholars , and it was this occultism which would be a key factor in the development of the worldview from which the New Age emerged . 
 One of the earliest influences on the New Age was the Swedish 18th century Christian mystic Emanuel Swedenborg , who professed the ability to communicate with angels , demons , and spirits . Swedenborg 's attempt to unite science and religion and his prediction of a coming era in particular have been cited as ways in which he prefigured the New Age movement . Another early influence was the late 17th and early 18th century German physician and hypnotist Franz Mesmer , who claimed the existence of a force known as " animal magnetism " running through the human body . The establishment of Spiritualism , an occult religion influenced by both Swedenborgianism and Mesmerism , in the U.S. during the 1840s has also been identified as a precursor to the New Age movement , in particular through its rejection of established Christianity , its claims to representing a scientific approach to religion , and its emphasis on channeling spirit entities . 
 A further major influence on the New Age was the Theosophical Society , an occult group co @-@ founded by the Russian Helena Blavatsky in the late 19th century . In her books Isis Unveiled ( 1877 ) and The Secret Doctrine ( 1888 ) , Blavatsky claimed that her Society was conveying the essence of all world religions , and it thus emphasized a focus on comparative religion . Another was New Thought , which developed in late nineteenth century New England as a Christian @-@ oriented healing movement before spreading throughout the United States . Drury also identified as an important influence upon the New Age movement the Indian Swami Vivekananda , an adherent of the philosophy of Vedanta who first brought Hinduism to the West in the late 19th century . 
 Popularisation behind these ideas has roots in the work of early 20th century writers such as D. H. Lawrence and William Butler Yeats . In the early- to mid @-@ 1900s , American mystic , theologian , and founder of the Association for Research and Enlightenment Edgar Cayce was a seminal influence on what later would be termed the New Age movement ; he was known in particular for the practice some refer to as channeling . Another prominent influence was the psychologist Carl Jung , who was a proponent of the concept of the Age of Aquarius . 
 Hanegraaff believed that the New Age movement 's direct antecedents could be found in the UFO religions of the 1950s , which he termed a " proto @-@ New Age movement " . Many of these new religious movements had strong apocalyptic beliefs regarding a coming new age , which they typically asserted would be brought about by contact with extraterrestrials . Examples of such groups included the <unk> Society , founded in the UK in 1955 , and the Heralds of the New Age , established in New Zealand in 1956 . 
 From a historical perspective , the New Age phenomenon is rooted in the counterculture of the 1960s . Although not common throughout the counterculture , usage of the terms " New Age " and " Age of Aquarius " – used in reference to a coming era – were found within it , for instance appearing on adverts for the Woodstock festival of 1969 , and in the lyrics of " Aquarius " , the opening song of the 1967 musical Hair : The American Tribal Love @-@ Rock Musical . This decade also witnessed the emergence of a variety of new religious movements and newly established religions in the United States , creating a spiritual milieu from which the New Age drew upon ; these included the San Francisco Zen Center , Transcendental Meditation , Soka Gakkai , the Inner Peace Movement , the Church of All Worlds , and the Church of Satan . Although there had been an established interest in Asian religious ideas in the U.S. from at least the eighteenth @-@ century , many of these new developments were variants of Hinduism , Buddhism , and Sufism which had been imported to the West from Asia following the U.S. government 's decision to rescind the Asian Exclusion Act in 1965 . In 1962 the Esalen Institute was established in Big Sur , California . It was from Esalen and other similar personal growth centers which had developed links to humanistic psychology that the human potential movement emerged , which would also come to exert a strong influence on the New Age movement . 
 In Britain , a number of small religious groups that came to be identified as the " light " movement had begun declaring the existence of a coming new age , influenced strongly by the Theosophical ideas of Blavatsky and Bailey . The most prominent of these groups was the Findhorn Foundation which founded the Findhorn Ecovillage in the Scottish area of Findhorn , Moray in 1962 . Although its founders were from an older generation , Findhorn attracted increasing numbers of countercultural baby boomers during the 1960s , to the extent that its population had grown sixfold to circa 120 residents by 1972 . In October 1965 , the founder of Findhorn , Peter Caddy , attended a meeting of various prominent figures within Britain 's esoteric milieu ; titled " The Significance of the Group in the New Age " , it was held at <unk> Park over the course of a weekend . 
 All of these groups would create the backdrop from which the New Age movement emerged ; as James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton point out , the New Age phenomenon represents " a synthesis of many different preexisting movements and strands of thought " . Nevertheless , York asserted that while the New Age bore many similarities with both earlier forms of Western esotericism and Asian religion , it remained " distinct from its predecessors in its own self @-@ consciousness as a new way of thinking " . 
 = = = Emergence and development : c . 1970 – 2000 = = = 
 Sutcliffe argued that between circa 1967 and 1974 , the " emblem " of the " New Age " came to be passed from the " subcultural pioneers " of alternative spirituality groups such as that at Findhorn to the wider array of " countercultural baby boomers " , and that as that happened , there was a " fundamental transformation in meaning " of the term " New Age " ; whereas it had once referred specifically to a coming era , at this point it came to be used in a wider sense to refer to a variety of humanistic activities and practices . The counterculture of the 1960s had rapidly declined by the start of the 1970s , in large part due to the collapse of the commune movement , but it would be many former members of the counter @-@ culture and hippy subculture who subsequently became early adherents of the New Age movement . The exact origins of the New Age movement remain an issue of debate ; Melton asserted that it emerged in the early 1970s , whereas Hanegraaff instead traced its emergence to the latter 1970s , adding that it then entered its full development in the 1980s . This early form of the movement was based largely in Britain and exhibited a strong influence from Theosophy and <unk> . Hanegraaff termed this early core of the movement the New Age sensu stricto , or " New Age in the strict sense " . 
 In the latter part of the 1970s , the New Age movement expanded to cover a wide variety of alternative spiritual and religious beliefs and practices , not all of which explicitly held to the belief in the Age of Aquarius , but which were nevertheless widely recognised as being broadly similar in their search for " alternatives " to mainstream society . In doing so , the " New Age " became a banner under which to bring together the wider " cultic milieu " of American society . Hanegraaff terms this development the New Age sensu lato , or " New Age in the wider sense " . Stores that came to be known as " New Age shops " opened up , selling related books , magazines , jewellery , and crystals , and they were typified by the playing of New Age music and the smell of <unk> probably influenced several thousand small metaphysical <unk> and gift @-@ stores that increasingly defined themselves as " New Age bookstores " , while New Age titles came to be increasingly available from mainstream bookstores and then websites like Amazon.com. 
 Not everyone who came to be associated with the New Age phenomenon openly embraced the term " New Age " , although it was popularised in books like David Spangler 's 1977 work Revelation : The Birth of a New Age and Mark Satin 's 1979 book New Age Politics : Healing Self and Society . Other terms that were employed synonymously with " New Age " in this milieu included " Green " , " Holistic " , " Alternative " , and " Spiritual " . 
 1971 witnessed the foundation of est by Werner H. Erhard , a transformational training course which became a prominent part of the early movement . Melton suggested that the 1970s witnessed the growth of a relationship between the New Age movement and the older New Thought movement , as evidenced by the widespread use of Helen Schucman 's A Course in Miracles ( 1975 ) , New Age music , and crystal healing in New Thought churches . Some figures in the New Thought movement were sceptical , challenging the compatibility of New Age and New Thought perspectives . During these decades , Findhorn had become a site of pilgrimage for many New Agers , and greatly expanded in size as people joined the community , with workshops and conferences being held there that brought together New Age thinkers from across the world . 
 Several key events occurred , which raised public awareness of the New Age subculture : publication of Linda Goodman 's best @-@ selling astrology books Sun Signs ( 1968 ) and Love Signs ( 1978 ) ; the release of Shirley MacLaine 's book Out on a Limb ( 1983 ) , later adapted into a television mini @-@ series with the same name ( 1987 ) ; and the " Harmonic Convergence " planetary alignment on August 16 and 17 , 1987 , organized by José Argüelles in Sedona , Arizona . The Convergence attracted more people to the movement than any other single event . Heelas suggested that the movement was influenced by the " enterprise culture " encouraged by the U.S. and U.K. governments during the 1980s onward , with its emphasis on initiative and self @-@ reliance resonating with any New Age ideas . 
 The claims of <unk> Jane Roberts ( Seth Material ) , Helen Schucman ( A Course in Miracles ) , J. Z. Knight ( <unk> ) , Neale Donald <unk> ( Conversations with God ) ( note that <unk> denies being a " channeler " and his books make it obvious that he is not one , though the text emerged through a dialogue with a deeper part of himself in a process comparable to automatic writing ) contributed to the movement 's growth . The first significant exponent of the New Age movement in the U.S. has been cited as Ram Dass . Core works in the propagating New Age ideas included Jane Roberts 's Seth series , published from 1972 onward , Helen Schucman 's 1975 publication A Course in Miracles , and James Redfield 's 1993 work The Celestine Prophecy . A variety of these books were best sellers , with the Seth book series for instance selling over a million copies . Supplementing these books were videos , <unk> , compact discs and websites . The development of the internet in particular further popularized New Age ideas and made them more widely accessible . 
 New Age ideas influenced the development of rave culture in the late 1980s and 1990s . In Britain during the 1980s , the term " New Age Travellers " came into use , while the term " New Age " came to be used increasingly widely by the popular media in the 1990s . 
 = = Beliefs and practices = = 
 Although there is great diversity among the beliefs and practices found within the New Age movement , according to York it is united by a shared " vision of radical mystical transformation on both the personal and collective levels " . The movement aims to create " a spirituality without borders or confining dogmas " that is inclusive and pluralistic . 
 The eclecticism of the New Age has resulted in the common jibe that it represents " supermarket spirituality " . 
 = = = Theology , cosmogony , and cosmology = = = 
 Hanegraaff noted that the existence of divinity was " mostly an integral and necessary part of New Age ideas " . However , he added that within the movement , such ideas regarding the nature of divinity " reflect a marked aversion to rigid , doctrinal definitions " , with New Age theology exhibiting an <unk> and <unk> approach which accepts all personal perspectives on the divine as being equally valid . This intentional vagueness as to the nature of divinity also reflects the New Age idea that divinity cannot be comprehended by the human mind or language . There are nevertheless a number of traits that are repeatedly associated with divinity in New Age literature , the first of which is the idea that it is holistic , thus frequently being described with such terms as an " Ocean of Oneness " , " Infinite Spirit " , " Primal Stream " , " One Essence " , and " Universal Principle " . A second common trait is the characterisation of divinity as " Mind " , " Consciousness " , and " Intelligence " , while a third is the description of divinity as a form of " energy " . A fourth trait is the characterisation of divinity as a " life force " , the essence of which is creativity , while a fifth is the concept that divinity consists of love . 
 Most New Age groups subscribe to the view that there is an Ultimate Source from which all things originate , which is usually conflated with the divine . Various creation myths have been articulated in New Age publications outlining how this Ultimate Source came to create the universe and everything in it . In contrast , some other New Agers have emphasised the idea of a universal inter @-@ relatedness that is not always emanating from a single source . The New Age worldview emphasises holism and the idea that everything in existence is intricately connected as part of a single whole , in doing so rejecting both the dualism of Judeo @-@ Christian thought and the reductionism of Cartesian science . A number of New Agers have linked this holistic interpretation of the universe to the Gaia hypothesis of James Lovelock . The idea of holistic divinity results in a common New Age belief that humans themselves are divine in essence , a concept described using such terms as " droplet of divinity " , " inner Godhead " , and " divine self " . Influenced by Theosophical and <unk> ideas regarding ' subtle bodies ' , a common New Age idea holds to the existence of a " Higher Self " which is a part of the human but which connects with the divine essence of the universe , and which can advise the human mind through intuition . 
 <unk> creation stories are common in New Age sources , with these accounts reflecting the movement 's holistic framework by describing an original , primal oneness from which all things in the universe emanated . An additional common theme is that human souls – once living in a spiritual world – then descended into a world of matter . The New Age movement typically views the material universe as a meaningful illusion , which humans should try to use constructively rather than focus on escaping into other spiritual realms . This physical world is hence seen as " a domain for learning and growth " after which the human soul might pass on to higher levels of existence . There is thus a widespread belief that reality is engaged in an ongoing process of evolution ; rather than Darwinian evolution , this is typically seen as either a teleological evolution which assumes a process headed to a specific goal , or an open @-@ ended , creative evolution . 
 Within the New Age movement , it is often unclear how divine beings are divided from those entities which are believed to exist between divinity and humanity . In the literature , there is much talk of non @-@ human beings who are benevolently interested in the spiritual development of humanity , and which are variously referred to under such names as angels , guardian angels , personal guides , masters , teachers , and contacts . New Age <unk> is nevertheless unsystematic , reflecting the idiosyncrasies of individual authors . The figure of Jesus Christ is often mentioned within New Age literature as a mediating principle between divinity and humanity , as well as an exemplar of a spiritually advanced human being . 
 = = = Self @-@ spirituality and channeling = = = 
 The New Age movement exhibits a strong emphasis on the idea that the individual and their own experiences are the primary source of authority on spiritual matters . Thus , it exhibits what Heelas termed " unmediated individualism " , and reflects a world @-@ view which is " radically democratic " . As a result , there is a strong emphasis on the freedom of the individual in the movement . This emphasis has led to some ethical disagreements ; while some New Age participants stress the need to help others because all are part of the unitary holistic universe , others have disagreed , refusing to aid others because it is believed that it will result in their dependency on others and thus conflicts with the self @-@ as @-@ authority ethic . Nevertheless , within the movement , there are differences in the role accorded to voices of authority outside of the self . 
 Although not present in every New Age group , a core belief of the movement is in channeling . This is the idea that humans beings , sometimes ( although not always ) in a state of trance , can act " as a channel of information from sources other than their normal selves " . These sources are varyingly described as being God , gods and goddesses , ascended masters , spirit guides , extraterrestrials , angels , devas , historical figures , the collective unconscious , elementals , or nature spirits . Hanegraaff described channeling as a form of " articulated revelation " , and identified four forms : trance channeling , <unk> , <unk> channeling , and open channeling . 
 Prominent examples of channeling in the New Age movement include Jane Roberts ' claims that she was contacted by an entity called Seth , and Helen Schucman 's claims to have channeled Jesus Christ . The academic Suzanne Riordan examined a variety of these New Age channeled messages , and noted that they typically " echoed each other in tone and content " , offering an analysis of the human condition and giving instructions or advice for how humanity can discover its true destiny . 
 For many New Agers , these channeled messages rival the scriptures of the main world religions as sources of spiritual authority , although often New Agers describe historical religious revelations as forms of " channeling " as well , thus attempting to legitimate and authenticate their own contemporary practices . Although the concept of channeling from <unk> spirit entities has links to Spiritualism and psychical research , in the New Age movement the Spiritualist emphasis on proving the existence of life after death is absent , as is the psychical research focus of testing mediums for consistency . 
 = = = Astrological cycles and the Age of Aquarius = = = 
 New Age thought typically envisions the world as developing through a series of large astronomical cycles which can be identified astrologically . Although the concept of distinct ages has older roots in Western esoteric thought , the New Age movement adopted it from Theosophy , despite the fact that such New Age conceptions of ages are often looser and more eclectic than those in Theosophical doctrine . New Age literature often claims that humanity once lived in an age of spiritual wisdom . In the writings of New Agers like Edgar Cayce , the ancient period of spiritual wisdom is associated with concepts of supremely @-@ advanced societies living on lost continents such as Atlantis , Lemuria , and Mu , as well as the idea that ancient societies like those of Ancient Egypt were far more technologically advanced than modern scholarship accepts . New Age literature often posits that the ancient period of spiritual wisdom ultimately gave way to an age of spiritual decline , sometimes termed the Age of Pisces . Although characterised as being a negative period for humanity , New Age literature views the Age of Pisces as an important learning experience for the species . Hanegraaff stated that New Age perceptions of history were " extremely sketchy " in their use of description , reflecting little interest in historiography and conflating history with myth . He also noted that they were highly ethnocentric in placing Western civilization at the centre of historical development . 
 A common belief among the New Age movement is that humanity has entered , or is coming to enter , a new age known as the Age of Aquarius , which Melton has characterised as a " New Age of love , joy , peace , abundance , and harmony [ ... ] the Golden Age heretofore only dreamed about " . In accepting this belief in a coming new age , the movement has been described as " highly positive , celebratory , [ and ] utopian " , and has also been cited as an apocalyptic movement . Opinions about the nature of the coming New Age differ among New Agers . There are for instance differences in belief about its commencement , with New Age author David Spangler claiming that it began in 1967 , while various practitioners placed its beginning with the Harmonic Convergence of 1987 , with others claiming that it will not begin until several centuries into the third millennium . 
 There are also differences in how this new age is envisioned . Those adhering to what Hanegraaff termed the " moderate " perspective believed that it would be marked by an improvement to current society , which affected both New Age concerns – through the convergence of science and mysticism and the global embrace of alternative medicine – to more general concerns , including an end to violence , crime and war , a healthier environment , and international co @-@ operation . Other New Agers adopt a fully utopian vision , believing that the world will be wholly transformed into an " Age of Light " , with humans evolving into totally spiritual beings and experiencing unlimited love , bliss , and happiness . 
 The Age of Aquarius is not viewed as eternal , but it is instead believed that it will last for around two thousand years , before being replaced by a further age . There are various beliefs within the movement as to how this new age will come about , but most emphasise the idea that it will be established through human agency ; others assert that it will be established with the aid of non @-@ human forces such as spirits or <unk> . Participants in the movement typically express the view that their own spiritual actions are helping to bring about the Age of Aquarius , with a common belief also being that there are higher powers in the universe that are helping to birth the new age . 
 = = = Healing and alternative medicine = = = 
 Another core factor of the New Age movement is its emphasis on healing and the use of alternative medicine . The general ethos within the movement is that health is the natural state for the human being and that illness is a disruption of that natural balance . Hence , New Age therapies seek to heal " illness " as a general concept which includes physical , mental , and spiritual aspects ; in doing so it critiques mainstream Western medicine for simply attempting to cure disease , and thus has an affinity with most forms of traditional medicine found around the world . The concept of " personal growth " is also greatly emphasised within the healing aspects of the New Age movement . The movement 's focus of self @-@ spirituality has led to the emphasis of self @-@ healing , although also present in the movement are ideas that focus on both healing others and healing the Earth itself . 
 The healing elements of the movement are difficult to classify given that a variety of terms are used , with some New Age authors using different terms to refer to the same trends , while others use the same term to refer to different things . However , Hanegraaff developed a set of categories into which the forms of New Age healing could be roughly categorised . The first of these was the Human Potential Movement , which argues that contemporary Western society suppresses much human potential , and which accordingly professes to offer a path through which individuals can access those parts of themselves that they have alienated and suppressed , thus enabling them to reach their full potential and live a meaningful life . Hanegraaff described <unk> psychology as the " theoretical wing " of this Human Potential Movement ; in contrast to other schools of psychological thought , <unk> psychology takes religious and mystical experiences seriously by exploring the uses of altered states of consciousness . Closely connected to this is the shamanic consciousness current , which argues that the shaman was a specialist in altered states of consciousness and which seeks to adopt and imitate traditional shamanic techniques as a form of personal healing and growth . 
 Hanegraaff identified the second main healing current in the New Age movement as being holistic health . This emerged in the 1970s out of the free clinic movement of the 1960s , and has various connections with the Human Potential Movement . It emphasises the idea that the human individual is a holistic , interdependent relationship between mind , body , and spirit , and that healing is a process in which an individual becomes whole by integrating with the powers of the universe . A very wide array of methods are utilised within the holistic health movement , with some of the most common including acupuncture , biofeedback , chiropractic , yoga , kinesiology , homeopathy , <unk> , massage and other forms of bodywork , meditation and visualisation , nutritional therapy , psychic healing , herbal medicine , healing using crystals , metals , music , <unk> , and reincarnation therapy . The use of crystal healing has become a particularly prominent visual trope in the movement . The mainstreaming of the Holistic Health movement in the UK is discussed by Maria Tighe . The inter @-@ relation of holistic health with the New Age movement is illustrated in Jenny Butler 's ethnographic description of " Angel therapy " in Ireland . 
 = = = " New Age science " = = = 
 According to Drury , the New Age movement attempts to create " a worldview that includes both science and spirituality " . Although it typically rejects rationalism , the scientific method , and the academic establishment , at times those active in the movement employ terminology and concepts borrowed from science and particularly from the New Physics . Moreover , a number of prominent influences on New Age movement , such as David Bohm and Ilya Prigogine , came from backgrounds as professional scientists . Instead it typically expresses the view that its own understandings of the universe will come to replace those of the academic establishment in a paradigm shift . 
 However , most of the academic and scientific establishments dismiss " New Age science " as pseudo @-@ science , or at best existing in part on the fringes of genuine scientific research . Hanegraaff identified " New Age science " as a form of Naturphilosophie . In this , the movement is interested in developing unified world views to discover the nature of the divine and establish a scientific basis for religious belief . Richard H. Jones has presented strong arguments challenging New Age thinkers ' treatment of both science and mysticism . 
 Figures in the New Age movement – most notably Fritjof Capra in his The Tao of Physics ( 1975 ) – have drawn parallels between theories in the New Physics and traditional forms of mysticism , thus arguing that ancient religious ideas are now being proven by contemporary science . Many New Agers have adopted James Lovelock 's Gaia hypothesis that the Earth acts akin to a single living organism , although have expanded this idea to include the idea that the Earth has consciousness and intelligence . 
 = = = Ethics and afterlife = = = 
 There is no ethical cohesion within the New Age phenomenon , although Hanegraaff argued that the central ethical tenet of the New Age movement is to cultivate one 's own divine potential . Given that the movement 's holistic interpretation of the universe prohibits a belief in a dualistic good and evil , negative events that happen are interpreted not as the result of evil but as lessons designed to teach an individual and enable them to advance spiritually . It rejects the Christian emphasis on sin and guilt , believing that these generate fear and thus negativity , which then hinder spiritual evolution . It also typically criticises the blaming and judging of others for their actions , believing that if an individual adopts these negative attitudes it harms their own spiritual evolution . Instead the movement emphasizes positive thinking , although beliefs regarding the power behind such thoughts vary within New Age literature . Common New Age examples of how to generate such positive thinking include the repeated recitation of mantras and statements carrying positive messages , and the visualisation of a white light . 
 According to Hanegraaff , the question of death and afterlife is not a " pressing problem requiring an answer " in the New Age movement . A belief in reincarnation is very common , being viewed as part of humanity 's " progressive spiritual evolution " . In New Age literature the reality of reincarnation is usually treated as self @-@ evident , with no explanation as to why practitioners embrace this afterlife belief over others , although New Agers endorse it in the belief that it ensures cosmic justice . Many New Agers adopt a belief in karma , treating it as a law of cause and effect which assures cosmic balance , although in some cases they stress that it is not a system that enforces punishment for past actions . In much New Age literature discussing reincarnation , there is the claim that part of the human soul , that which carries the personality , perishes with the death of the body , while the Higher Self – that which connects with divinity – survives in order to be reborn into another body . It is believed that the Higher Self chooses the body and circumstances into which it will be born , in order to use it as a vessel through which to learn new lessons and thus advance its own spiritual evolution . Some prominent New Age writers such as Shakti Gawain and Louise Hay have thus expressed the view that humans are therefore totally responsible for the events that happen to them during their life , an idea that many New Agers characterise as empowering . At times , past life regression are employed within the New Age movement in order to reveal a Higher Soul 's previous incarnations , usually with an explicit healing purpose . 
 = = Lifestyle = = 
 New Age spirituality has led to a wide array of literature on the subject and an active niche market , with books , music , crafts , and services in alternative medicine available at New Age stores , fairs , and festivals . New Age fairs – sometimes known as " Mind , Body , Spirit fairs " , " psychic fairs " , or " alternative health fairs " – are spaces in which a variety of goods and services are displayed by different vendors , including forms of alternative medicine and esoteric practices such as palmistry or tarot card reading . A prominent example is the Mind Body Spirit Festival , held annually in the United Kingdom , at which – the religious studies scholar Christopher Partridge noted – one could encounter " a wide range of beliefs and practices from crystal healing to ... Kirlian photography to psychic art , from angels to past @-@ life therapy , from Theosophy to UFO religion , and from New Age music to the vegetarianism of Suma <unk> Hai . " 
 A number of New Age proponents have emphasised the use of spiritual techniques as a tool for attaining financial prosperity , thus moving the movement away from its counter @-@ cultural origins . Embracing this attitude , various books have been published espousing such an ethos , established New Age centres have held spiritual retreats and classes aimed specifically at business people , and New Age groups have developed specialised training for businesses . During the 1980s , many prominent U.S. corporations – among them IBM , AT & T , and General Motors – embraced New Age seminars , hoping that they could increase productivity and efficiency among their work force , although in several cases this resulted in employees bringing legal action against their employers , claiming that such seminars had infringed on their religious beliefs or damaged their psychological health . However , the use of spiritual techniques as a method for attaining profit has been an issue of major dispute within the wider New Age movement , with prominent New Agers such as Spangler and Michael Fox criticising what they see as trends within the community that are narcissistic and lack a social conscience . In particular , the movement 's commercial elements have caused problems given that they often conflict with its general economically @-@ egalitarian ethos ; as York highlighted , " a tension exists in New Age between socialistic egalitarianism and capitalistic private enterprise " . 
 Given that it encourages individuals to choose spiritual practices on the grounds of personal preference and thus encourages them to behave as a consumer , the New Age has been considered to be well suited to modern society . 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 Sociological studies of the demographics of New Age practitioners have established that certain sectors of society are more likely to get involved in the movement than others . Sutcliffe noted that although most of the influential New Age figureheads were male , approximately two thirds of its participants were female . The movement is strongly gendered ; sociologist Ciara O 'Connor argues that it shows a tension between commodification and women 's empowerment . It also a primarily middle @-@ class phenomenon . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , it was asserted that the New Age movement was primarily found in the United States and Canada , Western Europe , and Australia and New Zealand . It is problematic ascertaining the number of New Agers because many individuals involved in the movement don 't explicitly identify themselves as such . While some individuals self @-@ identify as a New Ager , others who participate in New Age practices instead may identify as Jewish , Christian , Buddhist or atheist . Heelas highlighted the range of attempts to establish the number of New Age participants in the U.S. during this period , noting that estimates ranged from 20 @,@ 000 to 6 million ; he believed that the higher ranges of these estimates were greatly inflated by , for instance , an erroneous assumption that all Americans who believed in reincarnation were part of the movement . He nevertheless suggested that over 10 million people in the U.S. had had some contact with New Age practices or ideas . 
 Sutcliffe described the " typical " participant in the New Age milieu as being " a religious individualist , mixing and matching cultural resources in an animated spiritual quest " . Susan Lee Brown noted that in the U.S. , the movement was first embraced by the baby boomer generation ( those born between 1946 and 1964 ) , " through which it was incubated and transmitted to other parts of American society " . Heelas asserted that the movement was " strongly associated " with members of the middle and upper @-@ middle classes of Western society . He added that within that broad demographic , the movement had nevertheless attracted a diverse clientele . He typified the typical New Ager as someone who was well @-@ educated yet disenchanted with mainstream society , thus arguing that the movement catered to those who believe that modernity is in crisis . He suggested that the movement appealed to many former practitioners of the 1960s counter @-@ culture because while they came to feel that they were unable to change society , they were nonetheless interested in changing the self . He believed that many individuals had been " culturally primed for what the New Age has to offer " , with the New Age attracting " expressive " people who were already comfortable with the ideals and outlooks of the movement 's self @-@ spirituality focus . It could be particularly appealing because the New Age suited the needs of the individual , whereas traditional religious options that are available primarily catered for the needs of a community . He believed that although the adoption of New Age beliefs and practices by some fitted the model of religious conversion , others who adopted some of its practices could not easily be considered to have converted to the religion . 
 He highlighted that those involved in the movement did so to varying degrees . Heelas argued that those involved in the movement could be divided into three broad groups ; the first comprised those who were completely dedicated to it and its ideals , often working in professions that furthered those goals . The second consisted of " serious part @-@ timers " who worked in unrelated fields but who nevertheless spent much of their free time involved in movement activities . The third was that of " casual part @-@ timers " who occasionally involved themselves in New Age activities but for whom the movement was not a central aspect of their life . Many New Age practices have filtered into wider Western society , with a 2000 poll for instance revealing that 39 % of the UK population had tried alternative therapies . 
 People who practice New Age spirituality or who embrace its lifestyle are included in the Lifestyle of Health and Sustainability ( LOHAS ) demographic market segment , figures rising , related to sustainable living , green ecological initiatives , and generally composed of a relatively affluent and well @-@ educated segment . The LOHAS market segment in 2006 was estimated at USD $ 300 billion , approximately 30 percent of the United States consumer market . According to The New York Times , a study by the Natural Marketing Institute showed that in 2000 , 68 million Americans were included within the LOHAS demographic . The sociologist Paul H. Ray , who coined the term cultural creatives in his book The Cultural <unk> : How 50 Million People Are Changing the World ( 2000 ) , states , " What you 're seeing is a demand for products of equal quality that are also virtuous . " 
 = = = Community = = = 
