 Some New Agers advocate living in a simple and sustainable manner to reduce humanity 's impact on the natural resources of Earth ; and they shun consumerism . The New Age movement has been centered around rebuilding a sense of community to counter social disintegration ; this has been attempted through the formation of intentional communities , where individuals come together to live and work in a communal lifestyle . 
 New Age centres have been set up in various parts of the world , representing an institutionalised form of the movement . Notable examples include the <unk> Institute in Boulder , Colorado , Holly Hock Farm near to Vancouver , the Wrekin Trust in West Malvern , Worcestershire , and the Skyros Centre in Skyros . 
 Criticising mainstream Western education as counterproductive to the ethos of the movement , many New Age groups have established their own schools for the education of children , although in other cases such groups have sought to introduce New Age spiritual techniques into pre @-@ existing establishments . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The term " New @-@ age music " is applied , often in a <unk> manner , to forms of ambient music , a genre which developed in the 1960s and was popularised in the 1970s , particularly with the work of Brian Eno . The genre 's relaxing nature resulted in it becoming popular within New Age circles , with some forms of the genre having a specifically New Age orientation . Studies have determined that new @-@ age music can be an effective component of stress management . 
 The style began in the 1970s with the works of free @-@ form jazz groups recording on the ECM label ; such as Oregon , the Paul Winter Consort , and other pre @-@ ambient bands ; as well as ambient music performer Brian Eno and classical avant @-@ garde musician Daniel <unk> . In the early 1970s , it was mostly instrumental with both acoustic and electronic styles . New @-@ age music evolved to include a wide range of styles from electronic space music using synthesizers and acoustic instrumentals using Native American flutes and drums , singing bowls , Australian <unk> and world music sounds to spiritual chanting from other cultures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Academia = = = 
 The earliest academic studies of the New Age movement were performed by specialists in the study of new religious movements , such as Robert Ellwood . However , this research was often scanty because many scholars of alternative spirituality thought of the New Age movement as an insignificant cultural fad . Alternately , much of it was largely negative and critical of New Age groups , as it was influenced by the U.S. anti @-@ cult movement . In 1996 , Wouter Hanegraaff published New Age Religion and Western Culture , a historical analysis of New Age texts . That same year , Paul Heelas published a study of the movement which focused on its manifestation in Britain . Most of these early studies were based on a textual analysis of New Age publications , rather than on an ethnographic analysis of its practitioners . 
 In the 2003 book A Culture of Conspiracy : Apocalyptic Visions in Contemporary America written by Michael Barkun , professor emeritus of political science at the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs Barkun argues New Age beliefs have been greatly facilitated by the advent of the internet which has exposed people to beliefs once consigned to the outermost fringe of political and religious life . He identifies two trends which he terms , " the rise of improvisational millennialism " and " the popularity of stigmatized knowledge " . He voices concern that these trends could lead to mass hysteria and could have a devastating effect on American political life . 
 = = = Christian perspectives = = = 
 The majority of published criticism of the New Age movement has come from Christians , in particular those on the religion 's fundamentalist wing . In the United States , the New Age movement became a major concern of evangelical Christian groups in the 1980s , an attitude that gradually also influenced British evangelical groups . During that decade , evangelical writers such as Constance <unk> , Dave Hunt , Gary North , and Douglas Groothuis published books criticising the New Age movement from their Christian perspective ; a number of them have been characterised as propagating conspiracy theories regarding the origin and purpose of the movement . The most successful such publication however was Frank E. Peretti 's 1986 novel This Present Darkness , which sold over a million copies ; it depicted the New Age movement as being in league with feminism and secular education to overthrow Christianity . This criticism has been sustained since ; in 2003 Richard Land of the Southern Baptist Convention stated that there 's " widespread agreement " by Baptists who regard New Age ideas as contrary to Christian tradition and doctrine . 
 In his 1989 book , Le Nouvel Age , French scholar and <unk> priest Jean <unk> criticised the New Age movement , which he described as an Anglo Saxon movement which was beginning to invade France . He asked if it represented the coming of the Anti @-@ Christ , a Jewish conspiracy , or a project for a global government . He also noted its parallels with Nazism and said that Christians should be discerning towards it . 
 The Roman Catholic Church published A Christian reflection on the New Age in 2003 , following a six @-@ year study ; the 90 @-@ page document criticizes New Age practices such as yoga , meditation , feng shui , and crystal healing . According to the Vatican , euphoric states attained through New Age practices should not be confused with prayer or viewed as signs of God 's presence . Cardinal Paul <unk> , then @-@ president of the Pontifical Council for Culture , said the " New Age is a misleading answer to the oldest hopes of man " . Monsignor Michael Fitzgerald , then @-@ president of the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue , stated at the Vatican conference on the document : the " Church avoids any concept that is close to those of the New Age " . The report also advised Christians to respect the sincerity of New Age persons ' spiritual searches , and to witness to them about the Gospel 
 = = = Contemporary Pagan perspectives = = = 
 An issue of academic debate has been regarding the connection between the New Age movement and contemporary Paganism , or Neo @-@ Paganism , with the two often being confused . Religious studies scholar Sarah Pike asserted that that there was a " significant overlap " between the two religious movements , while Aidan A. Kelly stated that Paganism " parallels the New Age movement in some ways , differs sharply from it in others , and overlaps it in some minor ways " . Ethan Doyle White stated that while the Pagan and New Age movements " do share commonalities and overlap " , they were nevertheless " largely distinct phenomena . " Hanegraaff suggested that whereas various forms of contemporary Paganism were not part of the New Age movement – particularly those who pre @-@ dated the movement – other Pagan religions and practices could be identified as New Age . Partridge portrayed both Paganism and the New Age as different streams of <unk> that merge at points . 
 Various differences between the two movements have been highlighted ; the New Age movement focuses on an improved future , whereas the focus of Paganism is on the pre @-@ Christian past . Similarly , the New Age movement typically propounds a universalist message which sees all religions as fundamentally the same , whereas Paganism stresses the difference between monotheistic religions and those embracing a polytheistic or animistic theology . While the New Age emphasises a light @-@ centred image , Paganism acknowledges both light and dark , life and death , and recognises the savage side of the natural world . Further , the New Age movement shows little interest in magic and witchcraft , which are conversely core interests of many Pagan religions , such as Wicca . Many Pagans have sought to distance themselves from the New Age movement , even using " New Age " as an insult within their community , while conversely many involved in the New Age have expressed criticism of Paganism for emphasizing the material world over the spiritual . Many Pagans have expressed criticism of the high fees charged by New Age teachers , something not typically present in the Pagan movement , which some Pagans pronouncing the word " <unk> " to rhyme with " sewage " . 
 = = = Native American and other indigenous responses = = = 
 The New Age movement has also been accused of cultural imperialism , misappropriating the sacred ceremonies , intellectual and cultural property of indigenous peoples . Indigenous American spiritual leaders , such as Elders councils of the Lakota , Cheyenne , Navajo , Creek , Hopi , Chippewa , and Haudenosaunee have denounced New Age misappropriation of their sacred ceremonies and other intellectual property , stating that " [ t ] he value of these instructions and ceremonies [ when led by unauthorized people ] are questionable , maybe meaningless , and hurtful to the individual carrying false messages " . Traditional leaders of the Lakota , Dakota , and Nakota peoples have reached consensus to reject " the expropriation of [ their ] ceremonial ways by non @-@ Indians " . They see the New Age movement as either not fully understanding , deliberately trivializing , or distorting their way of life , and have declared war on all such " plastic medicine people " who are appropriating their spiritual ways . The United Nations General Assembly has issued a declaration protecting ceremonies as part of the cultural and intellectual property of their respective Indigenous nations : 
 Article 31 1 . " Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain , control , protect and develop their cultural heritage , traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions , as well as the manifestations of their sciences , technologies and cultures , including human and genetic resources , seeds , medicines , knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora , oral traditions , literatures , designs , sports and traditional games and visual and performing arts . They also have the right to maintain , control , protect and develop their intellectual property over such cultural heritage , traditional knowledge , and traditional cultural expressions . " ― Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
 Indigenous leaders have spoken out against individuals from within their own communities who may go out into the world to become a " white man 's shaman , " and any " who are prostituting our spiritual ways for their own selfish gain , with no regard for the spiritual well @-@ being of the people as a whole " . The term " plastic shaman " or " plastic medicine people " has been applied to outsiders who identify themselves as shamans , holy people , or other traditional spiritual leaders , but who have no genuine connection to the traditions or cultures they claim to represent . 
 = = Social and political movement = = 
 While many commentators have focused on the personal aspects of the New Age movement , it also has a social and political component . The New Age political movement became visible in the 1970s , peaked in the 1980s , and continued into the 1990s . In the 21st century , the political movement evolved in new directions . 
 = = = Late 20th century = = = 
 After the political turmoil of the 1960s , many activists in North America and Europe became disillusioned with traditional reformist and revolutionary political ideologies . Some began searching for a new politics that gave special weight to such topics as consciousness , ecology , personal and spiritual development , community empowerment , and global unity . An outpouring of books from New Age thinkers acknowledged that search and attempted to articulate that in politics . 
 According to some observers , the first was Mark Satin 's New Age Politics ( 1978 ) . It originally appeared in Canada in 1976 . Other books that have been described as New Age political include Theodore Roszak 's Person / Planet ( 1978 ) , Marilyn Ferguson 's The Aquarian Conspiracy ( 1980 ) , Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler 's The Third Wave ( 1980 ) , Hazel Henderson 's The Politics of the Solar Age ( 1981 ) , Fritjof Capra 's The Turning Point ( 1982 ) , Robert Muller 's New Genesis ( 1982 ) , John Naisbitt 's <unk> ( 1982 ) , Willis Harman 's Global Mind Change ( 1988 ) , James Redfield 's The Celestine Prophecy ( 1993 ) , and Corinne McLaughlin and Gordon Davidson 's Spiritual Politics ( 1994 ) . 
 All these books were issued by major publishers . Some became international bestsellers . By the 1980s , New Age political ideas were being discussed in big @-@ city newspapers and established political magazines . In addition , some of the New Age 's own periodicals were regularly addressing social and political issues . In the U.S. , observers pointed to Leading Edge Bulletin , New Age Journal , New Options Newsletter , and Utne Reader . Other such periodicals included New Humanity ( England ) , <unk> ( Denmark ) , Odyssey ( South Africa ) , and World Union from the Sri Aurobindo Ashram ( India ) . 
 As with any political movement , organizations sprang up to generate popular support for New Age political ideas and policy positions . In the U.S. , commentators identified the New Age Caucus of California , the New World Alliance , Planetary Citizens , and California State legislator John Vasconcellos 's Self @-@ Determination : A Personal / Political Network as New Age political organizations . So , on occasion , did their own spokespeople . There may have been more New Age political organizing outside the U.S. ; writer @-@ activists pointed to the Future in Our Hands movement in Norway ( which claimed 20 @,@ 000 adherents out of a population of four million ) , the early European Green movements , and the Values Party of New Zealand . 
 Although these books , periodicals , and organizations did not speak with one voice , commentators found that many of them sounded common themes : 
 Our world does not reflect who we at our best can be . 
 All our most significant social and political problems go back at least 300 years . 
 The political system therefore needs to be transformed , not just reformed , with the help of a new political theory appropriate to our time . 
 Holism — seeing everything as connected — is the first step on the way to creating that new political theory . 
 Doing away with the categories of " left " and " right " is another essential part of that task . 
 Significant social change requires deep changes in consciousness ; institutional change is not enough . 
 Above all , consciousness needs to become more ecologically aware , more feminist , and more oriented to compassionate global unity . 
 Desirable values include nonviolence , diversity , a sense of community , and a sense of <unk> . 
 Human growth and development , not economic growth , should be the overarching goal of New Age society . 
 Ownership and control of institutions is important . But the size of institutions is at least as important . We must move away from big governments , big corporations , and other large institutions to the extent it enhances our lives . 
 We can begin this process by interlacing hierarchical structures with horizontal networks . 
 Global unification is a key goal , but is probably best accomplished by networking at many levels rather than establishing a centralized world state . 
 The agent of political change is no longer the working class , or any economic class . Instead , it is all those who are developing themselves personally and spiritually — all who aspire to live lives of dignity and service . 
 Evolution is to be preferred to revolution . However , the forces of evolutionary change need not be a statistical majority . A " critical mass " of informed , committed , and spiritually aware people can move a nation forward . 
 Over time , these themes began to cohere . By the 1980s , observers in both North America and Europe were acknowledging the emergence of a New Age political " ideology " . 
 = = = Political objections at century ’ s end = = = 
 Toward the end of the 20th century , criticisms were being directed at the New Age political project from many quarters , but especially from the liberal left and religious right . 
 On the left , scholars argued that New Age politics is an oxymoron : that personal growth has little or nothing to do with political change . One political scientist said New Age politics fails to recognize the " realities " of economic and political power ; another faulted it for not being opposed to the capitalist system , or to liberal individualism . <unk> activist Harvey Wasserman argued that New Age politics is too averse to social conflict to be effective politically . 
 On the right , some worried that the drive to come up with a new consciousness and new values would topple time @-@ tested old values . Others worried that the celebration of diversity would leave no strong viewpoint in place to guide society . 
 Neither left nor right was impressed with the New Age 's ability to organize itself politically . Many explanations were offered for the New Age 's practical political weakness . Some said that the New Age political thinkers and activists of the 1970s and 1980s were simply too far in advance of their time . Others suggested that New Age activists ' commitment to the often frustrating process of consensus decision @-@ making was at fault . After it dissolved , New World Alliance co @-@ founder Marc <unk> told an interviewer that the Alliance had been too " New Age counter @-@ cultural " to appeal to a broad public . 
 = = = New political directions in the 21st century = = = 
 In the 21st century , writers and activists continue to pursue a political project with New Age roots . However , it differs from the project that had come before . 
 The principal difference was anticipated in texts like New Age Politics author Mark Satin 's essay " Twenty @-@ eight Ways of Looking at Terrorism " ( 1991 ) , human potential movement historian Walter Truett Anderson 's essay " Four Different Ways to Be Absolutely Right " ( 1995 ) , and mediator Mark <unk> 's book A House Divided ( 1996 ) . In these texts , the New Age political perspective is recognized as legitimate . But it is presented as merely one among many , with strong points and blind spots just like all the rest . The result was to alter the nature of the New Age political project . If every political perspective had unique strengths and significant weaknesses , then it no longer made sense to try to convert everyone to the New Age political perspective , as had been attempted in the 1970s and 1980s . It made more sense to try to construct a higher political synthesis that took every political perspective into account , including that of the New Age . 
 Another difference between the two eras of political thought is that , in the 21st century , few political actors use the term New Age or post @-@ New Age to describe themselves or their work . Some observers attribute this to the negative connotations that the term " New Age " had acquired . Instead , other terms are employed that connote a similar sense of personal and political development proceeding together over time . For example , according to an anthology from three political scientists , many writers and academics use the term " transformational " as a substitute for such terms as New Age and new paradigm . Ken Wilber has popularized use of the term " integral " , Carter Phipps emphasizes the term " evolutionary " , and both terms can be found in some authors ' book titles . 
 = Ohio State Route 11 = 
 State Route 11 ( SR 11 ) is a north – south freeway in the eastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . Its southern terminus is at U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) in East Liverpool at the West Virginia state line on the Jennings Randolph Bridge over the Ohio River ; its northern terminus is at SR 531 in Ashtabula . The route is concurrent with US 30 through East Liverpool and with Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) near Youngstown . The first section of the route to be completed , from Canfield to Austintown , opened in 1969 . The entire current route was complete in 1972 , and upgraded to a divided highway by 1980 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of SR 11 is included as a part of the National Highway System , a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . The highest traffic count is at I @-@ 80 near Austintown , where 38 @,@ 360 vehicles travel the highway on average each day . The lowest traffic count is near US 6 , where 5 @,@ 550 vehicles travel the highway on average each day . 
 SR 11 starts at Jennings Randolph Bridge , and becomes concurrent with US 30 and SR 39 as it turns southwest . The concurrency bends around East Liverpool , SR 39 leaves the concurrency , and SR 7 joins it . The route finally turns north and leaves East Liverpool . It turns northwest , near the southern terminus of SR 170 . It intersects the concurrency termini of SR 7 and US 30 in these three miles . SR 11 travels through forests , passes by Lisbon , only connecting with SR 154 at an interchange . The highway travels north to near Leetonia , where it meets SR 344 at a diamond interchange . The forests slowly change into farmland , as it passes under SR 14 and into Mahoning County . 
 In Mahoning County , the route becomes part of the eastern city limits of Canfield , meeting US 224 at a parclo interchange . The highway crosses over the Ohio Turnpike , and becomes concurrent with I @-@ 80 few miles later . Here , most of the route is surrounded by urban areas . The interchange with I @-@ 80 and I @-@ 680 is incomplete , with ramps from I @-@ 680 west to I @-@ 80 east and I @-@ 80 west to I @-@ 680 east missing . I @-@ 80 and SR 11 travel northeast , leaves Mahoning County , and enters Trumbull County . SR 11 and I @-@ 80 split at the interchange at SR 711 , east of Girard . This interchange is also incomplete , with ramps from I @-@ 80 east to SR 711 south and SR 711 to I @-@ 80 west missing . 
 SR 11 continues north toward Ashtabula , meeting interchanges for SR 82 and an access road to the Youngstown @-@ Warren Regional Airport . Urban areas transition back into rural areas here . It later intersects SR 305 and SR 5 at diamond interchanges near Cortland . The route then enters Ashtabula County , and travels in a straight line , passing through US 322 , a rest area , US 6 , and SR 307 . Mostly forests and fields are between the highway . The route slowly bends northwest , and meets I @-@ 90 at a cloverleaf interchange . The route crosses over Ashtabula River , and bypasses Ashtabula . It ends at SR 531 , part of the Lake Erie Circle Tour , at a stop sign . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 11 was designated between 1967 – 1969 as a connector between Canfield and Austintown . Two years later , it was extended north to I @-@ 80 , and south to SR 7 , five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of East Liverpool . A section from SR 531 to SR 307 was also completed . Those two sections were later connected . By 1972 , all parts of the route were complete . SR 11 was upgraded to a limited access highway , from SR 82 to SR 307 , between 1972 and 1981 . In 2000 , construction began for the King Graves Road interchange , which opened a year later . On October 24 , 2005 , the interchange at SR 711 and I @-@ 80 / SR 11 opened , after it was modified to connect SR 711 . The only rest area on SR 11 received turn lanes in 2011 . 
 SR 11 was designated as the " Lake to River highway " on September 28 , 1973 . The section in Ashtabula County was also designated as the " Marine Private Henry Kalinowski Memorial Highway " on April 7 , 2009 . Around 2002 , the section in East Liverpool , starting from Newell Street , and ending at the state line , was designated as the " Lou Holtz Highway " . 
 = = = Chemical spills = = = 
 There have been three chemical spills on SR 11 . The first one happened on November 30 , 1984 . A tanker truck leaked Titanium tetrachloride at the I @-@ 80 / SR 11 interchange at Girard . About 200 residents who lived near the highway were evacuated . No injuries were reported , and the chemicals were soon contained . A spill was reported on July 7 , 1996 . A tanker truck spilled methyl alcohol onto SR 11 northbound , in Fairfield Township . The spill was contained , and charges were filed against the driver . The third and most recent one , happened on September 9 , 2003 . A tanker spilled one US gallon ( 3 @.@ 8 L ) of a flammable solvent between SR 344 and SR 154 . There were no evacuations . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Arthur F. Devereux = 
 Arthur Forrester Devereux ( April 27 , 1838 – February 13 , 1906 ) was a captain in the Massachusetts Volunteer Militia prior to the Civil War and a colonel in the Union Army during the Civil War . He is notable for his expertise and proficiency in the instruction of military drill . During the Battle of Gettysburg , the 19th Massachusetts Infantry , under his command , played an important role in filling a breach in the Union lines during Pickett 's Charge . After his active service had concluded , Devereux was awarded the honorary rank of brevet brigadier general , United States Volunteers , by appointment of President Andrew Johnson on February 21 , 1866 to rank from March 13 , 1865 , and confirmation by the U.S. Senate on April 10 , 1866 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Salem , Massachusetts , Devereux attended Harvard College and the United States Military Academy at West Point . His father was George H. Devereux who had served as adjutant general of Massachusetts from 1848 – 1851 . His father 's interest in military matters likely influenced Arthur Devereux 's career . Devereux did not graduate West Point , however , and instead moved to Chicago , Illinois to pursue a career in business in 1854 , when he was 15 or 16 years old . 
 = = = Chicago = = = 
 Soon after moving to Chicago , Devereux became business partners with a young man of his own age , Elmer E. Ellsworth . In business they were unsuccessful . Before long , Ellsworth would move on to a career in law and Devereux would move back to Massachusetts . However , as peace @-@ time militia soldiers , they were both highly successful . Both Devereux and Ellsworth became involved in the Illinois National Guard . Devereux became adjutant to Illinois National Guard Maj. Simon Bolivar Buckner , later a Confederate general during the Civil War and eventually a governor of Kentucky . Both Devereux and Ellsworth were acutely interested in the Zouave method of drill , inspired by the French Army units of the same name which fought in North Africa and wore elaborate uniforms influenced by Algerian fashions . Zouave militia units in the United States wore similar uniforms to their French counterparts and emphasized precision and showmanship in their drill . Ellsworth formed a Zouave company known as the Chicago Cadets which was placed under Adjutant Devereux 's supervision . The two men frequently consulted with each other on the practice of precision Zouave drill . Later , during the Civil War , Ellsworth would command the 11th New York Infantry , a Zouave regiment . Ellsworth famously became one of the first Union Army officers killed in the war . 
 = = = Salem Light Infantry company = = = 
 Returning to Massachusetts in 1855 , Devereux was eventually elected captain of the Salem Light Infantry company in 1859 . The Salem Light Infantry company was a prestigious Massachusetts militia unit with a long history , having been established in 1805 . Inspired by Ellsworth 's Chicago Cadets , Devereux enhanced the Salem company 's prestige by transforming it into a Zouave unit and training its members in precision drill . In 1860 , the company gave an exhibition drill for Massachusetts Gov. John Andrew and a large crowd of distinguished guests . The Salem Light Infantry was declared " a marvel of precision and exactness . " 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = 8th Massachusetts = = = 
 After the Battle of Fort Sumter on April 12 , 1861 , the Salem Light Infantry company was assigned to the 8th Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry for three months of service . The regiment arrived in Annapolis , Maryland on April 21 . Almost immediately after their arrival , the Salem Light Infantry , designated Company J of the 8th Massachusetts , was ordered aboard the USS Constitution to protect the vessel from attack by Confederate sympathizers . At the time , the Constitution was serving as a training ship at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis . As one of the original six frigates of the U.S. Navy , the warship was an important national symbol . The Navy soon towed the Constitution , with Devereux 's Salem company on board , to New York City where she would be less vulnerable . Returning to Maryland , Devereux and his company rejoined the 8th Massachusetts , aiding in repairing railroads and serving guard duty outside of Baltimore . The 8th Massachusetts was mustered out of service on August 1 , 1861 . 
 = = = 19th Massachusetts = = = 
 Having completed his first term of service , Devereux immediately sought involvement with a new regiment . On August 22 , 1861 , he was commissioned lieutenant colonel of the 19th Massachusetts . The commanding officer of the regiment , Col. Edward Winslow Hinks had great respect for Devereux 's expertise in military drill . He therefore placed the training of the 19th Massachusetts under Devereux 's supervision . To prepare the regiment for action , Devereux enlisted the aid of several members of the Salem Light Infantry company to serve as drill masters . 
 After their first winter of service on picket duty in the vicinity of Washington , D.C. , the 19th Massachusetts was attached to the 3rd Brigade , 2nd Division , of the II Corps in the Army of the Potomac . Devereux was placed on sick leave just before the Seven Days Battles and therefore missed the unit 's first severe action . The unit was involved in the Second Battle of Bull Run on August 30 , 1862 . During the Battle of Antietam on September 17 , 1862 , the 19th Massachusetts , as part of Maj. Gen. John Sedgwick 's division , took part in an infamous charge on Confederate lines in the West Woods . The division was virtually surrounded by Confederates and suffered heavy casualties . Lt. Col. Devereux was wounded during this action . Col. Hinks suffered a severe wound at Antietam which required his extended absence from the army . In his place , Devereux took command of the 19th Massachusetts . Devereux 's promotion to colonel was effective November 29 , 1862 . 
 Devereux and the 19th Massachusetts played a significant role in the Battle of Gettysburg on July 3 , 1863 . Confederate forces attempted a massive frontal assault on the Union position known as Pickett 's Charge . The attack only managed to breach Union lines in one small place along Cemetery Ridge . The spot is now referred to as the " high @-@ water mark " of the Confederacy , not only because it was the furthest position reached by Confederate troops during the charge but also because the failure of Pickett 's Charge is regarded as the major turning point of the Civil War . The 19th Massachusetts happened to be one of several Union infantry regiments positioned at the high @-@ water mark . The regiment had been placed slightly to the south of the " copse of trees " which served as the target of the Confederate units during the charge . The 19th Massachusetts was in line with the 42nd New York . The two units were the second line of defense in their brigade . 
 As the Confederate charge struck the Union position , a gap in the Union line opened in front of the 19th Massachusetts between their brigade and the adjacent brigade commanded by Brig. Gen. Webb . Seeing the break , Devereux turned to the colonel of the 42nd New York and , gesturing to the gap said , " Mallon , we must move ! " At that moment , Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock rode by and Devereux called out to Hancock , " They have broken through ! Shall I get in there ? " To which Hancock replied , " Go at them ! " The 19th Massachusetts and the 42nd New York together filled the gap , entering a pandemonium of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . In the brutal fighting , the 19th Massachusetts captured four Confederate regimental flags which Devereux personally delivered to his brigade commander after the battle . 
 Following the Battle of Gettysburg , Devereux was detached from the regiment to assist in the draft service in Massachusetts . During the fall of 1863 , he was in command of the garrison at Camp Wightman on Long Island in Boston Harbor . 
 = = = Brigade command = = = 
 Returning to the Army of the Potomac in November 1863 , Devereux was placed in command of the Second Brigade , Second Division , II Corps . In that capacity , he was selected to lead a dangerous charge during the planning of the Battle of Mine Run on November 30 , 1863 . Fortunately , the attack was called off . 
 Devereux was forced to resign his command on February 27 , 1864 , according to historian James Bowen , due to , " imperative family considerations . " Devereaux was nominated by President Andrew Johnson on February 21 , 1866 for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general , U.S. Volunteers , to rank from March 13 , 1865 , for gallant services during the war and the U.S. Senate confirmed the award on April 10 , 1866 . 
 = = Family and post @-@ war life = = 
 About the time of his resignation in 1864 , Devereux married Clara Anna Rich of Haverhill , Massachusetts . They had three sons and four daughters . 
 Arthur Devereux went back to a business career after the war , first in Boston , then in New York and eventually settling with his wife and children in Cincinnati , Ohio . In Ohio , Devereux became a representative in the Ohio legislature . His wife , Clara , pursued a career in journalism , writing editorials and a social column for the Cincinnati Commercial Gazette , among other publications , and became one of the best @-@ known female journalists of her time . In the latter decades of the 19th century , the Devereux family played a key role in defining the elite social circles of Cincinnati . In 1894 , Clara Devereux published Mrs. Devereux 's Blue Book of Cincinnati , a social register of notable residents of that city . She was assisted by her daughter , Marion , who later took up her mother 's mantle and wrote an influential social column during the early 20th century which , according to a more recent journalist , " made Cincinnati aristocrats quake for 29 years . " 
 Arthur Devereux died on February 13 , 1906 and is interred in Spring Grove Cemetery in Cincinnati . 
 = LocoRoco = 
 LocoRoco ( <unk> ) is a platform video game released worldwide in 2006 for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) handheld game console , and developed and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . The game was developed by Tsutomu Kouno , striving to create a game that was different to other titles being released for the PSP at the time . After demonstrating a prototype of the core gameplay to his management , Kouno was able to complete development over a course of one and a half years . In LocoRoco , the player must tilt the environment by using the shoulder buttons on the PSP in order to maneuver the LocoRoco , multi @-@ colored jelly @-@ like characters , through each level , being aided by other odd residents while avoiding hazards and the deadly Moja Troop , to reach an end goal . 
 Along the way , the LocoRoco can grow in size by eating special berries , and then can be split and rejoined to pass the LocoRoco through narrow spaces . The game 's bright and colorful visuals and dynamic music soundtrack were hallmarks of the game , earning it several awards from the gaming press in 2006 . While the game did not sell high volumes , its success led to the development of four other LocoRoco titles - two sequels for the PSP ( PlayStation Portable ) / PSP Go , a spin @-@ off for the PlayStation 3 and a mobile version ( called LocoRoco Mobile and LocoRoco Hi , depending on the market ) for cellular ( mobile ) telephones . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Living peacefully on a faraway planet , the LocoRoco and their friends , the Mui Mui , help grow vegetation and look after nature , making the planet a pleasant place to be , playing and singing the days away . When the Moja Troop comes to the planet to take it over , the LocoRoco do not know how to fight against these invaders from outer space . As such , the player assumes the role of " the planet " that is capable of guiding the LocoRoco around to defeat the Moja Troop and rescue the remaining LocoRoco , returning the planet to its peaceful ways . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 LocoRoco is divided into 5 worlds each consisting of 8 levels . In each level , the goal is to reach the end point of the level , with the player scored on the number of LocoRoco found , the time to complete the level , and other factors . There are six varieties of LocoRoco in the game , identified by their color , appearance , and musical voice , but outside of the first yellow one ( <unk> ) , the rest are unlocked as the player completes the levels . The player can then opt which LocoRoco they want to use for a level , however , this selection has no fundamental gameplay effects and only changes the songs used . LocoRoco act as blobs of gelatin , deforming from their normally round shape when demanded by the environment . Certain beings in the world can change the default shape of the LocoRoco into other forms , such as squares or triangles , which lasts until they wash off in water or they encounter another similar being . 
 The player starts with a single LocoRoco . When this LocoRoco eats a berry , it grows by one , up to a maximum size of twenty . The single large LocoRoco may be split into individual beings by pressing <unk> or through specific points on the level , while individual LocoRoco can merge back into a single being by holding down <unk> . Manipulation of the LocoRoco in this manner may be necessary to guide them to the finish ; while the single large LocoRoco is easier to control , small passages can only be navigated by individual LocoRoco . The player can lose LocoRoco if they are touched by harmful objects or they run into the Moja , and the game will be over if they lose all their LocoRoco . With the exception of making them jump , the player does not otherwise directly control the LocoRoco , but instead controls the planet itself , tilting the planet using the L and R buttons . This causes the LocoRoco to roll in the direction of tilt , as well as causing certain mechanical objects such as platforms to also tilt . The player can also cause the LocoRoco to jump by holding and releasing both buttons ; this not only allows the LocoRoco a way to cross gaps , but to burst through walls as well as harm the Moja without taking damage . As the player collects more LocoRoco in a level , the music gains more voices , each LocoRoco singing a part in the overall song . 
 Throughout the levels are areas that require a minimum number of LocoRoco in order to cause them to sing and wake up one of the planet 's odd residents , who will then reward the player with an item for their " Loco House " . There are also hidden <unk> throughout the levels to be found . Levels also contain " <unk> " which can be collected by the LocoRoco and are used as a form of currency to play two mini @-@ games outside of the main game . The mini @-@ games are " <unk> Crane " , a variation of a crane game , and " Chuppa Chuppa " that use Chuppa , bird @-@ like launchers for the LocoRoco , to navigate a long course . Both mini @-@ games grant additional Loco House parts and <unk> as prizes . The player can use the accumulated Loco House parts to create a course that the LocoRoco will automatically navigate , with additional parts that can be collected by directing the course appropriately . A Loco Editor is also an unlockable feature in the game , creating an interactive course with a start and finish using the Loco House parts . LocoRoco has lots of other characters and enemies that have strange names . 
 = = Development = = 
 LocoRoco was envisioned by Tsutomu Kouno , who had previously work on development of Ico . While on a train during the second quarter of 2004 , Kouno had used a PDA to sketch a game that would involve multiple similar characters that would not be in direct control of the player . He realized the planet @-@ tilting aspect after seeing how rotating the phone with the sketch around would lead to a compelling game . At that time , the PlayStation Portable was nearing release , and Kouno felt the unit 's shoulder buttons would be appropriate for the tilting controls . Kouno also opted to develop for the PSP to break the mold of other , more complicated sequels from PlayStation 2 games that were being developed for the unit and instead create something that " really seemed at home on the PSP " . Kouno also wanted " every aspect of the game [ ... ] to be unique " , and led to his choices for graphics and music in the game . 
 Three concepts were part of Kouno 's vision for the game , " easy to play , fun and to have dramatic visuals " . Kouno sought not only to make the game accessible to younger players , but also to a wider , international audience . While his team experimented with different control schemes for the game , they recognized that the simple tilting controls would be easily learned by children as well as those outside Japan . This approach also led to the use of a new " language " for the music , instead of relying on Japanese works which would not be understood by the international audience . However , despite the simple controls , Kouno noted they included deep gameplay around those that would require players to master to gain all the collectibles in the game . 
 Kouno opted to keep the game in 2D instead of the more popular 3D to maintain the simplicity of the game . The Loco Roco team had experimented with different designs for the characters and world , including claymation , papercraft , and detailed textures , but settled on the resulting patterns not only to convey a " bright , cheerful " world , but as well as to keep budget costs down , no longer having a need to seek artists for textures . Kouno drew upon his interest in the natural world to design the other characters in the game ; for example , one character was based on the appearance of his pet tropical fish . Kouno found that using 2D graphics allowed him to constantly present the faces of the LocoRoco and other beings within the game , and used that to convey a constant sense of emotion from all the characters . Maya was used to construct the levels and place hazards and obstacles . The graphics themselves were based on using and animating <unk> curves , a feature of the PSP 's software capabilities . 
 Kouno had attempted to present the idea at pitch meetings twice in the early part of 2005 but was turned away . While management was able to understand the mechanic of tilting the world , they could not understand Kouno 's vision of applying artificial intelligence to the LocoRoco or other creatures in the game . On the second rejection , the management staff suggested that Kouno return with something more concrete to explain his ideas . Kouno spent one month with a four @-@ person team to create a simple pre @-@ prototype version of the game that demonstrated the rolling gameplay aspect . The pre @-@ prototype version was well received , and Kouno was given further resources to develop the full game . A complete prototype was created by an eight @-@ person team over three months to establish the rest of the game 's core mechanics , including the joining and splitting of the Loco Roco and the dynamic music . The remainder of the game was completed in the following 11 months by the full 16 @-@ person staff at Sony Computer Entertainment Japan . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for Loco Roco is based on a fictional language created by Kouno to avoid alienating foreign players by using Japanese music . Kouno created the language by compiling a list of interesting words in katakana , then altering the words slightly to make them sound cool in Japanese as to mask their origins . Kouno then sent the lyrics along with some of his preferred reggae , soul and R & B music to the composers , Nobuyuki Shimizu and <unk> Adachi , to complete the soundtrack . Kouno requested that the composers use as little electronic @-@ sounding instruments as possible to give the music a feeling of " live sound " . The team ultimately created about 60 songs to be used in the game . While the soundtrack had many different themes , Kouno felt that the fictional LocoRoco language helped to unify the songs across the game . 
 The LocoRoco Original Soundtrack : LocoRoco No Uta was published by Columbia Records and released in October 2006 in Japan . The album contains 42 tracks from the game . 
 = = Demo versions = = 
 = = = Standard demo = = = 
 Following the release of Firmware 2 @.@ 7 on April 25 , 2006 , a downloadable demo of LocoRoco was released on the game 's Japanese website and was the first Sony @-@ sanctioned user @-@ downloadable game for the PSP . A demo localized for western countries was released in June 2006 , shortly before the game 's full European release . It includes one level that will take the player around 5 – 15 minutes to complete , depending on the number of secret areas the player encounters . 
 = = = Halloween demo = = = 
 A special Halloween @-@ themed demo was released for download on October 26 , 2006 , It featured some exclusive graphics and objects , like Jack @-@ o @-@ lanterns , spirits , and more . Few puzzles were implemented . 
 = = = Christmas demo = = = 
 A Christmas @-@ themed demo was released for download on December 11 , 2006 . It featured some exclusive graphics like Santa 's sleigh and more . A unique LocoRoco song is implemented . 
 = = Reception = = 
 LocoRoco has received mostly positive reviews from critics . The game was consistently praised for its bright and bold graphics . Charles Herold of the New York Times compared the graphics to Katamari Damacy , calling them " simple " and " pretty " while Sam Kennedy of 1UP considered it akin to " playing out an adorable cartoon " . The unique environments of each level were also credited to help the game 's charm , with Kristan Reed of Eurogamer believing that the game presents a " look and feel unlike anything we 've seen before " and that shows " a truly brilliant realisation of how to take 2D gaming into uncharted territory . " The music of the game was considered to be " quirky and catchy " , with Will Tuttle of GameSpy saying that " there 's a good chance that you 'll be humming some of the tunes all day " . The game , at times , was compared to a " slow @-@ motion version of Sonic the Hedgehog " with the player controlling the LocoRoco as they move up and down hills and through loop @-@ de @-@ loops in the level . This gameplay allows the game to be easily accessible to players , with IGN 's Juan Castro noting that the controls are " not simplistic so much as it 's refreshingly elegant " , and Kennedy commenting that while LocoRoco is not perfect , it was " perfect for the PSP " . As noted by Neil McGreevy of the BBC , LocoRoco " is the best game Nintendo never made . " 
 A common complaint for the game reviewers was the repetitive nature of the game , as no new gameplay mechanics are introduced after the player learns to roll and jump , and that the levels are " far from challenging " . However , these reviewers also commented that the monotonous gameplay is not as significant an issue with a gaming system like the PSP that encourages shorter play sessions . Reviewers also commented on the length of the game , considering it short with only a few extras that would add some additional enjoyment after completing the main game . 
 The game has won two awards at the 2006 BAFTA Games Awards for " Best Children 's Game " and " Best Character " , and was nominated for six additional awards , " Best Audio " , " Best Original Score " , " Best Innovation " , " Artistic Achievement " , " Best Gameplay " and " Best Casual and Social Game " . LocoRoco also won two awards at the 10th Annual Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences Awards for " Children 's Game of the Year " and " Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Competition " , in addition to being nominated for " Outstanding Innovation " and " Handheld Game of the Year " . The Associated Press named LocoRoco its handheld game of the year for 2006 . 
 Prior to its release in North America , 1UP blogger Alejandro Quan @-@ Madrid equated the Moja characters in LocoRoco to blackface , and citing the game as an example of " institutionalized racism that needs calling out " . Quan @-@ Madrid and 1UP reporter <unk> Parish noted that the Japanese culture does not have the same racial population as western countries like the United States , and as such , blackface or other similar representations of black persons are taken for granted in that country , and localization usually handles such issues . Quan @-@ Madrid called on Sony to make a simple color change to the Moja , similar to what Capcom had done for the character of <unk> in Mega Man Powered Up . Developers for the game , including Kouno , noted that the Moja character design was based on the hairstyle of Keigo Tsuchiya , the game 's artist , at the time of development , and did not mean to imply any racist tones . The accusation of racism came days before a similar charge against Sony for an advertisement for the white @-@ colored PSP , portraying a white woman subjugating a black woman . 
 The Yellow LocoRoco , as seen on the game 's cover , has become a mascot for the PSP system . 
 Sales of LocoRoco were not strong in Japan , with just more than 30 @,@ 000 copies sold the first week , and about 170 @,@ 000 in total sales for the year . The game was more successful in Europe and North America , prompting Sony to start development of additional titles . 
 = = Mobile version = = 
 A mobile version of LocoRoco , LocoRoco Mobile , was created for distribution via i @-@ mode , a wireless service in Japan in 2007 . The mobile game has since been ported for western countries by <unk> , however it has been renamed LocoRoco Hi . 
 = = Sequels and spin @-@ offs = = 
 LocoRoco <unk> is a LocoRoco program for the PlayStation 3 , released in September 2007 as a downloadable title through the PlayStation Store . It is described by Sony as an " interactive screensaver , " rather than a game . Instead of tilting the world , the game instead puts the player in control of a butterfly that will draw LocoRoco to it , guiding them to sleeping LocoRoco to wake them up and collect enough LocoRoco to progress to other parts of the single stage . 
 LocoRoco 2 , a sequel to the original LocoRoco , was officially announced at the 2008 Tokyo Game Show though Phil Harrison , Sony 's worldwide studios chief , revealed the game to be in development during an interview at the 2007 D.I.C.E. Summit . The game was released worldwide between late 2008 and early 2009 . 
 A third PSP LocoRoco game , LocoRoco Midnight Carnival , is a Halloween @-@ themed spin @-@ off title which features an enhanced bounce skill called " Boing ! " The game was digitally released on October 29 , 2009 for North American and European areas , and on November 1 , 2009 in Japan for the launch of the PSP Go . There are also LocoRoco costumes for LittleBigPlanet . 
 = Lachine massacre = 
 The Lachine massacre , part of the Beaver Wars , occurred when 1 @,@ 500 Mohawk warriors attacked by surprise the small , 375 @-@ inhabitant , settlement of Lachine , New France at the lower end of Montreal Island on the morning of August 5 , 1689 . The attack was precipitated by growing Iroquois dissatisfaction with the increased French incursions into their territory , and was encouraged by the settlers of New England as a way to leverage power against New France during King William 's War . 
 In their attack , the Mohawk destroyed a substantial portion of the Lachine settlement by fire and killed or captured numerous inhabitants , although historic sources have varied widely in estimates of the number killed , from 24 to 250 . 
 = = Background and motivations = = 
 The Mohawk and other Iroquois attacked the French and their native allies for a variety of reasons , related to both economic and cultural circumstances . 
 = = = Cultural motives = = = 
 The Europeans ( French , Dutch and English ) in the Northeast developed a fur trade with natives , including the Five Nations of the Iroquois ; beaver furs were most desired . However , in the 17th century , the dominance of what historian Daniel Richter refers to as “ Francophiles ” or French takeover , contributed to an erosion of French @-@ native relations . The French mission to assimilate natives required the abandonment of native tradition , which was met with resistance . By 1667 , large numbers of Huron and Iroquois , especially Mohawk , started arriving at the St Lawrence Valley and its mission villages , to escape the effects of warfare . Many traditionalists , including some Mohawk , resented the Jesuits for destroying traditional native society but were unable to do anything to stop them . However , traditionalists reluctantly accepted the establishment of a mission in order to have good relations with the French , whom they needed for trade . This cultural invasion increased tensions between the two factions . The relationship between the French and the Iroquois were strained long before the Lachine Massacre , as the French maintained relations with other tribes as well , both for trade and war alliances , such as the Abenaki . In 1679 , following the end of the Iroquois war with the Susquehannock and the Mahican , the Iroquois raided native villages in the West . Pushing out Siouan tribes to the west , they claimed hunting grounds in the Ohio Valley by right of conquest . These were kept empty of inhabitants in order to encourage hunting . As a result , the Iroquois regularly raided trading parties in the western frontier which under French protection , and took loot from them . Following military confrontation in 1684 , though the Iroquois negotiated a peace treaty with New France governor Le Febvre de la Barre , the treaty stated the Iroquois were free to attack the western Indians . The French Crown objected to the treaty , and replaced <unk> with the Marquis de Denonville . He was less sympathetic to native relations , and did not pay attention to the Iroquois @-@ Algonquian tensions . In part , the Iroquois attacked the French because they were not willing to accept constraints against their warfare related to traditional Iroquois enemies . 
 What were known as " mourning wars " were also an important cultural factor in native warfare . Natives fought war to “ avenge perceived wrongs committed by one people against another ” . These mourning wars were also a means to replace the dead within a native community . In times of war , natives would capture members of another native group and adopt them in order to rebuild their society . When new diseases such as smallpox killed large numbers of native people within their communities , survivors were motivated to warfare in order to take captives to rebuild . 
 = = = Economic motives = = = 
 What the Iroquois wanted was not war , but instead a better share of the fur trade . To serve as punishment for attacks on French fur fleets , New France ordered two expeditions under Courcelles and Tracy into Mohawk territory in 1666 . These expeditions burned villages and destroyed much of the Mohawk winter corn supply . In addition , Denonville ’ s 1687 invasion of the Seneca nation country destroyed approximately 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 bushels of corn , crippling the Iroquois economy . This kind of aggression served as fuel for the Iroquois ’ retaliation that was to come . 
 Following two decades of uneasy peace , Britain and France declared war against one another in 1689 . Despite the 1669 Treaty of Whitehall , in which European forces agreed that Continental conflicts would not disrupt colonial peace and neutrality , the war was fought primarily by proxy in New France and New England . The British of New York prompted local Iroquois warriors to attack New France 's undefended settlements . While the British were preparing to engage in acts of warfare , the inhabitants of New France were ill prepared to defend against the Indian attacks ” due to the isolation of the farms and villages . Denonville was quoted as saying “ If we have a war , nothing can save the country but a miracle of God , ” . 
 = = The attack = = 
 On the rainy morning of August 5 , 1689 , Iroquois warriors used surprise to launch their nighttime raid against the undefended settlement of Lachine . They traveled up the Saint Lawrence River by boat , crossed Lake Saint @-@ Louis , and landed on the south shore of Montreal Island . While the colonists slept , the invaders surrounded their homes and waited for their leader to signal when the attack should begin . They attacked the homes , breaking down doors and windows , and dragging the colonists outside , where many were killed . When some of the colonists barricaded themselves within the village 's structures , the attackers set fire to the buildings and waited for the settlers to flee the flames . According to a 1992 article , the Iroquois , wielding weapons such as the tomahawk , killed 24 French and took more than 70 prisoners . Other sources , such as Encyclopædia Britannica , claim that 250 settlers and soldiers lost their lives during the “ Massacre . ” The Iroquois wanted to avenge the 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 bushels of corn burned by the French , but since they were unable to reach the food stores in Montreal , they kidnapped and killed the Lachine crop producers instead . Lachine was the main departure point for westward @-@ traveling fur traders , which may have provided extra motivation for the Mohawk attack . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Word of the attack spread when one of the Lachine survivors reached a local garrison , three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away , and notified the soldiers of the events . In response to the attack , the French mobilized 200 soldiers , under the command of Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase , along with 100 armed civilians and some soldiers from nearby forts Rémy , Rolland and La Présentation , to marched against the Iroquois . They defended some of the fleeing colonists from their Mohawk pursuers , but just prior to reaching Lachine , the armed forces were recalled to Fort Rolland by order of Governor Denonville . He was trying to pacify the local Iroquois inhabitants . Governor Denonville had 700 soldiers at his disposal within the Montreal barracks , and might have overtaken the Iroquois forces . He decided to follow a diplomatic route . 
 Numerous attacks from both sides followed , but none were fatal , and the two groups quickly realized the futility of their attempts to drive the other out . In February of 1690 , the French began peace negotiations with the Iroquois . The French returned captured natives in exchange for the beginnings of peace talks . Through the 1690s , there were no major French or native raids and , even against the will of the English , peace talks continued . This time of relative peace eventually led to the Montreal Treaty of 1701 , by which the Iroquois promised to remain neutral in case of war between the French and English . 
 Following the events at Lachine , Denonville was recalled to France for matters unrelated to the massacre , and Louis de Buade de Frontenac took over governorship of Montreal in October 1689 . Frontenac launched raids of vengeance against the English colonists to the south " in Canadien style " by attacking during the winter months of 1690 . 
 = = Bias = = 
 Francis Parkman , an American historian who was one of the first to write about natives within the colonial historical narrative , argues that the Iroquois wars “ were products of an ‘ insensate fury ’ and ‘ mad ambition ’ " . He said that the Iroquois waged wars due to the extinction of the beaver , their growing dependence on European goods , and resentment at the extermination of native culture . Parkman argues that the Iroquois had become so dependent on European goods that they needed these items in order to survive . In his research , Parkman had no evidence to support his claims . He assumed that the natives ’ culture was inferior to the British @-@ American , and overlooked potential reasons for the Iroquois attacks . Parkman ’ s interpretation neglected to explain why the Iroquois had waged war against other native groups as well . Parkman ’ s view would later on be dismissed due to its ethnocentric interpretation of the events . 
 Jose Brandao , a historian specializing in North American Native history , suggests that contemporary analyses of the Lachine Massacre continue to demonstrate cultural bias . Brandao criticizes historians Parkman , Charles McIlwain , and George Hunt for citing the growing dependence on European goods ( which were , according to these historians , viewed by the Iroquois as superior to other goods ) as a reason for Iroquois dissatisfaction and violence . Brando dismisses this theory as a largely ethnocentric interpretation with little evidence to support it . Brandao also dismisses Hunt ’ s suggestion that natives , similar to the Europeans , waged wars for economic reasons . 
 = = Historical accounts = = 
 According to historian Jean @-@ Francois Lozier , the factors influencing the course of war and peace throughout the region of New @-@ France were not exclusive to the relations between the French and Iroquois , or those between the French and British crowns . A number of factors provide context for the Lachine Massacre . 
 Sources of information regarding victims of the Iroquois in New France are the writings of Jesuit priests ; the state registry of parishes in Quebec , Trois @-@ <unk> , and Montreal ; letters written by Marie <unk> ( French : Mère Marie de l ’ Incarnation ) ; and the writings of Samuel Champlain . However , the accuracy of these sources and reports vary . For instance , in the town of Trois @-@ <unk> , approximately one third of deaths attributed to the Iroquois are missing names . According to Canadian historian John A. Dickinson , although the cruelty of the Iroquois was real , their threat was neither as constant nor terrible as the sources of the time represented , but they were feeling under siege . 
 European accounts of the Lachine massacre come from two primary sources , survivors of the attack , and Catholic missionaries in the area . 
 Initial reports inflated the Lachine death toll significantly . Colby arrived at the total number of dead , 24 , by examining Catholic parish registers before and after the attack . French Catholic accounts of the attack were recorded . François Vachon de Belmont , the fifth superior of the <unk> of Montreal , wrote in his History of Canada : 
 After this total victory , the unhappy band of prisoners was subjected to all the rage which the cruellest vengeance could inspire in these savages . They were taken to the far side of Lake St. Louis by the victorious army , which shouted ninety times while crossing to indicate the number of prisoners or scalps they had taken , saying , we have been tricked , <unk> , we will trick you as well . Once they had landed , they lit fires , planted stakes in the ground , burned five Frenchmen , roasted six children , and grilled some others on the coals and ate them . 
 Surviving prisoners of the Lachine massacre reported that 48 of their colleagues were tortured , burned and eaten shortly after being taken captive . Further , many survivors showed evidence of ritual torture and recounted their experiences . Following the attack , the French colonists retrieved many English @-@ made weapons which the Mohawk had left behind in their retreat from the island . The evidence of English arming the Mohawk incited a long @-@ standing hatred of the English colonists of New York and demands for revenge . Iroquois accounts of the attack have not been recovered , as they were recounted in oral histories . French sources reported that only three of the attackers were killed . Because all written accounts of the attack were by the French victims , their reports of cannibalism and parents being forced to throw their children onto burning fires may be exaggerated or apocryphal . At the same time , the Mohawk and Iroquois used ritual torture after warfare , sometimes to honor the bravery of enemy warriors . It was common practice among native tribes at the time . 
 = Velociraptor = 
 Velociraptor ( / <unk> / ; meaning " swift <unk> " in Latin ) is a genus of dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived approximately 75 to 71 million years ago during the later part of the Cretaceous Period . Two species are currently recognized , although others have been assigned in the past . The type species is V. mongoliensis ; fossils of this species have been discovered in Mongolia . A second species , V. osmolskae , was named in 2008 for skull material from Inner Mongolia , China . 
 Smaller than other dromaeosaurids like Deinonychus and Achillobator , Velociraptor nevertheless shared many of the same anatomical features . It was a bipedal , feathered carnivore with a long tail and an enlarged sickle @-@ shaped claw on each hindfoot , which is thought to have been used to tackle prey . Velociraptor can be distinguished from other dromaeosaurids by its long and low skull , with an upturned snout . 
 Velociraptor ( commonly shortened to " raptor " ) is one of the dinosaur genera most familiar to the general public due to its prominent role in the Jurassic Park motion picture series . Today , Velociraptor is well known to paleontologists , with over a dozen described fossil skeletons , the most of any dromaeosaurid . One particularly famous specimen preserves a Velociraptor locked in combat with a Protoceratops . 
 = = Description = = 
 Velociraptor was a mid @-@ sized dromaeosaurid , with adults measuring up to 2 @.@ 07 m ( 6 @.@ 8 ft ) long , 0 @.@ 5 m ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) high at the hip , and weighing up to 15 kg ( 33 lb ) . The skull , which grew up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) long , was uniquely up @-@ curved , concave on the upper surface and convex on the lower . The jaws were lined with 26 – 28 widely spaced teeth on each side , each more strongly serrated on the back edge than the front . 
 Velociraptor , like other dromaeosaurids , had a large manus ( ' hand ' ) with three strongly curved claws , which were similar in construction and flexibility to the wing bones of modern birds . The second digit was the longest of the three digits present , while the first was shortest . The structure of the carpal ( wrist ) bones prevented pronation of the wrist and forced the ' hands ' to be held with the palmar surface facing inwards ( medially ) , not downwards . The first digit of the foot , as in other theropods , was a small dewclaw . However , whereas most theropods had feet with three digits contacting the ground , dromaeosaurids like Velociraptor walked on only their third and fourth digits . The second digit , for which Velociraptor is most famous , was highly modified and held retracted off the ground . It bore a relatively large , sickle @-@ shaped claw , typical of dromaeosaurid and troodontid dinosaurs . This enlarged claw , which could grow to over 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) long around its outer edge , was most likely a predatory device used to tear into or restrain struggling prey . 
 As in other dromaeosaurs , Velociraptor tails had long bony projections ( prezygapophyses ) on the upper surfaces of the vertebrae , as well as ossified tendons underneath . The prezygapophyses began on the tenth tail ( caudal ) vertebra and extended forward to brace four to ten additional vertebrae , depending on position in the tail . These were once thought to fully stiffen the tail , forcing the entire tail to act as a single rod @-@ like unit . However , at least one specimen has preserved a series of intact tail vertebrae curved sideways into an S @-@ shape , suggesting that there was considerably more horizontal flexibility than once thought . 
 In 2007 , paleontologists reported the discovery of quill knobs on a well @-@ preserved Velociraptor mongoliensis forearm from Mongolia , confirming the presence of feathers in this species . 
 = = = Feathers = = = 
 Fossils of dromaeosaurids more primitive than Velociraptor are known to have had feathers covering their bodies and fully developed feathered wings . The fact that the ancestors of Velociraptor were feathered and possibly capable of flight had long suggested to paleontologists that Velociraptor bore feathers as well , since even flightless birds today retain most of their feathers . In September 2007 , researchers found quill knobs on the forearm of a Velociraptor found in Mongolia . These bumps on bird wing bones show where feathers anchor , and their presence on Velociraptor indicate it too had feathers . According to paleontologist Alan Turner , 
 A lack of quill knobs does not necessarily mean that a dinosaur did not have feathers . Finding quill knobs on Velociraptor , though , means that it definitely had feathers . This is something we 'd long suspected , but no one had been able to prove . 
 Co @-@ author Mark Norell , Curator @-@ in @-@ Charge of fossil reptiles , amphibians and birds at the American Museum of Natural History , also weighed in on the discovery , saying : 
 The more that we learn about these animals the more we find that there is basically no difference between birds and their closely related dinosaur ancestors like velociraptor . Both have wishbones , brooded their nests , possess hollow bones , and were covered in feathers . If animals like velociraptor were alive today our first impression would be that they were just very unusual looking birds . 
 According to Turner and co @-@ authors Norell and Peter Makovicky , quill knobs are not found in all prehistoric birds , and their absence does not mean that an animal was not feathered – flamingos , for example , have no quill knobs . However , their presence confirms that Velociraptor bore modern @-@ style wing feathers , with a rachis and vane formed by barbs . The forearm specimen on which the quill knobs were found ( specimen number IGM 100 / 981 ) represents an animal 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 @.@ 9 feet ) in length and 15 kilograms ( 33 pounds ) in weight . Based on the spacing of the six preserved knobs in this specimen , the authors suggested that Velociraptor bore 14 secondaries ( wing feathers stemming from the forearm ) , compared with 12 or more in Archaeopteryx , 18 in Microraptor , and 10 in Rahonavis . This type of variation in the number of wing feathers between closely related species , the authors asserted , is to be expected , given similar variation among modern birds . 
 Turner and colleagues interpreted the presence of feathers on Velociraptor as evidence against the idea that the larger , flightless maniraptorans lost their feathers secondarily due to larger body size . Furthermore , they noted that quill knobs are almost never found in flightless bird species today , and that their presence in Velociraptor ( presumed to have been flightless due to its relatively large size and short forelimbs ) is evidence that the ancestors of dromaeosaurids could fly , making Velociraptor and other large members of this family secondarily flightless , though it is possible the large wing feathers inferred in the ancestors of Velociraptor had a purpose other than flight . The feathers of the flightless Velociraptor may have been used for display , for covering their nests while brooding , or for added speed and thrust when running up inclined slopes . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 During an American Museum of Natural History expedition to the Outer Mongolian Gobi Desert , on 11 August 1923 Peter Kaisen recovered the first Velociraptor fossil known to science : a crushed but complete skull , associated with one of the raptorial second toe claws ( AMNH <unk> ) . In 1924 , museum president Henry Fairfield Osborn designated the skull and claw ( which he assumed to come from the hand ) as the type specimen of his new genus , Velociraptor . This name is derived from the Latin words velox ( ' swift ' ) and raptor ( ' robber ' or ' plunderer ' ) and refers to the animal 's cursorial nature and carnivorous diet . Osborn named the type species V. mongoliensis after its country of origin . Earlier that year , Osborn had mentioned the animal in a popular press article , under the name " <unk> <unk> " ( not to be confused with the similarly named Oviraptor ) . However , because the name " <unk> " was not published in a scientific journal or accompanied by a formal description , it is considered a nomen nudum ( ' naked name ' ) , and the name Velociraptor retains priority . 
 While North American teams were shut out of communist Mongolia during the Cold War , expeditions by Soviet and Polish scientists , in collaboration with Mongolian colleagues , recovered several more specimens of Velociraptor . The most famous is part of the famous " Fighting Dinosaurs " specimen ( <unk> 100 / 25 ) , discovered by a Polish @-@ Mongolian team in 1971 . This fossil preserves a single Velociraptor in the midst of battle against a lone Protoceratops . This specimen is considered a national treasure of Mongolia , although in 2000 it was loaned to the American Museum of Natural History in New York City for a temporary exhibition . 
 Between 1988 and 1990 , a joint Chinese @-@ Canadian team discovered Velociraptor remains in northern China . American scientists returned to Mongolia in 1990 , and a joint Mongolian @-@ American expedition to the Gobi , led by the American Museum of Natural History and the Mongolian Academy of Sciences , turned up several well @-@ preserved skeletons . One such specimen , IGM 100 / 980 , was nicknamed " <unk> " by Norell 's team because the fairly complete specimen was found without its skull ( an allusion to the Washington Irving character Ichabod Crane ) . This specimen may belong to Velociraptor mongoliensis , but Norell and Makovicky concluded that it was not complete enough to say for sure , and it awaits a formal description . 
 <unk> and a lacrimal ( the main tooth @-@ bearing bones of the upper jaw , and the bone that forms the anterior margin of the eye socket , respectively ) recovered in 1999 by the Sino @-@ Belgian Dinosaur Expeditions were found to pertain to Velociraptor , but not to the type species V. mongoliensis . Pascal Godefroit and colleagues named these bones V. osmolskae ( for Polish paleontologist Halszka Osmólska ) in 2008 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Velociraptor is a member of the group <unk> , a derived sub @-@ group of the larger family Dromaeosauridae . It is often placed within its own " subfamily " , Velociraptorinae . In phylogenetic taxonomy , Velociraptorinae is usually defined as " all dromaeosaurs more closely related to Velociraptor than to Dromaeosaurus . " However , dromaeosaurid classification is highly variable . Originally , the subfamily Velociraptorinae was erected solely to contain Velociraptor . Other analyses have often included other genera , usually Deinonychus and Saurornitholestes , and more recently Tsaagan . However , several studies published during the 2010s , including expanded versions of the analyses that found support for Velociraptorinae , have failed to resolve it as a distinct group , but rather have suggested it is a paraphyletic grade which gave rise to the Dromaeosaurinae . 
 In the past , other dromaeosaurid species , including Deinonychus antirrhopus and Saurornitholestes langstoni , have sometimes been classified in the genus Velociraptor . Since Velociraptor was the first to be named , these species were renamed Velociraptor antirrhopus and V. langstoni . However , the only currently recognized species of Velociraptor are V. mongoliensis and V. osmolskae . 
 When first described in 1924 , Velociraptor was placed in the family Megalosauridae , as was the case with most carnivorous dinosaurs at the time ( Megalosauridae , like Megalosaurus , functioned as a sort of ' <unk> ' taxon , where many unrelated species were grouped together ) . As dinosaur discoveries multiplied , Velociraptor was later recognized as a dromaeosaurid . All dromaeosaurids have also been referred to the family <unk> by at least one author ( which would , in effect , make Velociraptor a flightless bird ) . 
 The cladogram below follows a 2015 analysis by paleontologists Robert DePalma , David Burnham , Larry Martin , Peter Larson , and Robert Bakker , using updated data from the Theropod Working Group . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Predatory behavior = = = 
 The " Fighting Dinosaurs " specimen , found in 1971 , preserves a Velociraptor mongoliensis and Protoceratops andrewsi in combat and provides direct evidence of predatory behavior . When originally reported , it was hypothesized that the two animals drowned . However , as the animals were preserved in ancient sand dune deposits , it is now thought that the animals were buried in sand , either from a collapsing dune or in a sandstorm . Burial must have been extremely fast , judging from the lifelike poses in which the animals were preserved . Parts of the Protoceratops are missing , which has been seen as evidence of scavenging by other animals . Comparisons between the scleral rings of Velociraptor , Protoceratops , and modern birds and reptiles indicates that Velociraptor may have been nocturnal , while Protoceratops may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day during short intervals , suggesting that the fight may have occurred at twilight or during low @-@ light conditions . 
 The distinctive claw , on the second digit of dromaeosaurids , has traditionally been depicted as a slashing weapon ; its assumed use being to cut and disembowel prey . In the " Fighting Dinosaurs " specimen , the Velociraptor lies underneath , with one of its sickle claws apparently embedded in the throat of its prey , while the beak of Protoceratops is clamped down upon the right forelimb of its attacker . This suggests Velociraptor may have used its sickle claw to pierce vital organs of the throat , such as the jugular vein , carotid artery , or trachea ( windpipe ) , rather than slashing the abdomen . The inside edge of the claw was rounded and not unusually sharp , which may have precluded any sort of cutting or slashing action , although only the bony core of the claw is known . The thick abdominal wall of skin and muscle of large prey species would have been difficult to slash without a specialized cutting surface . The slashing hypothesis was tested during a 2005 BBC documentary , The Truth About Killer Dinosaurs . The producers of the program created an artificial Velociraptor leg with a sickle claw and used a pork belly to simulate the dinosaur 's prey . Though the sickle claw did penetrate the abdominal wall , it was unable to tear it open , indicating that the claw was not used to disembowel prey . 
 Remains of Deinonychus , a closely related dromaeosaurid , have commonly been found in aggregations of several individuals . Deinonychus has also been found in association with a large herbivore , Tenontosaurus , which has been seen as evidence of cooperative hunting . The only solid evidence for social behavior among dromaeosaurids comes from a Chinese trackway of fossil footprints , which shows six individuals of a large species moving as a group , though no evidence of cooperative hunting was found . Although many isolated fossils of Velociraptor have been found in Mongolia , none were closely associated with any other individuals . Therefore , while Velociraptor is commonly depicted as a pack hunter , as in Jurassic Park , there is only limited fossil evidence to support this theory for dromaeosaurids in general , and none specific to Velociraptor itself . The pack hunting theory was based on a discovery of several specimens of Deinonychus found around the remains of a Tenontosaurus . No other group of dromaeosaurids has been found in close association . 
 In 2011 , Denver Fowler and colleagues suggested a new method by which dromaeosaurs like Velociraptor and similar dromaeosaurs may have captured and restrained prey . This model , known as the " raptor prey restraint " ( RPR ) model of predation , proposes that dromaeosaurs killed their prey in a manner very similar to extant accipitrid birds of prey : by leaping onto their quarry , pinning it under their body weight , and gripping it tightly with the large , sickle @-@ shaped claws . Like accipitrids , the dromaeosaur would then begin to feed on the animal while still alive , until it eventually died from blood loss and organ failure . This proposal is based primarily on comparisons between the morphology and proportions of the feet and legs of dromaeosaurs to several groups of extant birds of prey with known predatory behaviors . Fowler found that the feet and legs of dromaeosaurs most closely resemble those of eagles and hawks , especially in terms of having an enlarged second claw and a similar range of grasping motion . The short metatarsus and foot strength , however , would have been more similar to that of owls . The RPR method of predation would be consistent with other aspects of Velociraptor 's anatomy , such as their unusual jaw and arm morphology . The arms , which could exert a lot of force but were likely covered in long feathers , may have been used as flapping stabilizers for balance while atop a struggling prey animal , along with the stiff counterbalancing tail . The jaws , thought by Fowler and colleagues to be comparatively weak , would have been useful for row saw motion bites like the modern day Komodo dragon , which also has a weak bite , to finish of its prey if the kicks weren 't powerful enough . These predatory adaptations working together may also have implications for the origin of flapping in paravians . 
 = = = Scavenging behavior = = = 
 In 2010 , Hone and colleagues published a paper on their 2008 discovery of shed teeth of what they believed to be a Velociraptor near a tooth @-@ marked jaw bone of what they believed to be a Protoceratops in the Bayan Mandahu Formation . The authors concluded that the find represented " late @-@ stage carcass consumption by Velociraptor " as the predator would have eaten other parts of a freshly killed Protoceratops before biting in the jaw area . The evidence was seen as supporting the inference from the " Fighting Dinosaurs " fossil that Protoceratops was part of the diet of Velociraptor . In 2012 , Hone and colleagues published a paper that described a Velociraptor specimen with a long bone of an azhdarchid pterosaur in its gut . This was interpreted as showing scavenging behaviour . 
 = = = Metabolism = = = 
 Velociraptor was warm @-@ blooded to some degree , as it required a significant amount of energy to hunt . Modern animals that possess feathery or furry coats , like Velociraptor did , tend to be warm @-@ blooded , since these coverings function as insulation . However , bone growth rates in dromaeosaurids and some early birds suggest a more moderate metabolism , compared with most modern warm @-@ blooded mammals and birds . The kiwi is similar to dromaeosaurids in anatomy , feather type , bone structure and even the narrow anatomy of the nasal passages ( usually a key indicator of metabolism ) . The kiwi is a highly active , if specialized , flightless bird , with a stable body temperature and a fairly low resting metabolic rate , making it a good model for the metabolism of primitive birds and dromaeosaurids . 
 = = = Pathology = = = 
 One <unk> mongoliensis skull bears two parallel rows of small punctures that match the spacing and size of Velociraptor teeth . Scientists believe that the wound was likely inflicted by another Velociraptor during a fight . Further , because the fossil bone shows no sign of healing near the bite wounds , the injury probably killed it . Another specimen , found with the bones of an azhdarchid pterosaur within its stomach cavity , was carrying or recovering from an injury sustained to its ribs . From evidence on the pterosaur bones , which were devoid of pitting or deformations from digestion , the Velociraptor died shortly after , possibly from the earlier injury . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 All known specimens of Velociraptor mongoliensis were discovered in the Djadochta Formation ( also spelled <unk> ) , in the Mongolian province of Ömnögovi . Species of Velociraptor have also been reported from the slightly younger Barun Goyot Formation of Mongolia , though these are indeterminate and may belong to a related genus instead . These geologic formations are estimated to date back to the Campanian stage ( between 83 and 70 million years ago ) of the Late Cretaceous Epoch . 
 V. mongoliensis has been found at many of the most famous and prolific Djadochta localities . The type specimen was discovered at the Flaming Cliffs site ( also known as <unk> <unk> and <unk> Usu ) , while the " Fighting Dinosaurs " were found at the <unk> locality ( also known as <unk> <unk> ) . The well @-@ known Barun Goyot localities of <unk> and <unk> Tsav have also produced remains which may belong to Velociraptor or a related genus . Teeth and partial remains attributed to juvenile V. mongoliensis have also been reported from the Bayan Mandahu Formation , a prolific site in Inner Mongolia , China that is contemporaneous with the Djadochta Formation . However , these fossils had not been prepared or studied as of 2008 . A partial adult skull from the Bayan Mandahu Formation has been assigned to a distinct species , Velociraptor osmolskae . 
 = = = Paleoecology = = = 
 All of the fossil sites that have yielded Velociraptor remains preserve an arid environment with fields of sand dunes and only intermittent streams , although the younger Barun Goyot environment seems to have been slightly wetter than the older Djadochta . The posture of some complete fossils , as well as the mode of preservation most show within structureless sandstone deposits , may show that a number of specimens were buried alive during sandstorm events common to the three environments . 
 Many of the same genera were present across these formations , though they varied at the species level . For example , the Djadochta was inhabited by Velociraptor mongoliensis , Protoceratops andrewsi , and Pinacosaurus grangeri , while the Bayan Mandahu was home to Velociraptor osmolskae , Protoceratops <unk> , and Pinacosaurus <unk> . These differences in species composition may be due a natural barrier separating the two formations , which are relatively close to each other geographically . However , given the lack of any known barrier which would cause the specific faunal compositions found in these areas , it is more likely that those differences indicate a slight time difference . 
 Other dinosaurs known from the same locality as V. mongoliensis include the troodontid <unk> mongoliensis , the oviraptorid Oviraptor <unk> , and the dromaeosaurid Mahakala <unk> . V. osmolskae lived alongside the ceratopsian species Magnirostris <unk> , as well as the oviraptorid <unk> <unk> and the dromaeosaurid <unk> <unk> . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Velociraptor are well known for their role as vicious and cunning killers thanks to their portrayal in the 1990 novel Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton and its 1993 film adaptation , directed by Steven Spielberg . The " raptors " portrayed in Jurassic Park were actually modeled after the closely related dromaeosaurid Deinonychus . Paleontologists in both the novel and film excavate a skeleton in Montana , far from the central Asian range of Velociraptor but characteristic of the Deinonychus range . A character in Crichton 's novel also states that " Deinonychus is now considered one of the velociraptors " , which suggests that Crichton used the controversial taxonomy proposed by Gregory S. Paul , even though the " raptors " in the novel are at another point referred to as V. mongoliensis . Crichton met with the discoverer of Deinonychus , John Ostrom , several times at Yale University to discuss details of the animal 's possible range of behaviors and appearance . Crichton at one point apologetically told Ostrom that he had decided to use the name Velociraptor in place of Deinonychus because the former name was " more dramatic " . According to Ostrom , Crichton stated that the Velociraptor of the novel was based on Deinonychus in almost every detail , and that only the name had been changed . The Jurassic Park filmmakers also requested all of Ostrom 's published papers on Deinonychus during production . They portrayed the animals with the size , proportions , and snout shape of Deinonychus rather than Velociraptor . 
 Production on Jurassic Park began before the discovery of the large dromaeosaurid Utahraptor was made public in 1991 , but as Jody Duncan wrote about this discovery : " Later , after we had designed and built the Raptor , there was a discovery of a Raptor skeleton in Utah , which they labeled ' super @-@ slasher ' . They had uncovered the largest Velociraptor to date - and it measured five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ feet tall , just like ours . So we designed it , we built it , and then they discovered it . That still boggles my mind . " Spielberg was particularly pleased with the discovery of the Utahraptor because of the boost it gave to the velociraptors in his film . Spielberg 's name was briefly considered for naming of the new dinosaur . In reality , Velociraptor , like many other maniraptoran theropods , was covered in feathers . Jurassic Park and its sequel The Lost World : Jurassic Park were released before this discovery , so the creatures in both films are depicted as featherless with scales all over in the manner of modern reptiles . For Jurassic Park III , the male Velociraptor was given quill @-@ like structures along the back of the head and neck . While this was the extent to which CGI effects were able to render feathers at the time , the structures do not resemble the down @-@ like feathers real @-@ life dromaeosaurids bore or the fully developed arm feathers , akin to the wing feathers of modern birds , borne by Velociraptor . 
 = This Used to Be My Playground = 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " is a song recorded by American singer Madonna . It is the theme for the film A League of Their Own , which starred Madonna , and portrayed a fictionalized account of the real @-@ life All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League . Madonna was asked to record a song for the film 's soundtrack . At that time she was busy recording her fifth studio album , Erotica , with producer Shep Pettibone . They worked on some ideas and came up with " This Used to Be My Playground " in two days . Once presented to director Penny Marshall 's team , the song was released as a standalone single on June 16 , 1992 , by Warner Bros. Records . However , it was not available on the film 's soundtrack due to contractual obligations and was later added to the Olympics @-@ inspired Barcelona Gold compilation album , released that summer . The song was included on Madonna 's 1995 ballads compilation Something to Remember . 
 Written and produced by Madonna and Pettibone , " This Used to Be My Playground " was the first time that Pettibone worked with live string arrangement . Madonna recorded the song on a Shure SM57 microphone , with instrumentation from piano , organ , strings and a basic drum sounds . During the final recording , the duo had to redo the whole orchestra section to tailor it for the song . " This Used to Be My Playground " starts with a keyboard introduction and strings , with Madonna singing in expressive but subdued vocals . Its verse and chorus merge into each other for having a continuity in the song , but the track ends abruptly . Lyrically it discusses visiting one 's childhood places and not letting go of the past . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , who noted it as an essential addition in Madonna 's repertoire . The song earned the singer a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Original Song . It was a commercial success , reaching the top of the charts on the US Billboard Hot 100 ; the track was Madonna 's tenth chart @-@ topping single , breaking her tie with Whitney Houston to become the female artist with the most number one singles at that time . It also reached the top of the charts in Canada , Finland , Italy and Sweden , while reaching the top @-@ ten of the charts in Australia , Belgium , France , Germany , Ireland , Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . Even though the song was commercially successful , Madonna has never performed it in any of her concert tours , nor included it on her greatest hits albums , GHV2 ( 2001 ) and Celebration ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In 1992 , Madonna starred in the Penny Marshall directed film A League of Their Own , which portrayed a fictionalized account of the real @-@ life All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League ( AAGPBL ) . Columbia Records representatives presented music supervisor Jay Landers with the film 's script . Together with Michael Dilbeck , head of music for Columbia Pictures , they decided to compose a soundtrack for the film . According to Landers , Marshall being well connected to the music community also helped them choose the artists they wanted to work with . The director wanted the music and songs to be performed by contemporary artists , but catering to the period of 1943 – 44 , which was the film 's timeline . Carole King had already written the opening song for A League of Their Own , and Madonna being associated with it , Columbia wanted her to record another song . Lars recalled that there was some " early hesitation " if Madonna 's character should be kept the same or separated from that in the film and the song , and in the end they decided to go with the latter concept . 
 After the shooting was over , Madonna was busy in the recording sessions for her fifth studio album , Erotica with producer Shep Pettibone . Throughout January – March 1992 , Madonna and Pettibone worked on demos for the album and finally decided on 15 of them . When Lars called Madonna and asked her to record a song for the film , the singer and Pettibone had just completed working on the ballad " Rain " . Madonna admitted that she did not have any material for the film and Lars explained that Marshall wanted only a ballad . Pettibone composed a track the same night and Madonna had some ideas she wanted to incorporate . During an interview with The Guardian , Madonna described the process as " assignment writing " since it was completely separate from her Erotica sessions . It took them two days to write and produce the song , and the final version was submitted to Marshall 's team . Lars recalled that they " immediately loved it ... We all thought it would be a very successful record and we knew right away it would be perfect . " 
 Due to contractual reasons , the track could not be included on the official A League of Their Own soundtrack ; instead , it was included on the compilation Barcelona Gold , which was released to promote the 1992 Barcelona Summer Olympics . " This Used to Be My Playground " was officially released as a standalone single to promote the film , on June 16 , 1992 , by Warner Bros. Records . The song was later included on the 1995 ballad compilation album Something to Remember . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Recording the track was a new experience for Pettibone since it was the first time that he worked with live musicians and arrangements . Pettibone took the demo of the song , and added live drums , piano and strings to it . They did not have any strings written originally for the song , and chose composer Jeremy Lubbock for the music arrangement ; Lubbock had previously worked with Madonna on her soundtrack album I 'm Breathless ( 1990 ) . Madonna recorded the song on a Shure SM57 microphone , with the melody being played over and over again , accompanied by the piano , organ , strings and a basic rim @-@ looping sound on a portable Macintosh computer . Pettibone spent the rest of the recording session working on the verses and final structure of " This Used to Be My Playground " was completed . The day after the song was finished , Madonna traveled to Oregon to work on her next film , Body of Evidence , giving Pettibone the time to finish off the songs for Erotica . 
 The duo met again in May 1992 at Oceanway Studios in Los Angeles to complete the orchestration of the song . Lubbock 's arrangement was chosen for adding the final touches and the recording started . However , Madonna and Pettibone did not like the orchestra parts and wanted to redo the whole composition . The producer recalled , " Madonna and I had to change the whole arrangement , right there in the studio , with a full orchestra sitting there getting paid for taking up space — around $ 15 @,@ 000 for three hours , $ 3000 for every half @-@ hour over that . And of course , Lubbock was talking to two people who didn 't know a C from a B natural . The pressure was on " . So they stood near Pettibone 's Mac and sang the notes , with Lubbock correcting them . The total recording was finished of in 2 hours and 58 minutes , thereby saving to pay the orchestra the extra fees . The last recording of the song was on Memorial Day where Madonna re @-@ did the lead vocals and improved them . Together they did some final edits of the track and finished it . 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " features a keyboard introduction , followed by the strings and the song starts . Musically , the song is set in the time signature of common time with a slow tempo of 77 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of G minor with Madonna vocals ranging from the chords of G3 to B ♭ 4 . The song follows a basic sequence of Gm – F / G – E ♭ maj7 – Dm7 – <unk> – G as its chord progression . The chords have an unexpected flow in terms of the beginning and the ending , moving from E ♭ down to Gm and momentarily to F major , then going back to the previous sequence again . The song has a lush , romantic quality , with the melody going through different ranges and peaks , and the verse and the chorus flow into each other , making it sound seamless . Madonna sings in subdued but expressive vocals , aided by the strings and background singers during the third verse . Towards the end the singer 's voice is double tracked and produces little amount of roughness . Lyrically the song talks about Madonna revisiting the places from her childhood ( " This used to be my playground / This used to be my childhood dream " ) , and evokes the songwriting on her fourth studio album , Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . The singer is in a dilemma between choosing the past and letting go , concluding that the latter is difficult ( " Say goodbye to yesterday ( the dream ) / Those are words I 'll never say ( I 'll never say ) ) " . The track has a sudden ending with the orchestra and the backing vocal uttering " Wishing you were here with me " , the line addressed to Madonna 's mother . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 After its release , " This Used to Be My Playground " received acclaim from music critics . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , called the track a " melancholic performance " . Michelle Morgan , author of the book Madonna , described it as a " beautiful ballad " . Similarly , Humberto Quiroga <unk> called it one of Madonna 's best ballads in his essay <unk> y <unk> de Hombres y Mujeres . Author Rikky Rooksby wrote in his book The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , that the song was appropriate for the film and its nostalgic moment towards the end , showing the characters grown up and reuniting at a museum opened for themselves and the titular league . He called it " one of Madonna 's very best recordings and most expressive single " . While reviewing Something to Remember , author Chris Wade wrote in his book The Music of Madonna , that the song conjured up a " strangely sad , nostalgic feel , reminding ourselves of memories from yesteryear " . He commended Madonna 's vocals calling it as the song 's " premier sound " and adding that the way " she sings and captures the melancholic melody is heartbreaking [ ... ] it 's one of her finest ever ballads . " Encyclopedia Madonnica writer and journalist Matthew Rettenmund noted in the book that the song 's rise to the top of the charts was aided by its " honest delivery and aching sense of loneliness , regret and nostalgia for friendship lost . " 
 Matthew Jacobs from The Huffington Post , placed it at number 32 on his list " The Definitive Ranking Of Madonna Singles " . He wrote : " What 's surprising is that this heartfelt ballad 's release was sandwiched between ' Justify My Love ' and ' Erotica ' , which corroborates the many checkered crowns that Madonna can wear " . Similarly , AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis called it " a quiet predecessor to her most notorious album Erotica " . Promis also believed that the single version of the song was worth of collecting since it was not released in CD version in the United States . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine , called it one of the singer 's " soundtrack gems " . Writing for the Deseret News , Chris Hicks called the song " a lovely change @-@ of @-@ pace number " for Madonna . 
 Louis Virtel , from TheBacklot.com , placed " This Used to Be My Playground " at number 52 of his list " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " . He wrote ; " The theme to Madonna ’ s best movie is nostalgic and sweet , and it gave her a major hit that utilized the <unk> qualities in her voice . " Mary Ann A. <unk> , from the Philippine Daily Inquirer , called it one of the singer 's " alternative tunes [ ... ] that can be as romantic and touching as any ballad " . Liz Smith , from The Toledo Blade , called it an " exquisite ballad " . On his review of the compilation Barcelona Gold , The Daily Gazette 's Bill Rice wrote : " Madonna 's plaintive single ' This Used to Be My Playground ' , is one medal winner " . The song was nominated for a Golden Globe award for Best Original Song , but lost to " A Whole New World " from Aladdin . It won two accolades at the ASCAP Awards , in the categories of Most Performed Songs from Motion Pictures and Most Performed Pop Song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " This Used to Be My Playground " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 35 , for the week of July 4 , 1992 . The debut was aided by just airplay points which enabled it to enter the Hot 100 Airplay chart at number 14 . The song received immediate heavy rotation in US radio stations like Hot 97 in New York and Wild 107 in San Francisco . One week later , the song jumped to number 17 on the Hot 100 , having had the largest sales and airplay points of any record on the chart . On August 8 , 1992 , the song reached the top of the chart for one week , becoming Madonna 's tenth number one single , breaking her tie with Whitney Houston as the female artist with the most number one singles at that time . The song replaced " Baby Got Back " by Sir Mix @-@ a @-@ Lot although it was number three on the Hot Singles Sales and Hot 100 Airplay charts . According to Michael Ellis from Billboard , the song edged out " Baby Got Back " by a small margin of chart points . The song spent a total of 20 weeks on the chart and ranked at number 21 on the Hot 100 year end chart for 1992 . 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " also reached peak positions of number two on the Hot 100 Airplay and number four on the Adult Contemporary charts . On September 10 , 1992 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Billboard ranked it at number 22 on their list of " Madonna 's 40 Biggest Hits " on the Hot 100 . In Canada , the song debuted at number 60 on the RPM Top Singles chart on July 4 , 1992 . After seven weeks it reached the top of the chart and was present for a total of 19 weeks . It also reached number two on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart , and reached a peak of number three the week of August 25 , 1992 , and was present on the top 100 for a total of 9 weeks . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on September 1 , 1992 , for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . The single has sold over 275 @,@ 000 copies as of October 2010 . The song also achieved great success across Europe , hitting number one in various countries including Italy , Finland , and Sweden and charting within the top ten in other countries . It resulted in the song achieving a peak of number five on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . In Australia the song reached a peak of number nine on the ARIA Charts and received a gold certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video , directed by Alek Keshishian , was filmed in June 1992 at Raleigh Studios in Hollywood , California and Malibu Beach . It premiered on MTV on June 30 , 1992 , a day before the release of A League of Their Own . The video shows a man viewing a photo album , as Madonna sings in different settings from within the various pictures . Scenes from A League of Their Own also appear on the album during the song 's instrumental break . As the video ends , the man having reached the end of the album , then scrolls backwards through the previous pages . The video was commercially released in 2004 as a bonus feature on the 2 @-@ disc special edition DVD of A League of Their Own . According to Rettenmund , unlike most music videos related to film soundtracks , " This Used to Be My Playground " did not give emphasis on having shots from the film in the video itself . Instead Keshishian and Madonna chose introspection as the theme , with simple images to portray them . Rettenmund notes , " At the end , the man who has been looking back at his scrapbook of Madonna lays his head down , sealing the video with the perfect bit of sadness to resonate with Madonna 's ennui . " 
 The video has been compared to Boy George 's video for his 1987 single , " To Be Reborn " , released less than five years before " This Used to Be My Playground " . In George 's video , he also appears on pages of a photo album , performing the song . George himself stated in his autobiography that he was " furious " after watching Madonna 's video and renamed it " This Used to Be My Video " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " vinyl , Cassette single , Japanese 3 " CD single 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " ( single version ) – 5 : 08 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " ( long version ) – 6 : 03 
 European 12 " vinyl , CD single 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " ( single version ) – 5 : 08 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " ( instrumental version ) – 6 : 54 
 " This Used to Be My Playground " ( long version ) – 6 : 03 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , vocals 
 Shep Pettibone – songwriter , producer , programming 
 Jeremy Lubbock – string arrangement , programming 
 Al Schmitt – engineer , mixing 
 Jeri Heiden – designer 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Something to Remember and the single release of " This Used to Be My Playground " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Talk That Talk ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Talk That Talk " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her 2011 studio album of the same name . It features a rap verse by American rapper Jay @-@ Z , who had previously collaborated with Rihanna on her song " Umbrella " in 2007 and " Run This Town " in 2009 . The song was written by Jay @-@ Z , Ester Dean , Christopher Wallace , Anthony Best , Sean Combs , and Chucky Thompson together with the Norwegian production duo StarGate . Def Jam Recordings serviced the track to urban radio in the United States on January 17 , 2012 , as the third single from Talk That Talk . It was released in France as a CD single on March 26 . " Talk That Talk " is a hip hop song with R & B beats , rough drums and unrefined synths , and has a similar style to Rihanna 's 2010 single " Rude Boy " . 
 The single received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its sound and Rihanna 's collaboration with Jay Z. It was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 2013 ceremony . The song appeared on several charts worldwide ; it reached number 31 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , number 25 on the UK Singles Chart , and the top ten in Israel , Norway , and South Korea . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting digital downloads of over one million copies in the US . Rihanna performed " Talk That Talk " on television shows such as The Jonathan Ross Show and Saturday Night Live , and included it on the set lists of the 2013 Diamonds and the 2014 The Monster Tour with Eminem . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before her sixth studio album Talk That Talk was released in November 2011 , Rihanna announced on her Twitter account that , apart from the song " We Found Love " with Calvin Harris , the album would have only one other featured artist , although she did not mention the artist 's name . Jay Brown , Rihanna 's manager , explained that they preferred to record independently rather than collaborate with other artists . On November 8 , Rihanna confirmed on Twitter that her mentor , American rapper Jay @-@ Z , would appear as a featured artist on the album 's title track . Brown said that the collaboration " happened organically " . 
 " Talk That Talk " is the third major collaboration between Rihanna and Jay @-@ Z , who had worked together on " Umbrella " in 2007 and " Run This Town " in 2009 . " Umbrella " was the lead single from Rihanna 's 2007 album Good Girl Gone Bad and topped the charts in more than ten countries , including the US Billboard Hot 100 , on which it spent seven consecutive weeks at number one . " Run This Town " , which also featured rapper Kanye West , was released as the second single from Jay @-@ Z 's 2009 album The Blueprint 3 . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Talk That Talk " was written by Ester Dean , Jay @-@ Z , StarGate , Anthony Best , Sean Combs , and Chucky Thompson , and produced by StarGate . They had produced Rihanna 's 2010 hit singles " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and " What 's My Name ? " for her fifth album Loud . StarGate told Norwegian website <unk> that it was their first collaboration with Jay @-@ Z and said that they were very satisfied with both the song and each artist 's contribution . " Talk That Talk " was recorded at Roc the Mic Studios and The Jungle City Studios in New York City , Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , and The Hide Out Studios in London . StarGate , Miles Walker , and Mike Anderson served as the song 's recording engineers . Rihanna 's vocals were recorded by Marcos Tovar and Kuk Harrell , who additionally produced them , while Jordan " DJ Swivel " Young recorded Jay @-@ Z 's verses . Additional recording of the song was done in Sofitel Paris Le Faubourg and Savoy London hotels . " Talk That Talk " was mixed by Phil Tan and assistant Daniela Rivera at Ninja Beat Club Studios in Atlanta . Eriksen and Hermansen recorded the song 's instrumentation , and Tim Blacksmith and Danny D. were assigned as its executive producers . 
 In December 2011 , Rihanna asked her fans on Twitter to recommend a song from Talk That Talk for release as the third single . On January 10 , 2012 , she announced that the title track was chosen and also debuted the single 's cover — a black @-@ and @-@ white image in which Rihanna is dressed in " street punk / rockabilly clothes " and crouches against a wall . According to Jazmine Gray of Vibe magazine , the singer 's has an ambiguous facial expression on the cover . On January 17 , Def Jam Recordings serviced " Talk That Talk " to urban contemporary radio stations in the United States . It also impacted US contemporary hit and rhythmic radios on February 14 . On March 26 , " Talk That Talk " was released in France as a CD single , which contained the album version of the song and the Chuckie Extended Remix of " We Found Love " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Talk That Talk " has a length of three minutes and twenty @-@ nine seconds . Time magazine 's Claire Suddath characterized it as a lively hip hop track with a pop hook . It features R & B beats , " hard drums " , unrefined synths , and a sample of the song " I Got a Story to Tell " by rapper The Notorious B.I.G .. 
 Adrian Thrills from the Daily Mail described the song as " slow and sultry " . Similarly , Sam Lansky of MTV Buzzworthy found it sensual and confident , and observed that Rihanna counts when she sings the song 's chorus . IGN 's Chad Grischow wrote that a " fuzzy synth melody " interjects Rihanna 's " sexy plea for pillow talk " , which is complemented by " bling @-@ loving rap from Jay @-@ Z. " Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey felt that its riff is similar to Rihanna 's 2010 single " Rude Boy " . 
 The song begins with a rap verse performed by Jay Z , whose lines include : " I talk big money , I talk big homes / I sell out arenas , I call that getting dome / Million dollar voice , came through phone / We heading to the top , if you coming , come on " . He raps at a slow pace and incorporates both double entendres and humorous remarks , including a sexual reference that Claire Suddath viewed was an indication of Jay Z 's enjoyment on the song : " [ I ] had it by her bladder , she 's like ' Oh I gotta pee ! ' . " Melissa Maerz from Entertainment Weekly remarked that he " even touts their jet @-@ set lifestyle on the title track , bragging that he can fly out to Pisa / Just to get some pizza . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Talk That Talk " was well received by most music critics . Daily Mirror critic Gavin Martin commented that the song has Rihanna " stealing not just Beyoncé 's bootylicious crown but also her husband Jay Z for a frisky exchange against sibilant drum cracks . " Sputnikmusic 's Steve M. felt that it could be a major hit on radio partly because of Jay Z 's guest rap . Reem <unk> of The National similarly felt that " Talk That Talk " , along with " You da One " and " Roc Me Out " , is part of " the winning combination of made @-@ for @-@ radio pop sensibility " . David Griffiths from 4Music found the song to be compelling and viewed it as another successful collaboration between Rihanna and Jay @-@ Z. Lansky from MTV Buzzworthy was not surprised that another collaboration between the two was a success . MTV News ' Jocelyn Vena called it " big and hard with just enough brightness " and felt that the song discusses sexual intercourse more appropriately than " Cockiness ( Love It ) " ; in the latter , Rihanna expresses her desire to have sex while singing the lyrics " Suck my cockiness , lick my persuasion " . 
 Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars and called it an enticing , anthemic club song . In a review of Talk That Talk , Pitchfork Media 's Lindsay Zoladz wrote that it is one of the album 's more lighthearted songs , even though it is not as good as " Umbrella " . Consequence of Sound 's Chris Coplan found Jay Z 's rap unenthusiastic , but said that Rihanna is as emotional and invested in her singing as she was on Saturday Night Live . People magazine 's Chuck Arnold called the song " another moment in the sun . " Julianne Escobedo Shepherd of Spin thought that it is a collaboration that " does not go unnoticed " . On the critical side , Priya Elan of NME wrote that the song is a " gamble that doesn ’ t pay off " . The single was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 2013 Grammy Awards , but lost to " No Church in the Wild " ( 2012 ) by Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West featuring Frank Ocean and The @-@ Dream . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After the release of the album , the song charted in many countries owing to strong digital sales . It debuted and peaked at number 31 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and sold 73 @,@ 000 digital copies , which was the highest debut on the chart for that week . In the week of February 4 , 2012 , " Talk That Talk " re @-@ entered the chart at number 100 . It reached number 36 in the week of March 24 . The song also appeared on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number 63 in the issue dated January 28 . It peaked of number 12 and stayed on the chart for 21 weeks . It was ranked number 73 on the Billboard 's year @-@ end R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . On the Pop Songs chart , the single debuted and peaked at number 26 in the week of April 7 . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting digital downloads of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . " Talk That Talk " debuted and peaked at number 30 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . 
 In Europe , after the release of the album , the song appeared on ten national charts . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number 25 on the Singles Chart , and reached number seven on the R & B Chart . The song made a top @-@ ten debut on the Norwegian Singles Chart and charted at number 11 on the Swiss Singles Chart . It also made top @-@ forty appearances in the Republic of Ireland , New Zealand , and Spain , and also entered the top thirty in Scotland , France , and Denmark . After its release as a single , " Talk That Talk " entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 42 and peaked at number 28 on February 19 . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for selling 70 @,@ 000 digital copies . Following the release of the album , the song debuted in South Korea on the Gaon International Chart at number 22 with sales of 14 @,@ 207 digital copies . The following week , it sold 27 @,@ 169 more copies and peaked at number 9 on the chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Rihanna first performed " Talk That Talk " on the British talk show The Jonathan Ross Show , which aired on March 3 , 2012 . She performed without Jay Z and was also interviewed . On May 5 , Rihanna performed the song on the American comedy show Saturday Night Live as part of a medley that included the original interlude version of " Birthday Cake " . In her performance , she wore an all @-@ black outfit with a giant spider web as her backdrop . She sung a short section of " Birthday Cake " , which transitioned into " Talk That Talk " , of which the latter was performed in its entirety . Rihanna and Jay Z performed " Talk That Talk " together at the 2012 BBC Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend in London . The performance also featured their previous collaborations " Run This Town " and " Umbrella " . In November , she performed the song on the set list of her 777 Tour , a seven @-@ day long promotional tour that supported the release of her 2012 album Unapologetic . " Talk That Talk " was also included on the set list of her 2013 Diamonds World Tour . Rihanna performed the song on her joint tour with rapper Eminem , titled The Monster Tour in 2014 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single 
 " Talk That Talk " ( feat . Jay @-@ Z ) 
 " We Found Love " ( Chuckie Extended Remix ) 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk . 
 Locations 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios and The Jungle City Studios , New York City , New York ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; The Hide Out Studios , London , UK 
 Mixed at Ninja Club Studios , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Pundarikakshan Perumal Temple = 
 Pundarikakshan Perumal Temple or Thiruvellarai a in Thiruvellarai , a village in the outskirts of Tiruchirappalli in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu , is dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu . Constructed in the Dravidian style of architecture , the temple is glorified in the Divya Prabandha , the early medieval Tamil canon of the Azhwar saints from the 6th – 9th centuries AD . It is one of the 108 Divyadesam dedicated to Vishnu , who is worshipped as Pundarikakshan and his consort Lakshmi as Pankajavalli . 
 The temple was built by <unk> Chakravarthy , king of Ayodhya in Treta Yuga 15 lakh years ago . This temple is older than Srirangam <unk> temple has three inscriptions in its two rock @-@ cut caves , two dating from the period of Nandivarman II ( 732 – 796 AD ) and the other to that of Dantivarman ( 796 – 847 ) . It also has Pallava sculptural depictions of Narasimha and Varaha , two of the ten avatars of Vishnu . 
 A granite wall surrounds the temple , enclosing all its shrines and six of its seven bodies of water . The <unk> , the temple 's gateway tower , is unfinished . A swastika shaped temple tank built in 800 AD by Kamban <unk> during the reign of Dantivarman is outside the temple complex . The Vijayanagar and Nayak kings commissioned paintings on the walls of the shrine of <unk> , some of which are still present . 
 Pundarikakshan is believed to have appeared to Garuda ( vahana of Vishnu ) , Sibi Chakravarthy , sage Markandeya and Hindu gods <unk> , Brahma and Shiva . Six daily rituals and three yearly festivals are held at the temple , of which the chariot festival , celebrated during the Tamil month of Chittirai ( March – April ) , is the most prominent . The festival is unique in the state as a community feast is offered , a custom stretching back many centuries . The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu . 
 = = History = = 
 Pundarikakshan Perumal temple is believed to have been built by the Pallavas , as seen from the three inscriptions in its two rock @-@ cut caves . Two of the inscriptions are dated from the period of Nandivarman II ( 732 – 796 AD ) and the other from the period of Dantivarman ( 796 – 847 AD ) . The temple construction completed presumably during the time of Dantivarman . The influence of Azhwars , the <unk> saints of the 7th – 9th centuries helped spread Vaishnavism to a greater extent among the public and the ruling Pallava kings , who became temple patrons . 
 A Chola inscription indicates an endowment to the shrines of Krishna ( an avatar of Vishnu ) and his consort Rukmini inside the temple by King <unk> ( 907 @-@ 955 AD ) . The temple had later additions from the subsequent Chola , later Pandyas , Hoysala and the Vijayanagara kings . The temple suffered extensive damage during a flood and was repaired by a merchant around 1262 – 63 . 
 In modern times , the temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu . An Executive officer appointed by the Board manages the temple along with Srirangam Ranganathaswamy temple , Sri <unk> <unk> Perumal Temple at <unk> , Sri <unk> <unk> Perumal Temple and Mariamman Temple at <unk> . <unk> scheme , which provides free food to devotees , is implemented in the temple by the Board . Under the scheme , free food is offered to hundred devotees every day in the temple and the expenditure is fully funded by the contributions from devotees . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Pundarikakshan Perumal temple is located in Thiruvellarai , a village 27 km ( 17 mi ) from Tiruchirappalli , on the <unk> road . The shrine of Pundarikakshan is built on a 50 ft ( 15 m ) tall artificial hill . There are two stepped entrances to the sanctum , <unk> Vaasal and <unk> Vaasal , each open for a six @-@ month period . From 15 January to 15 June , <unk> Vaasal is opened , <unk> Vaasal is for the other six @-@ month period . Pundarikakshan , the presiding deity of the temple is named " <unk> " during <unk> and " Thai <unk> <unk> " during <unk> . The two gates in the temple are believed to represent the continuous cycle of entering into life and getting out of it . An image of the presiding deity , Pundarikakshan , is seen in a standing posture facing east . He is believed to have appeared to Garuda , Sibi Chakravarthy , <unk> , sage Markandeya , Brahma and Shiva , all of whose images are housed inside the sanctum . The consort of Pundarikakshan , <unk> , ( also called " Peri <unk> Lakshmi Devi " ) has a separate shrine . The <unk> ( festival image ) of Pankajavalli is called <unk> and is housed inside the same shrine . The temple has Pallava sculptural depictions of Narasimha and Varaha , two of the ten avatars of Vishnu . Narasimha is depicted holding a demon in one panel , the other shows him tearing the demon . 
 The rectangular walls around the temple enclose all the eight shrines and six of the seven water bodies associated with the temple . Besides the main shrine for Pundarikakshan and <unk> , the temple has shrines for Azhwars , Garuda , <unk> and Uyyakondar . The seven water bodies are Divya Theertham , Kanda <unk> Theertham , Theertham , <unk> Theertham , <unk> Theertham , Padma Theertham and <unk> Manikarnika Theertham . The <unk> ( structure over the <unk> ) is called <unk> <unk> . There are various sculptural depictions of Krishna on the pillars of the temple , in the most notable of which he is depicted dancing on a pot . He is seen dancing in Swastika posture with his bun like hair @-@ do , ornaments and anklet . In another sculpture , he is seen slaying the demon <unk> . The Vijayanagar and Nayak kings commissioned the Krishna paintings on the exterior walls of the shrine of Pundarikakshan ; they have clear Telugu language labels . Paintings with some of the popular themes from the epic Ramayana were also commissioned by the Nayak kings in the temple . 
 The <unk> , the main gateway tower , is an unfinished structure . A swastika @-@ shaped temple tank built during 800 AD is present in the south @-@ western corner of the street around the temple . It has four stepped gateways , each having 51 steps . The tank is believed to have been built by Kamban <unk> during the reign of Dantivarman . In modern times , it is maintained by the Department of Archaeology of the Government of Tamil Nadu . The temple complex covers an area of 2 @.@ 62 ha ( 6 @.@ 5 acres ) , while the tank covers an area of 0 @.@ 1256 ha ( 0 @.@ 310 acres ) . 
 A archaeological study in 2010 revealed that the layout of the rock @-@ cut caves in the temple is similar to that of other rock @-@ cut temples such as the Rockfort and <unk> cave temple . The unfinished caves in the temple , along with the lower cave temples in Tiruchirappalli and <unk> , each have a shrine for Shiva in the east and Vishnu in the west , separated by a central bay between them . 
 = = Legend = = 
 The word <unk> means white rock . Owing to the presence of white rocks in the region , the place is historically referred as Thiru <unk> . As per Hindu legend , when Sibi Chakravarthi stayed there with his warriors , a white boar crossed his path . He chased it and the boar hid inside a hole . Markandeya , a sage , was doing penance there and the king narrated the incident to him . The sage asked the king to fill the hole with milk . While doing so , Hindu god Vishnu appeared before them . The sage asked the king to bring 3700 Vaishnavites from the north and build a temple on the site for Vishnu . As requested , the king took 3700 Vaishnavites and started building the temple . While doing so , one of the Vaishnavites was killed in transit and the king was concerned by the accident . Vishnu appeared incognito as Pundarikakshan , a Vaishnavite , and requested to be counted among the 3700 . According to another legend Lakshmi , the consort of Vishnu , performed penance at the temple , and Vishnu appeared before her as <unk> . The presiding deity has since been called " Thamarai Kannan " , meaning the one who has eyes resembling lotus ; his consort is called " <unk> Valli " . The Hindu god Shiva in form of <unk> is believed to have worshiped Pundarikakshan to absolve himself from the sin of holding Brahma 's severed head . Vishnu appeared to both Shiva and Brahma , adhering to their prayers . 
 = = Religious significance = = 
 The temple is revered in Nalayira Divya Prabandham , the 7th – 9th century Vaishnava canon , by <unk> in eleven hymns and Thirumangai Azhwar in thirteen hymns . The temple is classified as a Divyadesam , one of the 108 Vishnu temples that are mentioned in the book . Some of the ancient Sanskrit books consider the temple as a <unk> , meaning the place that gives the best to its devotees . The sculptures on the pillars of the temple reveal the earliest practice of Krishna worship in Tamil Nadu . <unk> Desikar ( 1269 – 1370 ) has revered the temple in his work Hamsa <unk> . As per Hindu legend , the eighteen steps in the temple represent the eighteen chapters of the Hindu scripture <unk> Gita and the last four steps represent the four vedas , the sacred Hindu religious texts . The sound made in front of some of the big pillars of the temple echoes around the temple . Some of the sacred verses are recited more than once in front of these pillars during worship . Thiruvellarai is the birthplace of Uyyakondar , a disciple of Ramanuja and <unk> Piran <unk> . Uyyakondar ( also called <unk> ) is believed to have taught Sri <unk> to <unk> Ammal in the temple . 
 According to Hindu legend Ramanuja ( 1017 – 1137 ) , the leading expounder of Vishishtadvaita philosophy , visited the temple . One of his disciples placed Ramanuja 's sandals along with the image of <unk> . <unk> became furious at this , for which the disciple explained that for Ramanuja <unk> is god , but for him , Ramanuja is supreme . Thiruvellarai is the birthplace of Uyyakondar , a disciple of <unk> and <unk> Piran <unk> . Acharya Uyyakondar ( <unk> ) is believed to have taught Sri <unk> to <unk> Ammal in the temple . 
 = = Festivals and religious practices = = 
 The temple priests perform the pooja ( rituals ) during festivals and on a daily basis . As at other Vishnu temples of Tamil Nadu , the priests belong to the <unk> community , a Brahmin sub @-@ caste . The temple rituals are performed six times a day : <unk> at 7 a.m. , <unk> at 8 : 00 a.m. , <unk> at 12 : 00 p.m. , <unk> at 6 : 00 p.m. , <unk> at 7 : 00 p.m. and Ardha <unk> at 10 : 00 p.m. Each ritual has three steps : <unk> ( decoration ) , <unk> ( food offering ) and <unk> <unk> ( waving of lamps ) for both Pundarikakshan and Pankajavalli . During the last step of worship , nagaswaram ( pipe instrument ) and tavil ( percussion instrument ) are played , religious instructions in the Vedas ( sacred text ) are recited by priests , and worshippers prostrate themselves in front of the temple mast . There are weekly , monthly and fortnightly rituals performed in the temple . 
 The Chariot festival is the most prominent festival of the temple , and for the surrounding villages . It is celebrated during the Tamil month of Chittirai ( March – April ) when devotees pull the chariot round the streets of <unk> . Verses from Nalayira Divya Prabandham are recited by a group of temple priests amidst music with nagaswaram ( pipe instrument ) and tavil ( percussion instrument ) . The chariot festival is unique in the state as a community feast is offered by several individuals and committees , a custom many centuries old . The processional idols of Pundarikakshan and Pankajavalli are brought to the temple car early in the morning amidst religious chanting . <unk> , the rituals associated with taking the idols to the temple car , is performed at an auspicious time before commencing the procession . 
 = Thomas Pilcher = 
 Major @-@ General Thomas David Pilcher , CB ( 8 July 1858 – 14 December 1928 ) was a British Army officer , who commanded a mounted infantry unit in the Second Boer War and the 17th ( Northern ) Division during the First World War , before being removed from command in disgrace during the Battle of the Somme . 
 Pilcher spent his early career as an infantry officer , first seeing active service on colonial campaigns in Nigeria in the late 1890s followed by field command in the Second Boer War ( 1899 – 1902 ) , on which he published a book of lessons learned in 1903 . Following the war , he held a number of senior commands in India . However , further promotion was checked by his having come into conflict with his commander @-@ in @-@ chief , who regarded him as unsuited for senior command in part because of his writings ; Pilcher was a keen student of the German army and its operational methods , and an active theorist who published a number of controversial books advocating the adoption of new military techniques as well as an anonymous invasion novel . 
 On the outbreak of the First World War he was on leave in England , and eventually obtained the command of 17th ( Northern ) Division , a New Army volunteer unit . The division supported the initial attacks at the Battle of the Somme in July 1916 , where Pilcher again clashed with his superiors over his refusal to push on an attack without pausing for preparations , believing it would result in failure and heavy casualties . After ten days of fighting , Pilcher was sacked and sent to command a reserve centre in England . From here , he wrote a series of books before retiring in 1919 . He ran as a parliamentary candidate for the splinter right @-@ wing National Party in the 1918 general election , and continued a loose involvement with right @-@ wing politics which extended to membership in the early British <unk> . 
 Pilcher had married Kathleen Gonne , daughter of a cavalry officer , in 1889 ; the marriage was strained , partly through Pilcher 's gambling habits and adultery , and partly through his dislike for Maud Gonne , Kathleen 's sister and a prominent Irish nationalist . The couple divorced in 1911 , having had four children ; one would later become a High Court judge , while another died on the Western Front in 1915 . Pilcher remarried in 1913 , and remained married to his second wife Millicent until his death in 1928 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After being educated at Harrow School , Pilcher joined the Dublin City Artillery , a Militia unit , and from there transferred into the regular Army . He was initially commissioned into the 22nd Regiment of Foot , but transferred shortly afterwards into the 5th Fusiliers ( later the Northumberland Fusiliers ) . 
 Pilcher attended the Staff College , Camberley , passing the course in 1902 , and from 1895 to 1897 was deputy assistant adjutant @-@ general for Dublin District . From here , he took a posting in colonial West Africa in the late 1890s , where he was involved in raising a battalion of the West African Frontier Force and commanded an expedition to <unk> and <unk> . 
 In 1899 Pilcher transferred regiments for the third time , to the Bedfordshire Regiment , where he took command of the 2nd Battalion . It served in the Second Boer War from 1899 to 1902 , during which time Pilcher was also given command of a column of mounted infantry , including a large contingent of Australians . He was promoted to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel on 20 October 1900 , and to Colonel on 29 November 1900 , and in 1901 he was made an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King Edward VII . He returned to the United Kingdom in early June 1902 , and commanded regular brigades at Aldershot from 1902 to 1907 . From here , he was posted to India , where he held a variety of commands , culminating in that of the Burma Division , the senior military officer in the colony , from 1912 to 1914 . From 1914 to 1928 he was Colonel of the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment . At the time of the outbreak of war , though still holding the Burmese posting , he was on leave in England . 
 = = Personal life and writing = = 
 In 1889 , Pilcher married Kathleen Mary Gonne , daughter of Colonel Thomas Gonne of the 17th Lancers ; her sister , Maude Gonne , later became a prominent Irish nationalist and mother of the politician and Nobel laureate Seán MacBride , as well as a close associate and muse of W. B. Yeats . Pilcher disapproved of his sister @-@ in @-@ law , particularly after her marriage to John MacBride , and relations were frequently strained ; however , the two sisters remained close . The couple would have a daughter , Thora , and three sons – Toby , Tommy , and Pat . The elder son , Gonne ( " Toby " , to his family ) , became a Judge of the High Court of Justice , while Tommy would be killed at the Battle of Neuve Chapelle in 1915 , aged 21 . 
 Pilcher 's marriage was not a happy one ; a gambler and womaniser , he expected his independently wealthy wife to bail out his debts and turn a blind eye to his mistresses . The two gradually drifted into separate lives , and after finally confronted with an affair becoming public , Kathleen sued for divorce . The precipitating event was Pilcher having been named as co @-@ respondent in a divorce suit ; it was alleged that he had committed adultery with Millicent Knight @-@ Bruce , the wife of Major James Knight @-@ Bruce . The case dragged on through 1910 , delayed by Pilcher 's inability to return from India to attend the court . Pilcher did not contest his wife 's suit , and his own divorce was granted in 1911 ; he married Millicent , now divorced , in 1913 . 
 Pilcher was a particularly active observer of the German army , studying their military methods and attending German army manoeuvres . He would later publish a translation of Clausewitz . His writing was sometimes controversial , beginning with the 1896 Artillery from an Infantry Officer 's Point of View , in which he argued strongly in favour of adopting indirect fire techniques from concealed locations . Conventional doctrine held that artillery should be used to fire directly on its targets , as much from principle as from practical effect , with one prominent artillerist arguing that " firing from cover ... will destroy the whole spirit of the arm " . The argument ran for two years . As well as provoking debate , his writing proved problematic for his career ; in part because of a 1907 pamphlet , Fire Problems , he was twice blocked for promotion by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief India . In it , he had encouraged the development of machine @-@ gun tactics , and much heavier concentration and use of the weapons , an unusual position for the pre @-@ war period . 
 In 1906 , Pilcher had also published an anonymous invasion novel , The Writing on the Wall , which described a German invasion of Britain ; The war he theorised was an invasion by Germany followed by a rapid collapse of the British forces , particularly the volunteers , which he saw as unfit for purpose ; he advocated a form of conscription and a mandatory reserve system to strengthen the Army . The Spectator was dismissive , comparing the novel unfavourably to The Invasion of 1910 ( " many useful hints are given as to practical lessons ... [ but ] the general plot entirely destroys any value it might otherwise possess " ) and noting that the suggestions were " highly typical " , but that it was counterproductive to simply malign the Army and encourage the country to adopt German military policies . It was translated and published in Germany the same year , as Mene Mene <unk> <unk> : Englands <unk> durch Deutschland . 
 = = First World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Pilcher was on leave in England , and offered his services to the War Office , but was initially turned down as unsuitable for command by Sir John French ; however , in January 1915 he was appointed to command the newly formed 17th ( Northern ) Division , a New Army division predominantly drawn from northern England . 
 The division moved to France in July 1915 , where it held a sector near Ypres for the remainder of the year . It fought in an action at St. Eloi in March 1916 , following which Douglas Haig considered relieving Pilcher of his command – he was not highly rated by his superior officers – but in the end his corps commander , Hew Fanshawe , was sacked instead . Pilcher was perceived by many as old @-@ fashioned and disengaged , rarely visiting the trenches ; the journalist Philip Gibbs remarked on his " courteous old @-@ fashioned dignity and gentleness of manner " , but concluded simply that " modern warfare was too brutal for him " . Pilcher 's command was certainly slack ; an observer in the summer of 1916 , recently appointed to 17th Division as a staff officer , recalled finding a completely disorganised unit , with no central co @-@ ordination , no effective provision of laundry or comforts for front @-@ line units , and described the divisional staff as simply " of no value " . 
 The 17th was deployed for the Battle of the Somme in July . It was engaged on the first day of the Somme , 1 July , where it supported the capture of Fricourt and lost 1 @,@ 155 men killed or wounded . Following this , it was involved in the capture of <unk> and the capture of Mametz , and had taken a total of 4 @,@ 771 casualties by the time it was relieved on 11 July . Many of these casualties stemmed from an unsuccessful attack on the " Quadrangle Trench Support " on 7 July ; the division had captured the main trench system on 5 July and Pilcher ordered it to pause and prepare for a subsequent assault . However , he was over @-@ ruled by higher command , who forced an attack the next night – which failed – followed by a daylight attack on 7 July , which Pilcher strongly protested but eventually acquiesced in . He ordered an attack with the minimal amount of men necessary , assuming it would inevitably be doomed to failure and high casualties , which outraged his superiors . Pilcher later wrote that " It is very easy to sit a few miles in the rear and get credit for allowing men to be killed in an undertaking foredoomed to failure , but the part did not appeal to me and my protests against these useless attacks were not well received . " 
 Following the division 's withdrawal , Pilcher was promptly sacked by his corps commander , Henry Horne , along with the commander of the neighbouring 38th ( Welsh ) Division ; Horne considered him lacking in " initiative , drive , and readiness " , while Haig simply dismissed him as " unequal to the task " of divisional command . Pilcher was succeeded by Philip Robertson on 13 July 1916 . He was later appointed to command the Eastern Reserve Centre at St. Albans , and retired from the Army in 1919 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following the end of the war , Pilcher contested the seat of Thornbury in the 1918 general election . He opposed the sitting Liberal member Athelstan Rendall , a Coalition <unk> candidate , representing the splinter right @-@ wing National Party of Conservatives opposed to the Coalition . He was heavily defeated , taking only 38 % of the vote in what had previously been a relatively close seat . He continued a loose association with right @-@ wing politics , chairing the anti @-@ Bolshevik National Security Union , and joining the anti @-@ socialist and protectionist British Commonwealth Union . When the British <unk> was formed in the early 1920s , Pilcher became a member and an official of its London branch . 
 Pilcher died in 1928 , aged 70 , of pneumonia . He was survived by his second wife . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Pilcher published a number of books through his career : 
 <unk> block ( 1895 ) 
 Artillery from an Infantry Officer 's Point of View ( 1896 [ ? ] ) 
 Some Lessons from the Boer War , 1899 – 1902 ( 1903 ) – digital copy 
 Some considerations connected with the formations of infantry in attack and defence ( 1906 ) 
 The writing on the wall [ published anonymously as " General Staff " ] ( 1906 ) 
 Fire problems ( 1912 ) 
 A general 's letters to his son on obtaining his commission [ published anonymously ] ( 1917 ) – digital copy 
 A General 's letters to his son on minor tactics [ published anonymously as " X. Y. Z. " ] ( 1918 ) – digital copy 
 War according to Clausewitz [ edited , with commentary ] ( 1918 ) 
 East is East : stories of Indian life ( 1922 ) – digital copy 
 = Culture of the Cook Islands = 
 The culture of the Cook Islands reflects the traditions of its fifteen islands as a Polynesian island country , spread over 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 690 @,@ 000 sq mi ) in the South Pacific Ocean . It is in free association with New Zealand . Its traditions are based on the influences of those who settled the islands over several centuries . Polynesian people from Tahiti settled in the Cook Islands in the 6th century . The Portuguese captain , Pedro Fernandes de Queirós , made the first recorded European landing in the islands in the early 17th century , and well over a hundred years later , in the 18th century , the British navigator , Captain James Cook arrived , giving the islands their current name . Missionaries developed a written language , bringing schools and Christianity to the Cook Islands in the early 19th century . Cook Islands Māori , also known as Māori <unk> ' <unk> or <unk> , is the country 's official language . 
 The Culture Division of the Cook Islands Government supports and preserves the country 's national heritage . One of the popular traditional dances of the Cook Islands is the Ura , a sacred ritual usually performed by a female who moves her body to tell a story , accompanied by intense drumming by at least five drummers . The craft of the locals can be seen in dresses , sarongs , and jewellery crafted with local products , such as shells , and an important practice among women is <unk> , a type of quilting . Typical cuisine consumed in the Cook Island is fresh seafood such as octopus or clams , lamb or suckling pig , and fresh fruit , especially coconut . Rugby union and bowling are popular sports , and the islands hosted the 1986 Pacific Cup and the 1998 Polynesia Cup . The House of Ariki ( Are Ariki ) offers dignity but limited power to the ariki , historical chiefs in the islands ' social hierarchy . 
 = = Background = = 
 Polynesian settlers arrived from Tahiti in the 6th century . In 1606 , the Portuguese captain , Pedro Fernandes de Queirós , was the first European recorded as landing in the islands . Captain Cook , who gave the islands their current name , arrived in 1773 and 1777 . Missionaries from the early 1800s brought schools and Christianity , and developed a written language . 
 = = = Social hierarchy = = = 
 Social hierarchy and tapu ( sacred matters ) in the Cook Islands was controlled by ariki ( high chiefs ) , with typically between three and six per island . Each ariki was a ruler of an <unk> or <unk> ( tribe ) . Lesser noble ranks in the social hierarchy were the <unk> and rangatira ( minor chiefs ) . The chief 's control , which could neither be gained or lost , was established by his mana ( power ) , which derived from his birth , achievements and status . However , an ariki with declining popularity could be perceived to be lacking in mana , which might lead to a loss of social control . 
 Ariki controlled Ariki , <unk> and rangatira titles continue to be passed down through family lines , and the associated ancient ceremonies and traditions continue to be practised in the present day . The House of Ariki ( Are Ariki ) , a parliamentary body in the Cook Islands , was established in 1967 . It is composed of high chiefs , with limited power . 
 Some women 's organisations , such as the Cook Islands National Council of Women and the Cook Islands Business and Professional Women 's Association , have difficulty separating themselves from national politics . The largest women 's organisations , Cook Islands Christian Church <unk> <unk> , Dorcas , National Catholic Women 's League , and Women 's Harvesters , are affiliated with local churches . 
 = = Mythology , superstition and religion = = 
 Cook Islands mythology has commonality with Polynesian myths and legends . <unk> is known as the land of the gods and ancestors . Prominent figures include Avatea , Ina , Marama , <unk> , Papa , <unk> , Tangaroa , <unk> , <unk> te <unk> , and <unk> . A belief in the mystic power by the use of incantations and charms or <unk> ( see witchcraft ) was passed down through the generations . Tales of the supernatural and spirits is common practice in the islands by people of all generations and are used to explain many of the more unusual events . <unk> is woven into discussions on social relationships , proprietary rights , and historical events . Spirit shelters exist in the islands , typically made by children who weave them out of plantain stems . 
 The missionary , John Williams , was instrumental in the conversion of Cook Islanders to Christianity . He brought two Tahitian missionaries to Aitutaki in 1821 who converted the island 's population . A subsequent group of Polynesian missionaries went to Mauke and Atiu , while Mitiaro followed next in 1823 . Williams encountered difficulty in converting the population on Rarotonga whose tribes were divided under ariki ( chiefs ) and ta 'unga ( priests ) . Aaron <unk> , a Congregationalist colleague of Williams , a central figure in the missionary work of the London Missionary Society in the South Seas , lived on Rarotonga between 1828 and 1857 . <unk> Theological College , founded by Aaron <unk> , trains pastors for the Cook Islands Christian Church , which is the nation 's largest religious denomination . 
 = = Language and literature = = 
 Cook Islands Māori , officially named Māori <unk> ' <unk> , and also known as <unk> , is the nation 's official language . There are several mutually intelligible dialects , spoken on the fifteen islands . Rakahanga @-@ Manihiki and Penrhyn are examples . The Cook Islands Maori Dictionary was eventually published in 1995 and included language studies by Dr. Jasper Base of the University of London ( 1957 – 1985 ) , the compilation assistance of <unk> <unk> ( 1957 – 1959 ) , and the works of an Advisory Committee which was established by Dr. Jasper <unk> established in 1960 . <unk> developed in isolation on the island of Pukapuka and is considered by scholars as a distinct language . 
 Naming is a symbolic tradition of the islands ' Maori population . Names form a link not only to ancestors , descendents , and friends , but to titles and land , as well as events and relationships . Dreamed or created , name change are not limited to events , such as birth , marriage , and death , but can also occur in association with a bad omen . First names are interchangeable between men and women , while surnames can vary from person to person within a family unit . 
 Considering the relatively small size of the islands , it has a notable literary scene . <unk> <unk> Morgan is credited with writing musical compositions and poetry and producing folk opera . Composer and poet <unk> <unk> , who toured as communications adviser of the Pacific Conference of Churches , has been commended for his secular writings . <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> are known for their writings on the culture of Atiu Island and Pukapuka , and <unk> <unk> wrote an extensive collection of stories based on the legends of Atiu Island . One of the well @-@ known Cook Islands children 's story tellers and poets was Mona <unk> , who produced the <unk> television series of 52 episodes for children . There is also a number of popular songs and dramas of unknown artists , presented on television and radio , which are available on cassettes and CDs . Radio programs in the islands are broadcast in the native language , English and Tahitian . 
 = = Music and dance = = 
 The music of the Cook Islands is characterised by heavy drums and ukuleles . Men perform the <unk> , which is the equivalent of the Hawaiian hula , locking their feet on the ground and keeping their shoulders steady . Drums form part of an ensemble . Performing groups include the Cook Islands National Arts Theatre , <unk> Dance Troupe , <unk> Dance Troupe , <unk> Folk Dance Troupe , and Te <unk> Maori Cultural Dance Troupe . <unk> Records is the main specialist in music retail on the islands . 
 Dances are performed at multicultural festivals . One of the popular traditional dances of the Cook Islands is the Maori Ura , a sacred ritual usually performed by a female who moves her body to tell a story , accompanied by intense drumming by at least 5 drummers . Moving the hips , legs and hands give off different gestures to the audience to tell a tale , typically related to the natural landscape such as the ocean and birds and flowers , but also feelings of love and sadness . The ura dance has three distinct components ; the ura pa 'u ( drum dances ) , <unk> ( legends ) and <unk> ( action songs ) . To perform the ura , women typically wear a <unk> and a <unk> ( grass ) skirt , with flowers and shell headbands and necklaces known as ei . Men during the dance are said to " vigorously flap their knees in a semi @-@ crouched position while holding their upper bodies steady " , and they typically wear <unk> skirts and headbands . The drumming group , an integral part of the Ura , typically consists of a lead drummer ( pate <unk> ) , support lead ( pate <unk> ) , a double player ( <unk> or pate <unk> ) playing wooden gongs , and two other players playing skin drums ( pa 'u and mango ) . Travel writer David Stanley asserts that the finest performances of the Ura are put on in Rarotonga . 
 A sexually charged variant of the ura dance is known at the ura <unk> in which both men and women are involved in telling the story . Other variations include the ura <unk> ( stilt dance ) , ura <unk> ( fan dance ) , ura <unk> ( spear dance ) , and ura rama ( torch dance ) . Aside from the Ura dance and its components such as the <unk> and <unk> , there are several other genres of music and dance in the Cook Islands including dance dramas ( peu <unk> ) , religious pageants ( <unk> ) , formal chants ( pe 'e ) , celebratory chants ( ' ute ) , and polyphonic choral music ( ' <unk> tapu ) . Like the ura , these are also often accompanied by drums . 
 = = Art = = 
 Local residents have developed their own style in clothing and jewellery , using local products , such as shells . Giving somebody a shell necklace and placing it around the recipients neck is a goodwill and love gesture . They make a type of sarong , called a <unk> , which is typically brightly coloured . Like the other islands of Melanesia such as Fiji and Samoa , the Cook Islanders are known for their hand @-@ painted and silk @-@ screened dress fabrics . An important practice among women is <unk> , a type of quilting . 
 The islanders have many fine carvers , especially at Michael <unk> 's workshop and Island Craft , the latter of which produces items like spears and masks . Items are sold in places like <unk> Nui Market , Beachcomber Gallery and Bergman and Sons Crafts Store . <unk> Gallery displays paintings by local artists , and landscape artist Judith Kunzle sells her drawings and paintings in her home studio and several of the crafts stores , several of which have featured in numerous publications and postcards of the islands . 
 = = Cuisine = = 
 Due to the island location and the fact that the Cook Islands produce a significant array of fruits and vegetables , natural local produce , especially coconut , features in many of the dishes of the islands as does fresh seafood . While most food is imported from New Zealand , there are several Growers ' Associations , such as <unk> , <unk> , Penrhyn , <unk> , and Rakahanga , which contribute produce for local cuisine . Typical local cuisine includes arrowroot , clams , octopus , and taro , and seasonings such as fresh ginger , lime , lemon , basil , garlic and coconut . <unk> is a dish of taro leaves cooked with coconut sauce and onion . A meal of octopus is known locally as <unk> , and suckling pig is known as <unk> . Ika mata is a dish of raw fish marinated with lemon or lime and served with coconut cream , while Pai Ika and Keke Ika are also local fish fare . Poke is a dessert which can be made in one of two ways , either with banana and coconut milk or with pawpaw . <unk> , oranges and mangos are popular as juices . Coconut water , local beer ( Cooks Lager ) , and coffee are popular beverages among the Cook Islanders . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Like in many of the other islands of the Pacific , Rugby Union is a popular sport . The Cook Islands national rugby union team began playing on the international stage in 1971 . Sevens rugby is also played and has its own association , as does netball , sevens rugby , weightlifting and powerlifting , table tennis , Tae Kwon @-@ Do , and volleyball . The Cook Islands Round Cup is the top division of the Cook Islands Football Association and plays at the National Stadium among other venues . 
 Bowling is popular , and the Cook Islands have at least six clubs including <unk> Women 's Bowling Club , <unk> Men 's Bowling Club , <unk> Women 's Bowling Club , and Rarotonga Men 's Bowling Club . It is presided over by the Cook Islands Lawn Bowling Federation , and the Cook Islands Bowls Carnival Tour is organised annually . There are also various badminton , motorcycle , golf , racing , sailing , squash , and canoeing clubs . 
 On a broader scale , the Cook Islands Sports & Olympic Association , Rarotonga Amateur Athletics Association , <unk> Sports & Cultural Association , and <unk> @-@ <unk> Sports Association are notable associations . The Cook Islands Fisherman 's Association , Cook Islands Game Fishing Club , and the <unk> Fishermen 's Club support fishing enthusiasts . The country hosted the 1986 Pacific Cup and the 1998 Polynesia Cup . 
 = = Administration and preservation = = 
 Native antiquities , defined as " native relics , articles with ancient native tools and according to native methods , and all other articles or things of historical or scientific value or interest and relating to the Cook Islands " are protected by the Cook Islands Amendment Act 1950 . Cultural events are coordinated by the Cook Islands National Arts Council , which was established in 1985 by an Act of Parliament . The administrative mechanism was specially oriented towards promotion of culture of the islands and a Cultural Division was functional . In the late 1980s , the Prime Minister , Geoffrey Henry a keen enthusiast in promoting island 's culture , established a number of monuments and also created the Ministry of Cultural Development , he backed it up with financial resources . The activity got a boost because of creation of expressive arts , large influx of tourist into the island , and the knowledge assimilated and adopted by the islanders on the culture of the other regions . The Ministry of Cultural Development Act 1990 repealed the National Arts Council Act 1981 – 82 and provided for the preservation and enhancement of the country 's cultural heritage , encouragement of its cultural art forms , and maintenance of the unique cultural national identity of its people . 
 The Cook Island Museum promotes the cultural heritage of the entire region including Pacific Islanders . It represents a large variety of material culture . The islands ' history , as well as its traditional techniques in dancing , fishing , weaving , woodcarving , medicine , and food preparation are also profiled at the Cook Islands Cultural Village . 
 = Speed of light = 
 The speed of light in vacuum , commonly denoted c , is a universal physical constant important in many areas of physics . Its precise value is 299792458 metres per second ( approximately 3 @.@ 00 × 108 m / s ) , since the length of the metre is defined from this constant and the international standard for time . According to special relativity , c is the maximum speed at which all matter and hence information in the universe can travel . It is the speed at which all massless particles and changes of the associated fields ( including electromagnetic radiation such as light and gravitational waves ) travel in vacuum . Such particles and waves travel at c regardless of the motion of the source or the inertial reference frame of the observer . In the theory of relativity , c <unk> space and time , and also appears in the famous equation of mass – energy equivalence E 
 = mc2 . 
 The speed at which light propagates through transparent materials , such as glass or air , is less than c ; similarly , the speed of radio waves in wire cables is slower than c . The ratio between c and the speed v at which light travels in a material is called the refractive index n of the material ( n = 
 c / v ) . For example , for visible light the refractive index of glass is typically around 1 @.@ 5 , meaning that light in glass travels at c / 1 @.@ 5 ≈ 200000 km / s ; the refractive index of air for visible light is about 1 @.@ 0003 , so the speed of light in air is about <unk> km / s ( about 90 km / s slower than c ) . 
 For many practical purposes , light and other electromagnetic waves will appear to propagate instantaneously , but for long distances and very sensitive measurements , their finite speed has noticeable effects . In communicating with distant space probes , it can take minutes to hours for a message to get from Earth to the spacecraft , or vice versa . The light seen from stars left them many years ago , allowing the study of the history of the universe by looking at distant objects . The finite speed of light also limits the theoretical maximum speed of computers , since information must be sent within the computer from chip to chip . The speed of light can be used with time of flight measurements to measure large distances to high precision . 
 Ole Rømer first demonstrated in 1676 that light travels at a finite speed ( as opposed to instantaneously ) by studying the apparent motion of Jupiter 's moon Io . In 1865 , James Clerk Maxwell proposed that light was an electromagnetic wave , and therefore travelled at the speed c appearing in his theory of electromagnetism . In 1905 , Albert Einstein postulated that the speed of light c with respect to any inertial frame is a constant and is independent of the motion of the light source . He explored the consequences of that postulate by deriving the special theory of relativity and in doing so showed that the parameter c had relevance outside of the context of light and electromagnetism . 
 After centuries of increasingly precise measurements , in 1975 the speed of light was known to be 299792458 m / s with a measurement uncertainty of 4 parts per billion . In 1983 , the metre was redefined in the International System of Units ( SI ) as the distance travelled by light in vacuum in 1 / 299792458 of a second . As a result , the numerical value of c in metres per second is now fixed exactly by the definition of the metre . 
 = = Numerical value , notation , and units = = 
 The speed of light in vacuum is usually denoted by a lowercase c , for " constant " or the Latin <unk> ( meaning " swiftness , celerity " ) . Historically , the symbol V was used as an alternative symbol for the speed of light , introduced by James Clerk Maxwell in 1865 . In 1856 , Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf <unk> had used c for a different constant later shown to equal √ 2 times the speed of light in vacuum . In 1894 , Paul Drude redefined c with its modern meaning . Einstein used V in his original German @-@ language papers on special relativity in 1905 , but in 1907 he switched to c , which by then had become the standard symbol for the speed of light . 
 Sometimes c is used for the speed of waves in any material medium , and <unk> for the speed of light in vacuum . This subscripted notation , which is endorsed in official SI literature , has the same form as other related constants : namely , μ0 for the vacuum permeability or magnetic constant , ε0 for the vacuum permittivity or electric constant , and Z0 for the impedance of free space . This article uses c exclusively for the speed of light in vacuum . 
 Since 1983 , the metre has been defined in the International System of Units ( SI ) as the distance light travels in vacuum in 1 ⁄ 299792458 of a second . This definition fixes the speed of light in vacuum at exactly 299792458 m / s . As a dimensional physical constant , the numerical value of c is different for different unit systems . In branches of physics in which c appears often , such as in relativity , it is common to use systems of natural units of measurement or the <unk> unit system where c = 1 . Using these units , c does not appear explicitly because multiplication or division by 1 does not affect the result . 
 = = Fundamental role in physics = = 
 The speed at which light waves propagate in vacuum is independent both of the motion of the wave source and of the inertial frame of reference of the observer . This invariance of the speed of light was postulated by Einstein in 1905 , after being motivated by Maxwell 's theory of electromagnetism and the lack of evidence for the luminiferous aether ; it has since been consistently confirmed by many experiments . It is only possible to verify experimentally that the two @-@ way speed of light ( for example , from a source to a mirror and back again ) is frame @-@ independent , because it is impossible to measure the one @-@ way speed of light ( for example , from a source to a distant detector ) without some convention as to how clocks at the source and at the detector should be synchronized . However , by adopting Einstein synchronization for the clocks , the one @-@ way speed of light becomes equal to the two @-@ way speed of light by definition . The special theory of relativity explores the consequences of this invariance of c with the assumption that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames of reference . One consequence is that c is the speed at which all massless particles and waves , including light , must travel in vacuum . 
 Special relativity has many counterintuitive and experimentally verified implications . These include the equivalence of mass and energy ( E 
 = mc2 ) , length contraction ( moving objects shorten ) , and time dilation ( moving clocks run more slowly ) . The factor γ by which lengths contract and times dilate is known as the Lorentz factor and is given by γ = 
 ( 1 − v2 / c2 ) − 1 / 2 , where v is the speed of the object . The difference of γ from 1 is negligible for speeds much slower than c , such as most everyday speeds — in which case special relativity is closely approximated by Galilean relativity — but it increases at relativistic speeds and diverges to infinity as v approaches c . 
 The results of special relativity can be summarized by treating space and time as a unified structure known as spacetime ( with c relating the units of space and time ) , and requiring that physical theories satisfy a special symmetry called Lorentz invariance , whose mathematical formulation contains the parameter c . Lorentz invariance is an almost universal assumption for modern physical theories , such as quantum electrodynamics , quantum chromodynamics , the Standard Model of particle physics , and general relativity . As such , the parameter c is ubiquitous in modern physics , appearing in many contexts that are unrelated to light . For example , general relativity predicts that c is also the speed of gravity and of gravitational waves . In non @-@ inertial frames of reference ( gravitationally curved spacetime or accelerated reference frames ) , the local speed of light is constant and equal to c , but the speed of light along a trajectory of finite length can differ from c , depending on how distances and times are defined . 
 It is generally assumed that fundamental constants such as c have the same value throughout spacetime , meaning that they do not depend on location and do not vary with time . However , it has been suggested in various theories that the speed of light may have changed over time . No conclusive evidence for such changes has been found , but they remain the subject of ongoing research . 
 It also is generally assumed that the speed of light is isotropic , meaning that it has the same value regardless of the direction in which it is measured . Observations of the emissions from nuclear energy levels as a function of the orientation of the emitting nuclei in a magnetic field ( see Hughes – <unk> experiment ) , and of rotating optical resonators ( see Resonator experiments ) have put stringent limits on the possible two @-@ way anisotropy . 
 = = = Upper limit on speeds = = = 
 According to special relativity , the energy of an object with rest mass m and speed v is given by <unk> , where γ is the Lorentz factor defined above . When v is zero , γ is equal to one , giving rise to the famous E = mc2 formula for mass – energy equivalence . The γ factor approaches infinity as v approaches c , and it would take an infinite amount of energy to accelerate an object with mass to the speed of light . The speed of light is the upper limit for the speeds of objects with positive rest mass , and individual photons cannot travel faster than the speed of light . This is experimentally established in many tests of relativistic energy and momentum . 
 More generally , it is normally impossible for information or energy to travel faster than c . One argument for this follows from the counter @-@ intuitive implication of special relativity known as the relativity of simultaneity . If the spatial distance between two events A and B is greater than the time interval between them multiplied by c then there are frames of reference in which A precedes B , others in which B precedes A , and others in which they are simultaneous . As a result , if something were travelling faster than c relative to an inertial frame of reference , it would be travelling backwards in time relative to another frame , and causality would be violated . In such a frame of reference , an " effect " could be observed before its " cause " . Such a violation of causality has never been recorded , and would lead to paradoxes such as the <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Faster @-@ than @-@ light observations and experiments = = 
 There are situations in which it may seem that matter , energy , or information travels at speeds greater than c , but they do not . For example , as is discussed in the propagation of light in a medium section below , many wave velocities can exceed c . For example , the phase velocity of X @-@ rays through most glasses can routinely exceed c , but phase velocity does not determine the velocity at which waves convey information . 
 If a laser beam is swept quickly across a distant object , the spot of light can move faster than c , although the initial movement of the spot is delayed because of the time it takes light to get to the distant object at the speed c . However , the only physical entities that are moving are the laser and its emitted light , which travels at the speed c from the laser to the various positions of the spot . Similarly , a shadow projected onto a distant object can be made to move faster than c , after a delay in time . In neither case does any matter , energy , or information travel faster than light . 
 The rate of change in the distance between two objects in a frame of reference with respect to which both are moving ( their closing speed ) may have a value in excess of c . However , this does not represent the speed of any single object as measured in a single inertial frame . 
 Certain quantum effects appear to be transmitted instantaneously and therefore faster than c , as in the EPR paradox . An example involves the quantum states of two particles that can be entangled . Until either of the particles is observed , they exist in a superposition of two quantum states . If the particles are separated and one particle 's quantum state is observed , the other particle 's quantum state is determined instantaneously ( i.e. , faster than light could travel from one particle to the other ) . However , it is impossible to control which quantum state the first particle will take on when it is observed , so information cannot be transmitted in this manner . 
 Another quantum effect that predicts the occurrence of faster @-@ than @-@ light speeds is called the Hartman effect ; under certain conditions the time needed for a virtual particle to tunnel through a barrier is constant , regardless of the thickness of the barrier . This could result in a virtual particle crossing a large gap faster @-@ than @-@ light . However , no information can be sent using this effect . 
 So @-@ called superluminal motion is seen in certain astronomical objects , such as the relativistic jets of radio galaxies and quasars . However , these jets are not moving at speeds in excess of the speed of light : the apparent superluminal motion is a projection effect caused by objects moving near the speed of light and approaching Earth at a small angle to the line of sight : since the light which was emitted when the jet was farther away took longer to reach the Earth , the time between two successive observations corresponds to a longer time between the instants at which the light rays were emitted . 
 In models of the expanding universe , the farther galaxies are from each other , the faster they drift apart . This receding is not due to motion through space , but rather to the expansion of space itself . For example , galaxies far away from Earth appear to be moving away from the Earth with a speed proportional to their distances . Beyond a boundary called the Hubble sphere , the rate at which their distance from Earth increases becomes greater than the speed of light . 
 = = Propagation of light = = 
 In classical physics , light is described as a type of electromagnetic wave . The classical behaviour of the electromagnetic field is described by Maxwell 's equations , which predict that the speed c with which electromagnetic waves ( such as light ) propagate through the vacuum is related to the electric constant ε0 and the magnetic constant μ0 by the equation 
 <formula> 
 In modern quantum physics , the electromagnetic field is described by the theory of quantum electrodynamics ( QED ) . In this theory , light is described by the fundamental excitations ( or quanta ) of the electromagnetic field , called photons . In QED , photons are massless particles and thus , according to special relativity , they travel at the speed of light in vacuum . 
 Extensions of QED in which the photon has a mass have been considered . In such a theory , its speed would depend on its frequency , and the invariant speed c of special relativity would then be the upper limit of the speed of light in vacuum . No variation of the speed of light with frequency has been observed in rigorous testing , putting stringent limits on the mass of the photon . The limit obtained depends on the model used : if the massive photon is described by <unk> theory , the experimental upper bound for its mass is about 10 − 57 grams ; if photon mass is generated by a Higgs mechanism , the experimental upper limit is less sharp , m ≤ 10 − 14 eV / c2 ( roughly 2 × 10 − 47 g ) . 
 Another reason for the speed of light to vary with its frequency would be the failure of special relativity to apply to arbitrarily small scales , as predicted by some proposed theories of quantum gravity . In 2009 , the observation of the spectrum of gamma @-@ ray burst GRB <unk> did not find any difference in the speeds of photons of different energies , confirming that Lorentz invariance is verified at least down to the scale of the Planck length ( <unk> = √ <unk> / c3 ≈ 1 @.@ <unk> × 10 − 35 m ) divided by 1 @.@ 2 . 
 = = = In a medium = = = 
 In a medium , light usually does not propagate at a speed equal to c ; further , different types of light wave will travel at different speeds . The speed at which the individual crests and troughs of a plane wave ( a wave filling the whole space , with only one frequency ) propagate is called the phase velocity vp . An actual physical signal with a finite extent ( a pulse of light ) travels at a different speed . The largest part of the pulse travels at the group velocity vg , and its earliest part travels at the front velocity <unk> . 
 The phase velocity is important in determining how a light wave travels through a material or from one material to another . It is often represented in terms of a refractive index . The refractive index of a material is defined as the ratio of c to the phase velocity vp in the material : larger indices of refraction indicate lower speeds . The refractive index of a material may depend on the light 's frequency , intensity , polarization , or direction of propagation ; in many cases , though , it can be treated as a material @-@ dependent constant . The refractive index of air is approximately 1 @.@ 0003 . Denser media , such as water , glass , and diamond , have refractive indexes of around 1 @.@ 3 , 1 @.@ 5 and 2 @.@ 4 , respectively , for visible light . In exotic materials like Bose – Einstein condensates near absolute zero , the effective speed of light may be only a few metres per second . However , this represents absorption and re @-@ radiation delay between atoms , as do all slower @-@ than @-@ c speeds in material substances . As an extreme example of light " slowing " in matter , two independent teams of physicists claimed to bring light to a " complete standstill " by passing it through a Bose – Einstein condensate of the element rubidium , one team at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute for Science in Cambridge , Mass . , and the other at the Harvard – Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics , also in Cambridge . However , the popular description of light being " stopped " in these experiments refers only to light being stored in the excited states of atoms , then re @-@ emitted at an arbitrarily later time , as stimulated by a second laser pulse . During the time it had " stopped , " it had ceased to be light . This type of behaviour is generally microscopically true of all transparent media which " slow " the speed of light . 
 In transparent materials , the refractive index generally is greater than 1 , meaning that the phase velocity is less than c . In other materials , it is possible for the refractive index to become smaller than 1 for some frequencies ; in some exotic materials it is even possible for the index of refraction to become negative . The requirement that causality is not violated implies that the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric constant of any material , corresponding respectively to the index of refraction and to the attenuation coefficient , are linked by the Kramers – Kronig relations . In practical terms , this means that in a material with refractive index less than 1 , the absorption of the wave is so quick that no signal can be sent faster than c . 
 A pulse with different group and phase velocities ( which occurs if the phase velocity is not the same for all the frequencies of the pulse ) smears out over time , a process known as dispersion . Certain materials have an exceptionally low ( or even zero ) group velocity for light waves , a phenomenon called slow light , which has been confirmed in various experiments . The opposite , group velocities exceeding c , has also been shown in experiment . It should even be possible for the group velocity to become infinite or negative , with pulses travelling instantaneously or backwards in time . 
 None of these options , however , allow information to be transmitted faster than c . It is impossible to transmit information with a light pulse any faster than the speed of the earliest part of the pulse ( the front velocity ) . It can be shown that this is ( under certain assumptions ) always equal to c . 
 It is possible for a particle to travel through a medium faster than the phase velocity of light in that medium ( but still slower than c ) . When a charged particle does that in a dielectric material , the electromagnetic equivalent of a shock wave , known as Cherenkov radiation , is emitted . 
 = = Practical effects of finiteness = = 
 The speed of light is of relevance to communications : the one @-@ way and round @-@ trip delay time are greater than zero . This applies from small to astronomical scales . On the other hand , some techniques depend on the finite speed of light , for example in distance measurements . 
 = = = Small scales = = = 
 In supercomputers , the speed of light imposes a limit on how quickly data can be sent between processors . If a processor operates at 1 gigahertz , a signal can only travel a maximum of about 30 centimetres ( 1 ft ) in a single cycle . Processors must therefore be placed close to each other to minimize communication <unk> ; this can cause difficulty with cooling . If clock frequencies continue to increase , the speed of light will eventually become a limiting factor for the internal design of single chips . 
 = = = Large distances on Earth = = = 
 For example , given the equatorial circumference of the Earth is about <unk> km and c about 300000 km / s , the theoretical shortest time for a piece of information to travel half the globe along the surface is about 67 milliseconds . When light is travelling around the globe in an optical fibre , the actual transit time is longer , in part because the speed of light is slower by about 35 % in an optical fibre , depending on its refractive index n . Furthermore , straight lines rarely occur in global communications situations , and delays are created when the signal passes through an electronic switch or signal <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> and astronomy = = = 
 Similarly , communications between the Earth and spacecraft are not instantaneous . There is a brief delay from the source to the receiver , which becomes more noticeable as distances increase . This delay was significant for communications between ground control and Apollo 8 when it became the first manned spacecraft to orbit the Moon : for every question , the ground control station had to wait at least three seconds for the answer to arrive . The communications delay between Earth and Mars can vary between five and twenty minutes depending upon the relative positions of the two planets . As a consequence of this , if a robot on the surface of Mars were to encounter a problem , its human controllers would not be aware of it until at least five minutes later , and possibly up to twenty minutes later ; it would then take a further five to twenty minutes for instructions to travel from Earth to Mars . 
 NASA must wait several hours for information from a probe orbiting Jupiter , and if it needs to correct a navigation error , the fix will not arrive at the spacecraft for an equal amount of time , creating a risk of the correction not arriving in time . 
 Receiving light and other signals from distant astronomical sources can even take much longer . For example , it has taken 13 billion ( 13 × 109 ) years for light to travel to Earth from the faraway galaxies viewed in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field images . Those photographs , taken today , capture images of the galaxies as they appeared 13 billion years ago , when the universe was less than a billion years old . The fact that more distant objects appear to be younger , due to the finite speed of light , allows astronomers to infer the evolution of stars , of galaxies , and of the universe itself . 
 Astronomical distances are sometimes expressed in light @-@ years , especially in popular science publications and media . A light @-@ year is the distance light travels in one year , around 9461 billion kilometres , <unk> billion miles , or 0 @.@ <unk> parsecs . In round figures , a light year is nearly 10 trillion kilometres or nearly 6 trillion miles . Proxima Centauri , the closest star to Earth after the Sun , is around 4 @.@ 2 light @-@ years away . 
 = = = Distance measurement = = = 
 Radar systems measure the distance to a target by the time it takes a radio @-@ wave pulse to return to the radar antenna after being reflected by the target : the distance to the target is half the round @-@ trip transit time multiplied by the speed of light . A Global Positioning System ( GPS ) receiver measures its distance to GPS satellites based on how long it takes for a radio signal to arrive from each satellite , and from these distances calculates the receiver 's position . Because light travels about 300000 kilometres ( <unk> mi ) in one second , these measurements of small fractions of a second must be very precise . The Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment , radar astronomy and the Deep Space Network determine distances to the Moon , planets and spacecraft , respectively , by measuring round @-@ trip transit times . 
 = = = High @-@ frequency trading = = = 
 The speed of light has become important in high @-@ frequency trading , where traders seek to gain minute advantages by delivering their trades to exchanges fractions of a second ahead of other traders . For example , traders have been switching to microwave communications between trading hubs , because of the advantage which microwaves travelling at near to the speed of light in air , have over fibre optic signals which travel 30 – 40 % slower at the speed of light through glass . 
 = = Measurement = = 
 There are different ways to determine the value of c . One way is to measure the actual speed at which light waves propagate , which can be done in various astronomical and earth @-@ based setups . However , it is also possible to determine c from other physical laws where it appears , for example , by determining the values of the electromagnetic constants ε0 and μ0 and using their relation to c . Historically , the most accurate results have been obtained by separately determining the frequency and wavelength of a light beam , with their product equalling c . 
 In 1983 the metre was defined as " the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1 ⁄ 299792458 of a second " , fixing the value of the speed of light at 299792458 m / s by definition , as described below . Consequently , accurate measurements of the speed of light yield an accurate realization of the metre rather than an accurate value of c . 
 = = = Astronomical measurements = = = 
 Outer space is a convenient setting for measuring the speed of light because of its large scale and nearly perfect vacuum . Typically , one measures the time needed for light to traverse some reference distance in the solar system , such as the radius of the Earth 's orbit . Historically , such measurements could be made fairly accurately , compared to how accurately the length of the reference distance is known in Earth @-@ based units . It is customary to express the results in astronomical units ( AU ) per day . 
 Ole Christensen Rømer used an astronomical measurement to make the first quantitative estimate of the speed of light . When measured from Earth , the periods of moons orbiting a distant planet are shorter when the Earth is approaching the planet than when the Earth is receding from it . The distance travelled by light from the planet ( or its moon ) to Earth is shorter when the Earth is at the point in its orbit that is closest to its planet than when the Earth is at the farthest point in its orbit , the difference in distance being the diameter of the Earth 's orbit around the Sun . The observed change in the moon 's orbital period is caused by the difference in the time it takes light to traverse the shorter or longer distance . Rømer observed this effect for Jupiter 's innermost moon Io and deduced that light takes 22 minutes to cross the diameter of the Earth 's orbit . 
 Another method is to use the aberration of light , discovered and explained by James Bradley in the 18th century . This effect results from the vector addition of the velocity of light arriving from a distant source ( such as a star ) and the velocity of its observer ( see diagram on the right ) . A moving observer thus sees the light coming from a slightly different direction and consequently sees the source at a position shifted from its original position . Since the direction of the Earth 's velocity changes continuously as the Earth orbits the Sun , this effect causes the apparent position of stars to move around . From the angular difference in the position of stars ( maximally 20 @.@ 5 arcseconds ) it is possible to express the speed of light in terms of the Earth 's velocity around the Sun , which with the known length of a year can be converted to the time needed to travel from the Sun to the Earth . In 1729 , Bradley used this method to derive that light travelled 10 @,@ 210 times faster than the Earth in its orbit ( the modern figure is 10 @,@ 066 times faster ) or , equivalently , that it would take light 8 minutes 12 seconds to travel from the Sun to the Earth . 
 = = = = Astronomical unit = = = = 
 An astronomical unit ( AU ) is approximately the average distance between the Earth and Sun . It was redefined in 2012 as exactly <unk> m . Previously the AU was not based on the International System of Units but in terms of the gravitational force exerted by the Sun in the framework of classical mechanics . The current definition uses the recommended value in metres for the previous definition of the astronomical unit , which was determined by measurement . This redefinition is analogous to that of the metre , and likewise has the effect of fixing the speed of light to an exact value in astronomical units per second ( via the exact speed of light in metres per second ) . 
 Previously , the inverse of c expressed in seconds per astronomical unit was measured by comparing the time for radio signals to reach different spacecraft in the Solar System , with their position calculated from the gravitational effects of the Sun and various planets . By combining many such measurements , a best fit value for the light time per unit distance could be obtained . For example , in 2009 , the best estimate , as approved by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) , was : 
 light time for unit distance : 499 @.@ <unk> ( 10 ) s 
 c 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> ( 4 ) AU / s = 
 173 @.@ <unk> ( 3 ) AU / day . 
 The relative uncertainty in these measurements is 0 @.@ 02 parts per billion ( 2 × 10 − 11 ) , equivalent to the uncertainty in Earth @-@ based measurements of length by interferometry . Since the metre is defined to be the length travelled by light in a certain time interval , the measurement of the light time in terms of the previous definition of the astronomical unit can also be interpreted as measuring the length of an AU ( old definition ) in metres . 
 = = = Time of flight techniques = = = 
 A method of measuring the speed of light is to measure the time needed for light to travel to a mirror at a known distance and back . This is the working principle behind the Fizeau – Foucault apparatus developed by Hippolyte Fizeau and Léon Foucault . 
 The setup as used by Fizeau consists of a beam of light directed at a mirror 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) away . On the way from the source to the mirror , the beam passes through a rotating cogwheel . At a certain rate of rotation , the beam passes through one gap on the way out and another on the way back , but at slightly higher or lower rates , the beam strikes a tooth and does not pass through the wheel . Knowing the distance between the wheel and the mirror , the number of teeth on the wheel , and the rate of rotation , the speed of light can be calculated . 
 The method of Foucault replaces the cogwheel by a rotating mirror . Because the mirror keeps rotating while the light travels to the distant mirror and back , the light is reflected from the rotating mirror at a different angle on its way out than it is on its way back . From this difference in angle , the known speed of rotation and the distance to the distant mirror the speed of light may be calculated . 
 Nowadays , using <unk> with time resolutions of less than one nanosecond , the speed of light can be directly measured by timing the delay of a light pulse from a laser or an LED reflected from a mirror . This method is less precise ( with errors of the order of 1 % ) than other modern techniques , but it is sometimes used as a laboratory experiment in college physics classes . 
 = = = Electromagnetic constants = = = 
 An option for deriving c that does not directly depend on a measurement of the propagation of electromagnetic waves is to use the relation between c and the vacuum permittivity ε0 and vacuum permeability μ0 established by Maxwell 's theory : c2 = 1 / ( <unk> ) . The vacuum permittivity may be determined by measuring the capacitance and dimensions of a capacitor , whereas the value of the vacuum permeability is fixed at exactly 4π × 10 − 7 H · m − 1 through the definition of the ampere . Rosa and Dorsey used this method in 1907 to find a value of <unk> ± 22 km / s . 
 = = = Cavity resonance = = = 
 Another way to measure the speed of light is to independently measure the frequency f and wavelength λ of an electromagnetic wave in vacuum . The value of c can then be found by using the relation c = <unk> . One option is to measure the resonance frequency of a cavity resonator . If the dimensions of the resonance cavity are also known , these can be used to determine the wavelength of the wave . In 1946 , Louis Essen and A.C. Gordon @-@ Smith established the frequency for a variety of normal modes of microwaves of a microwave cavity of precisely known dimensions . The dimensions were established to an accuracy of about ± 0 @.@ 8 μm using gauges calibrated by interferometry . As the wavelength of the modes was known from the geometry of the cavity and from electromagnetic theory , knowledge of the associated frequencies enabled a calculation of the speed of light . 
 The Essen – Gordon @-@ Smith result , 299792 ± 9 km / s , was substantially more precise than those found by optical techniques . By 1950 , repeated measurements by Essen established a result of 299792 @.@ 5 ± 3 @.@ 0 km / s . 
 A household demonstration of this technique is possible , using a microwave oven and food such as marshmallows or margarine : if the turntable is removed so that the food does not move , it will cook the fastest at the antinodes ( the points at which the wave amplitude is the greatest ) , where it will begin to melt . The distance between two such spots is half the wavelength of the microwaves ; by measuring this distance and multiplying the wavelength by the microwave frequency ( usually displayed on the back of the oven , typically 2450 MHz ) , the value of c can be calculated , " often with less than 5 % error " . 
 = = = Interferometry = = = 
 Interferometry is another method to find the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation for determining the speed of light . A coherent beam of light ( e.g. from a laser ) , with a known frequency ( f ) , is split to follow two paths and then recombined . By adjusting the path length while observing the interference pattern and carefully measuring the change in path length , the wavelength of the light ( λ ) can be determined . The speed of light is then calculated using the equation c = <unk> . 
 Before the advent of laser technology , coherent radio sources were used for interferometry measurements of the speed of light . However interferometric determination of wavelength becomes less precise with wavelength and the experiments were thus limited in precision by the long wavelength ( ~ 0 @.@ 4 cm ) of the <unk> . The precision can be improved by using light with a shorter wavelength , but then it becomes difficult to directly measure the frequency of the light . One way around this problem is to start with a low frequency signal of which the frequency can be precisely measured , and from this signal progressively synthesize higher frequency signals whose frequency can then be linked to the original signal . A laser can then be locked to the frequency , and its wavelength can be determined using interferometry . This technique was due to a group at the National Bureau of Standards ( NBS ) ( which later became NIST ) . They used it in 1972 to measure the speed of light in vacuum with a fractional uncertainty of 3 @.@ 5 × 10 − 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 Until the early modern period , it was not known whether light travelled instantaneously or at a very fast finite speed . The first extant recorded examination of this subject was in ancient Greece . The ancient Greeks , Muslim scholars , and classical European scientists long debated this until Rømer provided the first calculation of the speed of light . Einstein 's Theory of Special Relativity concluded that the speed of light is constant regardless of one 's frame of reference . Since then , scientists have provided increasingly accurate measurements . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Empedocles ( c . 490 – 430 BC ) was the first to propose a theory of light and claimed that light has a finite speed . He maintained that light was something in motion , and therefore must take some time to travel . Aristotle argued , to the contrary , that " light is due to the presence of something , but it is not a movement " . Euclid and Ptolemy advanced Empedocles ' emission theory of vision , where light is emitted from the eye , thus enabling sight . Based on that theory , Heron of Alexandria argued that the speed of light must be infinite because distant objects such as stars appear immediately upon opening the <unk> Islamic philosophers initially agreed with the Aristotelian view that light had no speed of travel . In 1021 , Alhazen ( Ibn al @-@ Haytham ) published the Book of Optics , in which he presented a series of arguments dismissing the emission theory of vision in favour of the now accepted intromission theory , in which light moves from an object into the eye . This led Alhazen to propose that light must have a finite speed , and that the speed of light is variable , decreasing in denser bodies . He argued that light is substantial matter , the propagation of which requires time , even if this is hidden from our senses . Also in the 11th century , Abū Rayhān al @-@ Bīrūnī agreed that light has a finite speed , and observed that the speed of light is much faster than the speed of sound . 
 In the 13th century , Roger Bacon argued that the speed of light in air was not infinite , using philosophical arguments backed by the writing of Alhazen and Aristotle . In the 1270s , <unk> considered the possibility of light travelling at infinite speed in vacuum , but slowing down in denser bodies . By the 14th century , Sayana had made statements about the speed of light in his commentary on the Hindu Rigveda . 
 In the early 17th century , Johannes Kepler believed that the speed of light was infinite , since empty space presents no obstacle to it . René Descartes argued that if the speed of light were to be finite , the Sun , Earth , and Moon would be noticeably out of alignment during a lunar eclipse . Since such misalignment had not been observed , Descartes concluded the speed of light was infinite . Descartes speculated that if the speed of light were found to be finite , his whole system of philosophy might be demolished . In Descartes ' derivation of Snell 's law , he assumed that even though the speed of light was instantaneous , the more dense the medium , the faster was light 's speed . Pierre de Fermat derived Snell 's law using the opposing assumption , the more dense the medium the slower light traveled . Fermat also argued in support of a finite speed of light . 
 = = = First measurement attempts = = = 
 In 1629 , Isaac <unk> proposed an experiment in which a person observes the flash of a cannon reflecting off a mirror about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away . In 1638 , Galileo Galilei proposed an experiment , with an apparent claim to having performed it some years earlier , to measure the speed of light by observing the delay between uncovering a lantern and its perception some distance away . He was unable to distinguish whether light travel was instantaneous or not , but concluded that if it were not , it must nevertheless be extraordinarily rapid . In 1667 , the Accademia del Cimento of Florence reported that it had performed Galileo 's experiment , with the lanterns separated by about one mile , but no delay was observed . The actual delay in this experiment would have been about 11 microseconds . 
 The first quantitative estimate of the speed of light was made in 1676 by Rømer ( see Rømer 's determination of the speed of light ) . From the observation that the periods of Jupiter 's innermost moon Io appeared to be shorter when the Earth was approaching Jupiter than when receding from it , he concluded that light travels at a finite speed , and estimated that it takes light 22 minutes to cross the diameter of Earth 's orbit . Christiaan Huygens combined this estimate with an estimate for the diameter of the Earth 's orbit to obtain an estimate of speed of light of <unk> km / s , 26 % lower than the actual value . 
 In his 1704 book Opticks , Isaac Newton reported Rømer 's calculations of the finite speed of light and gave a value of " seven or eight minutes " for the time taken for light to travel from the Sun to the Earth ( the modern value is 8 minutes 19 seconds ) . Newton queried whether Rømer 's eclipse shadows were coloured ; hearing that they were not , he concluded the different colours travelled at the same speed . In 1729 , James Bradley discovered stellar aberration . From this effect he determined that light must travel 10 @,@ 210 times faster than the Earth in its orbit ( the modern figure is 10 @,@ 066 times faster ) or , equivalently , that it would take light 8 minutes 12 seconds to travel from the Sun to the Earth . 
 = = = Connections with electromagnetism = = = 
 In the 19th century Hippolyte Fizeau developed a method to determine the speed of light based on time @-@ of @-@ flight measurements on Earth and reported a value of <unk> km / s . His method was improved upon by Léon Foucault who obtained a value of <unk> km / s in 1862 . In the year 1856 , Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf <unk> measured the ratio of the electromagnetic and electrostatic units of charge , 1 / √ <unk> , by discharging a Leyden jar , and found that its numerical value was very close to the speed of light as measured directly by Fizeau . The following year Gustav Kirchhoff calculated that an electric signal in a <unk> wire travels along the wire at this speed . In the early 1860s , Maxwell showed that , according to the theory of electromagnetism he was working on , electromagnetic waves propagate in empty space at a speed equal to the above Weber / <unk> ratio , and drawing attention to the numerical proximity of this value to the speed of light as measured by Fizeau , he proposed that light is in fact an electromagnetic wave . 
 = = = " <unk> aether " = = = 
 It was thought at the time that empty space was filled with a background medium called the luminiferous aether in which the electromagnetic field existed . Some physicists thought that this aether acted as a preferred frame of reference for the propagation of light and therefore it should be possible to measure the motion of the Earth with respect to this medium , by measuring the isotropy of the speed of light . Beginning in the 1880s several experiments were performed to try to detect this motion , the most famous of which is the experiment performed by Albert A. Michelson and Edward W. Morley in 1887 . The detected motion was always less than the observational error . Modern experiments indicate that the two @-@ way speed of light is isotropic ( the same in every direction ) to within 6 nanometres per second . Because of this experiment Hendrik Lorentz proposed that the motion of the apparatus through the aether may cause the apparatus to contract along its length in the direction of motion , and he further assumed , that the time variable for moving systems must also be changed accordingly ( " local time " ) , which led to the formulation of the Lorentz transformation . Based on Lorentz 's aether theory , Henri Poincaré ( 1900 ) showed that this local time ( to first order in v / c ) is indicated by clocks moving in the aether , which are synchronized under the assumption of constant light speed . In 1904 , he speculated that the speed of light could be a limiting velocity in dynamics , provided that the assumptions of Lorentz 's theory are all confirmed . In 1905 , Poincaré brought Lorentz 's aether theory into full observational agreement with the principle of relativity . 
 = = = Special relativity = = = 
 In 1905 Einstein postulated from the outset that the speed of light in vacuum , measured by a non @-@ accelerating observer , is independent of the motion of the source or observer . Using this and the principle of relativity as a basis he derived the special theory of relativity , in which the speed of light in vacuum c featured as a fundamental constant , also appearing in contexts unrelated to light . This made the concept of the stationary aether ( to which Lorentz and Poincaré still adhered ) useless and revolutionized the concepts of space and time . 
 = = = Increased accuracy of c and redefinition of the metre and second = = = 
 In the second half of the 20th century much progress was made in increasing the accuracy of measurements of the speed of light , first by cavity resonance techniques and later by laser interferometer techniques . These were aided by new , more precise , definitions of the metre and second . In 1950 , Louis Essen determined the speed as 299792 @.@ 5 ± 1 km / s , using cavity resonance . This value was adopted by the 12th General Assembly of the Radio @-@ Scientific Union in 1957 . In 1960 , the metre was redefined in terms of the wavelength of a particular spectral line of krypton @-@ 86 , and , in 1967 , the second was redefined in terms of the hyperfine transition frequency of the ground state of caesium @-@ 133 . 
 In 1972 , using the laser interferometer method and the new definitions , a group at the US National Bureau of Standards in Boulder , Colorado determined the speed of light in vacuum to be c = <unk> @.@ 2 ± 1 @.@ 1 m / s . This was 100 times less uncertain than the previously accepted value . The remaining uncertainty was mainly related to the definition of the metre . As similar experiments found comparable results for c , the 15th General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1975 recommended using the value 299792458 m / s for the speed of light . 
 = = = Defining the speed of light as an explicit constant = = = 
 In 1983 the 17th CGPM found that wavelengths from frequency measurements and a given value for the speed of light are more reproducible than the previous standard . They kept the 1967 definition of second , so the caesium hyperfine frequency would now determine both the second and the metre . To do this , they redefined the metre as : " The metre is the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1 / 299792458 of a second . " As a result of this definition , the value of the speed of light in vacuum is exactly 299792458 m / s and has become a defined constant in the SI system of units . Improved experimental techniques that prior to 1983 would have measured the speed of light , no longer affect the known value of the speed of light in SI units , but instead allow a more precise realization of the metre by more accurately measuring the wavelength of Krypton @-@ 86 and other light sources . 
 In 2011 , the CGPM stated its intention to redefine all seven SI base units using what it calls " the explicit @-@ constant formulation " , where each " unit is defined indirectly by specifying explicitly an exact value for a well @-@ recognized fundamental constant " , as was done for the speed of light . It proposed a new , but completely equivalent , wording of the metre 's definition : " The metre , symbol m , is the unit of length ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum to be equal to exactly 299792458 when it is expressed in the SI unit m s − 1 . " This is one of the proposed changes to be incorporated in the next revision of the SI also termed the New SI . 
 = = = Historical references = = = 
 = = = Modern references = = = 
 = Chris Higgins ( ice hockey , born 1983 ) = 
 Christopher Robert Higgins ( born June 2 , 1983 ) is an American professional ice hockey winger who is currently an unrestricted free agent of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . While playing college hockey , he was selected 14th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in the first round of the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . He finished a two @-@ year career with the Yale Bulldogs , earning ECAC Hockey Player of the Year honors as a sophomore , before turning professional for the 2003 – 04 season . After two seasons with the Canadiens ' minor league affiliate , the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , he joined the NHL in 2005 – 06 . He recorded three consecutive 20 @-@ goal seasons to begin his NHL career before being traded to the New York Rangers in June 2009 . After brief stints with the Rangers , Calgary Flames and Florida Panthers , he joined the Vancouver Canucks in February 2011 . Internationally , Higgins has competed for the United States in two World Junior Championships ( 2002 and 2003 ) and one World Championship ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur career ( 1998 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Higgins played four years of high school hockey for Avon Old Farms , a preparatory school in Avon , Connecticut , graduating in 2001 . He then opted to play in the National Collegiate Athletics Association ( NCAA ) with the Yale Bulldogs . Higgins also considered offers from Boston College and Harvard University . In 2001 – 02 , Higgins began a two @-@ year stint with the Yale Bulldogs of the ECAC Hockey Conference . After recording a team @-@ leading 31 points ( 14 goals and 17 assists ) over 27 games as a freshman , he was named the ECAC Rookie of the Year . He additionally received ECAC All @-@ Rookie and Second All @-@ Star Team honors . 
 In the off @-@ season , Higgins was selected 14th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . He became the first ECAC Hockey player to be selected in the first round of the NHL Entry Draft since Normand Lacombe in 1983 ( the Buffalo Sabres selected him 10th overall ) . Returning to Yale for one more season , he improved to 41 points over 28 games , leading his team in scoring for the second consecutive year . Higgins earned ECAC Player of the Year ( co @-@ recipient with Cornell Big Red goaltender David LeNeveu ) and First All @-@ Star Team honors ; he was also recognized regionally on the NCAA East All @-@ American Team . 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens ( 2003 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Following his sophomore year , he signed a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract with the Canadiens on May 22 , 2003 . Higgins made his NHL debut on October 11 , 2003 , registering three minutes of ice time in a 4 – 0 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs . Struggling to play his way onto the Canadiens ' lineup , he was often made a healthy scratch ( non @-@ dressing player ) in October before being assigned to the team 's minor league affiliate , the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , by the end of the month . He recorded 48 points over 67 AHL games in 2003 – 04 , ranking fifth in team scoring . Due to the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Higgins automatically remained in Hamilton and improved to 51 points , ranking third among Bulldogs scorers . 
 The following season , as NHL play resumed , Higgins made the Canadiens ' roster out of training camp . He scored his first career NHL goal on October 6 , 2005 , against New York Rangers goalie Kevin Weekes during an away game at Madison Square Garden . The Canadiens won the contest 4 – 3 in overtime . He finished the season with 23 goals , ranking seventh among league rookies , and 15 assists for a total of 38 points . 
 A month into the 2006 – 07 season , Higgins suffered a sprained left ankle during a game against the New Jersey Devils . At the time of the injury , on November 4 , 2006 , he was leading the Canadiens with eight goals . Sidelined for 6 weeks , Higgins was limited to 61 games , though still managed to match his previous season 's points total with 22 goals and 16 assists . Set to become a restricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Montreal re @-@ signed Higgins to a two @-@ year , US $ 3 @.@ 4 million deal on June 25 , 2007 . Prior to the start of the 2007 – 08 season , Higgins was named an alternate captain for the Canadiens . He went on to have a career season with personal bests of 27 goals , 25 assists and 52 points . On November 11 , 2008 , Higgins recorded his first NHL hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 0 win over the Ottawa Senators . However , his points total decreased in his fourth NHL campaign with 23 points over 57 games . 
 = = = Rangers , Flames and Panthers ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Coming off what was the lowest statistical season of his career , he was traded by the Canadiens , along with Ryan McDonagh , Pavel <unk> and Doug <unk> , to the New York Rangers in exchange for Scott Gomez , Tom Pyatt and Michael Busto on June 30 , 2009 . A restricted free agent at the time of the trade , he agreed to a one @-@ year , US $ 2 @.@ 25 contract with the Rangers six days later . He scored his first goal with the Rangers on November 3 , 2009 , against the Vancouver Canucks , his team 's lone marker in a 4 – 1 loss . His offensive struggles continued in New York ( he recorded 15 points in 55 games ) and he was subsequently traded to the Calgary Flames on February 2 , 2010 . Higgins was dealt , along with Aleš Kotalík , in exchange for Olli Jokinen and Brandon Prust . He scored his first goal with the Flames on March 9 , an empty netter , in a 4 – 1 win against the Detroit Red Wings . Two days later , he suffered a foot injury that sidelined him for the remaining 14 games of the regular season . Splitting the season between New York and Calgary , he had eight goals and 17 points over 67 games . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Higgins signed a one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 6 million deal with the Florida Panthers on July 2 , 2010 . He had considered re @-@ signing with Calgary , but cited new Florida Panthers General Manager Dale Tallon 's experience as a strong factor for joining Florida ( Tallon was largely responsible for assembling the Chicago Blackhawks team that won the Stanley Cup the previous season ) . In December 2010 , he was sidelined four games with a Staphylococcal infection in his foot , an injury that was misdiagnosed first as " skate bite , " then a spider bite . Higgins later missed an additional seven games the following month with a hamstring injury . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2011 – 2016 ) = = = 
 With the Panthers out of playoff contention late in the season , the team began trading away numerous veterans and core players . At the NHL trade deadline , on February 28 , 2011 , Higgins was dealt to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for defensive prospect Evan Oberg and a third @-@ round draft pick in 2013 . The Canucks had reportedly been interested in a different Panthers player , but with a minute left until the trade deadline , Panthers Assistant General Manager Mike Santos called the Canucks back and offered Higgins . In 48 games with the Panthers , he had recorded 11 goals and 23 points . Injured with a hand injury at the time of the trade , he did not debut with the Canucks until March 10 . He scored his first two goals as a Canuck on March 27 in a 4 – 1 win against the Columbus Blue Jackets . He completed the season with 13 goals and 28 points in 62 games between Florida and Vancouver . While Higgins played the majority of the regular season with the Canucks as a bottom @-@ six forward , by the playoffs , he was playing on the second line centred by Ryan Kesler . Entering the post @-@ season as the Presidents ' Trophy champions , the Canucks held the first seed in the West . After eliminating the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks in the first three rounds , the Canucks advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals . Facing the Boston Bruins , the series went to a seventh game , which the Canucks lost 4 – 0 . Following the Canucks ' defeat , it was revealed that several Canucks players had been playing with injuries , including Higgins . His injury occurred in the second round against the Predators , when he blocked a shot with his skate , breaking his foot . Over 25 playoff games , Higgins recorded four goals and eight points . Three of his goals were game @-@ winners , tying him with Geoff Courtnall ( 1994 ) for the most in a single playoff season by a Canucks player . 
 During the off @-@ season , Higgins re @-@ signed with Vancouver to a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 8 million contract on July 1 , 2011 . The deal was agreed upon prior to his scheduled unrestricted free agency . During the season , Higgins struggled with two bouts of <unk> infection , one in December 2011 and the other in February 2012 . He missed a combined 11 games as a result of swelling and suffering from severe side effects to the associated medication . Though he missed time , Higgins also played through the adverse reactions for several games following both bouts with the infection . Through the first half of the season , he often played on the second line with Kesler and David Booth ; the trio were dubbed the " American Express Line , " as they were all born in the United States . Towards the end of the season , he was consistently placed on the team 's third line , a defensive shutdown unit with fellow two @-@ way forwards Jannik Hansen and deadline @-@ acquisition Samuel <unk> . Used in both roles over the campaign , Higgins was often recognized as the team 's most consistent and hardest @-@ working forward . On the last day of the regular season , he was accordingly awarded the Fred J. Hume Award , voted by fans as the team 's " unsung hero . " Appearing in 71 games , Higgins recorded 43 points ( 18 goals and 25 assists ) , his highest total in four years and fifth among team forwards . On April 2 , 2013 Higgins signed a four @-@ year , $ 10 million extension with the Canucks . 
 During the 2015 – 16 season , on January 12 , 2016 , Higgins was put on waivers after unsuccessful attempts to trade the winger . He cleared waivers the next day and was sent down to the Utica Comets , the AHL affiliate of the Canucks . On March 19 , 2016 , Higgins was recalled by the Vancouver Canucks after multiple injuries occurred on both the Canucks and Comets rosters . 
 In the off @-@ season , on June 27 , 2016 , Higgins 's tenure in Vancouver ended when he was placed on waivers by the Canucks for the intention of buying out the remaining year of his contract . 
 = = International play = = 
 Higgins played in back @-@ to @-@ back World Junior Championships during his college career . First appearing in 2002 , he recorded four goals and two assists over seven games . He helped the United States qualify for the quarterfinal , where they were eliminated by Russia 6 – 1 . The following year , Higgins matched his points total with three goals and three assists . After losing their semifinal to Canada 3 – 2 , the United States lost by the same score to Finland in the bronze medal game . 
 Higgins made his first international appearance for the American men 's team at the 2009 IIHF World Championship . He scored his only goal of the tournament in a 4 – 3 overtime loss to Switzerland in the qualifying round . After losing their semifinal game to Russia , the United States lost the bronze medal to Sweden by a 4 – 2 score . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Listed at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 83 meters ) tall and 203 pounds ( 92 kilograms ) , Higgins plays mostly in the style of a power forward . He is known as a two @-@ way player with good skating , capable of contributing offensively while remaining defensively responsible . He has alternated between playing the wing and center positions . Early in his career , he was compared to Dallas Stars forward Brendan Morrow . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Higgins grew up in Smithtown , New York , the second eldest among five siblings . His father , Robert , is a New York City firefighter and his younger brother is a New York City police officer . 
 Higgins played on minor hockey teams with former Canadiens teammate Mike Komisarek and former Flames teammate Eric Nystrom , both of whom he remains close friends with . He was a student of Lithuanian hockey coach Aleksey <unk> at hockey camps in his teenage years . Though he grew up on Long Island , Higgins was a Montreal Canadiens fan as a child , following after his father ; his favorite players on the team were goaltender Patrick Roy and captain Kirk Muller . 
 Higgins left home to join the high school hockey program of Avon Old Farms in Connecticut . Following his high school graduation , Higgins was enrolled in Yale University for two years , majoring in political science while playing on the school 's hockey team . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = Brian Kendrick = 
 Brian David Kendrick ( born May 29 , 1979 ) is an American professional wrestler signed to WWE , both as a wrestler and as a trainer at the WWE Performance Center . 
 Kendrick is also known for his appearances with New Japan Pro Wrestling and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling under his real name , as well as his appearances with Pro Wrestling Zero1 as Leonardo Spanky and on the independent circuit as Spanky . Championships held by Kendrick over the course of his career include the NWA International Junior Heavyweight Championship , NWA International Lightweight Tag Team Championship , TNA X Division Champion , World Tag Team Championship , WWE Tag Team Championship and Zero @-@ One United States Openweight Championship . He is also a former DDT Ironman Heavymetalweight Champion and the head trainer of Brian Kendrick 's School of Pro Wrestling . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kendrick was born in Fairfax , Virginia , and is the son of Barbara Kendrick and the oldest of three children — a brother named Neal and a sister named Shannon . He later moved to Olympia , Washington where he attended North Thurston High School in Lacey , Washington . During his senior year , he worked as a dishwasher in a pizza parlor while saving money to attend wrestling school . 
 While growing up , Kendrick 's favorite wrestlers included Ultimate Warrior , Blue Blazer and Koko B. Ware . He was also a fan of Shawn Michaels , who trained him , and Chris Jericho . He was already very good friends with his former tag team partner Paul London , with Lance Cade and Bryan Danielson , both of whom he trained with . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , he moved to Texas to begin training at the NWA Southwest wrestling school and later attended the Shawn Michaels Wrestling Academy . It was there that Kendrick adopted the ring name Spanky , a nickname he was given due to his method of staying awake during long drives on the <unk> circuit . He made his professional wrestling debut on October 8 , 1999 in a match with American Dragon that ended in a 10 @-@ minute time limit draw . In October 2001 , Kendrick wrestled American Dragon in the first round of The King of the Indies tournament , but lost . The crowd , however , gave both men a standing ovation after the match . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 = = = = Memphis Championship Wrestling ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 In February 2000 , Kendrick signed a developmental deal with the World Wrestling Federation , spending a year in the company 's " farm territory " , Memphis Championship Wrestling ( MCW ) , before the promotion closed and Kendrick was released from his contract . Kendrick won his first Championship in MCW when he defeated American Dragon for the MCW Southern Light Heavyweight Championship on September 22 . He later teamed with American Dragon to win the MCW Southern Tag Team Championship , on December 1 , becoming a double champion . The tag team disbanded after they lost the Championships to The <unk> . On December 30 , however , the Southern Light Heavyweight title was declared vacant after a match that Kendrick had with Derrick King . In a match for the vacant championship , Kendrick regained the title after beating King , on January 6 , 2001 . He later dropped it to Tyler Gates , before regaining it on May 11 . On June 1 , however , Spanky was stripped of the title and it was abandoned , making Spanky the last ever MCW Southern Light Heavyweight Champion . He also holds the record for most reigns , with three . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2002 ) = = = 
 On February 23 , 2002 , Kendrick wrestled on the premiere show of Ring of Honor ( ROH ) , winning the match to gain an ROH contract . While in ROH , Kendrick competed in several other promotions such as Heartland Wrestling Association and All Pro Wrestling , before leaving for Japan in June to compete in Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One ( Zero1 ) . There , he wrestled under the ring name Leonardo Spanky , a gimmick proposed by Shinya Hashimoto due to Kendrick 's resemblance to Leonardo DiCaprio . On June 29 , he became the first NWA International Junior Heavyweight Champion in company history . He dropped the title to Low Ki a few months later . 
 = = = Return to WWE ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = 
 In late 2002 , Kendrick signed a contract with WWE but was unable to compete until he completed his time in the independent circuit . He made his WWE debut on the January 11 , 2003 edition of Velocity under the gimmick of a mascot representing the local sports team of the town in which he was competing . He continued wearing masks for several weeks , each time competing under a different identity . After acting as a telegram deliverer for Big Show to Undertaker , and getting a Last Ride for his troubles , he showed up the following week and began a series of events trying to impress the then General Manager of Smackdown ! Stephanie McMahon in order to earn a contract for the WWE . He eventually earned himself a contract on the March 20 , 2003 episode of Smackdown ! by defeating Shannon Moore . His first major storyline within WWE came on the May 1 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! . He reverted to his former " Spanky " ring name after he interrupted a promo by John Cena . The two feuded over their similar hip hop gimmicks , until May 22 . On October 30 , Spanky began teaming with Paul London until January 13 , 2004 when Kendrick left WWE to return to Zero1 . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 After leaving WWE , Kendrick wrestled in different independent promotions . He returned to Zero1 as " Spanky " and was quickly pushed to capture the NWA International Lightweight Tag Team Championship . This occurred with partner Low Ki on February 19 , 2004 , when they defeated Dick Togo and <unk> Hidaka . They lost the championship to Tatsuhito Takaiwa and Tomohiro Ishii a few months later . Kendrick gained a new tag team partner in Kaz Hayashi , on September 19 , 2004 , and won back the championships . They held onto the titles until March 2005 , when they dropped them to Hidaka and Minoru Fujita . Although he lost the tag titles in March , Kendrick , as Spanky , received a singles push , and won the Zero @-@ One United States Heavyweight Championship that same <unk> but he lost the title in September 2005 . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2004 ) = = = 
 Kendrick had a brief stint in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling in November 2004 , where he defeated Kaz , Matt Sydal and Amazing Red , in a four @-@ way match . 
 = = = Return to ROH ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 He then returned to ROH , as well as debuting on its sister promotion Full Impact Pro ( FIP ) on December 17 , 2004 , winning the first ever Florida Rumble . On February 25 , Kendrick wrestled a match against fellow WWE alumnus , James Gibson . Throughout the match , the crowd chanted " Welcome Back ! " and " SmackDown ! Sucks ! " , and both men received a standing ovation after the match . During his time in ROH , Kendrick was booked as a mid @-@ carder , consistently having matches late on the card . Kendrick also competed in the Trios Tournament , but lost in the first round with his team members , Gibson and Nigel McGuinness . He unsuccessfully competed for several titles such as the ROH Pure Championship , ROH World Championship and ROH World Tag Team Championship . In July 2005 , Kendrick announced that he had re @-@ signed with World Wrestling Entertainment , and would be returning there after he had fulfilled his obligations on the Independent circuit . In FIP , Kendrick won the FIP Tag Team Championship with Sal Rinauro on August 6 , 2005 , but lost it to The Heartbreak Express less than a month later , shortly before he returned to WWE . 
 = = = Second return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Teaming with Paul London ( 2005 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 In July 2005 , Kendrick announced that after he had fulfilled his obligations on the independent circuit , he would return to WWE . He made his return during a live event on August 22 , 2005 , losing in a Fatal Four @-@ Way match for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship . He then reformed a tag team with his former partner Paul London on the September 30 edition of Velocity . On December 16 , the pair remade their image , wearing theatrical masks to the ring with matching vests and shorts . They were quickly elevated into the WWE Tag Team Championship picture , receiving a non @-@ title match against WWE Tag Team Champions MNM on the February 10 , 2006 edition of SmackDown ! , which London and Kendrick lost . On April 7 , they faced MNM again , picking up a win in a non @-@ title match . Their storyline feud continued , as London and Kendrick continued their winning streak over the champions , including singles victories for both Kendrick and London on MNM members Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury , respectively . London and Kendrick won the WWE Tag Team Title at Judgment Day , thus defeating MNM six times in a row in singles and tag team matches altogether . 
 Their first main competition for the titles came when K. C. James and Idol Stevens defeated the champions in a non @-@ title match , in early August , igniting a storyline feud between the two teams . During the rivalry , WWE Diva Ashley Massaro began accompanying London and Kendrick to the ring , acting as a valet to the team while combating the actions of James and Stevens ' manager Michelle McCool . 
 On October 14 , London and Kendrick became the longest reigning WWE Tag Team Champions of all time , surpassing MNM 's previous record of 145 days . Despite this , they were still booked as the underdogs in their feuds , and this was shown when they began a losing streak to the team of William Regal and Dave Taylor . Regal defeated both in singles matches and on the December 8 episode of SmackDown ! , Kendrick and London lost a non @-@ title tag team match to the duo , although Kendrick beat Taylor on the December 9 episode of Velocity . London and Kendrick had a scheduled title defense at Armageddon , against Regal and Taylor . Before the pay @-@ per @-@ view , the match changed into a Fatal Four Way tag team ladder match with London and Kendrick defending their titles against Regal and Taylor , MNM , and The Hardys . London and Kendrick won the match and retained the titles . 
 On February 2 , 2007 , London and Kendrick suffered a non @-@ title loss to the rookie team Deuce ' n Domino . In a title match at No Way Out , London and Kendrick retained the championship . London and Kendrick , however , dropped the championship to them on the April 20 edition of SmackDown ! , ending their reign at 331 days ( SmackDown ! was recorded on April 17 ) . In the storyline , London missed a moonsault from the ring apron to the floor during the title match , injuring his ribs , leaving Kendrick to battle Deuce ' n Domino alone . London and Kendrick unsuccessfully competed for the title on June 1 in a triple threat tag team match , which also involved Regal and Taylor , and lost a rematch on June 15 in a standard tag team match . 
 Kendrick , along with London , was drafted to the Raw brand on June 17 , 2007 during the Supplemental Draft . They won their debut match on Raw against The World 's Greatest Tag Team on June 18 . They were soon established as a threat to the tag titles , and on the September 3 edition of Raw , they won a number one contender 's match for Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch 's World Tag Team Championship . Kendrick and London then worked a feud with Cade and Murdoch , and at a house show on September 5 , they defeated Cade and Murdoch to win the titles , only to lose it back to Cade and Murdoch three days later . London and Kendrick continued to feud with Cade and Murdoch and lost to the Tag Team champions at Unforgiven . For the rest of 2007 , London and Kendrick mainly competed on Heat or in tag title bouts , until London got injured in late 2007 . As a result , Kendrick was mainly used as a jobber on Raw , until London returned at the start of February 2008 , although Kendrick still won sometimes on Heat . 
 In his next storyline , Kendrick abandoned London during a handicap match with Umaga . This abandonment resulted in Umaga performing the Samoan Spike on London , allowing Umaga to pick up the win over the duo . London and Kendrick still teamed together with no apparent dissension rising between the former tag team champions . After defeating Charlie Haas and Robbie McAllister on Heat , London and Kendrick said they were ready to win the World Tag Team Championship . London and Kendrick beat the champions Hardcore Holly and Cody Rhodes next week on Heat in a non @-@ title match . However , they failed to win the World Tag Team Titles on Raw after Holly pinned London . 
 = = = = The Brian Kendrick ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 As part of the 2008 WWE Supplemental Draft , Kendrick was drafted back to the SmackDown brand while London stayed on Raw , thus ending the team . He made his return to the brand on the July 18 , 2008 airing of SmackDown ! as a major heel , with new ring attire defeating Jimmy Wang Yang with the help of his bodyguard , Ezekiel , who was later given a surname and became Ezekiel Jackson . Kendrick was later given the name " The Brian Kendrick " . On the August 22 edition of SmackDown , Kendrick won a 10 @-@ man battle royal to qualify for the WWE Championship Scramble match at Unforgiven . Kendrick won his first WWE Championship title at the event , though he did lose minutes after making him the longest reign as " interim " champion . As Kendrick was not the final interim champion , he never officially held the title . He later teamed with Jackson on many occasions , becoming number one contenders to the WWE Tag Team Championship held by Carlito and Primo , but they never managed to win the championship . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , Kendrick was separated from Jackson as he was drafted back to the Raw brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft while Jackson was drafted to the ECW brand . He wrestled his return match on Raw on the April 27 episode , against Kofi Kingston . He won a match on Raw after defeating Carlito on the May 11 episode before declaring his intention to win the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship ; in the following weeks , Kendrick tried several unsuccessful pairings . In his final match , he was defeated by Kofi Kingston while cutting a promo on Jerry Lawler . The match ended with Kendrick turning around into Trouble In Paradise . On July 30 , 2009 , WWE announced that Kendrick was released from his WWE contract . 
 = = = Return to the independent circuit ( 2009 – 2014 ) = = = 
 Kendrick signed with Dragon Gate USA on August 6 , 2009 . His first match for the company , a losing effort against Cima at Untouchable , aired on pay @-@ per @-@ view edited down to only the highlights of the match . On August 28 he made his return to Pro Wrestling Guerrilla at Speed of Sound where he , wrestling as a heel , defeated Bryan Danielson after a low blow . Afterwards he formed an alliance with PWG World Tag Team Champions The Young Bucks and started a feud with El Generico , Colt Cabana and the PWG World Champion Kenny Omega . On December 19 Ring of Honor announced that Kendrick would be making his return to the company on February 13 , 2010 , at the 8th Anniversary Show . At the event Kendrick was defeated by Roderick Strong . 
 On January 30 , 2010 , at PWG 's WrestleReunion 4 the Young Bucks decided that Kendrick did not fit in with them and turned on him , only for him to be saved by his old tag team partner Paul London . Later in the night , Kendrick and London defeated the Young Bucks , now renamed Generation Me , in a non @-@ title match . On March 27 , 2010 , at the tapings of Dragon Gate USA 's Mercury Rising pay @-@ per @-@ view , Kendrick was defeated by Jimmy Jacobs in a Loser Leaves Company tag team match , where he teamed with Paul London against Jacobs and Jack Evans and as a result was forced to leave the company for good . 
 On February 26 , 2011 , Kendrick defeated Tommy Lee Curtis for the Steeltown Pro Wrestling Provisional Championship and lost it to <unk> Rose on April 9 . 
 In March 2012 , Kendrick made his debut in Family Wrestling Entertainment , defeating Mike Benett . In mid May , Kendrick participated in Absolute Intense Wrestling 's JT Lightning Invitational Tournament and made it to the semi final before losing to B.J. Whitmer . On July 28 , at FWE X , he wrestled against FWE Champion Tommy Jay Lethal , Tommy Dreamer and Carlito for the title , but the match was won by Dreamer . Three months later , London , Kendrick and Lethal defeated Petey Williams and The Young Bucks . He also was in the first event of House of Hardcore , where <unk> & Kendrick defeated The Young Bucks . 
 Kendrick returned to <unk> on January 26 , 2013 , winning an Eight Way Fray . Next Day , Kendrick was defeated By Johnny Gargano for the Open the Freedom Gate title . In February , at Preston City Wrestling , Kendrick participated in the Road To Glory Tournament where he reached the semi final , losing to Noam Dar . At FWE No Limits , Kendrick lost a number one contendership match for the FWE Tri @-@ Borough Championship to Paul London . Kendrick made his Combat Zone Wrestling debut on April 5 , 2013 , defeating Sami Callihan . Same day , Kendrick and <unk> defeated The Gentlemen 's Club on <unk> 19 . On April 6 and 7 , was defeated by Rich Swann on <unk> Open the Ultimate Gate . On June 22 , 2013 , Londrick were defeated by The Young Bucks at House of Hardcore 2 . 
 On March 30 , 2014 , Kendrick made his ICW debut in a match against Joe Coffey at ICW - Still Smokin ' in the O2 ABC in Glasgow , Scotland where he was narrowly defeated . On 8 September 2014 , it was announced that Kendrick would once again team up with Paul London to take on The New Age Kliq in Newcastle , England on October 5 for the Insane Championship Wrestling Tag @-@ Team Championship . Both men won the titles and lost them on November 2 , 2014 . 
 = = = Return to TNA = = = 
 = = = = EV 2 @.@ 0 ( 2010 ) = = = = 
 On January 17 , 2010 at Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) ' s pay @-@ per @-@ view Genesis , Kendrick made his return to the promotion using his real name and losing to Amazing Red in a match for the TNA X Division Championship , under a similar heel gimmick to his The Brian Kendrick gimmick used in WWE . On April 7 , 2010 , Dixie Carter announced on her Twitter account that Kendrick had signed a new multi @-@ year deal with the company . On the May 3 , 2010 edition of TNA Impact ! , Kendrick turned face by having a confrontation with his partner Douglas Williams after their match against Ink Inc . ( Shannon Moore and Jesse Neal ) , but then Samoa Joe came out and attacked both of them . The following week , Kendrick picked up his first singles victory since returning to TNA by defeating Williams after a distraction from Kazarian . As a result of his victory , Kendrick was given a shot at Williams ' X Division Championship at Slammiversary VIII , but was unable to win the title . Kendrick received a rematch the following month at Victory Road , but was defeated again by Williams , this time in an Ultimate X submission match . On the September 2 edition of Impact ! , Kendrick joined EV 2 @.@ 0 , a stable consisting of former Extreme Championship Wrestling performers . At Bound for Glory Kendrick interfered in a Lethal Lockdown match between EV 2 @.@ 0 and Fortune and helped his team win the match between the two factions . At Turning Point EV 2 @.@ 0 faced Fortune in a ten @-@ man tag team match , where each member of EV 2 @.@ 0 put their TNA careers on the line . Kendrick was taken out of the match immediately , after being attacked by Douglas Williams . In the end , EV 2 @.@ 0 lost the match and Sabu was released from TNA . 
 = = = = X Division Champion ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 After the dissolution of EV 2 @.@ 0 , Kendrick spent months wrestling mainly house show matches , before returning to PPV on April 17 , 2011 , at Lockdown , where he wrestled in an eight @-@ man X Division number one contender 's Xscape match , where he outlasted six other men , before losing to Max Buck . On the May 5 edition of Impact ! , Kendrick came together with Amazing Red and Generation Me to battle for X Division 's future , after the legitimate firing of Jay Lethal . On June 12 at Slammiversary IX , Kendrick failed in his attempt to win the X Division Championship from Abyss in a three – way match with Kazarian . On July 10 at Destination X , Kendrick defeated Abyss to win the TNA X Division Championship for the first time . On the July 21 edition of Impact Wrestling , Kendrick made his first successful defense of the X Division Championship by defeating Alex Shelley , following outside interference from Austin Aries . The following week Kendrick successfully defended the title against Abyss in an Ultimate X match to end the feud . On August 7 at Hardcore Justice , Kendrick successfully defended the title against Alex Shelley and Austin Aries in a three @-@ way match . On September 11 at No Surrender , Kendrick lost the X Division Championship . On the September 29 edition of Impact Wrestling , Kendrick won a five @-@ man ladder match to earn a rematch with Aries . On the October 6 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kendrick was attacked by Kid Kash for disrespect on Kash . On October 16 at Bound for Glory , Kendrick failed in his attempt to regain the X Division Championship from Austin Aries , this was Kendrick 's last TNA pay @-@ per @-@ view appearance . On the November 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kendrick teamed up with Jesse Sorensen to help defeat Austin Aries and Kid Kash in a tag team match , this was Kendrick 's last appearance in TNA . After three months of inactivity , TNA announced that Kendrick was released from his TNA contract on February 27 , 2012 . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On June 18 , 2011 , at Dominion 6 @.@ 18 , Kendrick made a surprise debut for New Japan Pro Wrestling in Osaka , teaming with Gedo and Jado in a six @-@ man tag team match , where they defeated Jushin Thunder Liger , Kushida and Tiger Mask , when Kendrick pinned Kushida with the Sliced Bread # 2 . Three days later Kendrick , Gedo and Jado were eliminated from the J Sports Crown Openweight 6 Man Tag Tournament in the first round by the team of IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi , Kushida and Máscara Dorada . The two matches built to a singles match between Kendrick and Kushida on June 23 , where Kushida managed to pick up the win . During his time in New Japan , Kendrick became an associate member of Chaos and competes for Chaos whenever he has toured New Japan . 
 On May 11 , 2012 , New Japan announced that Kendrick would return to the promotion to take part in the 2012 Best of the Super Juniors tournament as Davey Richards ' replacement . In the round @-@ robin stage of the tournament , which ran from May 27 to June 9 , Kendrick won five out of his eight matches , but a loss to Ryusuke Taguchi in his final round @-@ robin match caused him to narrowly miss advancing to the semifinals of the tournament . Kendrick returned to New Japan on October 21 , when he and Low Ki entered the 2012 Super Jr . Tag Tournament as " Chaos World Wrestling Warriors " . However , the team was eliminated from the tournament in the first round by Apollo 55 ( Prince Devitt and Ryusuke Taguchi ) . 
 In May 2013 , Kendrick returned to participate in the 2013 Best of the Super Juniors , where he managed to win four out of his eight matches , failing to qualify for the semifinals . Kendrick returned to NJPW on October 25 to take part in the 2013 Super Jr . Tag Tournament , where he teamed with Beretta . They were , however , eliminated in their first round match by The Young Bucks , following a pre @-@ match assault by Bullet Club . Kendrick teamed with various Chaos stablemates in <unk> six @-@ man and eight @-@ man tag team matches for the rest of the tour , which lasted until November 6 . 
 = = = Third return to WWE ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On December 11 , Kendrick was backstage at NXT TakeOver : R Evolution as he was reportedly trying out for a Trainer role at the WWE Performance Center . Kendrick returned to WWE with his " The Brian Kendrick " character at the NXT television tapings on December 12 , 2014 , losing a dark match to Solomon Crowe . Kendrick made a televised return on the February 25 , 2015 episode of NXT , losing to Finn Balor in the main event . Soon after , Kendrick began working as a trainer at the WWE Performance Center and began training WWE Diva Eva Marie , as well as Tough Enough Season 6 contestants Daria <unk> and Mada Abdelhamid . 
 On June 13 , 2016 , Kendrick was announced as a participant in WWE 's upcoming Cruiserweight Classic tournament . The tournament kicked off on June 23 with Kendrick defeating Raul Mendoza in his first round match . On July 14 , Kendrick defeated Tony <unk> in his second round match . 
 = = = Second return to ROH ( 2016 ) = = = 
 Kendrick returned to Ring of Honor on February 2nd , 2016 to defeat Will Ferrara in a non @-@ televised match . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kendrick has been married to Tough Enough finalist Taylor Matheny since August 2008 . 
 = = Media = = 
 Best of Spanky – Danger ! Danger ! ( DVD ) Ring of Honor 
 = = Other media = = 
 Kendrick appeared as a contestant on the March 8 , 2011 episode of The Price Is Right , where he won his " one bid " prize ( a $ 3 @,@ 018 popcorn machine ) , played the game Secret " X " and lost , and was eliminated from the game after spinning the wheel . 
 Kendrick also appeared in Season 4 of Total Divas , training Eva Marie . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Cobra clutch with bodyscissors – mid – 2010 
 Crossface – 2016 – present 
 Sliced Bread # 2 ( Independent circuit / WWE / TNA ) / The Kendrick ( WWE ) ( Shiranui ) 
 Shooting star press 
 Signature moves 
 Camel clutch followed by multiple crossface punches 
 Dr. <unk> 's Secret Recipe ( Corner backflip kick ) 
 Electric Mayhem ( Diving facebreaker knee smash ) 
 Hurricanrana 
 Left Turn at Albuquerque ( Turning frog splash ) 
 Leg lariat 
 Tornado DDT 
 Whirling <unk> ( Diving somersault corkscrew plancha ) 
 Nicknames 
 " The Post @-@ Apocalyptic Scavenger " 
 " The Man With A Plan " 
 " Spanky " 
 " The Wizard of Odd " ' 
 Managers 
 Prince Nana 
 Ashley 
 Ezekiel Jackson 
 Entrance Themes 
 " Shine " by The Dirty Heads ( FWE ) 
 " Man With A Plan " by Chris <unk> ft . Nick Walker ( WWE / NXT ) 
 " Sweet Talk " by Kito featuring <unk> Lee ( NJPW ) 
 " Make Em ' Say " by King <unk> ( ROH ) 
 " Danger ! High Voltage " by Electric Six ( ROH ) 
 " Quality Control " by Jurassic 5 ( ROH ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 DDT Pro @-@ Wrestling 
 Ironman Heavymetalweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Full Impact Pro 
 FIP Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Sal Rinauro 
 Florida Rumble ( 2004 ) 
 Insane Championship Wrestling 
 ICW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Paul London 
 Los Angeles Wrestling 
 LAW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Memphis Championship Wrestling 
 MCW Southern Light Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 MCW Southern Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with American Dragon 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI Tag Team of the Year ( 2007 ) with Paul London 
 PWI ranked him # 43 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2003 
 Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One / Pro Wrestling Zero1 @-@ Max 
 NWA International Lightweight Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Low Ki ( 1 ) and Kaz Hayashi ( 1 ) 
 NWA / UPW / ZERO @-@ ONE International Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Zero1 @-@ Max United States Openweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Santino Bros. Wrestling 
 <unk> Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Steeltown Pro Wrestling 
 SPW Provincial Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Texas Wrestling Alliance 
 TWA Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 TWA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with American Dragon 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA X Division Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Paul London 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Paul London 
 = Halo : Contact Harvest = 
 Halo : Contact Harvest is a military science fiction novel by Joseph Staten , based on the Halo series of video games . The book was released in October 2007 and is the fifth Halo novel , following 2006 's Halo : Ghosts of Onyx , written by Eric Nylund . Staten is a longtime employee of Bungie , the developer of the Halo video game series ; he directed the cut scenes in the video games and is a major contributor to Halo 's storyline . He set out to write a novel that appealed to gamers , as well as those who had never read a Halo novel . 
 Set in 2525 , twenty @-@ seven years before the events of Halo : Combat Evolved , the novel tells the story of the United Nations Space Command 's first encounter with the alien collective known as the Covenant on the colony world of Harvest , and the beginning of the long war that follows . The novel is an ensemble piece , with the action being narrated from both human and Covenant viewpoints . The protagonist is a young Marine , Staff Sergeant Avery Johnson , who also appears in the Halo video games . Upon release , the book was generally well received and became The New York Times bestseller in its first week . Critics pointed to the novel 's success as a sign of the increasing importance of story in video games . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to Staten , Tor Books asked Bungie if they had someone suited to writing the next novel ; Staten , having written much of the Halo series canon , was the obvious choice . The author found that the book was the perfect way to elaborate on the Halo story without stripping it down for a video game : " I always felt we shortchanged [ the player ] . We don 't have a lot of time to tell story while the bullets are flying . " In addition , Staten said that the novel was the perfect way to do the character of Sergeant Johnson — who had appeared somewhat one @-@ dimensional in the games — proper justice as a well @-@ rounded character . Replying to G4TV 's question about writing action , Staten replied that he felt that writing " involves slowing things down " , in comparison to a game of Halo . The author also said that the work of his favorite science @-@ fiction authors helped teach him the importance of honing a " strong , consistent voice " . 
 Originally , the novel was due to ship before the September 25 release of Halo 3 ; Staten stated that due to his involvement with both projects , the novel slipped behind . He also emphasized that he hoped Contact Harvest was a good novel , not just a good Halo novel ; " ... someone who isn 't a Halo fan – someone who hasn 't read any of the previous novels – will be able to pick up Contact Harvest and enjoy the read " . 
 This focus on accuracy was a challenge for Staten , as he believes his audience is highly intelligent , willing , and able to report flaws ; fellow Bungie employees cross @-@ referenced his drafts with the " Halo Story Bible " to ensure canonical agreement . One example of fans taking Staten to task over the novel occurred soon after the novel 's cover was revealed in July 2007 . The cover depicts the protagonist , Sergeant Avery Johnson holding a weapon known as the Battle Rifle . As the weapon was first introduced in the video game Halo 2 and the events of Contact Harvest take place decades before the game , fans were quick to say that Staten had made a mistake . Staten later pointed out he had good reasons for including the offending weapon in the book , and justified the inclusion by stating that the weapon is a prototypical form of the version players use in the game . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
