 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Contact Harvest takes place in the year <unk> of the Halo universe , where faster @-@ than @-@ light technology has allowed humanity to spread across the galaxy , founding new colonies administrated by the United Nations Space Command , or UNSC . The wealthier " Inner " colonies are politically dominant over the more recently established outer colonies , although the older planets rely on the new worlds for raw materials . Tensions lead to unrest and outright rebellion , with radical members of the outer colonies known as " <unk> " launching terrorist attacks on the UNSC in a bid for independence . 
 Contact Harvest features several characters seen previously in the video games as well as new characters . The protagonist is Avery Johnson , a Marine who is sent to the colony of Harvest to deal with suspected <unk> activity ; Johnson had previously appeared in the video game Halo : Combat Evolved and its sequels , as well as the novel Halo : First Strike . A side character is Wallace Jenkins , a hapless Marine who is assimilated by the parasitic Flood in Halo : Combat Evolved and plays an important role in the novelization of the game , Halo : The Flood . Contact Harvest also illuminates the origins of several alien Covenant characters who play important roles in the video games , such as the Brute Chieftain Tartarus and the three Prophet Hierarchs , Truth , Mercy , and Regret . 
 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 Humanity has spread across the galaxy , and the outer colony " Harvest " is one of the most remote . Although Harvest itself is only one @-@ third the size of Earth , its fertile surface serves as the breadbasket for the other colonies . The United Nations Space Command Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) notices strange disappearances of human ships around Harvest , and assumes that <unk> are attacking the vessels . ONI pulls Staff Sergeants Avery Johnson and Nolan Byrne from the frontlines of the civil war to raise a militia to protect Harvest . The disappearances are revealed to be alien Kig @-@ Yar vessels intercepting the ships in their search for relics left by the Forerunners , an ancient race sacred to the Kig @-@ Yar and other members of the Covenant . Members of the vessel are shocked to discover that their instruments indicates hundreds of thousands of Forerunner relics on the planet of Harvest . A Covenant Unggoy Deacon named Dadab is alarmed when he realizes the Kig @-@ Yar <unk> intends to steal a portion of the relics for herself , starting with relics leaving the planet on a human cargo ship . The ship is actually a trap set by the humans , with Johnson and Byrne on board . Johnson and Byrne kill several of the Covenant boarding party when they enter the cargo ship , which is later destroyed by a methane explosion . Dadab and his Huragok friend , Lighter than Some , escape the blast and are picked up by a Covenant ship crewed by Jiralhanae . These agents , led by their chieftain Maccabeus , have been ordered to confirm the presence of the relics ; despite the reservations of his nephew , Tartarus , Maccabeus agrees to parley with the humans on Harvest . In the midst of the meeting in Harvest 's gardens , the Covenant begin a firefight and the peace talks are shattered . 
 On the Covenant holy city of High Charity , two San ' Shyuum , the Minister of Fortitude and the Vice @-@ Minister of Tranquility , plot to take the place of the three Prophet Hierarchs currently leading the Covenant . They visit the old , supposedly senile Philologist for blessings and advice , seeking a third San ' Shyuum to help them usurp the throne . As Tranquility and Fortitude are meeting with the Philologist , the " Oracle " , a Forerunner A.I. named Mendicant Bias , suddenly awakens from eons of dormancy . Mendicant Bias informs the San ' Shyuum that the " Forerunner artifacts " found at Harvest are actually the A.I. ' s " makers " , living Forerunners — meaning that the humans themselves are the descendants of the Covenant 's gods , and that all the Covenant 's writings are false . The Minister of Fortitude realizes that the truth must never be revealed , as this revelation would tear the Covenant apart . Instead , Fortitude , Tranquility , and the Philologist plot to quickly take the throne so they can exterminate the " <unk> " . 
 Back on Harvest , Johnson and his squad of militia are heavily out @-@ manned and out @-@ gunned . Maccabeus is ordered to " glass " the planet from space , but disobeys and launches a ground assault in an effort to recover the " relics " . The human militia tries to keep the aliens busy while evacuating the civilians from the planet ; this requires Johnson and his team to board an orbital platform controlled by Dadab and his troops . Tartarus challenges Maccabeus for control of the Jiralhanae pack , killing his uncle and becoming the next leader . Lighter than Some is killed by Tartarus ' troops , and Dadab goes off to kill those he believes are responsible . As his weapon only has one more shot left , Dadab searches for Tartarus , who is fighting Johnson . Dadab destroys Tartarus ' shield , and the enraged Brute kills the deacon . Wallace Jenkins , a young militia member that had lost his family in the battle , attempts to finish Tartarus off , but the alien escapes . The human civilians and survivors of Harvest successfully evacuate the planet on hundreds of freighters , while on High Charity , the Minister of Fortitude , Tranquility , and The Philologist become the new Prophet Hierarchs . They take the names Truth , Regret , and Mercy , declaring a new age for the Covenant has begun , and that the humans must be annihilated for their crimes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Contact Harvest debuted at # 7 on The New York Times Best Sellers list ; it remained on the list for four more weeks . The novel also appeared on the USA Today bestseller 's list at the same time . Reviewers noted that despite being an unproven writer , Staten had succeeded in crafting an excellent novel ; complaints included the perceived overly descriptive prose and use of military jargon . In response to the success of the novel , Will <unk> of <unk> said that " it makes sense " because videogames are increasingly about the story . A ten @-@ CD audiobook was later released , featuring the voices of Holter Graham and Jen Taylor ; Publishers Weekly enjoyed Graham 's performance , but felt Taylor 's over @-@ emphasis and [ sic ] cheesy dialects detracted from the tension of the novel . 
 Contact Harvest 's success was surprising to some . On January 8 , 2008 , National Public Radio 's " All Things Considered " segment ran a story in which the Chana Joffe asked Staten if gamers read and acting surprised that Halo had a story . Several writers covering the story believed that the " All Things Considered " piece was biased against gamers and insulting . Scott Siegel of Joystiq , in particular , railed against interviewer Chana Joffe , saying that she " takes unfair jabs at video game fans " . 
 = Carnivores Tour = 
 The Carnivores Tour was a co @-@ headlining concert tour by American rock bands Linkin Park and Thirty Seconds to Mars . It was launched in support of Linkin Park 's sixth studio album The Hunting Party ( 2014 ) and Thirty Seconds to Mars ' fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . The joint tour was officially announced in March 2014 at a press conference , with the full itinerary being revealed . It began on August 8 , 2014 in West Palm Beach , Florida and ended on September 19 in Concord , California , visiting arenas and stadiums throughout North America . It was promoted by Live Nation and sponsored in @-@ part by Infinity . American rock band AFI served as the opening act for the tour . 
 During the concert tour , Linkin Park and Thirty Seconds to Mars promoted greener touring practices and worked with Music for Relief , a non @-@ profit organization to support disaster relief and programs to protect the environment . The Carnivores Tour received general critical acclaim , with critics praising both artists ' performance abilities and the production of the show . The concert at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles , California , was filmed and streamed live over the interactive social platform VyRT . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rumours of a co @-@ headlining tour from Linkin Park and Thirty Seconds to Mars first circulated on March 3 , 2014 , when a Texas radio station revealed that the two " modern rock icons " would be partaking in a tour starting in late summer and that a performance in The Woodlands would take place on September 5 . The tour was officially announced the following day , on March 4 , 2014 at a press conference held at Milk Studios in Los Angeles , California with Mike Shinoda and Chester Bennington from Linkin Park , and Jared Leto from Thirty Seconds to Mars . The conference was broadcast on the internet through the interactive social platform VyRT . In an interview with Billboard , Bennington explained that a co @-@ headlining tour with Thirty Seconds to Mars had been a long time coming ; Linkin Park , indeed , had polled their fans a number of times in order to identify which artist they would like to join them on tour and Thirty Seconds to Mars was the most sought @-@ after band multiple times . Thirty Seconds to Mars first worked with Linkin Park in 2007 , opening some European shows for the band . 
 Set for August 2014 , the Carnivores Tour showcased Linkin Park 's sixth studio album The Hunting Party ( 2014 ) and Thirty Seconds to Mars ' fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . Speaking on the tour name , Shinoda said , " ' Carnivores ' is a metaphor that is meant to convey an appetite for something visceral and substantive . I feel that 's exactly the hunger this tour will feed . " Leto added , " We are so excited to join our friends on this epic journey . It 's going to be the adventure of a lifetime . " American rock band AFI was confirmed as the supporting act for the tour , promoting their ninth album Burials ( 2013 ) . The Carnivores Tour was sponsored in @-@ part by Infinity and promoted by Live Nation . 
 = = Development = = 
 Sales for general tickets began on March 7 , 2014 , with Hollywood Bowl and Verizon Wireless Amphitheater on sale March 10 . Linkin Park and Thirty Seconds to Mars offered pre @-@ sale tickets for their respective fan club members . Linkin Park 's set list mixed The Hunting Party with the rest of the band 's catalog . The set by Thirty Seconds to Mars encompassed songs from Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams , as well as tracks from their previous albums . Supporting act AFI did not perform on September 15 in Los Angeles . Mike Shinoda described the tour production as " more @-@ video based " , incorporating The Hunting Party artwork created by visual artist James Jean . He explained : 
 " It adapts with the show , I think in the context of a live show it 's important to have something that lives and breathes with the show . One of the challenges that I posed to the production team was ... if we decided to play something different , if we decided to extend a part , whatever we decide to do , I want the artwork to change with the performance . So it needs to be malleable ... It 's as much a piece of art as the music is , so we want it to be compelling and fit with the overall kind of aesthetic of what the band is up to right at this moment . " 
 A minute @-@ long trailer for the tour premiered in March 2014 , featuring a British narrator and assorted live scenes , paired with some of the bands ' songs , including " Numb " by Linkin Park and " The Kill " by Thirty Seconds to Mars . The promotional poster for the tour featured the three groups ' logos with a background based on The Hunting Party artwork . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 A category of ticket packages was created to be sold by an auction process at prices estimated at up to $ 1 @,@ 000 . All proceeds were donated to Music for Relief , a non @-@ profit organization founded by Linkin Park to support disaster relief and programs to protect and restore the environment . Additionally , one dollar per concert ticket sold was contributed to the charity . A tent of Music for Relief was staffed by local volunteers at each concert . The tent featured a photo booth which enabled fans to document their concert experience and express their support to take action on climate change , leading up to the United Nations Climate Summit that took place on September 23 , 2014 in New York City . Various clean energy tools were also showcased . 
 Determined to offset the impact that the tour would had on the environment , Music for Relief and environmental non @-@ profit <unk> promoted greener touring practices such as recycling throughout the venue , free water stations for refillable bottles , reusable products and carpooling incentives . Touring vehicles were powered by low @-@ emissions renewable biodiesel , a fuel made partly from vegetable oil . Non @-@ profit organizations Love Hope Strength and <unk> joined the tour for select dates . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The tour was met with high praise from critics . Ashley Zimmerman from the New Times Broward @-@ Palm Beach called the opening night of the tour " memorable " , describing the set by Thirty Seconds to Mars as " a bit like a party " , during which lead vocalist Jared Leto provided " raw and beautiful vocals " . She further wrote that co @-@ headliner Linkin Park played a " great mix of old and new songs " that was able to please those who brought the band to fame , while still showcasing the newest work . Jay Cridlin of the Tampa Bay Times commented that the two bands made Steinbrenner Field 's return to concert a " smashing spectacle " creating a " powerful , festival @-@ like feeling " . He felt that Thirty Seconds to Mars delivered a " fully committed performance " , praising the band 's energy on stage , and noticed the " futuristic " production of the show by Linkin Park . Alison Angel , writing for Creative Loafing Charlotte , opined that the tour offered fans a chance to catch " three big rock bands " on a single event and felt that each performance was a " sight to behold " . She further said , " between AFI tearing up the stage before the headliners even appeared , to the theatrics in Thirty Seconds to Mars ' act and the grand performance of hard @-@ rocking Linkin Park , fans walked out with a sense that this moment was truly once in a lifetime . " Danny Crandall of the The Sun Chronicle commented that Linkin Park " blitzed through an intense , head @-@ bobbing " set , while Thirty Seconds to Mars played a " rousing performance " high on audience interaction . 
 Loudwire 's Mary Ouellette , who attended the same show , felt that Thirty Seconds to Mars emphatically invited the crowd into their self @-@ proclaimed cult , conducting a " straight up rock ' n ' roll sermon " , while Linkin Park took a different direction fueled by the " latest in technology and good old @-@ fashioned angst " . She concluded in her review , " Strangely enough , the combined forces made for one of the most memorable tours of the summer . " Andrej Ivanov from The Scene Magazine who attended the show in Montreal , gave a positive review and hailed Linkin Park 's " outstanding setlist " and Thirty Seconds to Mars ' musicianship . He also complimented special guest AFI for " bringing it back to our angsty teenage years " . Chris Riemenschneider of the Star Tribune , while praising Thirty Seconds to Mars ' performance , gave a negative response to the set by Linkin Park , noticing that older tracks were abbreviated to make room for a drum solo and less impactful songs . In his review for The Arizona Republic , Ed Masley commended the set by Linkin Park featuring a " well @-@ chosen mixture of career @-@ defining hits and album tracks " and hailed the inspirational and charismatic performance by Thirty Seconds to Mars . Mary Bonney from LA Music Blog , reviewing the concert at the Hollywood Bowl , felt that the tour delivered an " epic rock experience that turned up the heat " . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 In August 2014 , it was announced that VyRT would exclusively broadcast worldwide the performance scheduled on September 15 at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles . Sales for digital tickets began on September 3 . VyRT provided access to several different experience packages featuring backstage interactivity with both bands and exclusive content . On September 15 , before Thirty Seconds to Mars took to the stage , the VyRT platform was hacked and was a victim of a piracy . Jared Leto , founder of the streaming service , was forced to delay the performance by Thirty Seconds to Mars by an hour to resolve the issue . The audience eventually lost approximately three minutes of actual stage time , but the set list was shortened . The event included real @-@ time social community engagement from audiences worldwide . A second broadcast of the show was later scheduled for September 17 , 2014 . The performance by Thirty Seconds to Mars became commercially available for download in October 2014 through VyRT . Footage recorded during the Carnivores Tour was uploaded to Linkin Park 's official YouTube account . 
 = = Set list = = 
 This set list is representative of the show in Charlotte at PNC Music Pavilion . It does not represent all dates throughout the tour . 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = Cross of Gold speech = 
 The Cross of Gold speech was delivered by William Jennings Bryan , a former United States Representative from Nebraska , at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago on July 9 , 1896 . In the address , Bryan supported bimetallism or " free silver " , which he believed would bring the nation prosperity . He decried the gold standard , concluding the speech , " you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold " . Bryan 's address helped catapult him to the Democratic Party 's presidential nomination ; it is considered one of the greatest political speeches in American history . 
 For twenty years , Americans had been bitterly divided over the nation 's monetary standard . The gold standard , which the United States had effectively been on since 1873 , limited the money supply but eased trade with other nations , such as the United Kingdom , whose currency was also based on gold . Many Americans , however , believed that bimetallism ( making both gold and silver legal tender ) was necessary for the nation 's economic health . The financial Panic of 1893 intensified the debates , and when Democratic President Grover Cleveland continued to support the gold standard against the will of much of his party , activists became determined to take over the Democratic Party organization and nominate a silver @-@ supporting candidate in 1896 . 
 Bryan had been a dark horse candidate with little support in the convention . His speech , delivered at the close of the debate on the party platform , electrified the convention and is generally credited with getting him the nomination for president . However , he lost the general election to William McKinley and the United States formally adopted the gold standard in 1900 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Monetary standards and the United States = = = 
 In January 1791 , at the request of Congress , Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton issued a report on the currency . At the time , there was no mint in the United States ; foreign coins were used . Hamilton proposed a monetary system based on bimetallism , in which the new currency would be equal to a given amount of gold , or a larger amount of silver ; at the time a given weight of gold was worth about 15 times as much as the same amount of silver . Although Hamilton understood that adjustment might be needed from time to time as precious metal prices fluctuated , he believed that if the nation 's unit of value were defined only by one of the two precious metals used for coins , the other would descend to the status of mere merchandise . He also proposed the establishment of a mint , at which citizens could present gold or silver , and receive it back , struck into money . On April 2 , 1792 , Congress passed the Mint Act of 1792 . This legislation defined a unit of value for the new nation , to be known as a dollar . The new unit of currency was defined to be equal to 24 @.@ 75 grains ( 1 @.@ 604 g ) of gold , or alternatively , 371 @.@ 25 grains ( 24 @.@ 057 g ) of silver , establishing a ratio of value between gold and silver of 15 : 1 . The legislation also established the Mint of the United States . 
 In the early 19th century , the economic disruption caused by the Napoleonic Wars caused United States gold coins to be worth more as bullion than as money , and they vanished from circulation . Governmental response to this shortage was hampered by the fact that officials did not clearly understand what had happened . In 1830 , Treasury Secretary Samuel D. Ingham proposed adjusting the ratio between gold and silver in US currency to 15 @.@ 8 : 1 , which had for some time been the ratio in Europe . It was not until 1834 that Congress acted , changing the gold / silver ratio to 16 @.@ 002 : 1 . This was close enough to the market value to make it uneconomic to export either US gold or silver coins . When silver prices rose relative to gold as a reaction to the California Gold Rush , silver coinage was worth more than face value , and rapidly flowed overseas for melting . Despite vocal opposition led by Tennessee Representative ( and future president ) Andrew Johnson , the precious metal content of smaller silver coins was reduced in 1853 . Silver was now undervalued at the Mint ; accordingly little was presented for striking into money . 
 The Coinage Act of 1873 eliminated the standard silver dollar . It also repealed the statutory provisions allowing silver bullion to be presented to the Mint and returned in the form of circulating money . In passing the Coinage Act , Congress eliminated bimetallism . During the economic chaos of the Panic of 1873 , the price of silver dropped significantly , but the Mint would accept none for striking into legal tender . Silver producers complained , and many Americans came to believe that only through bimetallism could the nation achieve and maintain prosperity . They called for the return to pre @-@ 1873 laws , which would require the Mint to take all the silver offered it and return it , struck into silver dollars . This would inflate the money supply , and , adherents argued , increase the nation 's prosperity . Critics contended that the inflation which would follow the introduction of such a policy would harm workers , whose wages would not rise as fast as prices would , and the operation of Gresham 's law would drive gold from circulation , effectively placing the United States on a silver standard . 
 = = = Early attempts towards free silver = = = 
 To advocates of what became known as free silver , the 1873 act became known as the " Crime of ' 73 " . Pro @-@ silver forces , with congressional leaders such as Missouri Representative Richard P. Bland , sought the passage of bills to allow depositors of silver bullion to receive it back in the form of coin . Such bills , sponsored by Bland , passed the House of Representatives in 1876 and 1877 , but both times failed in the Senate . A third attempt in early 1878 again passed the House , and eventually both houses after being amended in the Senate . The bill , as modified by amendments sponsored by Iowa Senator William B. Allison , did not reverse the 1873 provisions , but required the Treasury to purchase a minimum of $ 2 million of silver bullion per month ; the profit , or seignorage from monetizing the silver was to be used to purchase more silver bullion . The silver would be struck into dollar coins , to be circulated or else stored and used as backing for silver certificates . The Bland – Allison Act was vetoed by President Rutherford B. Hayes , but was enacted by Congress over his veto on February 28 , 1878 . 
 Implementation of the Bland – Allison Act did not end calls for free silver . The 1880s saw a steep decline in the prices of grain and other agricultural commodities . Silver advocates argued that this dropoff , which caused the price of grain to fall below its cost of production , was caused by the failure of the government to adequately increase the money supply , which had remained steady on a per capita basis . Advocates of the gold standard attributed the decline to advances in production and transportation . The late 19th century saw divergent views in economics as the laissez @-@ faire orthodoxy was questioned by younger economists , and both sides found ample support for their views from theorists . 
 In 1890 , the Sherman Silver Purchase Act greatly increased government purchases of silver . The government pledged to stand behind the silver dollars and treasury notes issued under the act by redeeming them in gold . Pursuant to this promise , government gold reserves dwindled over the following three years . Although the economic Panic of 1893 had a number of causes , President Grover Cleveland believed the inflation caused by Sherman 's act to be a major factor , and called a special session of Congress to repeal it . Congress did so , but the debates showed bitter divides in both major parties between silver and gold factions . Cleveland tried to replenish the Treasury through issuance of bonds which could only be purchased with gold , with little effect but to increase the public debt , as the gold continued to be withdrawn in redemption for paper and silver currency . Many in the public saw the bonds as benefiting bankers , not the nation . The bankers ' feeling was that they did not want loans repaid in an inflated currency — the gold standard was deflationary , and as creditors , they preferred to be paid in such a currency , whereas debtors preferred to repay in inflated currency . 
 The effects of the recession which began in 1893 , and which continued through 1896 , ruined many Americans . Contemporary estimates were an unemployment rate as high as 25 % . The task of relieving the jobless fell to churches and other charities , as well as to labor unions . Farmers went bankrupt ; their farms were sold to pay their debts . Some of the impoverished died of disease or starvation ; others killed themselves . 
 = = = Bryan seeks the nomination = = = 
 Among those who spoke against the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act was Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan . Known as an orator even then , Bryan had not always favored free silver out of conviction , stating in 1892 that he was for it because the people of Nebraska were for it . By 1893 , his views on silver had evolved , and on the floor of the House of Representatives , he delivered a riveting three @-@ hour address against repeal of the Silver Purchase Act . In his conclusion , Bryan reached back in history : 
 When a crisis like the present arose and the national bank of his day sought to control the politics of the nation , God raised up an Andrew Jackson , who had the courage to grapple with that great enemy , and by overthrowing it , he made himself the idol of the people and reinstated the Democratic party in public confidence . What will the decision be today ? The Democratic party has won the greatest success in its history . Standing upon this victory @-@ crowned summit , will it turn its face to the rising or the setting sun ? Will it choose blessings or cursings — life or death — which ? Which ? 
 Despite the repeal of the act , economic conditions failed to improve . The year 1894 saw considerable labor unrest . President Cleveland sent federal troops to Illinois to end the Pullman strike — workers at the Pullman Palace Car Company , which made railroad cars , had struck after wages were cut . Railway employees had refused to handle Pullman cars in sympathy with the strikers ; this action threatened to paralyze the nation 's rail lines . The President 's move was opposed by the Democratic Governor of Illinois , John Altgeld . Angered by Cleveland 's actions in the labor dispute , and by his uncompromising stand against silver , Altgeld began to organize Democrats against Cleveland 's renomination in 1896 . Although Altgeld and his adherents urged voters to distinguish between Cleveland and his party , the Democrats lost 113 seats in the House in the 1894 midterm elections , the greatest loss by a majority party in congressional history . The Republicans gained control of the House , as well as the Senate , which until 1913 was elected by the state legislatures rather than by the popular vote . Among those defeated for Senate was Bryan in Nebraska . 
 Bryan had long planned to run for president . Although he would only be 36 years old in 1896 — one year above the constitutional minimum — he believed the silver question could carry him not only to the nomination , but to the presidency . He traveled widely , speaking to audiences across the nation . His speeches impressed many ; even some of his opponents later conceded that Bryan was the most compelling speaker they had ever heard . Bryan 's speeches evolved over time ; in December 1894 , in a speech in Congress , he first used a phrase from which would come the conclusion to his most famous address : as originally stated , it was " I will not help to crucify mankind upon a cross of gold . " 
 A myth has arisen that Bryan was an unknown prior to 1896 . This was not the case ; Bryan was well known as an orator on the tariff and silver questions . Albert Shaw , editor of The Review of Reviews , stated that after Bryan 's nomination , many easterners professed not to have heard of him but : " If , indeed , they had not heard of Mr. Bryan before , they had failed to follow closely the course of American politics in the past eight years . As a Democratic member of the Ways and Means Committee through two Congresses , Mr. Bryan was by all odds the ablest and strongest orator on the Democratic side of the House . His subsequent canvass [ campaign ] for the United States senatorship in Nebraska was noteworthy and conspicuous on many accounts . " 
 In the aftermath of the 1894 election , the silver forces , led by Altgeld and others , began an attempt to take over the machinery of the Democratic Party . Historian Stanley Jones , in his study of the 1896 election , suggests that western Democrats would have opposed Cleveland even if the party had held its congressional majority in 1894 ; with the disastrous defeat , they believed the party would be wiped out in the West if it did not support silver . Bryan biographer Paulo E. Coletta wrote , " during this year [ July 1894 – June 1895 ] of calamities , disintegration and revolution , each crisis aided Bryan because it caused division within his party and permitted him to contest for its mastery as it slipped from Cleveland 's fingers . " 
 In early 1896 , with the economy still poor , there was widespread discontent with the two existing major political parties . Some people , for the most part Democrats , joined the far @-@ left Populist Party . Many Republicans in the western states , dismayed by the strong allegiance of eastern Republicans to the gold standard , considered forming their own party . When the Republicans in June 1896 nominated former Ohio Governor William McKinley for president and passed at his request a platform strongly supporting " sound money " ( the gold standard unless modified by international agreement ) , a number of " Silver Republicans " walked out of the convention . The leader of those who left was Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller ; he was immediately spoken of as a possible candidate for the Democratic nomination . 
 Bryan believed that he could , if nominated , unite the disaffected behind a strong silver campaign . However , part of his strategy was to remain inconspicuous until the last possible moment at the convention . He sent letters to national convention delegates , urging them to support silver , and enclosing copies of his photograph , writings , and speeches . Jones points out that though Bryan 's speaking engagements were not deemed political by the standards of 1896 , by modern measurements he was far more active in campaigning for the nomination than most of the better @-@ known candidates . 
 Historian James A. Barnes , in his historical journal article pointing out myths that have arisen about Bryan 's candidacy and campaign , stated that Bryan 's efforts bore fruit even before the convention : 
 By April , 1896 , many individuals were quietly working for Bryan 's nomination . Circulars were being distributed in Illinois , and admirers in Nebraska , North Carolina , Mississippi , Louisiana , Texas , Arkansas , and other states were urging his selection among their friends . It was not in any concerted or open action , however , that Bryan had his strength ; it was in the friendly predisposition of the mass of the delegates that he had hopes . 
 = = = Selection of delegates = = = 
 The 1896 Democratic National Convention followed events unique in post @-@ Civil War American history . One after another , state conventions to elect delegates to the national convention in Chicago repudiated an incumbent elected president of their party , who had not declared whether he would be a candidate for renomination . According to Barnes : 
 The people of the South and the West had for years been convinced of the enormity of the " crime of 1873 " , and they had long since come to regard silver as the sword that would cut the Gordian knot of privilege . Consciousness of grievances of years and not of months was reflected in the decisive action of the state Democratic conventions in the spring and early summer of 1896 . 
 Many state conventions elected delegates pledged to support bimetallism in the party platform . Gold Democrats were successful in a few states in the Northeast , but had little luck elsewhere . Speakers in some states cursed Cleveland ; the South Carolina convention denounced him . Cleveland issued a statement urging Democratic voters to support gold — the next convention to be held , in Illinois , unanimously supported silver ; the keynote speaker prayed for divine forgiveness for Cleveland 's 1892 nomination . Gold and silver factions in some states , such as Bryan 's Nebraska , sent rival delegations to the convention . 
 = = 1896 convention = = 
 The 1896 Democratic convention opened at the Chicago Coliseum on July 7 , 1896 . Much activity took place in advance of the formal opening as the silver and ( vastly outnumbered ) gold forces prepared their strategies . Silver forces were supported by the Democratic National Bimetallic Committee , the umbrella group formed in 1895 to support silver Democrats in their insurgency against Cleveland . Gold Democrats looked to the President for leadership , but Cleveland , trusting few in his party , did not involve himself further in the gold efforts , but spent the week of the convention fishing off the New Jersey coast . 
 The Bimetallic Committee carefully planned to take control of every aspect of the convention , eliminating any threat that the minority gold faction could take power . It made no secret of these preparations . This takeover was considered far more important than was the choice of presidential candidate , and the committee decided to take no position on who should win the race for the nomination , reasoning that the victor , no matter who he was , would be a silver man . Well aware of the overwhelming forces against them , many gold delegates were inclined to concede the platform battle . 
 Bryan arrived quietly and took rooms at a modest hotel ; the Nebraskan later calculated that he spent less than $ 100 while in Chicago . He arrived convinced that he would win the nomination . He had already begun work on a speech . On the evening of July 5 , Bryan was visited by a delegation of Coloradans , seeking his support for Senator Teller . They went away apologetically , not having known Bryan sought the nomination . 
 = = = Candidates for the nomination = = = 
 Despite the desire of silver delegates to nominate a candidate who shared their beliefs , and although several states instructed their delegates to vote for a specific candidate , there was no overwhelming favorite for the nomination going into the convention . With a two @-@ thirds vote of the delegates needed to nominate , almost every silver delegate would have to vote for the same candidate to assure success , though any organized support from gold delegates would greatly damage a silver candidate 's chances . 
 The only gold man who put together any sort of campaign for the Democratic nomination was Treasury Secretary John G. Carlisle , but he withdrew in April , stating that he was more concerned about the platform of the party than who would lead it . However , as late as June , the gold forces , which still controlled the Democratic National Committee ( DNC ) , continued to believe that the nominee could be pro @-@ gold . Cleveland friend and former Postmaster General Donald M. Dickinson wrote to the President in June 1896 hoping that the delegates would recognize " common sense " and be frightened at the thought of nominating a radical . 
 One of the leaders of the silver movement was Illinois Governor Altgeld ; a native of Germany , he was constitutionally barred from the presidency by his foreign birth . Going into the convention , the two leading candidates for the nomination were former Congressman Bland , who had originated the Bland @-@ Allison Act , and former Iowa Governor Horace Boies , with Bland considered the frontrunner . These were the only two candidates to put together organizations to try to secure delegate votes , though both efforts were cash @-@ starved . Both men had electoral problems : Bland at age 61 was seen by some as a man whose time had passed ; Boies was a former Republican who had once decried bimetallism . There were a large number of potential candidates seen as having less support ; these included Vice President Adlai Stevenson of Illinois , Senator Joseph C. Blackburn of Kentucky , Senator Teller , and Bryan . 
 = = = Silver advocates take control = = = 
 Although Bryan had decided on a strategy to gain the nomination — to give a speech which would make him the logical candidate in the eyes of delegates — he faced obstacles along the way . For one thing , he began the 1896 convention without any official status — the Democratic National Committee , which made the initial determination of which delegations would be seated , had chosen the pro @-@ gold Nebraskans to represent their state . Bryan had been waiting outside the committee room when his rivals were seated by a 27 – 23 vote ; contemporary accounts state he was " somewhat surprised " at the result . The DNC 's action could be reversed , but not until the convention 's credentials committee reported . However , Barnes deemed the actions by the committee immaterial to the outcome due to the silver strength in the convention : 
 Anyone who doubts the power the silverites were ready to unleash in a disciplined and irresistible attack needs only to read the results of the election of temporary chairman . The gold men , though they possessed the machinery of the party , had neither the power nor the strength to challenge their opponents . They could only beg them to spare the party the humiliation of broken traditions and the overthrowing of established control . Nevertheless , Senator John W. Daniel of Virginia was by an overwhelming vote elected temporary chairman , and a Committee on Credentials was appointed that seated Bryan and his contesting Nebraska delegation . 
 Good luck favored Bryan — he was considered for various convention roles by the silverites , but each time was not selected . The temporary chairmanship , for example , would have permitted him to deliver the keynote address . However , Bryan , lacking a seat at the start of the convention , could not be elected temporary chairman . Bryan considered this no loss at all ; the focus of the convention was on the party platform and the debate which would precede its adoption . The platform would symbolize the repudiation of Cleveland and his policies after the insurgents ' long struggle , and Bryan was determined to close the debate on the platform . Bryan , once seated , was Nebraska 's representative to the Committee on Resolutions ( generally called the " platform committee " ) , which allocated 80 minutes to each side in the debate and selected Bryan as one of the speakers . South Carolina Senator Benjamin Tillman was to be the other pro @-@ silver speaker , and originally wished to close the debate . However , the senator wanted 50 minutes to speak , too long for a closing address , and at Bryan 's request agreed to open the debate instead . Accordingly , Bryan became the final speaker on the platform . 
 Delegates , as they waited for the committees to complete their work , spent much of the first two days listening to various orators . Of these , only Senator Blackburn , a silver supporter , sparked much reaction , and that only momentary . Delegates called for better @-@ known speakers , such as Altgeld or Bryan , but were granted neither then ; the Illinois governor declined , and the Nebraskan , once seated , spent much of his time away from the convention floor at the platform committee meeting at the Palmer House . 
 The debate on the platform opened at the start of the third day of the convention , July 9 , 1896 . The session was supposed to begin at 10 : 00 a.m. , but as delegates , slowed by the long commute from the hotels to the Coliseum and fatigue from the first two days , did not arrive on time , proceedings did not begin until 10 : 45 . Nevertheless , large crowds gathered outside the public entrances ; the galleries were quickly packed . Once the convention came to order , Arkansas Senator James K. Jones , chair of the Committee on Resolutions , read the proposed platform to cheers by many delegates ; the reading of the pro @-@ gold minority report attracted less applause . 
 " Pitchfork Ben " Tillman lived up to his nickname with an incendiary address which began with a reference to his home state 's role in beginning the Civil War . Although Tillman endorsed silver , his address was so laced with sectionalism that most silver delegates remained silent for fear of being seen as supporting him . Tillman 's speech , scheduled to be the only one in support of silver except Bryan 's , was so badly received that Senator Jones , who had not planned to speak , gave a brief address asserting that silver was a national issue . 
 Senator David B. Hill of New York , a gold supporter , was next . As Hill moved to the podium , a reporter friend passed Bryan a note urging him to make a patriotic speech without hint of sectionalism ; Bryan responded , " You will not be disappointed . " Hill gave a calm speech defending the gold position , and swayed few delegates . He was followed by two other gold men , Senator William Vilas of Wisconsin and former Massachusetts Governor William E. Russell . Vilas gave a lengthy defense of the Cleveland administration 's policies , so long that Russell , fearing that Vilas ' speech would cut into his time , asked that the time given to the gold proponents be extended by ten minutes . Bryan consented , on condition that his own time was extended by the same amount ; this was agreed to . " And I needed it for the speech I was to make . " Bryan later wrote , " This was another unexpected bit of good fortune . I had never had such an opportunity before in my life and never expect to have again . " 
 Vilas quickly lost his audience , which did not want to hear Cleveland defended . Russell 's address was inaudible to most of the Coliseum ; he was ill and died just over a week later . As the gold men spoke , Bryan ate a sandwich to settle his stomach ; he was often nervous before major speeches . Another reporter approached him and asked him who he thought would win the nomination . " Strictly confidential , not to be quoted for publication : I will be . " 
 = = = Bryan addresses the convention = = = 
 As Russell concluded , to strong applause from gold delegates , there was a buzz of anticipation as Bryan ascended to the podium . There was loud cheering as Bryan stood there , waiting for his audience to calm . Bryan 's lecture tours had left him a well @-@ known spokesman for silver . As yet , no one at the convention had effectively spoken for that cause , which was paramount to the delegates . According to political scientist Richard F. Bensel in his study of the 1896 Democratic convention , " Although the silver men knew they would win this fight , they nonetheless needed someone to tell them — and the gold men — why they must enshrine silver at the heart of the platform . " Bensel noted , " The pump was more than primed , it was ready to explode . " Bryan would say little that he had not said before — the text is similar to that of a speech he had given at Crete , Nebraska the previous week — but he would give the convention its voice . 
 Bryan began softly , 
 I would be presumptuous , indeed , to present myself against the distinguished gentlemen to whom you have listened if this were a mere measuring of abilities ; but this is not a contest between persons . The humblest citizen in all the land , when clad in the armor of a righteous cause , is stronger than all the hosts of error . I come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty — the cause of humanity . 
 Bryan 's opening claimed no personal prestige for himself — but nevertheless placed him as the spokesman for silver . According to Bensel , the self @-@ deprecation helped disarm the delegates . As Bryan was not deemed a major contender for the nomination , even delegates committed to a candidate could cheer him without seeming to betray their allegiance . Bryan then recounted the history of the silver movement ; the audience , which had loudly demonstrated its approval of his opening statements , quieted . Throughout the speech , Bryan had the delegates in the palm of his hand ; they cheered on cue . The Nebraskan later described the audience as like a trained choir . As he concluded his historical recitation , he reminded the silver delegates that they had come to crown their victory , " not to discuss , not to debate , but to enter up the judgment already rendered by the plain people of this country " . 
 Bryan continued with language evoking the Civil War , telling his audience that " in this contest brother has been arrayed against brother , father against son . " By then , as he spoke in a sincere tone , his voice sounded clearly and loudly through the hall . He denied , however that the contest was personal ; he bore no ill @-@ will towards those who supported the gold standard . However , he stated , facing towards the gold delegates , " when you come before us and tell us that we are about to disturb your business interests , we reply that you have disturbed our business interests by your course . " The gold men , during the address , paid close attention and showed their appreciation for Bryan 's oratory . Bryan then defended the right of silver supporters to make their argument against opposition from gold men , who were associated with financial interests , especially in the East . Although his statements nominally responded to a point made by Russell , Bryan had thought of the argument the previous evening , and had not used it in earlier speeches . He always regarded it as the best point he made during the speech , and only the ending caused more reaction from his listeners : 
 We say to you that you have made the definition of a business man too limited in its application . The man who is employed for wages is as much a business man as his employer ; the attorney in a country town is as much a business man as the corporation counsel in a great metropolis ; the merchant at the cross @-@ roads store is as much a business man as the merchant of New York ; the farmer who goes forth in the morning and toils all day , who begins in spring and toils all summer , and who by the application of brain and muscle to the natural resources of the country creates wealth , is as much a business man as the man who goes upon the Board of Trade and bets upon the price of grain ; the miners who go down a thousand feet into the earth , or climb two thousand feet upon the cliffs , and bring forth from their hiding places the precious metals to be poured into the channels of trade are as much business men as the few financial magnates who , in a back room , corner the money of the world . We come to speak of this broader class of business men . 
 Through this passage , Bryan maintained the contrast between the common man and the city @-@ dwelling elite . It was clear to listeners as he worked his way through the comparisons that he would refer to the farmer , and when he did , the hall exploded with sound . His sympathetic comparison contrasted the hardworking farmer with the city businessman , whom Bryan cast as a gambler . The galleries were filled with white as spectators waved handkerchiefs , and it was several minutes before he could continue . The police in the convention hall , not sharing the enthusiasm for silver , were described by the press ( some of whose members were caught up in the frenzy ) as standing as if they thought the audience was about to turn on them . When Bryan resumed , his comparison of miner with miser again electrified the audience ; the uproar prevented him from continuing for several minutes . One farmer in the gallery had been about to leave rather than listen to Bryan , whom he deemed a Populist ; he had been persuaded to stay . At Bryan 's words , he threw his hat into the air , slapped the empty seat in front of him with his coat , and shouted , " My God ! My God ! My God ! " 
 Bryan , having established the right of silver supporters to petition , explained why that petition was not to be denied : 
 It is for these that we speak . We do not come as aggressors . Our war is not a war of conquest ; we are fighting in the defense of our homes , our families , and posterity . We have petitioned , and our petitions have been scorned ; we have entreated , and our entreaties have been disregarded ; we have begged , and they have mocked when our calamity came . We beg no longer ; we entreat no more ; we petition no more . We defy them ! 
 With this call to action , Bryan abandoned any hint at compromise , and adopted the techniques of the radical , polarizing orator , finding no common ground between silver and gold forces . He then defended the remainder of the platform , though only speaking in general terms . He mocked McKinley , said by some to resemble Napoleon , noting that he was nominated on the anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo . The lengthy passage as he discussed the platform and the Republicans helped calm the audience , ensuring he would be heard as he reached his peroration . But Bryan first wished to tie the silver question to a greater cause : 
 Upon which side will the Democratic Party fight ; upon the side of " the idle holders of idle capital " or upon the side of " the struggling masses " ? That is the question which the party must answer first , and then it must be answered by each individual hereafter . The sympathies of the Democratic Party , as shown by the platform , are on the side of the struggling masses , who have ever been the foundation of the Democratic Party . 
 He faced in the direction of the gold @-@ dominated state delegations : 
 There are two ideas of government . There are those who believe that , if you will only legislate to make the well @-@ to @-@ do prosperous , their prosperity will leak through on those below . The Democratic idea , however , has been that if you legislate to make the masses prosperous , their prosperity will find its way up through every class which rests upon them . You come to us and tell us that the great cities are in favor of the gold standard ; we reply that the great cities rest upon our broad and fertile prairies . Burn down your cities and leave our farms , and your cities will spring up again as if by magic ; but destroy our farms and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country . 
 This statement attracted great cheering , and Bryan turned to rhetorically demolish the compromise position on bimetallism — that it should only be accomplished through international agreement : 
 It is the issue of 1776 over again . Our ancestors , when but three millions in number , had the courage to declare their political independence of every other nation ; shall we , their descendants , when we have grown to seventy millions , declare that we are less independent than our forefathers ? No , my friends , that will never be the verdict of our people . Therefore , we care not upon what lines the battle is fought . If they say bimetallism is good , but that we cannot have it until other nations help us , we reply that , instead of having a gold standard because England has , we will restore bimetallism , and then let England have bimetallism because the United States has it . If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing , we will fight them to the uttermost . 
 Now , Bryan was ready to conclude the speech , and according to his biographer , Michael Kazin , step " into the headlines of American history " . 
 Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world , supported by the commercial interests , the laboring interests , and the toilers everywhere , we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them : " You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns ; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold . " 
 As Bryan spoke his final sentence , recalling the Crucifixion of Jesus , he placed his hands to his temples , fingers extended ; with the final words , he extended his arms to his sides straight out to his body and held that pose for about five seconds as if offering himself as sacrifice for the cause , as the audience watched in dead silence . He then lowered them , descended from the podium , and began to head back to his seat as the stillness held . 
 = = Reception and nomination = = 
 = = = Convention events = = = 
 Bryan later described the silence as " really painful " and momentarily thought he had failed . As he moved towards his seat , the Coliseum burst into pandemonium . Delegates threw hats , coats , and handkerchiefs into the air . Others took up the standards with the state names on them with each delegation , and planted them by Nebraska 's . Two alert police officers had joined Bryan as he left the podium , anticipating the crush . The policemen were swept away by the flood of delegates , who raised Bryan to their shoulders and carried him around the floor . The Washington Post newspaper recorded , " bedlam broke loose , delirium reigned supreme . " 
 It took about 25 minutes to restore order , and according to Bensel , " somewhere in the mass demonstration that was convulsing the convention hall , the transfer of sentiment from silver as a policy to Bryan as a presidential candidate took place " . Newspaper accounts of the convention leave little doubt but that , had a vote been taken at that moment ( as many were shouting to do ) , Bryan would have been nominated . Bryan was urged by Senator Jones to allow it , but refused , stating that if his boom would not last overnight , it would never last until November . He soon retired from the convention , returning to his hotel to await the outcome . The convention passed the platform in Bryan 's absence and recessed . 
 The balloting began the following morning , July 10 , with a two @-@ thirds vote necessary to nominate . Bryan , who remained at his hotel , sent word to the Nebraska delegation to make no deals on his behalf . He stood second out of fourteen candidates in the first ballot , behind Bland . On the second ballot , Bryan still stood second , but had gained as other candidates had fallen away . The third ballot saw Bland still in the lead , but Bryan took the lead on the fourth ballot . According to Jones , it was clear that Bland could not win , and that Bryan could not be stopped . On the fifth ballot , the Illinois delegation , led by Governor Altgeld , switched its votes from Bland to Bryan . Other delegations , seeing that Bryan would be nominated , also switched , securing the victory . Nevertheless , he won the nomination without the votes of the gold delegates , most of whom either left the convention or refused to vote . 
 = = = Press reaction = = = 
 Most contemporary press accounts attributed Bryan 's nomination to his eloquence , though in the case of Republican and other gold @-@ favoring newspapers , they considered it his demagoguery . The pro @-@ silver Cleveland Plain Dealer called Bryan 's speech " an eloquent , stirring , and manly appeal " . The Chicago Tribune reported that Bryan had lit the spark " which touched off the trail of gun @-@ powder " . The St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch opined that with the speech , Bryan " just about immortalized himself " . 
 According to the New York World , " Lunacy having dictated the platform , it was perhaps natural that hysteria should evolve the candidate . " The New York Times disparaged Bryan as " the gifted <unk> from Nebraska " . The only paper to predict , after Bryan gave his speech , that he would not be nominated was The Wall Street Journal , which stated , " Bryan has had his day " . The Akron Journal and Republican , no friend to Bryan , opined that " never probably has a national convention been swayed or influenced by a single speech as was the national Democratic convention " . 
 = = Campaign and aftermath = = 
 The Pullman Company offered Bryan a private car for his trip home ; he declined , not wishing to accept corporate favors . As he traveled by rail to Lincoln , he saw farmers and others standing by the tracks , hoping for a glimpse of the new Democratic nominee . He received many letters from supporters , expressing their faith in him in stark terms . One Indiana voter wrote , " God has sent you amongst our people to save the poor from starvation , and we no [ sic ] you will save us . " A farmer in Iowa , in a letter to Bryan , stated , " You are the first big man that i [ sic ] ever wrote to . " 
 When McKinley heard that Bryan was likely to be the nominee , he called the report " rot " and hung up the phone . The Republican nominee was slow to realize the surge of support for Bryan after the nomination , stating his view that the silver sentiment would be gone in a month . When McKinley and his advisers , such as industrialist and future senator Mark Hanna , realized that the views were more than transitory , they began intensive fundraising from corporations and the wealthy . The money went for speakers , pamphlets , and other means of conveying their " sound money " campaign to the voter . With far less money than McKinley , Bryan embarked on a nationwide campaign tour by train on a then @-@ unprecedented scale . McKinley on the other hand , opted for a front porch campaign . Both men spoke to hundreds of thousands of people from their chosen venues . 
 Bryan 's nomination divided the party . The dissidents nominated their own ticket ; the split in the vote would contribute to Bryan 's defeat . However , Bryan did gain the support of the Populists , as well as a convention of Silver Republicans . Bryan spoke on silver throughout the campaign ; he rarely addressed other issues . Bryan won the South and most of the West , but McKinley 's victories in the more populous Northeast and Midwest carried him to the presidency . The Democratic candidate failed to gain a majority of the labor vote ; McKinley won in working @-@ class areas as well as wealthy precincts . Although McKinley outpolled him by 600 @,@ 000 votes , Bryan received more votes than any previous presidential candidate . 
 After McKinley 's inauguration , increases in gold availability from new discoveries and improved refining methods led to a considerable increase in the money supply . Even so , in 1900 , Congress passed the Gold Standard Act , formally placing the United States on that standard . Although Bryan ran again on a silver platform in the 1900 presidential election , the issue failed to produce the same resonance with the voters . McKinley won more easily than in 1896 , making inroads in the silver West . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bryan 's speech is considered one of the most powerful political addresses in American history . Stanley Jones , however , suggested that even if Bryan had never made it , he would still have been nominated . Jones deemed the Democrats likely to nominate a candidate who would appeal to the Populist Party , and Bryan had been elected to Congress with Populist support . According to rhetorical historian William Harpine in his study of the rhetoric of the 1896 campaign , " Bryan 's speech cast a net for the true believers , but only for the true believers . " Harpine suggested that , " by appealing in such an uncompromising way to the agrarian elements and to the West , Bryan neglected the national audience who would vote in the November election " . Bryan 's emphasis on agrarian issues , both in his speech and in his candidacy , may have helped cement voting patterns which kept the Democrats largely out of power until the 1930s . 
 Writer Edgar Lee Masters called the speech , " the beginning of a changed America . " Bryan 's words gave rise to later economic and political philosophies , including Huey Long 's 1930s Share Our Wealth program , with its trigger phrase , " Every Man a King " inspired by Bryan 's speech . Author and political commentator William Safire , in his political dictionary , traced the term " trickle @-@ down economics " ( common in the Reagan era ) to Bryan 's statement that some believe that government should legislate for the wealthy , and allow prosperity to " leak through " on those below . Historian R. Hal Williams suggested that the opposite philosophy , of legislation for the masses leading to prosperity for all , advocated by Bryan in his speech , informed the domestic policies of later Democratic presidents , including Franklin Roosevelt with his New Deal . 
 Bensel ties the delegates ' response to Bryan 's address to their uncertainty in their own beliefs : 
 In a very real sense , adoption of the silver plank in the platform was akin to a millennial expectation that the " laws of economics " would henceforth be suspended and that the silver men could simply " will " that silver and gold would , in fact , trade on financial markets at a ratio of sixteen to one . The silver men were thus in the hunt for a charismatic leader who would underpin what they already desperately wanted to believe . They manufactured that leader in the convention , a fabrication in which Bryan was only too happy to assist . 
 = Gran Paradiso National Park = 
 Gran Paradiso National Park ( Italian : Parco nazionale del Gran Paradiso , French : Parc national du Grand @-@ Paradis ) is an Italian national park in the Graian Alps , between the Aosta Valley and Piedmont regions . The park is named after Gran Paradiso mountain , which is located in the park , and is contiguous with the French Vanoise national park . The land the park encompasses was initially protected in order to protect the Alpine ibex from poachers , as it was a personal hunting ground for king Victor Emanuel II , but now also protects other species . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early 19th century , due to hunting , the Alpine ibex only survived in the Gran Paradiso area . Approximately 60 individual ibex survived , here . Ibex were intensively hunted , partly for sport , but also because their body parts were thought to have therapeutic properties : talismans were made from a small cross @-@ shaped bone near the ibex 's heart in order to protect against violent death . Due to the alarming decrease in the ibex population , Victor Emmanuel , soon to be King of Italy , declared the Royal Hunting Reserve of the Gran Paradiso in 1856 . A protective guard was created for the ibex . Paths laid out for the ibex are still used today as part of 724 kilometres ( 450 mi ) of marked trails and mule tracks . 
 In 1920 Victor Emmanuel II 's grandson King Victor Emmanuel III donated the park 's original 21 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 189 acres ) , and the park was established in 1922 . It was Italy 's first national park . There were approximately 4 @,@ 000 ibex in the park when it was protected . Despite the presence of the park , ibex were poached until 1945 , when only 419 remained . Their protection increased , and there are now almost 4 @,@ 000 in the park . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The park is located in the Graian Alps in the regions of Piedmont and Aosta Valley in north @-@ west Italy . It encompasses 703 square kilometres ( 173 @,@ 715 acres ) of alpine terrain . 10 % of the park 's surface area is wooded . 16 @.@ 5 % is used for agriculture and pasture , 24 % is uncultivated , and 40 % is classified as sterile . 9 @.@ 5 % of the park 's surface area is occupied by 57 glaciers . The park 's mountains and valleys were sculpted by glaciers and streams . <unk> in the park range from 800 @-@ 4 @,@ 061 metres ( 2 @,@ 624 @-@ 13 @,@ 323 ft ) , with an average altitude of 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 561 ft ) . Valley floors in the park are forested . There are alpine meadows at higher altitudes . There are rocks and glaciers at altitudes higher than the meadows . Gran Paradiso is the only mountain entirely within the boundaries of Italy that is over 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) high . Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn can be seen from its summit . In 1860 , John Cowell became the first person to reach the summit . To the west , the park shares a boundary with France 's Vanoise National Park . Combined , the two parks form the largest protected area in Western Europe . They co @-@ operate in managing the ibex population , which moves across their shared boundary seasonally . 
 = = Flora = = 
 The park 's woods are important because they provide shelter for a large number of animals . They are a natural defence against landslides , avalanches , and flooding . The two main types of woods found in the park are coniferous and deciduous woods . The deciduous European beech forests are common on the Piedmont side of the park , and are not found on the dryer Valle d 'Aosta side . These forests are thick with dense foliage that lets in very little light during the summer . The beech leaves take a long time to decompose , and they form a thick layer on the woodland floor that impedes the development of other plants and trees . <unk> are the most common trees in the forests on the valley floors . They are mixed with spruces , Swiss stone pines , and more rarely silver firs . 
 Maple and lime forests are found in gulleys . These forests are only present in isolated areas and are at risk of extinction . Downy oak woods are more common in the Aosta Valley area than in the Piedmont area because of its higher temperatures and lower precipitation . Oak is not a typical species in the park and it is often found mixed with Scots pine . The park 's chestnut groves have been affected by human cultivation for wood and fruit . It rarely grows above 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 280 ft ) , and the most important chestnut forests are in the park 's Piedmontese side . The park 's conifer woods include Scots pine groves , spruce forests dominated by the Norway spruce , often mixed with larch . Larch and Swiss stone pine woods are found up to the highest sub @-@ alpine level ( 2200 – 2300 metres ( 7 @,@ 217 @-@ 7 @,@ 546 ft ) ) . 
 At higher altitudes the trees gradually thin out and there are alpine pastures . These pastures are rich in flowers in the late spring . The wildflowers in the park 's high meadows include wild pansies , gentians , <unk> lilies , and <unk> . The park has many rocky habitats . They are mostly located above the timberline and alpine pastures . These areas have rock and detritus on their surface . Alpine plants have adapted to these habitats by assuming characteristics like dwarfism , hairiness , bright coloured flowers , and highly developed roots . About 1 @,@ 500 plant species can be seen at <unk> Botanical Garden near <unk> inside the park . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 Alpine ibex graze in the abundant mountain pastures in summer , and descend to lower elevations in winter . Gran Paradiso 's pairing with Vanoise National Park provides year @-@ round protection to the ibex . Along with the ibex , the animal species found in the park include ermine , weasel , hare , Eurasian badger , alpine chamois , wolf ( recently arrived from Central Italy ) and maybe even lynx . The ibex and chamois spend most of the year above the tree line . They descend to the valleys in the winter and spring . Alpine marmot forage on plants along the snow line . 
 There are more than 100 bird species in the park , including Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , rock ptarmigan , alpine accentor , and chough . Golden eagles nest on rocky ledges , and sometimes in trees . <unk> are found on steep cliffs . There are black woodpeckers and nutcrackers in the park 's woodlands . 
 The park supports many species of butterflies including <unk> , peak whites , and southern white admirals . 
 = Where No Fan Has Gone Before = 
 " Where No Fan Has Gone Before " is the eleventh episode in the fourth season of the American animated television series Futurama . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 21 , 2002 . Set in a retro @-@ futuristic 31st century , the series follows the adventures of the employees of Planet Express , an interplanetary delivery company . In this episode , the Planet Express team and most of the main cast of Star Trek : The Original Series face a court @-@ martial after visiting the forbidden planet Omega 3 . 
 An existing idea to feature the cast of Star Trek : The Original Series was scrapped and replaced with a new script written by David A. Goodman , after the newly hired writer was identified as the biggest Star Trek fan on the staff . All of the main cast of The Original Series agreed to appear , with the exception of DeForest Kelley ( who had died in 1999 ) and James Doohan , resulting in the creation of a new character called Welshie . " Where No Fan Has Gone Before " was received positively by critics , with praise directed at the various Star Trek homages . The script was nominated for a Nebula Award , losing to The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fry learns that Star Trek has been forbidden since the show became a worldwide religion in the <unk> ; all of its fans were killed during the Star Trek Wars and the " sacred " tapes of its 79 episodes and six movies were burned , with the sole remaining copies sent to the forbidden planet Omega 3 . Outraged , Fry takes Leonard Nimoy 's head from the Head Museum and convinces Bender and Leela to join him in a mission to recover the Star Trek tapes from Omega 3 . 
 On Omega 3 they find several original sets from Star Trek , and most of the original cast with their bodies and eternal youth . An energy being named Melllvar appears and explains that he became an obsessed Star Trek fan after watching the dumped tapes over and over again . Melllvar gives Nimoy a body , and orders the actors and the Planet Express crew to participate in a Star Trek convention until the end of time . Welshie is killed in a show of force to force their obedience . While Melllvar forces the cast to perform his fan script , Bender , Leela and Fry escape in the Planet Express Ship . Fry convinces the crew to attack Melllvar to save the actors , but Melllvar destroys the ship 's engine as he drags it back to the planet . 
 After seeing the Planet Express crew 's attempt to defeat him , Melllvar wonders if they are more worthy of his adoration than the Star Trek cast , and decides to settle the question with a battle to the death . After several minutes of fighting , Melllvar 's mother appears and makes him come home for dinner . While he is gone , the two groups combine the engine of the cast 's ship with the hull of the Planet Express Ship to escape . To lose enough weight to lift off , the cast jettison their bodies . Melllvar follows the crew into space with his own ship , a Romulan Bird of Prey . Zapp Brannigan boards the Planet Express Ship and holds a court @-@ martial of the occupants for trespassing on Omega 3 . Leela points out that while the court @-@ martial is in progress Melllvar is still chasing them . Fry convinces Melllvar that he cannot spend his life watching Star Trek , and Melllvar agrees to end the chase . The crew and cast return to Earth . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer for this episode , David A. Goodman , said that making this episode was a " dream come true " for many members of the crew including himself . At the time he was hired onto the staff , they were already talking about creating a Star Trek @-@ centric episode . The initial idea was to have a giant Kirk and Spock fighting over New York @-@ New York Hotel and Casino . Executive producer David X. Cohen assigned the writing task to Goodman , as they agreed he was the biggest Trek fan of the group . They agreed to drop the story idea with the giant characters and gave him two weeks to write the script . The deadline was complicated as Goodman had to spend the first week on jury duty , and then broke his ankle . Despite this , he described " Where No Fan Has Gone Before " as the most fun he has ever had writing a script . 
 Series creator Matt Groening stated that while he is a fan of the Star Trek franchise he has never seen an episode of The Original Series in entirety , but has seen Star Trek : The Motion Picture . But director Pat Shinagawa said that there was a certain amount of jealousy among the crew that she got to work on this episode . All of the living members of the original Star Trek cast agreed to appear in the episode with the exception of James Doohan , whose agent replied with " No way . " Because of this , the episode 's working title was jokingly named " We got everybody but Scotty " and so Scotty was replaced with " Welshie " . William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy recorded their lines together , which was unusual as actors usually record solo . Following his work on Futurama , Goodman went on to join the writing staff on Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 A number of designs for the energy being were considered for this episode ; however , the final version was decided upon due to a desire to keep the design simple . Shinagawa noted that even so , the final design for Melllvar is more sophisticated than some energy beings featured in the original series . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 This episode contains many story elements based on episodes of Star Trek . In the DVD audio commentary , Goodman noted his pride in having included a large number of quotations from The Original Series , particularly those items which he claims " the people on the internet " had not found on their own . He noted that in " Shatner 's Log " , based on Star Trek 's " Captain 's log " , the line " The impossible has happened " quotes the opening log in " Where No Man Has Gone Before " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Although the episode was not the last episode produced for season four , it was used as the season finale for the fourth broadcast season , being broadcast on April 21 , 2002 , on Fox in the United States . The episode was subsequently nominated for a Nebula Award in 2004 for best script , but lost to the 2002 film The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers . 
 Prior to the broadcast , Dusty Saunders previewed the episode for Rocky Mountain News , calling Futurama " under @-@ appreciated " and that this episode had " Lots of fun and fantasy at the expense of the noted sci @-@ fi series . " Zack Handlen , while writing for the A.V. Club , gave the episode an ' A ' grade . He said that the storyline could have been seen as " pretty mean @-@ spirited if there wasn 't such a clear thread of Trek love running through the episode " . He felt that having the framing device set during the event rather than afterwards as " delightful " , and that the Star Trek references were both " relevant to the story and funny in their own right " . Andy Wilson reviewed the episode for <unk> , calling it the " greatest animated homage to Trek ever " and " one of the best episodes of Futurama " . 
 IGN ranked the episode in tenth place in their list of the top 25 episodes of the series in 2006 , calling it " ultimate fan service episode " , but " one that any sci @-@ fi fan , Trekker or otherwise , can still enjoy " . The popularity of this episode combined with the large volume of Star Trek references has made this episode a touchstone among Trekkies according to Chris Baker at <unk> This episode , along with " Teenage Mutant Leela 's Hurdles " , was the great moments of the fourth season by David Hofstede in his book 5000 Episodes and No Commercials : The Ultimate Guide to TV Shows on DVD . " Where No Fan Has Gone Before " was included in the Volume 4 release on DVD , including several deleted scenes , which was first released on August 24 , 2004 , in the United States . 
 = Jade @-@ class aircraft carrier = 
 The Jade class comprised a pair of passenger ships intended to be converted into auxiliary aircraft carriers by Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . The two ships were launched as Gneisenau and Potsdam in 1935 and operated in peace time by Norddeutscher Lloyd . After the outbreak of war , the ships were requisitioned by the Kriegsmarine as transports , and in May 1942 , plans were drawn up to convert them into aircraft carriers . The ships were not identical , but were similar enough in size to allow identical outfitting . 
 Gneisenau and Potsdam were to be renamed Jade and Elbe , respectively . Once converted , the ships were intended to operate twelve Ju @-@ 87 Stuka dive bombers and twelve Bf @-@ 109 fighters . Work on Jade was not started and the conversion project was abandoned in November 1942 . She returned to service as a troopship , only to be sunk by a mine in the western Baltic . Elbe actually began the conversion process in December 1942 , but only her passenger fittings were removed by the time work was halted in February 1943 . She was converted into a barracks ship in Gotenhafen and seized by Great Britain after the end of the war . She remained in use until 1976 , when she was broken up for scrap 
 = = Conversion = = 
 Following the loss of the battleship Bismarck in May 1941 , during which British aircraft carriers proved instrumental , and the near torpedoing of her sister ship Tirpitz by carrier @-@ launched aircraft in March 1942 , the Kriegsmarine became convinced of the necessity of acquiring aircraft carriers . Work on the purpose @-@ built carrier Graf Zeppelin , which had been halted in April 1940 , was resumed in March 1942 . The Kriegsmarine also decided to convert a number of vessels into auxiliary aircraft carriers . Several passenger ships , including Gneisenau , Potsdam , and Europa were selected for conversion , along with the incomplete heavy cruiser Seydlitz . Gneisenau and Potsdam had been built in the mid @-@ 1930s and operated by Norddeutscher Lloyd on its East Asia Service until the outbreak of war , when they were requisitioned by the Kriegsmarine as troopships . 
 The ships were found to have insufficient stability when converted into aircraft carriers . This was to have been remedied by the addition of side bulges and fixed ballast . The ballast was to have consisted of " concrete armor , " a layer of concrete fitted to the sides of the hulls below the waterline . Conversion work on Gneisenau , which was to be renamed Jade , never began . The project was abandoned on 25 November 1942 . The design for Potsdam , which was assigned the name Elbe , was reworked to correct the stability problems . The bulges and concrete armor were discarded and a second outer skin was substituted . Work began on the ship in December 1942 ; only the ship 's passenger fittings were removed by the time work was halted on 2 February 1943 . This was due to the resignation of Admiral Erich Raeder , the commander in chief of the Kriegsmarine , the previous month . Raeder had resigned in protest of Adolf Hitler 's order that all surface ships be decommissioned and scrapped in the aftermath of the Battle of the Barents Sea . 
 Gneisenau was returned to troopship duties after the project was abandoned , but at 12 : 02 on 2 May 1943 , she was sunk by a mine off Gedser . Potsdam was converted into a barracks ship in Gotenhafen , where she spent the remainder of the war . Following the German defeat , the ship was seized by the British on 20 June 1946 as a war prize , who commissioned her as a troop transport under the name Empire Fowey . She was sold to Pakistan , who operated her under the name Safina @-@ E @-@ <unk> until she was broken up for scrap in 1976 . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 Jade was 191 meters ( 627 ft ) long at the waterline and 203 m ( 666 ft ) long overall . Elbe was 189 m ( 620 ft ) long at the waterline and 203 m overall . Both ships had a designed draft of 5 @.@ 1 m ( 17 ft ) , and at full load , drew up to 8 @.@ 85 m ( 29 @.@ 0 ft ) . Jade displaced 18 @,@ 160 metric tons ( 17 @,@ 870 long tons ; 20 @,@ 020 short tons ) , while Elbe displaced 17 @,@ 527 t ( 17 @,@ 250 long tons ; 19 @,@ 320 short tons ) . The ships had steel @-@ built , welded hulls with twelve watertight compartments and a double bottom . Jade was to have been crewed by 79 officers and 804 enlisted men , including 134 Luftwaffe personnel ; Elbe 's crew arrangements are not known specifically , but would have consisted of approximately 900 officers and men . 
 Jade was powered by a pair of Deschimag geared steam turbines . The two turbines drove a three @-@ bladed screw each . Steam was provided by four single @-@ ended high @-@ pressure boilers . Elbe 's propulsion system consisted of two electric drive motors powered by two turbo @-@ generators . Each electric motor drove a four @-@ bladed screw . The two ships ' engines were rated at 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) and a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , though in service the ships were limited to 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . They had a maximum range of 9 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 17 @,@ 000 km ; 10 @,@ 000 mi ) at 19 knots . 
 As converted , the ships were to be armed with several anti @-@ aircraft guns . The heavy anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of eight 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK C / 33 guns in twin mountings . The mounts were the Dopp LC / 31 type , originally designed for earlier 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 31 guns . The LC / 31 mounting was triaxially @-@ stabilized and capable of elevating to 80 ° . This enabled the guns to engage targets up to a ceiling of 12 @,@ 500 m ( 41 @,@ 000 ft ) . Against surface targets , the guns had a maximum range of 17 @,@ 700 m ( 58 @,@ 100 ft ) . The guns fired fixed ammunition weighing 15 @.@ 1 kg ( 33 lb ) ; the guns could fire HE and HE incendiary rounds , as well as illumination shells . The two guns were supplied with a total of 3 @,@ 200 rounds of ammunition . 
 Close @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft weaponry consisted of twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 guns and twenty @-@ four to thirty @-@ two 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Flak 38 guns . The 3 @.@ 7 cm gun was a single @-@ shot gun , with a rate of fire of around 30 rounds per minute . At its maximum elevation of 85 ° , the gun had a ceiling of 6 @,@ 800 m ( 22 @,@ 300 ft ) . They were supplied with 20 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . The 2 cm gun was a magazine @-@ fed automatic weapon , firing at up to 500 rounds per minute . Twenty and forty @-@ round magazines were supplied for the guns ; The guns were supplied with 48 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . 
 Aircraft facilities were to have consisted of a 186 m ( 610 ft ) long , 27 m ( 89 ft ) wide flight deck . Aircraft were handled in a single hangar , which was 148 m ( 486 ft ) long and 18 m ( 59 ft ) wide . The hangar roof was protected by 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) of Krupp Wotan hart steel armor , while the sides were 10 to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick . The ships ' air complement was to have consisted of twelve Bf 109 fighters and twelve Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers . The Bf 109 fighters were a navalized version of the " E " model , designated as Bf 109T . Their wings were longer than the land @-@ based model to allow for shorter take @-@ off . The Ju 87s were to have been the " E " variant , which was a navalized version of the Ju 87D , and were modified for catapult launches and were equipped with arresting gear . 
 = K @-@ 17 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 17 was a 21 @.@ 138 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 34 @.@ 018 km ) state highway in Kansas that served Kingman and Reno counties . The route originated at an intersection with U.S. Route 54 ( US @-@ 54 ) and US @-@ 400 south of the unincorporated community of Waterloo and ended at K @-@ 96 south of South Hutchinson . The road was maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) , and was a two @-@ lane road for its entire length . The route was designated in 1932 . When originally designated , K @-@ 17 ran north to an intersection with US @-@ 81 near McPherson . Between 1957 and 1962 , a series of changes to the route shortened it and brought its northern terminus to an intersection with K @-@ 96 near South Hutchinson . The route was decommissioned in 2013 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 K @-@ 17 began at a diamond interchange with US @-@ 54 and US @-@ 400 near Waterloo in Kingman County and ran north on a two @-@ lane road . The route passed a cemetery just north of its southern terminus and continued north through level farmland , entering Reno County and passing a few miles east of the community of Pretty Prairie , which was accessible by a county road . North of here , K @-@ 17 crossed the north fork of the <unk> River and curved slightly to the northwest . The route bent back to the north and continued in that direction for approximately eight miles ( 13 km ) before twisting to the east and reaching its northern terminus at an intersection with K @-@ 96 . 
 K @-@ 17 was maintained by KDOT . In 2012 , KDOT calculated the route 's average annual daily traffic to be about 1000 vehicles near its southern terminus , and approximately 1600 vehicles near the northern terminus . K @-@ 17 was not included in the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's defense , economy , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 K @-@ 17 was commissioned by 1932 . Originally , the route went through Hutchinson and ended at US @-@ 81 south of McPherson . Only the portion from just south of Hutchinson to the city of Medora was paved . The remainder of the route was gravel . Within a year , the segment from Medora to the route 's northern terminus had been paved with a bituminous surface . Between 1933 and 1936 , a stretch of the route in Reno County was also given a bituminous surface . In 1940 , the route was extended north from its northern terminus along the route of US @-@ 81 to an intersection with K @-@ 4 in Saline County . By this time , all segments of the route had been paved . The majority of the route had a bituminous surface , but some segments had a hard surface . Between 1941 and 1945 , the whole route was paved with a hard surface . 
 In 1957 , the portion of K @-@ 17 from its intersection with K @-@ 61 to its northern terminus was redesignated as an extension of K @-@ 61 . This realignment removed K @-@ 17 from McPherson and Saline counties . In 1962 , K @-@ 96 was realigned through Hutchinson and replaced a portion of K @-@ 17 south of the city . This shortened K @-@ 17 yet again to its final northern terminus at an intersection with K @-@ 96 . In 1977 , the southern terminus was upgraded to an interchange as US @-@ 54 was upgraded to a freeway in much of eastern Kingman County . In 2012 , K @-@ 17 was decommissioned when KDOT realigned a number of state highways in Reno and Kingman counties . The former alignment of K @-@ 17 was re @-@ designated as a segment of K @-@ 14 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Levi Coffin = 
 Levi Coffin ( October 28 , 1798 – September 16 , 1877 ) was an American Quaker , abolitionist , and businessman . Coffin was deeply involved in the Underground Railroad in Indiana and Ohio and his home is often called " Grand Central Station of the Underground Railroad " . He was nicknamed " President of the Underground Railroad " because of the thousands of slaves that are reported to have passed through his care while escaping their masters . 
 Born in the Southern United States , Coffin was exposed to and developed an opposition to slavery as a child . He followed his family and immigrated to Indiana from North Carolina in 1826 following a persecution of the Quakers by the slave @-@ holders . In Indiana he quickly became a local business leader as a merchant and farmer . The wealth he accumulated allowed him to become a major investor in the Richmond branch of the Bank of Indiana where he served as director during the 1830s . His position in the community allowed him to provide most of the funds necessary to supply food , clothing , and transportation for the Underground Railroad operations in his region . 
 At the urging of friends in the anti @-@ slavery movement , he moved to Cincinnati in 1847 to operate a warehouse selling only goods produced by free labor . Despite making considerable progress with the business , the venture was unprofitable and he was forced to abandon the enterprise in 1857 . Throughout the period , he continued to assist hundreds of runaway slaves by lodging them in his Ohio home . After slavery was abolished following the American Civil War , Coffin traveled around the Midwestern United States and abroad to France and Great Britain where he was instrumental in forming aid societies to provide food , clothing , funds , and education to the freed slaves . He retired during the 1870s and wrote an autobiography that was published a year before his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Coffin was born on a farm near New Garden in Guilford County , North Carolina on October 28 , 1798 , the son of Prudence and Levi Coffin Sr. He was the family 's only son and had six sisters . Coffin 's father was born in Massachusetts during the 1760s and emigrated from Nantucket to North Carolina where he farmed land among a community of Quakers . The family was greatly influenced by the teachings of John Woolman who believed that slaveholding was not fair . Coffin 's parents probably met Woolman in 1767 during religious meetings near their New Garden home with other non @-@ slaveholding Quaker families . Coffin 's cousin , Vestal Coffin , also probably attended the meeting . <unk> was one of the earliest Quakers to help slaves escape North Carolina , beginning as early as 1819 . 
 Coffin grew up working on his father 's farm and received little , if any , formal education . He was frequently exposed to slaves throughout his childhood and sympathized with their condition . According to his own account , he became an abolitionist at age seven when he asked a slave who was in a chain gang why he was bound . The man replied that it was to prevent him from escaping and returning to his wife and children . The event disturbed Coffin who often considered the possibility of his own father being taken from him in a similar fashion . By age fifteen , Coffin was helping his family assist escaping slaves by taking food to those hiding on his farm . As the repressive Fugitive Slave Act became more rigorously enforced , the family began conducting their assistance to slaves with greater secrecy and doing most of their illegal activities at night . Scrutiny of the abolitionists only worsened with the passage of the 1804 Black Laws . By the early 1820s , Quakers in North Carolina were being openly persecuted for the assistance they were suspected of providing to runaway slaves . 
 = = = Move to Indiana = = = 
 In 1821 , Coffin and his cousin started a Sunday School to teach slaves to read the Bible . The plan was short @-@ lived though , as slaveholders soon forced the two to close the school . As the persecution worsened , thousands of Quakers began to leave North Carolina for the Northwest Territories where slavery was illegal and land was cheap . There was already a large Quaker community there and they had been influential in the passing of constitutional bans on slavery in Ohio and Indiana . In 1822 Coffin accompanied his brother @-@ in @-@ law Benjamin White on his move to Indiana . He stayed in Indiana with the Whites for about a year before returning to North Carolina . He carried back with him reports of Indiana and its prosperity . He was convinced that Quakers and slavery could not co <unk> and decided that he himself would move to Indiana . 
 On October 28 , 1824 , Coffin married long @-@ time friend Catherine White , the sister of his brother @-@ in @-@ law . The ceremony was held in the Hopewell Friends Meetinghouse in North Carolina . Catherine 's family is believed to have been involved in helping slaves escape , and it is likely she met Coffin in this activity . The couple postponed their move to Indiana after Catherine became pregnant with Jesse , the first of six children , who was born in 1825 . Coffin 's parents moved to Indiana in that year . He and his new wife and son followed them and moved to Newport ( now called Fountain City , Indiana ) in 1826 . 
 = = Underground Railroad = = 
 = = = Indiana = = = 
 After moving to Indiana , Coffin began to farm a tract of land . Within a year of his move he opened a general store . In his later years , he credited his business success with granting him the ability to become heavily involved in the costly enterprise of the Underground Railroad . Although the term " Underground Railroad " did not come into use until the 1830s , the organization was operating in Indiana by the early 1820s . According to Coffin 's own account , not long after moving he discovered that his home was on a line of Underground Railroad stops . There was a large community of free blacks near Newport where fugitive slaves would hide before continuing north . Often , they were recaptured because their hiding place there was well known . Coffin made contact with the black community and made it known to them that he would be willing to hide runaways in his nearby home to better protect them . 
 He first took fugitive slaves into his new home in the winter of 1826 – 1827 . Word of his activity quickly spread throughout the community . Although many had previously been afraid to take part , upon seeing his success at avoiding problems they soon joined him . The group formed a more formal route whereby the fugitives could be moved from stop to stop until they reached Canada . Coffin referred to the system as the " mysterious road " . As time progressed the number of escaping slaves increased . Coffin estimated that on average he helped one hundred escape annually . Coffin 's home became the convergence point of three major escape routes from Madison , New Albany , and Cincinnati . The runaways gathered at his home and at times two wagons were required to transport the escapees further north . Coffin would move them from his home to the next stops during the night . His home saw so many fugitives pass through , it became known as the " Grand Central Station of the Underground Railroad . " 
 Coffin 's life was frequently threatened by slave @-@ hunters and many of his friends feared for his safety . They tried to dissuade him from his activities by warning him of the danger to his family and business . Coffin , however , was deeply moved by his religious convictions and wrote of these fears later in life saying : 
 After listening quietly to these counselors , I told them that I felt no condemnation for anything that I had ever done for the fugitive slaves . If by doing my duty and endeavoring to fulfill the injunctions of the Bible , I injured my business , then let my business go . As to my safety , my life was in the hands of my Divine Master , and I felt that I had his approval . I had no fear of the danger that seemed to threaten my life or my business . If I was faithful to duty , and honest and industrious , I felt that I would be preserved , and that I could make enough to support my family . 
 His business had a period of poor performance . Neighbors who were opposed to his activity boycotted his store . The population of Indiana was quickly growing however , and the majority of the new immigrants supported the anti @-@ slavery movement and Coffin 's business began to grow . His prosperity continued and he made a substantial investment in the Bank of Indiana when it was first established in 1833 . He soon became the director of the Richmond branch of the bank . In 1836 he built a mill and began to produce linseed oil from flax he grew on his farm . Coffin built a new two @-@ story brick home in 1838 and had several modifications made to his house to create better hiding places for the slaves . A secret door was created in his maids ' quarters where up to fourteen people could hide in a narrow crawlspace between the walls . The space was often used when slave hunters came to Coffin 's home in search of runaways . 
 During the 1840s pressure was brought to bear on the Quaker communities that helped escaping slaves . In 1842 leaders of the Religious Society of Friends , the Quaker Meeting to which Coffin belonged , advised all their members to cease membership in abolitionist societies and end activities assisting runaway slaves . They insisted that legal emancipation was the best course of action . The following year they disowned Coffin and expelled him from their group because he continued to take an active role in assisting escaping slaves . Coffin and other Quakers who supported his activities separated and formed the Antislavery Friends . The two groups remained separate until a reunification in 1851 . 
 Despite the opposition , his desire to help the runaway slaves only increased . Catherine organized a sewing society who met at the Coffins ' home to produce clothing to give to the runaways . Other aid was sought from neighbors and those sympathetic , but unwilling take the fugitives into their homes . Through these activities he was able to procure a steady supply of goods to assist in the operations efforts . Over the years he came to realize that many of the goods he sold in his business were the product of slave labor . Through traveling he learned of organizations in Philadelphia and New York City that only sold goods produced by free labor . He began to purchase stock from the organizations and marketed them to his fellow abolitionists , though the products were sold for almost no profit . 
 The free labor proponents in the eastern United States wanted to create a similar organization in the west . The members of the Salem Free Produce Association approached Coffin to see if he would be interested in managing the proposed Western Free Produce Association . At first he declined , saying he lacked the money required to fund the venture , and that he did not want to move into the city . In 1845 a group of abolitionist businessmen opened a wholesale mercantile business in Cincinnati . The Free Produce Association raised $ 3 @,@ 000 to help stock the new warehouse with goods . Different groups continued to pressure him to accept a position as the new business 's director , claiming there were no other western abolitionists qualified to manage the enterprise . Reluctantly , he finally accepted , but agreed to only oversee the warehouse for five years , in which time he could train someone else to run it . 
 = = = Ohio = = = 
 Coffin moved to the Cincinnati area in 1847 , where he took over the management of the venture . He rented out his Newport business before leaving and made arrangements for his home to continue serving as an Underground Railroad stop ; he intended to return to Newport after fulfilling his obligation in Cincinnati . His first task was working with the eastern organizations to set up a steady supply of goods for the business . The most constant problem to plague the enterprise was the poor quality of its goods . Coffin had frequent difficulty procuring free goods that were produced with the same quality as those produced by slave labor . Because the goods were inferior in quality to his competition , he had a difficult time finding purchasers for the goods . The problem plagued the business for years , and as a result the enterprise was in a constant financial struggle . 
 The problem caused Coffin to begin to travel into the south to seek out plantations that did not use slave labor , but he met with only limited success . He located a cotton plantation in Mississippi where the owner had freed all his slaves and operated by paying them as free laborers . The plantation was struggling financially because they had no equipment to automate the cotton production . Coffin helped the owner purchase a cotton gin that greatly increased their productivity and provided a steady supply of cotton for his association . The cotton was shipped to Cincinnati where it was spun into cloth and sold . Other trips to Tennessee and Virginia were less successful , although he did succeed in spreading the word about the movement . Despite his constant attention to the business , the poor supply of cheap and quality free labor products proved insurmountable , making it impossible for Coffin to return to Indiana or locate a replacement to run the company . The company had stayed in business primarily through the financial support of wealthy benefactors . Coffin sold the business in 1857 after deciding it would be impossible for the business to remain profitable . 
 Cincinnati already had a large anti @-@ slavery movement who had violent conflicts with slavery proponents in the years before Coffin moved to the city . He purchased a new home at the corner of Elm and Sixth streets . He continued to be active in the Underground Railroad , setting up a new safe house in the city and helping organize a larger network in the area . At first he was very cautious about helping slaves until he was able to find people he could trust in the community , and the community came to trust him . Coffin moved several times during his life in the city , and finally came to reside on <unk> Street . It was a large home and rooms were rented out for boarding . With the many guests coming and going , the home was an excellent place to operate an Underground Railroad stop without arousing much suspicion . Catherine created costumes and when fugitives arrived they would be dressed as butlers , cooks , and other workers . Some of the mulattoes were even able to pass as white guests . The most frequently used disguise was a that of a Quaker woman . The high collar , long sleeves , gloves , veil , and large brimmed hat could completely hide its wearer when their head was tilted slightly downward . 
 One of the many slaves Coffin helped to escape was Eliza Harris . The girl had escaped the south and crossed the Ohio River on a winter night when it was frozen over . <unk> and carrying her baby , she was exhausted and nearly dead when she reached Coffin 's home . He provided her with food , clothing , new shoes , and shelter before helping her to continue on her journey to freedom in Canada . Harriet Beecher Stowe was living in the city at the time and was well acquainted with the Coffins . The story so moved her she retold it in part in her book Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Levi and Catherine Coffin may have been the Quaker couple she refers to in her book . 
 Coffin 's role began to change as the American Civil War approached . He made a trip to Canada in 1854 to visit the community of escaped slaves that was living there and offer assistance and he helped found an orphanage in Cincinnati for blacks . As soon as the war broke out in 1861 , he and his group began to prepare to help the war 's wounded . Although as a Quaker , he was opposed to war , he did support their cause . He and his wife spent almost every day at Cincinnati 's war hospital helping to care for the wounded . They prepared large buckets of coffee and distributed it freely to the soldiers and took many into their home . 
 Coffin helped form the Western Freedman 's Aid Society in 1863 to offer assistance to the slaves freed during the war . As Union soldiers moved into the South , some slaveholders shot their slaves , while others abandoned them , leaving them without food or shelter . Coffin 's group began collecting food and goods to be distributed to the former slaves . Coffin petitioned the government to create the Freedmen 's Bureau to offer assistance to freed slaves . Coffin was also involved in helping freed slaves after the war in establishing businesses and getting educations . As leader of the society , he traveled to Great Britain in 1864 to seek aid . His advocacy there led to the formation of the Englishman 's Freedmen 's Aid Society . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 After the war ended , Coffin raised over $ 100 @,@ 000 for the Western Freedman 's Aid Society to provide aid to the free blacks . The society provided food , clothing , money , and other aid to the newly freed slave population in the United States . In 1867 he attended the International Anti @-@ Slavery Conference in Paris . Coffin did not enjoy being in the public eye and considered his job as begging for money , which he thought to be demeaning . He recorded in his book that he gladly gave up the position once a new leader for the organization was found . He was concerned about giving money freely to all blacks , some of whom he was believed would never be able to care for themselves unless adequate education and farms were provided to them . He believed the society should only be giving their limited resources to those who were best able to benefit from them . The society continued to operate until 1870 , the same year blacks were guaranteed equality in constitutional amendment . 
 With the war over , the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment , and slavery illegal , Coffin lived the rest of his life in retirement . He later recorded in his book that " ... I resign my office and declare the operations of the Underground Railroad at an end . " He spent his final year writing a book about the activities of the Underground Railroad and his life . The book , Reminiscences of Levi Coffin , was published in 1876 and is considered by historians to be one of the best firsthand accounts of the activities of the Underground Railroad . He died on September 16 , 1877 at around 2 : 30pm in his Avondale , Ohio home . His funeral ceremony was held in the Friends Meeting House of Cincinnati . The Daily Gazette recorded that the crowd was too large to be accommodated and hundreds had to remain outside . Four of his eight pallbearers were free blacks who had worked with Coffin on the Underground Railroad . He was interred in the Spring Grove Cemetery in an unmarked grave . On July 11 , 1902 , African Americans in Cincinnati erected a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall monument over Coffin 's grave in his honor . 
 Coffin 's home in Fountain City , Indiana was purchased by the state of Indiana in 1967 and restored to its original condition . It is now a National Historic Landmark and is open to the public for tours . 
 Coffin was first referred to as the " President of the Underground Railroad " by a <unk> who said , " There 's an underground railroad going on here , and Levi 's the president of it . " The title became commonly used among other abolitionists . Modern historians estimate that Coffin helped more than 2 @,@ 000 slaves escape , although Coffin himself estimated the number to be around 3 @,@ 000 . Once questioned about why he aided slaves , Coffin said " The Bible , in bidding us to feed the hungry and clothe the naked , said nothing about color , and I should try to follow out the teachings of that good book . " Another time he simply said , " I thought it was always safe to do right . " 
 = Green Hill Zone = 
 Green Hill Zone is the first level of the 1991 Sega Genesis video game Sonic the Hedgehog . The level is grassy and lush , with environmental features such as palm trees , vertical loops , and cliffs , and is the home of numerous forest animals . Like the game 's other levels , Green Hill comprises three acts ; in the third , Sonic fights antagonist Doctor Eggman before moving to the second level , Marble Zone . It was constructed by level designer Hirokazu Yasuhara and its musical theme was created by Masato Nakamura . 
 Green Hill Zone is remembered as a classic within both the Sonic the Hedgehog series and video games in general . The level and its music have also received positive opinions from critics . It has gone on to make reappearances in other games , such as Sonic Adventure 2 , Sonic Battle , and Sonic Generations , and critics have also noted a Green Hill @-@ like aesthetic in levels of other games . 
 = = History and characteristics = = 
 Green Hill is the first level of Sonic the Hedgehog . Located on South Island , it is a lush , grassy stage with unique features like droopy palm trees and crumbling cliffs . In addition , as with later levels in the game , Green Hill has environmental features and obstacles like ramps , vertical loops , tunnels , spring @-@ boards , spikes , and checkpoints . It is normally populated by woodland creatures , but antagonist Doctor Eggman imprisons them inside robots known as <unk> prior to the events of the game , so the player must destroy them to free the animals . Green Hill consists of three acts , and the end of Act 3 features a boss battle with Eggman . After beating Eggman , Sonic moves on to the second level , the lava @-@ themed Marble Zone . 
 Sonic the Hedgehog was created by the newly formed Sonic Team , a 15 @-@ member Sega subsidiary formed to create a character that could compete with Nintendo 's Mario . The game 's level design was handled by Hirokazu Yasuhara , and the musical theme was composed by Masato Nakamura from the Japanese band Dreams Come True . In designing Green Hill , Yasuhara was inspired by the U.S. state of California , while the game 's color scheme in general was influenced by the work of pop artist <unk> Suzuki . While the original game was a 2D side @-@ scroller , Green Hill was remade in full 3D as a secret level in the 2001 game Sonic Adventure 2 ; the player unlocks it after collecting all 180 of the emblems found by completing the game 's many objectives . The 2011 game Sonic Generations , a title that revisits past entries in the Sonic series ' history , features both 2D ( " Classic " ) and 3D ( " Modern " ) versions of Green Hill , as well as of numerous other Sonic levels . A reinterpretation of the level is set to appear in the upcoming 2017 title , Sonic Mania . 
 In addition , Green Hill appears as a stage in the 2.5D fighting game Sonic Battle , in the tennis video game Sega Superstars Tennis , in the sports video game Mario & Sonic at the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games , in the crossover adventure game Lego Dimensions , and in the crossover fighting games Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS , and Dengeki Bunko : Fighting Climax . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Green Hill Zone has received consistently positive opinions from critics , particularly for its music . Craig Snyder at <unk> named the level as one of the five best levels in video games , calling it " a great way to prepare for what ’ s to come " . Game Informer 's Tim Turi found the level 's music " catchy " , and Wong ranked it as the thirteenth greatest piece of gaming music from the 16 @-@ bit era . In 2010 , Sega 's community manager , Aaron Webber , returned from a vacation to find his cubicle redecorated to resemble Green Hill ; IGN 's Levi Buchanan claimed that " everyone wants to come back to " this , and Owen Good of Kotaku exclaimed " I want to work in Green Hill Zone , too ! " Writing for the Sabotage Times , Carl Anka ranked the original Sonic the Hedgehog as having the greatest music of any video game , largely as a result of Green Hill 's theme . 
 Critics have compared levels , particularly first levels , of later Sonic games to Green Hill . Turi considers Emerald Hill from Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , Mushroom Hill from Sonic & Knuckles , and Seaside Hill from Sonic Heroes to fit the same general mold as Green Hill , noting repetition in Sonic level design and stating that " gamers have played Green Hill Zone dozens of times . " However , he has opined that the Generations version of the original Green Hill " <unk> them all " in both its 2D and 3D incarnations . Justin Baker of Nintendo World Report and Skrebels both analogized Windy Hill from Sonic Lost World to Green Hill , while Carter thought similarly of the Legend of Zelda downloadable content levels . 
 = = = Impact and legacy = = = 
 Green Hill Zone has also been recognized by critics as a classic , well @-@ known video game level . It has been described as " classic " by Samit Sarkar of Polygon and by Jim Sterling and Chris Carter of Destructoid . <unk> , Joe Skrebels of Official Nintendo Magazine called it " nostalgic " , while Christopher Grant from Joystiq considered it to have a place " in the center of your retro @-@ gaming shrine " . Kevin Wong of Complex stated that the game 's and level 's popularity were such that " even if you didn 't have a Genesis , this was the level you played at the department store while your parents went shopping . " Andy Kelly from Computer and Video Games called the Green Hill theme a " monumental slice of Sega nostalgia " , and GamesRadar writer Justin Towell also referred to it as classic . Anka has summarized that " Green Hill Zone in the original game has gone down as an instantly recognisable piece of music in pop culture " . 
 To mark Sonic 's fifteenth anniversary in 2006 , Sega released a papercraft version of Green Hill as a PDF on its website . In 2011 , not long after Generations ' release , Sega held a contest inviting gamers to upload playthroughs of Generations ' 3D version of Green Hill completed in under one minute and fifty seconds to YouTube ; winners were eligible for Sonic merchandise . 
 = Workhouse = 
 In England and Wales a workhouse , colloquially known as a spike , was a place where those unable to support themselves were offered accommodation and employment . The earliest known use of the term dates from 1631 , in an account by the mayor of Abingdon reporting that " wee haue erected <unk> our borough a <unk> to sett poore people to worke " . 
 The origins of the workhouse can be traced to the Poor Law Act of 1388 , which attempted to address the labour shortages following the Black Death in England by restricting the movement of labourers , and ultimately led to the state becoming responsible for the support of the poor . But mass unemployment following the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , the introduction of new technology to replace agricultural workers in particular , and a series of bad harvests , meant that by the early 1830s the established system of poor relief was proving to be unsustainable . The New Poor Law of 1834 attempted to reverse the economic trend by discouraging the provision of relief to anyone who refused to enter a workhouse . Some Poor Law authorities hoped to run workhouses at a profit by utilising the free labour of their inmates , who generally lacked the skills or motivation to compete in the open market . Most were employed on tasks such as breaking stones , crushing bones to produce fertiliser , or picking oakum using a large metal nail known as a spike , perhaps the origin of the workhouse 's nickname . 
 Life in a workhouse was intended to be harsh , to deter the able @-@ bodied poor and to ensure that only the truly destitute would apply . But in areas such as the provision of free medical care and education for children , neither of which was available to the poor in England living outside workhouses until the early 20th century , workhouse inmates were advantaged over the general population , a dilemma that the Poor Law authorities never managed to reconcile . 
 As the 19th century wore on , workhouses increasingly became refuges for the elderly , infirm and sick rather than the able @-@ bodied poor , and in 1929 legislation was passed to allow local authorities to take over workhouse infirmaries as municipal hospitals . Although workhouses were formally abolished by the same legislation in 1930 , many continued under their new appellation of Public Assistance Institutions under the control of local authorities . It was not until the National Assistance Act of 1948 that the last vestiges of the Poor Law disappeared , and with them the workhouses . 
 = = Legal and social background = = 
 = = = Medieval to Early Modern period = = = 
 The Poor Law Act of 1388 was an attempt to address the labour shortage caused by the Black Death , a devastating pandemic that killed about one @-@ third of England 's population . The new law fixed wages and restricted the movement of labourers , as it was anticipated that if they were allowed to leave their parishes for higher @-@ paid work elsewhere then wages would inevitably rise . According to historian Derek Fraser , the fear of social disorder following the plague ultimately resulted in the state , and not a " personal Christian charity " , becoming responsible for the support of the poor . The resulting laws against vagrancy were the origins of state @-@ funded relief for the poor . From the 16th century onwards a distinction was legally enshrined between those who were able to work but could not , and those who were able to work but would not : between " the genuinely unemployed and the idler " . Supporting the destitute was a problem exacerbated by King Henry VIII 's Dissolution of the Monasteries , which began in 1536 . They had been a significant source of charitable relief , and provided a good deal of direct and indirect employment . The Poor Relief Act of 1576 went on to establish the principle that if the able @-@ bodied poor needed support , they had to work for it . 
 The Act for the Relief of the Poor of 1601 made parishes legally responsible for the care of those within their boundaries who , through age or infirmity , were unable to work . The Act essentially classified the poor into one of three groups . It proposed that the able @-@ bodied be offered work in a house of correction ( the precursor of the workhouse ) , where the " persistent idler " was to be punished . It also proposed the construction of housing for the impotent poor , the old and the infirm , although most assistance was granted through a form of poor relief known as outdoor relief – money , food , or other necessities given to those living in their own homes , funded by a local tax on the property of the wealthiest in the parish . 
 = = = Georgian era = = = 
 The workhouse system evolved in the 17th century , allowing parishes to reduce the cost to ratepayers of providing poor relief . The first authoritative figure for numbers of workhouses comes in the next century from The Abstract of Returns made by the Overseers of the Poor , which was drawn up following a government survey in 1776 . It put the number of parish workhouses in England and Wales at more than 1800 ( approximately one parish in seven ) , with a total capacity of more than 90 @,@ 000 places . This growth in the number of workhouses was prompted by the Workhouse Test Act of 1723 ; by obliging anyone seeking poor relief to enter a workhouse and undertake a set amount of work , usually for no pay ( a system called indoor relief ) , the Act helped prevent irresponsible claims on a parish 's poor rate . The growth in the number of workhouses was also bolstered by the Relief of the Poor Act 1782 , proposed by Thomas Gilbert . Gilbert 's Act was intended to allow parishes to share the cost of poor relief by forming unions – known as Gilbert Unions – to build and maintain even larger workhouses to accommodate the elderly and infirm . The able @-@ bodied poor were instead either given outdoor relief or found employment locally . Relatively few Gilbert Unions were set up , but supplementing inadequate wages under the Speenhamland system did become established towards the end of the 18th century . So keen were some Poor Law authorities to cut costs wherever possible that cases were reported of husbands being forced to sell their wives , to avoid them becoming a financial burden on the parish . In one such case in 1814 the wife and child of Henry Cook , who were living in Effingham workhouse , were sold at Croydon market for one shilling ( 5p ) ; the parish paid for the cost of the journey and a " wedding dinner " . 
 By the 1830s most parishes had at least one workhouse , but many were badly managed . In his 1797 work , The State of the Poor , Sir Frederick Eden , wrote : 
 The workhouse is an inconvenient building , with small windows , low rooms and dark staircases . It is surrounded by a high wall , that gives it the appearance of a prison , and prevents free circulation of air . There are 8 or 10 beds in each room , chiefly of flocks , and consequently retentive of all scents and very productive of vermin . The passages are in great want of whitewashing . No regular account is kept of births and deaths , but when smallpox , measles or malignant fevers make their appearance in the house , the mortality is very great . Of 131 inmates in the house , 60 are children . 
 In lieu of a workhouse some sparsely populated parishes placed homeless paupers into rented accommodation , and provided others with relief in their own homes . Those entering a workhouse might have joined anything from a handful to several hundred other inmates ; for instance , between 1782 and 1794 Liverpool 's workhouse accommodated 900 – 1200 indigent men , women and children . The larger workhouses such as the Gressenhall House of Industry generally served a number of communities , in Gressenhall 's case 50 parishes . Writing in 1854 , Poor Law commissioner George Nicholls viewed many of them as little more than factories : 
 These workhouses were established , and mainly conducted , with a view to deriving profit from the labour of the inmates , and not as being the safest means of affording relief by at the same time testing the reality of their destitution . The workhouse was in truth at that time a kind of manufactory , carried on at the risk and cost of the poor @-@ rate , employing the worst description of the people , and helping to <unk> the best . 
 = = = 1834 act = = = 
 By 1832 the amount spent on poor relief nationally had risen to £ 7 million a year , more than 10 shillings per head of population , up from £ 2 million in 1784 . The large number of those seeking assistance was pushing the system to " the verge of collapse " . The economic downturn following the end of the Napoleonic Wars in the early 19th century resulted in increasing numbers of unemployed . Coupled with developments in agriculture that meant less labour was needed on the land , along with three successive bad harvests beginning in 1828 and the Swing Riots of 1830 , reform was inevitable . Many suspected that the system of poor relief was being widely abused , and in 1832 the government established a Royal Commission to investigate and recommend how relief could best be given to the poor . The result was the establishment of a centralised Poor Law Commission in England and Wales under the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , also known as the New Poor Law , which discouraged the allocation of outdoor relief to the able @-@ bodied ; " all cases were to be ' offered the house ' , and nothing else " . Individual parishes were formed into Poor Law Unions , each of which was to have a union workhouse . More than 500 were built during the next 50 years , two @-@ thirds of them by 1840 . In certain parts of the country there was a good deal of resistance to these new buildings , some of it violent , particularly in the industrial north . Many workers lost their jobs during the major economic depression of 1837 , and there was a strong feeling that what the unemployed needed was not the workhouse but short @-@ term relief to tide them over . By 1838 , 573 Poor Law Unions had been formed in England and Wales , incorporating 13 @,@ 427 parishes , but it was not until 1868 that unions were established across the entire country , the same year that the New Poor Law was applied to the Gilbert Unions . 
 Despite the intentions behind the 1834 Act , relief of the poor remained the responsibility of local taxpayers , and there was thus a powerful economic incentive to use loopholes such as sickness in the family to continue with outdoor relief ; the weekly cost per person was about half that of providing workhouse accommodation . Outdoor relief was further restricted by the terms of the 1844 Outdoor Relief Prohibitory Order , which aimed to end it altogether for the able @-@ bodied poor . In 1846 , of 1 @.@ 33 million paupers only 199 @,@ 000 were maintained in workhouses , of whom 82 @,@ 000 were considered to be able @-@ bodied , leaving an estimated 375 @,@ 000 of the able @-@ bodied on outdoor relief . Excluding periods of extreme economic distress , it has been estimated that about 6 @.@ 5 per cent of the British population may have been accommodated in workhouses at any given time . 
 = = Early Victorian workhouses = = 
 The New Poor Law Commissioners were very critical of existing workhouses , and generally insisted that they be replaced . They complained in particular that " in by far the greater number of cases , it is a large almshouse , in which the young are trained in idleness , ignorance , and vice ; the able @-@ bodied maintained in sluggish sensual indolence ; the aged and more respectable exposed to all the misery that is incident to dwelling in such a society " . 
 After 1835 many workhouses were constructed with the central buildings surrounded by work and exercise yards enclosed behind brick walls , so @-@ called " pauper <unk> " . The commission proposed that all new workhouses should allow for the segregation of paupers into at least four distinct groups , each to be housed separately : the aged and impotent , children , able @-@ bodied males , and able @-@ bodied females . A common layout resembled Jeremy Bentham 's prison panopticon , a radial design with four three @-@ storey buildings at its centre set within a rectangular courtyard , the perimeter of which was defined by a three @-@ storey entrance block and single @-@ storey outbuildings , all enclosed by a wall . That basic layout , one of two designed by the architect Sampson Kempthorne ( his other design was hexagonal with a segmented interior , sometimes known as the Kempthorne star ) , allowed for four separate work and exercise yards , one for each class of inmate . Separating the inmates was intended to serve three purposes : to direct treatment to those who most needed it ; to deter others from pauperism ; and as a physical barrier against illness , physical and mental . The commissioners argued that buildings based on Kempthorne 's plans would be symbolic of the recent changes to the provision of poor relief ; one assistant commissioner expressed the view that they would be something " the pauper would feel it was utterly impossible to contend against " , and " give confidence to the Poor Law Guardians " . Another assistant commissioner claimed the new design was intended as a " terror to the able @-@ bodied population " , but the architect George Gilbert Scott was critical of what he called " a set of ready @-@ made designs of the meanest possible character " . Some critics of the new Poor Law noted the similarities between Kempthorne 's plans and model prisons , and doubted that they were merely coincidental . Augustus Pugin compared Kempthorne 's hexagonal plan with the " antient poor <unk> " , in what Professor Felix Driver calls a " romantic , conservative critique " of the " degeneration of English moral and aesthetic values " . 
 By the 1840s some of the enthusiasm for Kempthorne 's designs had waned . With limited space in built @-@ up areas , and concerns over the ventilation of buildings , some unions moved away from panopticon designs . Between 1840 and 1870 about 150 workhouses with separate blocks designed for specific functions were built . Typically the entrance building contained offices , while the main workhouse building housed the various wards and <unk> , all linked by long corridors designed to improve ventilation and lighting . Where possible , each building was separated by an exercise yard , for the use of a specific category of pauper . 
 = = = Admission and discharge = = = 
 Each Poor Law Union employed one or more relieving officers , whose job it was to visit those applying for assistance and assess what relief , if any , they should be given . Any applicants considered to be in need of immediate assistance could be issued with a note admitting them directly to the workhouse . Alternatively they might be offered any necessary money or goods to tide them over until the next meeting of the guardians , who would decide on the appropriate level of support and whether or not the applicants should be assigned to the workhouse . 
 Workhouses were designed with only a single entrance guarded by a porter , through which inmates and visitors alike had to pass . Near to the entrance were the casual wards for tramps and vagrants and the relieving rooms , where paupers were housed until they had been examined by a medical officer . After being assessed the paupers were separated and allocated to the appropriate ward for their category : boys under 14 , able @-@ bodied men between 14 and 60 , men over 60 , girls under 14 , able @-@ bodied women between 14 and 60 , and women over 60 . Children under the age of two were allowed to remain with their mothers , but by entering a workhouse paupers were considered to have forfeited responsibility for their families . Clothing and personal possessions were taken from them and stored , to be returned on their discharge . After bathing , they were issued with a distinctive uniform : for men it might be a striped cotton shirt , jacket and trousers , and a cloth cap , and for women a blue @-@ and @-@ white striped dress worn underneath a smock . Shoes were also provided . In some establishments certain categories of inmate were marked out by their clothing , such as at Bristol Incorporation workhouse , where prostitutes were required to wear a yellow dress and pregnant single women a red dress ; such practices were deprecated by the Poor Law Commission in a directive issued in 1839 entitled " <unk> Dress for <unk> Women in Workhouses " , but they continued until at least 1866 . Some workhouses had a separate " foul " or " itch " ward , where inmates diagnosed with skin diseases such as scabies could be detained before entering the workhouse proper . 
 Conditions in the casual wards were worse than in the relieving rooms and deliberately designed to discourage vagrants , who were considered potential trouble @-@ makers and probably disease @-@ ridden . Vagrants who presented themselves at the door of a workhouse were at the mercy of the porter , whose decision it was whether or not to allocate them a bed for the night in the casual ward . Those refused entry risked being sentenced to two weeks of hard labour if they were found begging or sleeping in the open and prosecuted for an offence under the Vagrancy Act 1824 . 
 A typical early 19th @-@ century casual ward was a single large room furnished with some kind of bedding and perhaps a bucket in the middle of the floor for sanitation . The bedding on offer could be very basic : the Poor Law authorities in Richmond in the mid @-@ 1840s provided only straw and rags , although beds were available for the sick . In return for their night 's accommodation vagrants might be expected to undertake a certain amount of work before leaving the next day , such as at Guisborough , where men were required to break stones for three hours and women to pick oakum , two hours before breakfast and one after . Until the passage of the Casual Poor Act 1882 vagrants could discharge themselves before 11 am on the day following their admission , but from 1883 onwards they were required to be detained until 9 am on the second day . Those who were admitted to the workhouse again within one month were required to be detained until the fourth day after their admission . 
 Inmates were free to leave whenever they wished after giving reasonable notice , generally considered to be three hours , but if a parent discharged him or herself then the children were also discharged , to prevent them from being abandoned . The comic actor Charlie Chaplin , who spent some time with his mother in Lambeth workhouse , records in his autobiography that when he and his half @-@ brother returned to the workhouse after having been sent to a school in Hanwell , he was met at the gate by his mother Hannah , dressed in her own clothes . Desperate to see them again she had discharged herself and the children ; they spent the day together playing in Kennington Park and visiting a coffee shop , after which she readmitted them all to the workhouse . 
 = = = Work = = = 
 Some Poor Law authorities hoped that payment for the work undertaken by the inmates would produce a profit for their workhouses , or at least allow them to be self @-@ supporting , but whatever small income could be produced never matched the running costs . Eighteenth @-@ century inmates were poorly managed , and lacked either the inclination or skills to compete effectively with free market industries such as spinning and weaving . Some workhouses operated not as places of employment , but as houses of correction , a role similar to that trialled by Buckinghamshire magistrate Matthew <unk> . Between 1714 and 1722 he experimented with using the workhouse as a test of poverty rather than a source of profit , leading to the establishment of a large number of workhouses for that purpose . Nevertheless , local people became concerned about the competition to their businesses from cheap workhouse labour . As late as 1888 , for instance , the Firewood Cutters Protection Association was complaining that the livelihood of its members was being threatened by the cheap firewood on offer from the workhouses in the East End of London . 
 Many inmates were allocated tasks in the workhouse such as caring for the sick or teaching that were beyond their capabilities , but most were employed on " generally pointless " work , such as breaking stones or removing the hemp from telegraph wires . Others picked oakum using a large metal nail known as a spike , which may be the source of the workhouse 's nickname . Bone @-@ crushing , useful in the creation of fertiliser , was a task most inmates could perform , until a government inquiry into conditions in the Andover workhouse in 1845 found that starving paupers were reduced to fighting over the rotting bones they were supposed to be grinding , to suck out the marrow . The resulting scandal led to the withdrawal of bone @-@ crushing as an employment for those living in workhouses and the replacement of the Poor Law Commission by the Poor Law Board in 1847 . Conditions thereafter were regulated according to a list of rules contained in the 1847 Consolidated General Order , which included guidance on issues such as diet , staff duties , dress , education , discipline and redress of grievances . 
 Some Poor Law Unions opted to send destitute children to the British colonies , in particular to Canada and Australia , where it was hoped the fruits of their labour would contribute to the defence of the empire and enable the colonies to buy more British exports . Known as Home Children , the Philanthropic Farm school alone sent more than 1000 boys to the colonies between 1850 and 1871 , many of them taken from workhouses . In 1869 Maria Rye and Annie Macpherson , " two spinster ladies of strong resolve " , began taking groups of orphans and children from workhouses to Canada , most of whom were taken in by farming families in Ontario . The Canadian government paid a small fee to the ladies for each child delivered , but most of the cost was met by charities or the Poor Law Unions . 
 As far as possible elderly inmates were expected to undertake the same kind of work as the younger men and women , although concessions were made to their relative frailty . They might alternatively be required to chop firewood , clean the wards , or carry out other domestic tasks . In 1882 Lady Brabazon , later the Countess of Meath , set up a project to provide alternative occupation for non @-@ able @-@ bodied inmates , known as the Brabazon scheme . Volunteers provided training in crafts such as knitting , embroidery and lace making , all costs initially being borne by Lady Brabazon herself . Although slow to take off , when workhouses discovered that the goods being produced were saleable and could make the enterprise self @-@ financing , the scheme gradually spread across the country , and by 1897 there were more than 100 branches . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 In 1836 the Poor Law Commission distributed six diets for workhouse inmates , one of which was to be chosen by each Poor Law Union depending on its local circumstances . Although dreary , the food was generally nutritionally adequate , and according to contemporary records was prepared with great care . Issues such as training staff to serve and weigh portions were well understood . The diets included general guidance , as well as schedules for each class of inmate . They were laid out on a weekly rotation , the various meals selected on a daily basis , from a list of foodstuffs . For instance , a breakfast of bread and gruel was followed by dinner , which might consist of cooked meats , pickled pork or bacon with vegetables , potatoes , yeast dumpling , soup and suet , or rice pudding . Supper was normally bread , cheese and broth , and sometimes butter or potatoes . 
 The larger workhouses had separate dining rooms for males and females ; workhouses without separate dining rooms would stagger the meal times to avoid any contact between the sexes . Rations provided for the indoor staff were much the same as those for the paupers , although more generous . The master and matron , for instance , received six times the amount of food given to a pauper . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Education was provided for the children , but workhouse teachers were a particular problem . Poorly paid , without any formal training , and facing large classes of unruly children with little or no interest in their lessons , few stayed in the job for more than a few months . In an effort to force workhouses to offer at least a basic level of education , legislation was passed in 1845 requiring that all pauper apprentices should be able to read and sign their own indenture papers . A training college for workhouse teachers was set up at Kneller Hall in Twickenham during the 1840s , but it closed in the following decade . 
 Some children were trained in skills valuable to the area . In Shrewsbury , the boys were placed in the workhouse 's workshop , while girls were tasked with spinning , making gloves and other jobs " suited to their sex , their ages and abilities " . At St Martin in the Fields , children were trained in spinning flax , picking hair and carding wool , before being placed as apprentices . Workhouses also had links with local industry ; in Nottingham , children employed in a cotton mill earned about £ 60 a year for the workhouse . Some parishes advertised for apprenticeships , and were willing to pay any employer prepared to offer them . Such agreements were preferable to supporting children in the workhouse : apprenticed children were not subject to inspection by justices , thereby lowering the chance of punishment for neglect ; and apprenticeships were viewed as a better long @-@ term method of teaching skills to children who might otherwise be uninterested in work . Supporting an apprenticed child was also considerably cheaper than the workhouse or outdoor relief . Children often had no say in the matter , which could be arranged without the permission or knowledge of their parents . The supply of labour from workhouse to factory , which remained popular until the 1830s , was sometimes viewed as a form of transportation . While getting parish apprentices from Clerkenwell , Samuel <unk> 's agent reported how some parents came " crying to beg they may have their Children out again " . Historian Arthur Redford suggests that the poor may have once shunned factories as " an insidious sort of workhouse " . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Religion played an important part in workhouse life : prayers were read to the paupers before breakfast and after supper each day . Each Poor Law Union was required to appoint a chaplain to look after the spiritual needs of the workhouse inmates , and he was invariably expected to be from the established Church of England . Religious services were generally held in the dining hall , as few early workhouses had a separate chapel . But in some parts of the country , notably Cornwall and northern England , there were more dissenters than members of the established church ; as section 19 of the 1834 Poor Law specifically forbade any regulation forcing an inmate to attend church services " in a Mode contrary to [ their ] Religious Principles " , the commissioners were reluctantly forced to allow non @-@ Anglicans to leave the workhouse on Sundays to attend services elsewhere , so long as they were able to provide a certificate of attendance signed by the officiating minister on their return . 
 As the 19th century wore on non @-@ conformist ministers increasingly began to conduct services within the workhouse , but Catholic priests were rarely welcomed . A variety of legislation had been introduced during the 17th century to limit the civil rights of Catholics , beginning with the Popish Recusants Act 1605 in the wake of the failed Gunpowder Plot that year . But although almost all restrictions on Catholics in England and Ireland were removed by the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 , a great deal of anti @-@ Catholic feeling remained . Even in areas with large Catholic populations , such as Liverpool , the appointment of a Catholic chaplain was unthinkable . Some guardians went so far as to refuse Catholic priests entry to the workhouse . 
 = = = Discipline = = = 
 Discipline was strictly enforced in the workhouse ; for minor offences such as swearing or feigning sickness the " disorderly " could have their diet restricted for up to 48 hours . For more serious offences such as insubordination or violent behaviour the " refractory " could be confined for up to 24 hours , and might also have their diet restricted . Girls were punished in the same way as adults , but boys under the age of 14 could be beaten with " a rod or other instrument , such as may have been approved of by the Guardians " . The persistently refractory , or anyone bringing " spirituous or fermented liquor " into the workhouse , could be taken before a Justice of the Peace and even jailed . All punishments handed out were recorded in a punishment book , which was examined regularly by the workhouse guardians , locally elected representatives of the participating parishes with overall responsibility for the running of the workhouse . 
 = = = Management and staffing = = = 
 Although the commissioners were responsible for the regulatory framework within which the Poor Law Unions operated , each union was run by a locally elected board of guardians , comprising representatives from each of the participating parishes , assisted by six ex officio members . The guardians were usually farmers or tradesmen , and as one of their roles was the contracting out of the supply of goods to the workhouse the position could prove lucrative for them and their friends . Simon Fowler has commented that " it is clear that this [ the awarding of contracts ] involved much petty corruption , and it was indeed endemic throughout the Poor Law system " . 
 Although the 1834 Act allowed for women to become workhouse guardians provided they met the property requirement , the first female was not elected until 1875 . Working class guardians were not appointed until 1892 , when the property requirement was dropped in favour of occupying rented premises worth £ 5 a year . 
 Every workhouse had a complement of full @-@ time staff , often referred to as the indoor staff . At their head was the governor or master , who was appointed by the board of guardians . His duties were laid out in a series of orders issued by the Poor Law Commissioners . As well as the overall administration of the workhouse , masters were required to discipline the paupers as necessary and to visit each ward twice daily , at 11 am and 9 pm . Female inmates and children under seven were the responsibility of the matron , as was the general housekeeping . The master and the matron were usually a married couple , charged with running the workhouse " at the minimum cost and maximum efficiency – for the lowest possible wages " . 
 A large workhouse such as Whitechapel , accommodating several thousand paupers , employed a staff of almost 200 ; the smallest may only have had a porter and perhaps an assistant nurse in addition to the master and matron . A typical workhouse accommodating 225 inmates had a staff of five , which included a part @-@ time chaplain and a part @-@ time medical officer . The low pay meant that many medical officers were young and inexperienced . To add to their difficulties , in most unions they were obliged to pay out of their own pockets for any drugs , dressings or other medical supplies needed to treat their patients . 
 = = Later developments and abolition = = 
 A second major wave of workhouse construction began in the mid @-@ 1860s , the result of a damning report by the Poor Law inspectors on the conditions found in infirmaries in London and the provinces . Of one workhouse in Southwark , London , an inspector observed bluntly that " The workhouse does not meet the requirements of medical science , nor am I able to suggest any arrangements which would in the least enable it to do so " . By the middle of the 19th century there was a growing realisation that the purpose of the workhouse was no longer solely or even chiefly to act as a deterrent to the able @-@ bodied poor , and the first generation of buildings was widely considered to be inadequate . About 150 new workhouses were built mainly in London , Lancashire and Yorkshire between 1840 and 1875 , in architectural styles that began to adopt Italianate or Elizabethan features , to better fit into their surroundings and present a less intimidating face . One surviving example is the gateway at Ripon , designed somewhat in the style of a medieval almshouse . A major feature of this new generation of buildings is the long corridors with separate wards leading off for men , women and children . 
 By 1870 the architectural fashion had moved away from the corridor design in favour of a " pavilion " style based on the military hospitals built during and after the Crimean War , providing light and well @-@ ventilated accommodation . Opened in 1878 , the Manchester Union 's infirmary comprised seven parallel three @-@ storey pavilions separated by 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) wide " airing yards " ; each pavilion had space for 31 beds , a day room , a nurse 's kitchen and toilets . By the start of the 20th century new workhouses were often fitted out to an " impressive standard " . Opened in 1903 , the workhouse at Hunslet in West Riding of Yorkshire had two steam boilers with automatic stokers supplying heating and hot water throughout the building , a generator to provide electricity for the institution 's 1 @,@ 130 electric lamps , and electric lifts in the infirmary pavilion . 
 As early as 1841 the Poor Law Commissioners were aware of an " insoluble dilemma " posed by the ideology behind the New Poor Law : 
 If the pauper is always promptly attended by a skilful and well qualified medical practitioner ... if the patient be furnished with all the cordials and stimulants which may promote his recovery : it cannot be denied that his condition in these respects is better than that of the needy and industrious ratepayer who has neither the money nor the influence to secure prompt and careful attendance . 
 The education of children presented a similar dilemma . It was provided free in the workhouse but had to be paid for by the " merely poor " ; free elementary education for all children was not provided in the UK until 1918 . Instead of being " less eligible " , those living in the workhouse were in certain respects " more eligible " than those living in poverty outside . 
 By the late 1840s most workhouses outside London and the larger provincial towns housed only " the incapable , elderly and sick " . Responsibility for administration of the Poor Law passed to the Local Government Board in 1871 , and the emphasis soon shifted from the workhouse as " a receptacle for the helpless poor " to its role in the care of the sick and helpless . The Diseases Prevention Act of 1883 allowed workhouse infirmaries to offer treatment to non @-@ paupers as well as inmates , and by the beginning of the 20th century some infirmaries were even able to operate as private hospitals . By the end of the century only about 20 per cent admitted to workhouses were unemployed or destitute , but about 30 per cent of the population over 70 were in workhouses . The introduction of pensions for those aged over 70 in 1908 did not result in a reduction in the number of elderly housed in workhouses , but it did reduce the number of those on outdoor relief by 25 per cent . 
 A Royal Commission of 1905 reported that workhouses were unsuited to deal with the different categories of resident they had traditionally housed , and recommended that specialised institutions for each class of pauper should be established , in which they could be treated appropriately by properly trained staff . The " deterrent " workhouses were in future to be reserved for " <unk> such as drunkards , idlers and tramps " . The Local Government Act of 1929 gave local authorities the power to take over workhouse infirmaries as municipal hospitals , although outside London few did so . The workhouse system was abolished in the UK by the same Act on 1 April 1930 , but many workhouses , renamed Public Assistance Institutions , continued under the control of local county councils . Even as late as the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 there were still almost 100 @,@ 000 people accommodated in the former workhouses , 5 @,@ 629 of whom were children . It was not until the 1948 National Assistance Act that the last vestiges of the Poor Law disappeared , and with them the workhouses . Many of the buildings were converted into old folks ' homes run by local authorities ; slightly more than 50 per cent of local authority accommodation for the elderly was provided in former workhouses in 1960 . Camberwell workhouse ( in Peckham , South London ) continued until 1985 as a shelter for more than 1000 homeless men , operated by the Department of Health and Social Security and renamed a resettlement centre . Southwell workhouse , now a museum , was used to provide temporary accommodation for mothers and children until the early 1990s . 
 = = Modern view = = 
 The Poor Law was not designed to address the issue of poverty , which was considered to be the inevitable lot for most people ; rather it was concerned with pauperism , " the inability of an individual to support himself " . Writing in 1806 Patrick Colquhoun commented that : 
 Poverty ... is a most necessary and indispensable ingredient in society , without which nations and communities could not exist in a state of civilisation . It is the lot of man – it is the source of wealth , since without poverty there would be no labour , and without labour there could be no riches , no refinement , no comfort , and no benefit to those who may be possessed of wealth . 
 Historian Simon Fowler has argued that workhouses were " largely designed for a pool of able @-@ bodied idlers and <unk> ... However this group hardly existed outside the imagination of a generation of political economists " . Workhouse life was intended to be harsh , to deter the able @-@ bodied poor and to ensure that only the truly destitute would apply , a principle known as less eligibility . Writing ten years after its introduction , Friedrich Engels described the motives of the authors of the 1834 New Poor Law as " to force the poor into the <unk> bed of their preconceived notions . To do this they treated the poor with incredible savagery . " 
 The purpose of workhouse labour was never clear according to historian M. A. Crowther . In the early days of workhouses it was either a punishment or a source of income for the parish , but during the 19th century the idea of work as punishment became increasingly unfashionable . The idea took hold that work should rehabilitate the workhouse inmates for their eventual independence , and that it should therefore be rewarded with no more than the workers ' maintenance , otherwise there would be no incentive for them to seek work elsewhere . 
 = = In art and literature = = 
 The " dramatic possibilities " of the workhouse provided the inspiration for several artists including Charles West Cope , whose Board Day Application for Bread ( 1841 ) , depicting a young widow pleading for bread for her four children , was painted following his visit to a meeting of the Staines Board of Guardians . The " quintessential workhouse yarn " is of course Oliver Twist ( 1838 ) by Charles Dickens , which contains the well @-@ known request from Oliver to the master of the workhouse : " Please , sir , I want some more [ food ] " . Another popular piece of workhouse literature was the dramatic monologue In the Workhouse : Christmas Day ( 1877 ) by George Robert Sims , better known by its first line of " It is Christmas Day in the workhouse " . In chapter XXVII of his first novel Down and Out in Paris and London ( 1933 ) , George Orwell gives a brief but vivid account of his stay in a London workhouse when he roamed the streets as a tramp during a short period in his late twenties . In 1931 an early version of this account had already been published as an essay ( The Spike ) in an issue of The New Adelphi . 
 = John Waddy ( British Army officer ) = 
 Colonel John Llewellyn Waddy OBE ( born 17 June 1920 ) is a former officer of the British Army who served in World War II , Palestine and the Malayan Emergency before becoming director of the SAS . 
 Joining the British Army shortly before the Second World War , he initially served with the Somerset Light Infantry in India . He subsequently volunteered for the Parachute Regiment and saw action in the Italian Campaign in late 1943 . After returning to the United Kingdom with the 4th Parachute Brigade , part of the 1st Airborne Division , he took part in the Battle of Arnhem , where he was wounded and taken prisoner by German troops . 
 After the war Waddy remained in the army and saw action in the Mandatory Palestine and during the Malayan Emergency , for which he was mentioned in dispatches . He went on to hold a series of command posts with the Parachute Regiment , both at home and overseas , and was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1963 . He was an early incumbent in the post of Director SAS and did much to expand the Special Air Service 's role . He subsequently held a number of Military Advisor positions , most notably in Washington DC , Vietnam and , after resigning from the military , with Westland Helicopters and during filming of the movie A Bridge Too Far . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Waddy was born on 17 June 1920 in Taunton , Somerset , the son of Lieutenant Colonel Richard Henry Waddy , DSO , and his wife Llewellyn . He was educated at Wellington College , Berkshire and then as a cadet at Royal Military College Sandhurst . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = North Africa and Italy = = = 
 On 3 July 1939 , Waddy was commissioned into the Somerset Light Infantry as a second lieutenant and sent to India two months later with the 1st Battalion . After travelling from Taunton to Scotland he sailed from Britain on the same day that Britain declared war on Germany . He was promoted to acting , then temporary , captain from September 1940 , and substantive lieutenant on 3 January 1941 . His time in India , however , was mostly spent on exercises with little chance of action . Desperate to leave , Waddy successfully volunteered for a new British Parachute Battalion when the chance came in August 1941 , and in October joined 151st Parachute Battalion as their intelligence officer . Parachuting was rudimentary in India and training jumps were made from Vickers Valentia biplanes . He qualified for his jump wings on the same day that Japan attacked Pearl Harbor , although only two months later he was nearly killed in a training jump and spent three days in a coma . 
 In October 1942 the battalion was sent to North Africa and re @-@ designated 156th Parachute Battalion , where it became the central unit of the new 4th Parachute Brigade , formed in December . Waddy was briefly made adjutant of 156 Battalion , but quickly moved up to the post of 4th Brigade 's Intelligence Officer . The brigade moved from Egypt to Palestine in February 1943 , and to Tunisia in June where it joined the 1st Airborne Division . Waddy recalled that the introduction of the now famous maroon beret was particularly unpopular with 156 Battalion , who had previously worn bush hats . The 4th Brigade did not take part in the Invasion of Sicily but on 5 September the whole Division sailed to Taranto in Italy ( Operation Slapstick ) , successfully capturing the port with 156 Battalion and Brigade HQ in the vanguard . 
 The Division advanced northwards over the coming weeks , slowly pursuing the 1st German Parachute Division . In one action Waddy found an Italian <unk> Howitzer which he used to disperse Germans gathering to counter attack 156 Battalion 's positions , firing through open sights at a building in the centre of their front . Waddy was promoted to acting major in October and took charge of 156 Battalion 's B Company , a month before the Division was withdrawn and sailed back to the UK . On 24 January 1944 , he was made a war substantive captain and temporary major . 
 = = = Arnhem = = = 
 1st Airborne Division 's next deployment was in September 1944 during Operation Market Garden . The Allies planned to use airborne forces to secure key bridges over a number of rivers and canals in the Netherlands , opening a route around the <unk> Line and into the heart of Germany . 1st Airborne Division was tasked with securing bridges across the Lower Rhine at Arnhem and 4th Parachute Brigade was detailed to occupy the northern approaches of the city in the event of a counterattack by German forces . The brigade was scheduled to arrive on the second day of the operation , 18 September , using drop zones protected by elements of 1st Airlanding Brigade . In the event , ground mist in England meant that the second lift was delayed by four hours , which spared the Dakota transport aircraft from meeting Luftwaffe fighters over the drop zone . Nevertheless , the aircraft encountered considerable anti @-@ aircraft fire as they approached the drop zone . Waddy later recalled that his aircraft was so near to the ground that he could see the upturned faces of the German gun crews . He observed numerous flak bursts and watched the escorting Hawker Typhoon fighters attacking flak batteries as they approached the DZ . His own aircraft was hit in the tail but the pilot continued to the drop zone where , despite bad yawing , Waddy and his men were able to jump . The paratroopers came under small @-@ arms fire directed at the aircraft 's doors as they left the aircraft and parachuted under heavy fire onto <unk> Heath . Waddy 's signaller lost his radio as he jumped behind him ; the bulky equipment was hit by a round the moment he jumped out of the Dakota . 
 On the ground an irate captain , who had expected the men four hours earlier , explained to a shocked Waddy the rapidly deteriorating situation on the ground . With 11th Parachute Battalion despatched to Arnhem and 10th Parachute Battalion defending the wounded on the drop zone , only 156th Battalion was free to move . At about 5pm they moved off along the Utrecht @-@ Arnhem railway and met their glider @-@ borne elements at Wolfheze just before being strafed by a German fighter . Approaching Oosterbeek they encountered German Panzer troops and stopped for the night . 
 In the morning , fresh orders were issued to lead the 4th Brigade to the left flank of 1st Parachute Brigade . B Company were ordered to provide supporting fire from the flanks of A Company 's advance , which they successfully did before returning to battalion HQ and following up the advance . Lieutenant Colonel Sir Richard des Voeux ordered Waddy to take B Company through A Company 's positions and continue the advance to the high ground , believing that there was not much opposition . In fact A Company had been nearly destroyed , and Waddy passed numerous bodies on his way forward . As the company advanced , they were held up by what Waddy believes was a twin barrelled 20mm flak gun . He led a small group to attack it , but was spotted by a German sniper as they moved forward . A companion was killed instantly and Waddy , without his machine gun , could only fire ineffectively with his pistol . The sniper shot him in the groin and tried to hit him again as he started to crawl away , forcing Waddy to lay <unk> for a moment before one of his men , a 6 foot 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) tall Rhodesian soldier , carried him back to Company HQ . Faced with a heavy concentration of enemy armour , the attack stalled and was then called off ; the battalion had taken such heavy casualties that it was reduced to the size of what was essentially a single company . 
 At the Regimental Aid Post , Waddy found that the doctors did not rate his chances particularly highly ; the 156 Battalion 's war diary even recorded that " B Company commander was fatally wounded " . He was taken next to a Field Ambulance post and from there to the <unk> hotel in Oosterbeek , now being used as a Main Dressing Station . Here he was operated on in the hotel 's billiard room where Major Guy Rigby Jones used the billiard table to perform surgery . A day later he was moved to a house opposite as the number of casualties increased . Because the aid stations were in the front lines of the Oosterbeek perimeter , they came under constant fire and he was wounded twice more . A mortar round shell fragment lodged in his left foot , and a later hit caused splinter injuries to his face and shoulder . On another occasion , as the battle <unk> around the aid post , Germans occupied his building . A British sniper shot a German rifleman , prompting a German sergeant to lecture the British about shooting at a Red Cross house . When the house caught fire he was taken outside and driven to a collection point from where German medics took him to Apeldoorn . 
 Waddy spent the next six weeks in a German hospital in Apeldoorn . Once again the British patients were lectured about firing at the Red Cross after a Spitfire strafed the operating theatre , but overall Waddy was impressed by the kindness of the German staff and guards . He narrowly avoided having his foot amputated when a nurse removed the splinter embedded in it with a pair of forceps , and once he had sufficiently recovered from his wounds he was taken to Stalag VII @-@ A where he remained until the camp was liberated at the end of April 1945 . 
 = = Post @-@ war service = = 
 Waddy remained in the army after the war ended and joined the HQ of 3rd Parachute Brigade before being sent to Palestine in September 1945 . A month later he joined 9th Battalion dealing with the Jewish terrorist threat and in July 1947 he was wounded once again , this time by members of the <unk> . Because the Parachute Regiment was not allowed to recruit officers for longer than three years , Waddy was posted in March 1948 , after almost seven years with the regiment . He spent the next four years in staff posts , initially in Greece , then Taunton where he became GSO 3 for 43rd ( Wessex ) Division . Later he was sent to 1st Infantry Division in Egypt and then Libya . In July 1952 he was promoted to substantive major , and two months later was posted to Malaya as a company commander with the 1st Battalion , The Somerset Light Infantry . He spent a year in the country during the Malayan Emergency and was Mentioned in Despatches . 
 Returning from Malaya , Waddy spent time at RAF Staff College and as a training major for the Somerset Light Infantry Territorial Army Battalion . He then volunteered to rejoin the Parachute Regiment and was sent to the Canadian Joint Air Training Centre in Manitoba , Canada on exchange . In 1958 the Parachute Regiment was allowed to keep its own officers and Waddy swiftly applied . He was posted to Jordan and then Cyprus as 2IC of 2nd Battalion , an experience he likened to being back with family . In 1960 he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and posted to Aldershot to command the Depot The Parachute Regiment and Airborne Forces during which time he established the Parachute Regiment Battle Camp at Brecon , which later evolved into the Infantry Battle School . In 1962 he came chief instructor at a small arms school in Hythe . In the 1963 New Year Honours he was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his command of the depot . 
 In late 1964 , Waddy took up a new post as Colonel SAS , which later evolved into Director SAS ( now Director Special Forces ) , resulting in his promotion to full Colonel . Waddy was an early incumbent of this post and is credited with doing much to develop new roles for the SAS in the post colonial war period . He also wrote a paper envisaging counter @-@ terrorism and intelligence gathering roles for the service , predictions that have since been realised . 
 After brief stints in Washington DC and Fort Benning as a liaison officer , Waddy was posted to the British Embassy in Saigon as a defence advisor in 1970 . Here he was able to witness the Vietnam War first hand before returning to Britain in 1972 and joining the Joint Warfare Establishment at Old Sarum near Salisbury in Wiltshire . 
 = = Civilian service = = 
 Waddy resigned his commission in 1974 and became Military Advisor to Westland Helicopters , a post he held until his retirement in 1989 . Although he found the work stimulating , Waddy was frustrated by the Army 's lack of interest in the helicopter . 
 When production of the movie A Bridge Too Far began in 1975 , Waddy was given six months leave by Westland to act as chief Military Advisor , an appointment that John Frost thought was ideal . Waddy was responsible for training " Attenborough 's Private Army " , a group of fifty men who went through boot camp in order to portray Frost 's men at Arnhem Bridge and provide the backbone of the extra cast . Waddy confessed to being deeply concerned by the actors ' quality at first , but was able to turn them into men who looked and acted the part . Although there was little that Waddy or his fellow military consultants ( who included Frost , Roy Urquhart , James M. Gavin , Brian Horrocks and <unk> Vandeleur ) could do to greatly influence the film 's script , he was able to ensure that some parts were kept historically accurate . By way of thanking him after receiving some advice , Edward Fox referred to his driver as Waddy in his first scene in the movie , and he had a brief cameo appearance in one of the film 's final scenes . 
 Along with many veterans , Waddy has returned to Arnhem frequently . When visiting in 1954 he was presented with a damaged silver cigarette case bearing his surname . When he had it cleaned at home he discovered it was a present from his father to Colonel <unk> Barlow , another 1st Airborne officer who was killed during the battle . 
 From 1982 to 1996 Waddy led talks for students of the Army Staff College on their battlefield tours at Arnhem , a role he has reprised since the Defence Academy restarted the tours in 2008 . He wrote a book on the subject in 1999 ( A Tour of the Arnhem Battlefields ) and is recognised as an authority on the battle . 
 = Robert Surcouf = 
 Robert Surcouf ( 12 December 1773 – 8 July 1827 ) was a French privateer and slave trader who operated in the Indian Ocean between 1789 and 1801 , and again from 1807 to 1808 , capturing over 40 prizes , while amassing a large fortune as a ship @-@ owner , both from privateering and from commerce for a time . 
 Surcouf started his career as a sailor and officer on the slave ships Aurore , Courrier d 'Afrique and <unk> . Having risen to Captain , and in spite of the prohibition of slave trading by the National Convention in 1793 , he engaged in the business himself as a captain on Créole . He then captained the merchantman Émilie , on which he engaged in commerce raiding despite lacking a letter of marque . He preyed on British shipping , capturing the East Indiaman Triton , before returning to Île de France , where his prizes were confiscated . He then returned to France , where he obtained prize money from the government . 
 Returning to the Indian Ocean , Surcouf captained the privateers Clarisse and Confiance , raiding British , American and Portuguese merchantmen . He captured the East Indiaman Kent on 7 October 1800 . Returning to France , he was awarded the Legion of Honour and settled as a ship @-@ owner . 
 He briefly returned to the Indian Ocean in 1807 on the custom @-@ built Revenant before returning to France . There , he armed privateers and merchantmen . His privateers led successful campaigns against the British in the Indian Ocean and disastrous ones in the English Channel , except for Renard which achieved fame in her very costly victory over HMS <unk> on 9 September 1812 which exploded after repulsing French attempts at boarding it causing many casualties . After the Bourbon restoration , he organised fishing expeditions to Terre @-@ Neuve and amassed a considerable fortune . He died in 1827 and is buried in a graveyard at Saint @-@ Malo . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Robert Surcouf was born 12 December 1773 in Saint @-@ Malo to a family of ship @-@ owners . His father , Charles @-@ Ange Surcouf de <unk> , was the grandson of Robert Surcouf de Maisonneuve , who had captained the privateer Aimable during the reign of <unk> XIV . On his mother 's side , Robert was a distant relative of René Duguay @-@ Trouin . When his parents sent him to Dinan college to become a priest , he fled at age thirteen to enlist on the merchantman <unk> , which shuttled between Saint @-@ Malo and Cadiz . 
 On 3 March 1789 , he enlisted as a volunteer on the 700 @-@ ton Aurore , under Captain Tardivet , a slave ship bound for India . Aurore sailed to Pondicherry and ferried troops bound for Isle de France . On her next journey , seeking to purchase slaves on the Horn of Africa , Aurore was wrecked in Mozambique Channel , drowning 400 black slaves chained in the orlop . Tardivet chartered the <unk> San Antoine in October 1790 to return to Port @-@ Louis , but had to divert to Sumatra because of the weather , and only returned to Port @-@ Louis in late 1790 , on a French ship via the French colony of Pondicherry . Promoted to officer , Surcouf enlisted on the Courrier d 'Afrique , another slave ship , bound for Mozambique under Captain Garnier . Captain Tardivet then brought him over as Lieutenant on his new ship , Revanche . On Revanche , Surcouf made several expeditions off Madagascar . 
 Surcouf enlisted as a helmsman on the French Royal Navy 's 20 @-@ gun <unk> Bienvenue , under Lieutenant <unk> , bound for France . Bienvenue arrived at Lorient on 2 January 1792 , where Surcouf discovered the political changes France had undergone in the wake of the French Revolution . 
 After six months , Surcouf enlisted as a lieutenant on the slave ship <unk> , under Captain <unk> . She departed on 27 August 1792 for Mozambique before sailing to Isle de France , where Surcouf was informed on his arrival of the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 Rising to the rank of captain , Surcouf took command of the brig Créole , a four @-@ gun slave ship . He departed Isle de France on 3 June 1794 for a journey off Africa and Madagascar , and engaged again in slave trading , even though it had been prohibited by the National Convention and the Assembly of Île Bourbon . Upon his return to Isle de France , agents of the Committee of Public Safety inspected Créole for evidence of slave trading , but left empty @-@ handed as Surcouf had already sold his slaves . When British naval forces arrived to blockade Isle de France , he served as an auxiliary ensign on the 40 @-@ gun frigate Cybèle and participated in the Action of 22 October 1794 . 
 = = = Cruise of Émilie and capture of Triton = = = 
 In the spring in 1795 , Surcouf took command of the 180 @-@ ton , privateer schooner Modeste , renamed Émilie , with a 32 @-@ man crew and four 6 @-@ pounder guns , armed by <unk> and Levaillant . Governor Malartic refused to provide a lettre de marque and ordered Émilie to go to the Seychelles to purchase tortoises as food for Isle de France . 
 Émilie departed on 3 September 1795 with a <unk> de navigation authorising her to defend herself , but not to take prizes as a privateer . The next day , she made a port call at Saint @-@ Denis before cruising to Mahé . At Sainte Anne Island , two large British ships chased him , but he was able to evade them by sailing through the reefs , at night . 
 Surcouf then decided to sail to the Mergui Archipelago to load a rice cargo . On 8 December 1795 , while in transit , cruising off the Ganges Delta , Surcouf captured his first prized , the ship Penguin , loaded with lumber , on which he detached a prize crew under Lieutenant <unk> before sending her to Isle de France . 
 On 19 January 1796 , Surcouf met the pilot ship Cartier leading two merchantmen , the Russel and <unk> , through the Ganges delta . He attacked and captured them , finding the merchantmen to be carrying rice . After detaching prize crews , Surcouf transferred his command , along with his remaining 22 crew members and Émilie 's four guns , to Cartier , which ( according to Ambroise Louis <unk> ) he renamed Hasard . Surcouf then sent Émilie , under Lieutenant <unk> , together with his prizes , to Isle de France . 
 On the night of 28 January , Surcouf captured the 12 @-@ gun Diana , loaded with 6000 bags of rice . The next day , Cartier met a 26 @-@ gun Indiaman , the Triton , armed with 12 @-@ pounders and a 150 @-@ man crew ; having decided to attack , and recognising only too late the overwhelming superiority of his opponent , Surcouf , feeling threatened and unable to flee , decided to board her with his 26 men . After haranguing his men , he approached under a British flag , before hoisting French colours at the very last moment and launching a violent assault . In the ensuing 45 @-@ minute battle , Triton suffered 5 wounded and 10 killed , including her captain , Captain <unk> , and the first officer , Picket ; The prisoners were transferred to Diana , which Surcouf released against a 30 @,@ 000 rupee ransom . 
 Surcouf returned to Ile de France with his prizes , where he arrived on 10 March 1796 , although Hasard was captured by HMS Victorious on the journey back . As Émilie had been armed as a merchant rather than a privateer , the Prize court seized her prizes and sold them for the benefit of the State , although their capture was declared to be legal . Surcouf returned to France to claim his prize money , and on 3 September 1797 , the government finally granted him 660 @,@ 000 francs , of which he only received 80 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Cruise of Clarisse = = = 
 In early 1798 , after 14 months in Paris , Surcouf took command of the Clarisse , a 14 @-@ gun privateer brig armed with four 12 @-@ pounders , ten 8 @-@ pounders , and manned by a 120 @-@ strong complement . He departed from <unk> Nantes in February 1798 , this time with a proper lettre de marque . During the journey to Isle de France , Clarisse chased a British slave ship , which escaped after one of her shots cut off Clarisse ' s foremast tops . Surcouf captured a British brig South of Cape of Good Hope , which surrendered at the warning shot , on which he sent a prize crew under Captain Dujardin , and arrived La Réunion on 5 December . 
 In early 1799 , Surcouf sailed to the city of <unk> in Aceh , on Sumatra , where he found two 20 @-@ gun merchantmen anchored in the harbour , in the process of loading pepper ; Clarisse dropped anchor close by and opened fire , after which Surcouf sent his older brother Nicolas to head a 20 @-@ man board party on Clarisse ' s boats and board the largest of the ships , while he boarded her with Clarisse from the opposite side ; assaulted from two sides , she surrendered after a 30 @-@ minute battle . The other ship cut her anchor and attempted to flee , but she was overhauled by the boats of Clarisse and captured without resistance , most of her crew being ashore . Surcouf returned to Île de France with his prizes in June . 
 On 16 August , Clarisse departed Isle de France for another cruise ; she sailed to La Réunion carrying despatches of Malartic to the governor . She then cruised to Java to procure water , where she arrived on 27 September . On 1 October , Surcouf captured a Danish merchantman , which he sent away under Lieutenant <unk> ; on 4 November , the Portuguese merchantman Nostra Signora de la Conception carrying 116 000 piastres ; on 6 , a British ship laden with a salt cargo ; and on 11 November , the 20 @-@ gun Auspicious , with a cargo worth 1 @,@ 032 @,@ 580 francs . 
 Surcouf sailed to Mergui to purchase food and free his prisoners , and put to sail on 10 December . En route , he met the fellow French privateer Malartic , under Jean <unk> ; soon after , the privateers met a British frigate , 38 @-@ gun frigate HMS Sybille , which gave chase and which Surcouf managed to <unk> by throwing eight guns overboard , along with various other implements . 
 On 1 January 1800 , Clarisse captured a large rice @-@ laden merchantman , the British James . On 3 January , she detected two American 16 @-@ carronade ships forming a line of battle ; although Clarisse lacked the eight guns sacrificed to escape Sybille and 60 of her men detached on her various prizes , Surcouf engaged . Clarisse raked the rear @-@ most ship , the Louisa , and boarded her , while simultaneously firing a broadside on the other ship , Mercury , which attempted to rescue her mate . Nicolas Surcouf led a 30 @-@ man boarding party to seize Louisa , while Mercury escaped . Clarisse could not give chase , her bowsprit having been destroyed in the collision with Louisa . Nicolas Surcouf took a prize crew and sailed Louisa back to Port Louis . 
 Clarisse continued her patrol , capturing the ships Catherine , <unk> , Anna Maria , Nostra Signora de la Cruz , Louis , Janna , Notre Dame de Bon Succès and Albion , before sailing back to Isle de France with her prizes . She arrived in early February 1800 . 
 = = = Cruise of Confiance and capture of Kent = = = 
 In May 1800 , Surcouf took command of Confiance , a fast 18 @-@ gun brig from Bordeaux , with a 150 @-@ man complement ; the competition with <unk> for the captainship of Confiance almost degenerated into a duel , and Governor Malartic had to intervene to prevent it , stating that such a confrontation would be " an English victory " . The sailor and painter Ambroise Louis <unk> , future biographer of Surcouf , enlisted at this time . 
 In late April 1800 , Confiance cruised off Sunda Strait , where she captured the American ship ; she then left the strait to avoid the US frigate Essex which was known to cruise in these waters , and sailed to the Seychelles . There , he escaped a British ship of the line and a frigate , and sailed on to cruise the Bay of Bengal . 
 On 19 September , Confiance captured the Prize , from Calcutta , which has stored eight of her ten guns in her hold to improve her stability . Prize was sent off to Mauritius on the next day with an 85 @-@ man prize crew . Surcouf then steered for Ganjam , where he captured three smaller ships . 
 On 7 October 1800 , off Sand Heads , near Calcutta , Confiance met the 40 @-@ gun East Indiaman Kent , of 824 tons burthen , under Captain Robert Rivington . Kent had rescued the crew of another ship , the Queen , destroyed by fire , and therefore had an exceptionally large complement of 437 men , including her passengers ; 300 of them were soldiers and sailors ; Surcouf managed to board his larger opponent and , after over an hour and a half of battle across the decks of the ship , seize control of the Kent . 
 The British had fourteen killed , including the captain , and 44 wounded , while the French suffered five killed and ten wounded . The privateers were then granted one hour of free pillaging on Kent before Surcouf restored order ; however , the female passengers were strictly protected and sentries were placed in front of their apartments . Amongst the prisoners were General Frederick St. John and his wife , Arabella Craven . 
 The first officer of Confiance , Joachim <unk> , was sent on Kent with a 60 @-@ man prize crew , while her passengers were released on a merchantman that Surcouf stopped a few days later . Confiance and Kent arrived at the Rade des <unk> in Port @-@ Louis in November . The capture of Kent became a sensation , and the British Admiralty promised a reward for the capture of Surcouf . 
 After her return to Ile de France , Confiance was armed as a merchantman en <unk> with an 89 @-@ man crew and loaded with colonial goods for her return to France . On the journey , Surcouf still managed to capture a number of ships , notably the Portuguese <unk> , with eighteen 12 @-@ pounder carronades and a 60 @-@ man crew ; he released her against a ransom of 10 @,@ 000 piastres and after exchanging her <unk> with that of Confiance . 
 Upon her return , Confiance ran into the British blockade and was chased by a frigate ; Surcouf managed to evade her by throwing overboard all but one of her guns , his boats , anchors , chains and even components of his masts . He eventually arrived at La Rochelle on 13 April 1801 . 
 In France , Navy Minister <unk> attempted to enrol Surcouf in the Navy as an auxiliary officer , which he declined . <unk> states that Bonaparte himself offered him the rank of Captain and the command of two frigates , which Surcouf declined for fear of losing his freedom of action , and awarded him a Sabre of honour . Surcouf was awarded the Legion of Honour at the founding of the Order , on 19 May 1802 . 
 On 28 May , in Saint @-@ Malo , he married Marie Blaize , who had been his fiancée for two years ; over the course of their marriage , they had five children together . Around 1805 , Surcouf started to arm privateers in Saint @-@ Malo in partnership with his father @-@ in @-@ law Louis Blaize de Maisonneuve , notably Caroline which captured four ships in the Indian Ocean under Nicolas Surcouf ; <unk> ; and Confiance , which took two prizes under Joseph Potier . 
 = = = Cruise of Revenant = = = 
 After a five @-@ year retirement , in early 1807 , Surcouf ordered the 18 @-@ gun Revenant , a privateer which he had built on his own specifications . On 2 March , he departed Saint @-@ Malo with a 192 @-@ man crew to cruise off Bengal . On 9 March 1807 , while en route , off Madeira , Revenant captured the British slave ship Aun , of sixteen 12 @-@ pounders , recently departed from Liverpool , which Surcouf let go for a ransom , after throwing her guns overboard , wetting her gunpowder and destroying some of her sails . 
 Surcouf arrived at Île de France in June , defeating the British blockade and capturing several ships on the journey . During the subsequent campaign , which was to be his last , Surcouf captured 16 British ships , partly because British ships tended strike their colours as soon as they realised their opponent was Surcouf . 
 The arrival of Surcouf at Isle de France did not go unnoticed : the authorities and the population reacted with enthusiasm , while British insurance companies on Calcutta doubled the reward for his capture , which amounted to one rupee lake , or 250 @,@ 000 francs . On 3 September 1807 , Revenant departed to cruise off Bengal . On 25 September , she captured the British 12 @-@ gun Trafalgar carrying 10 @,@ 000 bags of rice , and the 14 @-@ gun Mangles , carrying 11 @,@ 000 ; on the 27th , the 12 @-@ gun Admiral <unk> , with 9 @,@ 500 bags of rice ; on 1 October , the 1 @-@ gun <unk> , with 5 @,@ 500 bags of rice ; on the 19th , the wood @-@ laden Success , which was burnt ; on the 30th , the 12 @-@ gun Fortune , which carried no cargo and was sunk ; on 15 November , the Indian <unk> ; on 18 December , the British 10 @-@ gun Sir William Burrough ; on the 30th , the Portuguese Oriente ; and on 6 January 1808 , the Arab Jem lab Dim . Surcouf sent these with prize crews to Isle de France , and then returned himself on 31 January 1808 . 
 When a British captive officer challenged Surcouf with the words " You French fight for money while we fight for honour " , Surcouf replied " Each of us fights for what he lacks most " . 
 Surcouf then gave command of Revenant to his first officer , Joseph Potier . After a short cruise , Potier returned with a 34 @-@ gun prize of the Portuguese East India Company , the <unk> de Santo Antonio , captured after a one @-@ hour fight . 
 On 4 July 1808 , Revenant was requisitioned by order of General Decaen , governor of Isle de France . She was renamed Iéna , and command given to Lieutenant Morice , with Lieutenant de vaisseau Albin Roussin as second officer . Surcouf had an altercation with Decaen but had to renounce his ship . He eventually purchased the Sémillante , which he renamed Charles . Returning with this vessel to Saint @-@ Malo , he arrived on 4 February 1809 . 
 = = = Late life = = = 
 From 1809 , Surcouf went into business as ship @-@ owner , and over the years , he armed a number of privateers : Auguste , under Pelletier ; <unk> ; <unk> ; Édouard ; <unk> ; Ville @-@ de @-@ Caen ; Adolphe and his last , the Renard , under Leroux . The British captured all the privateers sent into the Channel , with the exception of Renard . 
 In January 1814 , Surcouf was made a colonel in the National Guard of Saint @-@ Malo . During the Hundred Days , he served as a chief of Legion and maintained order . He resigned after the Battle of Waterloo and became a merchant , arming 19 merchantmen and establishing business with Newfoundland . 
 Surcouf died on 8 July 1827 , and was buried in Saint @-@ Malo graveyard with military honours . His tomb features a globe showing the Indian Ocean and an anchor , with the epitaph : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Five ships of the French Navy were named in honour of Surcouf : a steam aviso ( sloop ) ; an armoured cruiser ; a submarine cruiser , which at the time of her launch was the largest submarine in the world , joined the Free French Naval Forces during the Second World War , and disappeared mysteriously after liberating Saint @-@ Pierre and Miquelon ; a large fleet escort destroyer , which was heavily damaged in a collision with a Soviet ship ; and the present @-@ day stealth frigate , one of the first stealth combat ships . 
 A number of legends have grown around Surcouf over the time : he is often stated to have been made a Baron of the Empire , which is untrue . Another legend states that Surcouf had thrown overboard gold seized on Kent ; in fact , Kent did not carry gold . 
 There is a tale that in 1816 , Surcouf challenged twelve Prussian officers to a duel and defeated all of them except for the last , which he let go " to tell in his country how a former soldier of Napoleon fights " ; this story has been debunked . 
 = HD 2039 = 
 HD 2039 is a yellow dwarf or yellow subgiant star in the constellation Phoenix . The star is not visible to the naked eye , and lies approximately 330 light years away from the Sun . HD 2039 is a relatively stable star , and an exoplanet at least three times the mass of the planet Jupiter has been discovered in its orbit ; this exoplanet , known as HD 2039 b , was the 100th exoplanet to be discovered . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 The designation HD 2039 from the Henry Draper Catalogue . The catalogue , which was published between 1918 and 1924 , was based on the work of Annie Jump Cannon and her team between 1911 and 1915 . HD 2039 does not have a common , <unk> name that is characteristic of stars like Sirius , Procyon , and Aldebaran . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 HD 2039 is a stable G @-@ type star , meaning it shines with white light that can be seen in the Sun . In terms of mass , the star exhibits almost identical properties . HD 2039 exhibits a radius approximately six @-@ fifth times the size of the Sun 's . The star is slightly hotter than the Sun ; while HD 2039 has a temperature of <unk> K , the Sun 's surface temperature lies nearly 200 kelvins lower at 5778 K. HD 2039 is unusually metal @-@ rich , which has attracted the attention of astrophysicists . 
 = = = Distance and visibility = = = 
 The star 's magnitude as observed from Earth is 9 ; this signifies that the body is not visible with the naked eye , but can be seen with a telescope . HD 2039 lies roughly 330 light years from the Sun , which is about as far from the Sun as the second brightest star in the night sky , Canopus . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 In 2002 , a planet was found by the Anglo @-@ Australian Planet Search team to be orbiting the star in a very eccentric orbit . It has a minimum mass more than three times that of Jupiter and has an orbital period of over three years . The planet orbits its star at a distance of approximately two AU away ; the planet Earth , in comparison , orbits at a distance of one AU away from the Sun . HD 2039 b 's discovery was reported quietly ; no press release was provided by the observatory that discovered the star 's planet , and no formal announcement of the planet 's existence was made . The entity was the 100th exoplanet to have been verified by the scientific community . 
 = Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic = 
 The Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic ; ( Armenian SSR ; Armenian : Հայկական <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Sovetakan Soc <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> Сове ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> Sovetskaya <unk> Respublika ) also commonly referred to as Soviet Armenia or simply as Armenia was one of the constituent republics of the Soviet Union in December 1922 . It was established in December 1920 , when the Soviets took over control of the short @-@ lived First Republic of Armenia and lasted until 1991 . It is sometimes called the Second Republic of Armenia , following the First Republic of Armenia 's demise . 
 As part of the Soviet Union , the Armenian SSR transformed from a largely agricultural hinterland to an important industrial production center , while its population almost quadrupled from around 880 @,@ 000 in 1926 to 3 @.@ 3 million in 1989 due to natural growth and large @-@ scale influx of Armenian Genocide survivors and their descendants . On August 23 , 1990 , it was renamed the Republic of Armenia , but remained in the Soviet Union until its official proclamation of independence on 21 September 1991 . Its independence was recognised on 26 December 1991 when the Soviet Union ceased to exist . After the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the state of the post @-@ Union Republic of Armenia existed until the adoption of the new constitution in 1995 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sovietization = = = 
 From 1828 with the Treaty of Turkmenchay to the October Revolution in 1917 , Eastern Armenia was part of the Russian Empire and partly confined to the borders of the Erivan Governorate . After the October Revolution , Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin 's government announced that minorities in the empire could pursue a course of self @-@ determination . Following the collapse of the empire , in May 1918 Armenia , and its neighbors Azerbaijan and Georgia , declared their independence from Russian rule and each established their respective republics . After the near @-@ annihilation of the Armenians during the Armenian Genocide and the subsequent Turkish @-@ Armenian War , the historic Armenian area in the Ottoman Empire was overrun with despair and devastation . 
 A number of Armenians joined the advancing 11th Soviet Red Army . Afterward , Turkey and the newly proclaimed Soviet republics in the Caucasus negotiated the Treaty of Kars , in which Turkey resigned from its claims to Batumi to Georgia in exchange for the Kars territory , corresponding to the modern @-@ day Turkish provinces of Kars , Iğdır , and Ardahan . The medieval Armenian capital of Ani , as well as the cultural icon of the Armenian people Mount Ararat , were located in the ceded area . Additionally , Joseph Stalin , then acting Commissar for Nationalities , granted the areas of Nakhchivan and Nagorno @-@ Karabakh ( both of which were promised to Armenia by the Bolsheviks in 1920 ) to Azerbaijan . 
 From March 12 , 1922 to December 5 , 1936 , Armenia was a part of the Transcaucasian SFSR ( TSFSR ) together with the Georgian SSR and the Azerbaijan SSR . The policies of the first Soviet Armenian government , the Revolutionary Committee ( <unk> ) , headed by young , inexperienced , and militant communists such as Sarkis <unk> and Avis <unk> , were implemented in a <unk> manner and did not take into consideration the poor conditions of the republic and the general weariness of the people after years of conflict and civil strife . As the Soviet Armenian historian Bagrat <unk> , who was to later perish during Stalin 's purges , wrote in 1929 : 
 The Revolutionary Committee started a series of indiscriminate seizures and confiscations , without regard to class , and without taking into account the general economic and psychological state of the peasantry . Devoid of revolutionary planning , and executed with needless brutality , these confiscations were unorganized and promiscuous . <unk> by disciplinary machinery , without preliminary propaganda or enlightenment , and with utter disregard of the country 's unusually distressing condition , the Revolutionary Committee issued its orders nationalizing food supply of the cities and peasantry . With amazing recklessness and unconcern , they seized and nationalized everything – military uniforms , artisan tools , rice mills , water mills , barbers ' implements , beehives , linen , household furniture , and livestock . 
 Such was the degree and scale of the requisitioning and terror imposed by the local Cheka that in February 1921 the Armenians , led by former leaders of the republic , rose up in revolt and briefly unseated the communists in Yerevan . The Red Army , which was campaigning in Georgia at the time , returned to suppress the revolt and drove its leaders out of Armenia . 
 Convinced that these heavy @-@ handed tactics were the source of the alienation of the native population to Soviet rule , in 1921 Moscow appointed an experienced administrator , Alexander <unk> , to carry out a more moderate policy and one better attuned to Armenian sensibilities . With the introduction of the New Economic Policy ( NEP ) , Armenians began to enjoy a period of relative stability . Life under the Soviet rule proved to be a soothing balm in contrast to the turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire . The Armenians received medicine , food , as well as other provisions from the central government and extensive literacy reforms were carried out . The situation was difficult for the Armenian Apostolic Church , however , which became a regular target of criticism in educational books and in the media and struggled greatly under Communism . 
 = = = Stalin 's reign = = = 
 After the death of Vladimir Lenin in January 1924 , there was a brief power struggle in the Soviet Union , from which Joseph Stalin rose to take the reins of power . Armenian society and its economy were changed by Stalin and his fellow Moscow policymakers . In 1936 , the TSFSR was dissolved under Stalin 's orders and the socialist republics of Armenia , Azerbaijan , and Georgia were established instead . For the Armenian people , conditions grew worse under Stalin 's rule . In a period of twenty @-@ five years , Armenia was industrialized and educated under strictly prescribed conditions , and nationalism was harshly suppressed . 
 Stalin took several measures in persecuting the Armenian Church , already weakened by the Armenian Genocide and the Russification policies of the Russian Empire . In the 1920s , the private property of the church was confiscated and priests were harassed . Soviet assaults against the Armenian Church accelerated under Stalin , beginning in 1929 , but momentarily eased in the following years to improve the country 's relations with the Armenian diaspora . In 1932 , Khoren <unk> became known as Khoren I and assumed the title of His Holiness the Catholicos . However , in the late 1930s , the Soviets renewed their attacks against the Church . This culminated in the murder of Khoren in 1938 as part of the Great Purge , and the closing of the <unk> of Echmiatsin on August 4 , 1938 . The Church , however , managed to survive underground and in the diaspora . 
 The Great Purge was a series of campaigns of political repression and persecution in the Soviet Union orchestrated against members of the Communist Party , writers and intellectuals , peasants and ordinary citizens . In September 1937 Stalin dispatched Anastas Mikoyan , along with Georgy Malenkov and Lavrentiy Beria , with a list of 300 names to Yerevan to oversee the liquidation of the Communist Party of Armenia ( CPA ) , which was largely made up of Old Bolsheviks . Armenian communist leaders such as Vagharshak Ter @-@ <unk> and Aghasi <unk> fell victim to the purge , the former being a defendant at the first of the Moscow Show Trials . Mikoyan tried , but failed , to save one from being executed during his trip to Armenia . That person was arrested during one of his speeches to the CPA by Beria . Over a thousand people were arrested and seven of nine members of the Armenian Politburo were sacked from office . According to one study , 4 @,@ 530 people were executed by firing squad in the years 1937 @-@ 38 alone , the majority of them having been accused of anti @-@ Soviet or " counter @-@ revolutionary " activities , for belonging to the nationalist Dashnak party , or Trotskyism . 
 As with various other ethnic minorities who lived in the Soviet Union under Stalin , tens of thousands of Armenians were executed or deported . In 1936 , Beria and Stalin worked to deport Armenians to Siberia in an attempt to bring Armenia 's population under 700 @,@ 000 in order to justify an annexation into Georgia . Under Beria 's command , police terror was used to strengthen the party 's political hold on the population and suppress all expressions of nationalism . Many writers , artists , scientists and political leaders , including the writer Axel <unk> and the celebrated poet Yeghishe Charents , were executed or forced into exile . Additionally , in 1944 , roughly 200 @,@ 000 Hamshenis ( Sunni Muslim Armenians who live near the Black Sea coastal regions of Russia , Georgia and Turkey ) were deported from Georgia to areas of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan . Further deportations of Armenians from the coastal region occurred in 1948 , when 58 @,@ 000 alleged supporters of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation and Greeks were forced to move to Kazakhstan . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Armenia was spared the devastation and destruction that wrought most of the western Soviet Union during the Great Patriotic War of World War II . The Wehrmacht never reached the South Caucasus , which they intended to do in order to capture the oil fields in Azerbaijan . Still , Armenia played a valuable role in the war in providing food , manpower and war matériel . An estimated 300 – 500 @,@ 000 Armenians served in the war , almost half of whom did not return . Many attained the highest rank of Hero of the Soviet Union . Over sixty Armenians were promoted to the rank of general , and with an additional four eventually achieving the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union : Ivan Bagramyan ( the first non @-@ Slavic commander to hold the position of front commander when he was assigned to be the commander of the First Baltic Front in 1943 ) , Admiral Ivan Isakov , Hamazasp Babadzhanian , and Sergei <unk> . The Soviet government , in an effort to shore up popular support for the war , also allowed for token expressions of nationalism with the re @-@ publication of Armenian novels , the production of films such as David Bek ( 1944 ) , and the easing of restrictions placed against the Church . Stalin temporarily relented his attacks on religion during the war . This led to the election of bishop Gevork in 1945 as new Catholicos Gevork VI . He was subsequently allowed to reside in Echmiatsin . 
 Some Armenians who were captured by the Germans as POWs opted to serve in German battalions rather than risk life @-@ threatening conditions in POW camps . As with many Soviet soldiers who surrendered to German forces during fighting , Armenians were punished by Stalin and sent to work at labor camps located in Siberia . 
 At the end of the war , after Germany 's capitulation , many Armenians in both the Republic , including Armenian Communist Party First Secretary Grigor Harutyunyan ( <unk> ) , and the diaspora lobbied Stalin to reconsider the issue of taking back the provinces of Kars , Iğdır , and Ardahan , which Armenia had lost to Turkey in the Treaty of Kars . In September , 1945 , the Soviet Union announced that it would annul the Soviet @-@ Turkish treaty of friendship that was signed in 1925 . Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Vyacheslav Molotov presented the claims put forth by the Armenians to the other Allied heads . 
 Turkey itself was in no condition to fight against the Soviet Union , which had emerged as a superpower after the war . By the autumn of 1945 , Soviet troops in the Caucasus and Soviet @-@ occupied Iran were already assembling for an invasion of Turkey . However , as the hostility between the East and West developed into the Cold War , especially after the issuing of the Truman Doctrine in 1947 , Turkey strengthened its ties with the West . The Soviet Union relinquished its claims over the lost territories , understanding that the newly formed NATO would intervene on Turkey 's side in the event of a conflict . 
 = = = Armenian immigration = = = 
 With the republic suffering heavy losses after the war , Stalin allowed an open immigration policy in Armenia ; the diaspora were invited to repatriate to Armenia ( <unk> ) and revitalize the country 's population and bolster its workforce . Armenians living in countries such as Cyprus , France , Greece , Iraq , Lebanon , and Syria were primarily the survivors or the descendants of the genocide . They were offered the option of having their expenses paid by the Soviet government for their trip back to their homeland . An estimated 150 @,@ 000 Armenians immigrated to Soviet Armenia between 1946 and 1948 and settled in Yerevan , Leninakan , <unk> and other towns . 
 Lured by numerous incentives such as food coupons , better housing and other benefits , they were received coldly by the Armenians living in the Republic upon their arrival . The repatriates spoke the Western Armenian dialect , instead of the Eastern Armenian spoken in Soviet Armenia . They were often addressed as <unk> ( " brothers " ) by Armenians living in the republic , due to their different pronunciation of the word . Although initially used in humor , the word went on to carry on a more pejorative connotation . Their treatment by the Soviet government was not much better . A number of Armenian immigrants in 1946 had their belongings confiscated upon arrival at Odessa 's port , as they had taken with them everything they had , including clothes and jewelry . This was the first disappointment experienced by Armenians ; however , as there was no possibility of return the Armenians were forced to continue their journey to Armenia . Many of the immigrants were targeted by Soviet intelligence agencies and the Ministry of Interior for real or perceived ties to Armenian nationalist organizations , and were later sent to labor camps in Siberia and elsewhere , where they would not be released until after Stalin 's death . 
 = = = Revival under Khrushchev = = = 
 Following the power struggle after Stalin 's death in 1953 , Nikita Khrushchev emerged as the country 's new leader . In a secret speech he gave in 1956 , Khrushchev denounced Stalin and his domestic policies largely loosened the government 's grip over the country . Khrushchev put more resources into the production of consumer goods and housing . Almost immediately , Armenia underwent a cultural and economic rebirth . Religious freedom , to a limited degree , was granted to Armenia when Catholicos Vazgen I assumed the duties of his office in 1955 . One of Khrushchev 's advisers and close friends , Armenian Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan , urged Armenians to reaffirm their national identity . In 1954 , he gave a speech in Yerevan where he encouraged them to republish the works of writers such as Raffi and Charents . The massive statue of Stalin that towered over Yerevan was pulled down from its pedestal by troops literally overnight and replaced in 1962 with that of Mother Armenia . Contacts between Armenia and the Diaspora were revived , and Armenians from abroad began to visit the republic more frequently . 
 Many Armenians rose to prominence during this era , including one of Khrushchev 's friends , Mikoyan , who was the older brother of the designer and co @-@ founder of the Soviet MiG fighter jet company , Artem Mikoyan . Other famed Soviet Armenians included composer Aram <unk> , who wrote the ballets Spartacus and Gayane that featured the well known " Sabre Dance , " the noted astrophysicist and astronomer Viktor <unk> , and popular literary figures Paruyr Sevak , <unk> <unk> , Hovhannes Shiraz , and Silva Kaputikyan . 
 = = = Brezhnev = = = 
 After Leonid Brezhnev assumed power in 1964 , much of Khrushchev 's reforms were reversed . The Brezhnev era began a new state of stagnation , and saw a decline in both the quality and quantity of products in the Soviet Union . Armenia was severely affected by these policies , as was to be demonstrated several years later in the catastrophic earthquake that hit Spitak . Material allocated to the building of new homes , such as cement and concrete , was diverted for other uses . Bribery and a lack of oversight saw the construction of shoddily built and weakly supported apartment buildings . When the earthquake hit on the morning of December 7 , 1988 , the houses and apartments least able to resist collapse were those built during the Brezhnev years . Ironically , the older the dwellings , the better they withstood the quake . 
 Though the Soviet state remained ever wary of the resurgence of Armenian nationalism , it did not impose the sort of restrictions as were seen during Stalin 's time . On April 24 , 1965 , thousands of Armenians demonstrated in the streets of Yerevan during the fiftieth anniversary of the Armenian Genocide . Soviet troops entered the city and attempted to restore order . To prevent this from happening again , the Kremlin agreed to have a memorial built in honor of those who perished during the atrocities . In November 1967 , the memorial ( designed by the architects <unk> and <unk> ) was completed at the <unk> hill above the <unk> gorge in Yerevan . The 44 @-@ meter stele symbolizes the national rebirth of the Armenians . Twelve slabs are positioned in a circle , representing twelve lost provinces in present @-@ day Turkey . In the center of the circle , in depth of 1 @.@ 5 meters , there is an eternal flame . A 100 @-@ meter wall around the memorial 's park contains the names of towns and villages where massacres are known to have taken place . Monuments in honor of other important events in Armenian history , such as that commemorating the battles of Sardarapat and Bash Abaran , were also permitted to be erected , as was the sculpting of the statues of popular Armenian figures like the fifth @-@ century military commander Vardan Mamikonian and the folk hero <unk> David . 
 = = = The Gorbachev era = = = 
 Mikhail Gorbachev 's introduction of the policies of glasnost and perestroika in the 1980s also fueled Armenian visions of a better life under Soviet rule . The Hamshenis who were deported by Stalin to Kazakhstan began petitioning for the government to move them to the Armenian SSR . This move was denied by the Soviet government because of fears that the Muslim Hamshenis might spark ethnic conflicts with their Christian Armenian cousins . However , another event that occurred during this time made an ethnic clash between Christian Armenians and Muslims inevitable . 
 Armenians in the region of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh , which was promised to Armenia by the Bolsheviks but transferred to the Azerbaijan SSR by Stalin , began a movement to unite the area with Armenia . The majority Armenian population expressed concern about the forced " <unk> " of the region . On February 20 , 1988 , the Supreme Soviet of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Autonomous Oblast voted to unify with Armenia . Demonstrations took place in Yerevan showing support for the Karabakh Armenians . Azerbaijani <unk> encouraged counter demonstrations . However , these soon broke down into violence against Armenians in the city of Sumgait . Soon , ethnic rioting broke out between Armenians and Azeris , preventing a solid unification from taking place . A formal petition written to Gorbachev and senior leaders in Moscow asked for the unification of the enclave with Armenia , but the claim was rejected in the spring of 1988 . Until then , the Soviet leader had been viewed favorably by Armenians , but following his refusal to alter his stance on the issue , Gorbachev 's standing among Armenians deteriorated sharply . 
 = = Independence = = 
 Tension between central and local government heightened in the final years of the Soviet Union 's existence . On May 5 , 1990 , the New Armenian Army ( NAA ) , a defense force envisioned to serve as a separate entity from the Soviet Union 's military , was created . A celebration was planned for May 28 , the anniversary of the creation of the first Armenian republic . However , on May 27 hostilities broke out between the NAA and the MVD troops based in Yerevan , resulting in the deaths of five Armenians in a shootout at the railway station . Witnesses claimed that the MVD had used an excessive amount of force in the firefight and insisted that it had instigated the fighting . Further firefights between Armenian militiamen and the MVD in nearby <unk> ( now <unk> ) resulted in the deaths of twenty @-@ seven people and an indefinite cancellation of the May 28 celebration . 
 On March 17 , 1991 , Armenia , along with the Baltics , Georgia and Moldova , boycotted a union @-@ wide referendum in which 78 % of all voters voted for the retention of the Soviet Union in a reformed form . On August 23 , 1991 , Armenia became one of the first republics to declare independence from the Soviet Union . Armenia 's desire to break away from the Soviet Union largely stemmed from Moscow 's intransigence on Karabakh , mishandling of the earthquake relief effort , and the shortcomings of the Soviet economy . 
 On September 21 , 1991 , Armenia declared its independence . Tensions between Armenia and Azerbaijan continued to escalate , ultimately leading to the outbreak of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . Despite a cease @-@ fire in place since 1994 , Armenia has yet to resolve its conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno @-@ Karabakh . The country , however , has seen substantial development since independence , moving away from a planned economy to a privatized one and adopting a representative democratic system of government . Armenia remains blockaded by both Turkey and Azerbaijan over the Karabakh dispute . It maintains friendly relations with its neighboring states of Georgia and Iran and is a strategic ally of Russia . 
 On July 5 , 1995 , the new constitution of the Republic of Armenia was adopted . 
 = = Government = = 
 The structure of government in the Armenian SSR was identical to that of the other Soviet republics . The highest political body of the republic was the Armenian Supreme Soviet , which included the highest judicial branch of the republic , the supreme court . Members of the Supreme Soviet served for a term of five years , whereas regional deputies served for two and a half years . All officials holding office were mandated to be members of the Communist Party and sessions were convened in the Supreme Soviet building in Yerevan . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Under the Soviet system , the centralized economy of the republic banned private ownership of income producing property . Beginning in the late 1920s , privately owned farms in Armenia were collectivized and placed under the directive of the state , although this was often met with active resistance by the peasantry . During the same time ( 1929 – 1936 ) , the government also began the process of industrialization in Armenia . By 1935 , the gross product of agriculture was 132 % of that of 1928 and the gross product of industry was 650 % to that of 1928 . The economic revolution of the 1930s , however , came at a great cost : it broke up the traditional peasant family and village institution and forced many living in the rural countryside to settle in urban areas . Private enterprise came to a virtual end as it was effectively brought under government control . 
 = = Culture and life = = 
 With the establishment of the Republic , Soviet authorities worked tenaciously to eliminate certain elements in society , in whole or in part , such as nationalism and religion , to strengthen the cohesiveness of the Union . In the eyes of early Soviet policymakers , Armenians , along with Russians , Ukrainians , Belarusians , Georgians , Germans , and Jews were deemed " advanced " ( as opposed to " backward " ) peoples , and were grouped together with Western nationalities . The Caucasus and particularly Armenia were recognized by academic scholars and in Soviet textbooks as the " oldest civilisation on the territory " of the Soviet Union . 
 At first , Armenia was not impacted significantly by the policies set forth by Lenin 's government . Prior to his debilitating illness , Lenin encouraged the policy of <unk> or " <unk> " in the republics which essentially called for the different nationalities of the Soviet Union to " administer their republics " , establishing native @-@ language schools , newspapers , and theaters . In Armenia , the Soviet government ruled that all illiterate citizens up to the age of fifty to attend school and learn to read Armenian , which became the official language of the republic . The number of Armenian @-@ language newspapers ( Sovetakan Hayastan ) , magazines ( <unk> ) , and journals ( Sovetakan <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ) grew . An institute for culture and history was created in 1921 in Echmiatsin , the Yerevan Opera Theater and a dramatic theater in Yerevan were built and established in the 1920s and 1930s , the Matenadaran , a facility to house ancient and medieval manuscripts was erected in 1959 , important historical studies were prepared by a new cadre of Soviet @-@ trained scholars , and popular works in the fields of art and literature were produced by such luminaries as Martiros Saryan , <unk> <unk> and Yeghishe Charents , who all adhered to the socialist dictum of creating works " national in form , socialist in content . " The first Armenian film studio , <unk> , released the first fiction film , <unk> ( Honor ) in 1925 and the first sound film Pepo , both directed by Hamo Bek @-@ <unk> . 
 Like all the other republics of the Soviet Union , Armenia had its own flag and coat of arms . According to Nikita Khrushchev , the latter became a source of dispute between the Soviet Union and the Republic of Turkey in the 1950s , when Turkey objected to the inclusion of Mount Ararat , which holds a deep symbolic importance for Armenians but is located on Turkish territory , in the coat of arms . Turkey felt that the presence of such an image implied Soviet designs on Turkish territory . Khrushchev retorted by asking , " Why do you have a moon depicted on your flag ? After all , the moon doesn 't belong to Turkey , not even half the moon ... Do you want to take over the whole universe ? " Turkey dropped the issue after this . 
 = Construction of the World Trade Center = 
 The construction of the first World Trade Center was conceived as an urban renewal project , spearheaded by David Rockefeller , to help revitalize Lower Manhattan . The project was developed by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , which hired architect Minoru Yamasaki who came up with the specific idea for twin towers . After extensive negotiations , the New Jersey and New York state governments , which oversee the Port Authority , agreed to support the World Trade Center project at the Radio Row site on the Lower West Side of Manhattan , New York City . To make the agreement acceptable to New Jersey , the Port Authority agreed to take over the bankrupt Hudson & Manhattan Railroad , which brought commuters from New Jersey to the Lower Manhattan site and , upon the Port Authority 's takeover of the railroad , was renamed Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson ( now known as PATH ) . 
 The towers were designed as framed tube structures , which provided tenants with open floor plans , uninterrupted by columns or walls . This was accomplished using numerous closely spaced perimeter columns to provide much of the strength to the structure , along with gravity load shared with the core columns . The elevator system , which made use of sky lobbies and a system of express and local elevators , allowed substantial floor space to be freed up for use as office space by making the structural core smaller . The design and construction of the World Trade Center , most centrally its twin towers , involved many other innovative techniques , such as the slurry wall for digging the foundation , and wind tunnel experiments . Construction of the World Trade Center 's North Tower began in August 1968 , and the South Tower in 1969 . Extensive use of prefabricated components helped to speed up the construction process . The first tenants moved into the North Tower in December 1970 and into the South Tower in January 1972 . Four other low @-@ level buildings were constructed as part of the World Trade Center in the 1970s , and a seventh building was constructed in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = Planning = = 
 In 1942 , Austin J. Tobin became the Executive Director of the Port Authority , beginning a 30 @-@ year career during which he oversaw the planning and development of the World Trade Center . The concept of establishing a " world trade center " was conceived during the post – World War II period , when the United States thrived economically and international trade was increasing . In 1946 , the New York State Legislature passed a bill that called for a " world trade center " to be established . The World Trade Corporation was founded , and a board was appointed by New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey to develop plans for the project . Architect John <unk> and his son Drew devised a plan that included 21 buildings over a ten @-@ block area , at an estimated cost of $ 150 million . In 1949 , the World Trade Corporation was dissolved by the New York State Legislature , and plans for a " world trade center " were put on hold . 
 = = = Original plans = = = 
 During the post @-@ war period , economic growth was concentrated in Midtown Manhattan , in part stimulated by the Rockefeller Center , which was developed in the 1930s . Meanwhile , Lower Manhattan was left out of the economic boom . One exception was the construction of One Chase Manhattan Plaza in the Financial District by David Rockefeller , who led urban renewal efforts in Lower Manhattan . In 1958 , Rockefeller established the Downtown @-@ Lower Manhattan Association ( <unk> ) , which commissioned Skidmore , Owings and Merrill to draw up plans for revitalizing Lower Manhattan . The plans , made public in late June 1960 , called for a World Trade Center to be built on a 13 @-@ acre ( 53 @,@ 000 m2 ) site along the East River , from Old Slip to Fulton Street and between Water Street and South Street . The complex would include a 900 @-@ foot ( 275 m ) long exhibition hall , and a 50 – 70 story building , with some of its upper floors used as a hotel . Other amenities would include a theater , shops , and restaurants . The plan also called for a new securities exchange building , which the Downtown @-@ Lower Manhattan Association hoped would house the New York Stock Exchange . 
 David Rockefeller suggested that the Port Authority would be a logical choice for taking on the project , and argued that the Trade Center would provide great benefits in facilitating and increasing volume of international commerce coming through the Port of New York . Given the importance of New York City in global commerce , Port Authority director Austin J. Tobin remarked that the proposed project should be the World Trade Center , and not just a " world trade center . " After a year @-@ long review of the proposal , the Port Authority formally backed the project on March 11 , 1961 . 
 = = = Agreement = = = 
 The States of New York and New Jersey also needed to approve the project , given their control and oversight role of the Port Authority . Objections to the plan came from New Jersey Governor Robert B. Meyner , who resented that New York would be getting this $ 335 million project . Meanwhile , ridership on New Jersey 's Hudson and Manhattan Railroad ( H & M ) had declined substantially from a high of 113 million riders in 1927 to 26 million in 1958 , after new automobile tunnels and bridges opened across the Hudson River . Toward the end of 1961 , negotiations with outgoing New Jersey Governor Meyner regarding the World Trade Center project reached a stalemate . In December 1961 , Tobin met with newly elected New Jersey Governor Richard J. Hughes , and made a proposal to shift the World Trade Center project to a west side site where the Hudson Terminal was located . In acquiring the Hudson & Manhattan Railroad , the Port Authority would also acquire the Hudson Terminal and other buildings which were deemed obsolete . On January 22 , 1962 , the two states reached an agreement to allow the Port Authority to take over the railroad and to build the World Trade Center on Manhattan 's lower west side . The shift in location for the World Trade Center to a site more convenient to New Jersey , together with Port Authority acquisition of the H & M Railroad , brought New Jersey to agreement in support of the World Trade Center project . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Even once the agreement between the states of New Jersey , New York , and the Port Authority was finalized , the World Trade Center plan faced continued controversy . The site for the World Trade Center was the location of Radio Row , which was home to hundreds of commercial and industrial tenants , property owners , small businesses , and approximately 100 residents . The World Trade Center plans involved evicting these business owners , some of whom fiercely protested the forced relocation . In June 1962 , a group representing approximately 325 shops and 1 @,@ 000 other affected small businesses filed an injunction , challenging the Port Authority 's power of eminent domain . The dispute with local business owners worked its way through the court system , up to the New York State Court of Appeals , which in April 1963 upheld the Port Authority 's right of eminent domain , saying that the project had a " public purpose . " On November 12 , 1963 , the United States Supreme Court refused to accept the case . Under the state law , the Port Authority was required to assist business owners in relocating , though many business owners regarded what the Port Authority offered as inadequate . Questions continued while the World Trade Center was constructed , as to whether the Port Authority really ought to take on the project , described by some as a " mistaken social priority . " 
 By 1964 , by which time the intended scale of the Yamasaki designed scheme had been made public with plans for the twin 110 @-@ story towers , private real estate developers and members of the Real Estate Board of New York also expressed concerns about this much " subsidized " office space going on the open market , competing with the private sector when there was already a glut of vacancies . An especially vocal critic was Lawrence A. Wien , owner of the Empire State Building , which would lose its title of tallest building in the world . Wien organized a group of builders into a group called the " Committee for a Reasonable World Trade Center " to demand that the project be scaled down . 
 In January 1964 , the Port Authority inked a deal with the State of New York to locate government offices at the World Trade Center . The Port Authority began signing commercial tenants in the spring and summer of 1964 , including several banks . In 1965 , the Port Authority signed the United States Customs Service as a tenant . 
 A final obstacle for the Port Authority was getting approval from New York City Mayor John Lindsay and the New York City Council , who raised concerns about the limited extent that the Port Authority involved the city in the negotiations and deliberations . Negotiations between The City of New York and the Port Authority were centered on tax issues . A final agreement was made on August 3 , 1966 , that the Port Authority would make annual payments to the City , in lieu of taxes , for the portion of the World Trade Center leased to private tenants . In subsequent years , the payments would rise as the real estate tax rate increased . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Design announced = = = 
 On September 20 , 1962 , the Port Authority announced the selection of Minoru Yamasaki as lead architect , and Emery Roth & Sons as associate architects . Originally , Yamasaki submitted to the Port Authority a concept incorporating twin towers , but with each building only 80 stories tall . Yamasaki remarked that the " obvious alternative , a group of several large buildings , would have looked like a housing project . " Yamasaki 's design for the World Trade Center was unveiled to the public on January 18 , 1964 , with an eight @-@ foot model . The towers had a square plan , approximately 207 feet ( 63 m ) in dimension on each side . The buildings were designed with narrow office windows , only 18 inches ( 45 cm ) wide , which reflected on Yamasaki 's fear of heights and desire to make building occupants feel secure . Yamasaki 's design called for the building facades to be sheathed in aluminum @-@ alloy . 
 To meet the Port Authority 's requirement to build 10 million square feet ( 930 @,@ 000 m ² ) of office space , the buildings would each need to be 110 stories tall . A major limiting factor in building heights is elevators ; the taller the building , the more elevators are needed to service the building , requiring more space @-@ consuming elevator banks . Yamasaki and the engineers decided to use a new system that included sky lobbies , which are floors where people can switch from a large @-@ capacity express elevator , which goes only to the sky lobbies , to a local elevator that goes to each floor in a section ( the local elevators can be stacked within the same elevator shaft ) . Located on the 44th and 78th floors of each tower , the sky lobbies enabled the elevators to be used efficiently , while also increasing the amount of usable space on each floor from 62 to 75 percent by reducing the number of required elevator shafts . The World Trade Center towers were the second supertall buildings to use sky lobbies , after the John Hancock Center in Chicago . This system was inspired by the New York City Subway system , whose lines include local stations where local trains stop and express stations where all trains stop . 
 Yamasaki , who had previously designed Saudi Arabia 's Dhahran International Airport with the Saudi <unk> Group , incorporated features of Arabic architecture into the design of the World Trade Center . The plaza was modelled after Mecca , incorporating features such as a vast delineated square , a fountain , and a radial circular pattern . Yamasaki described the plaza as " a mecca , a great relief from the narrow streets and sidewalks of the Wall Street area . " He also incorporated other features of Arabic architecture into the building design , including pointed arches , interweaving tracery of prefabricated concrete , a minaret like flight tower , and arabesque patterns . 
 The World Trade Center design brought criticism of its aesthetics from the American Institute of Architects and other groups . Lewis Mumford , author of The City in History and other works on urban planning , criticized the project and described it and other new skyscrapers as " just glass @-@ and @-@ metal filing cabinets . " Television broadcasters raised concerns that the World Trade Center twin towers would cause interference in television reception for viewers in the New York City area . In response to these concerns , the Port Authority offered to provide new television transmission facilities at the World Trade Center . The Linnaean Society of the American Museum of Natural History also opposed the Trade Center project , citing hazards the buildings would impose on migrating birds . 
 The structural engineering firm Worthington , Skilling , Helle & Jackson worked to implement Yamasaki 's design , developing the tube @-@ frame structural system used in the buildings . The Port Authority 's Engineering Department served as foundation engineers , Joseph R. Loring & Associates as electrical engineers , and Jaros , Baum & Bolles as mechanical engineers . Tishman Realty & Construction Company was the general contractor on the World Trade Center project . Guy F. <unk> , director of the World Trade Department at the Port Authority , and the Port Authority 's Chief Engineer , Rino M. Monti , oversaw the project . 
 = = = Structural design = = = 
 As an interstate agency , the Port Authority was not subject to local laws and regulations of the City of New York , including building codes . Nonetheless , the Port Authority required architects and structural engineers to follow the New York City building codes . At the time when the World Trade Center was planned , new building codes were being devised to replace the 1938 version that was still in place . The structural engineers ended up following draft versions of the new 1968 building codes , which incorporated " advanced techniques " in building design . 
 The World Trade Center towers included many structural engineering innovations in skyscraper design and construction , which allowed the buildings to reach new heights and become the tallest in the world . Traditionally , skyscrapers used a skeleton of columns distributed throughout the interior to support building loads , with interior columns disrupting the floor space . The tube @-@ frame concept , earlier introduced by Fazlur Khan , was a major innovation , allowing open floor plans and more space to rent . The buildings used high @-@ strength , load @-@ bearing perimeter steel columns called <unk> trusses that were spaced closely together to form a strong , rigid wall structure . There were 60 perimeter columns , narrowly spaced , on each side of the buildings . In all , the perimeter walls of the towers were 210 feet ( 64 m ) on each side , and the corners were beveled . The perimeter columns were designed to provide support for virtually all lateral loads ( such as wind loads ) and to share the gravity loads with the core columns . Structural analysis of major portions of the World Trade Center were computed on an IBM 1620 . 
 The perimeter structure was constructed with extensive use of prefabricated modular pieces , which consisted of three columns , three stories tall , connected by spandrel plates . The perimeter columns had a square cross section , 14 inches ( 36 cm ) on a side , and were constructed of welded steel plate . The thickness of the plates and grade of structural steel varied over the height of the tower , ranging from 36 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch ( 260 to 670 MPa ) . The strength of the steel and thickness of the steel plates decreased with height because they were required to support lesser amounts of building mass on higher floors . The tube @-@ frame design required 40 percent less structural steel than conventional building designs . From the 7th floor to the ground level , and down to the foundation , the columns were spaced 10 feet ( 3 m ) apart . All columns were placed on bedrock , which , unlike that in Midtown Manhattan , where the bedrock is shallow , is at 65 – 85 feet ( 20 – 26 m ) below the surface . 
 The spandrel plates were welded to the columns to create the modular pieces off @-@ site at the fabrication shop . The modular pieces were typically 52 inches ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) deep , and extended for two full floors and half of two more floors . Adjacent modules were bolted together , with the splices occurring at mid @-@ span of the columns and spandrels . The spandrel plates were located at each floor , transmitting shear stress between columns , allowing them to work together in resisting lateral loads . The joints between modules were staggered vertically , so the column splices between adjacent modules were not at the same floor . 
 The building 's core housed the elevator and utility shafts , restrooms , three stairwells , and other support spaces . The core of each tower was a rectangular area 87 by 135 feet ( 27 by 41 m ) , and contained 47 steel columns running from the bedrock to the top of the tower . The columns tapered after the 66th floor , and consisted of welded box @-@ sections at lower floors and rolled wide @-@ flange sections at upper floors . The structural core in 1 WTC was oriented with the long axis east to west , while that of 2 WTC was oriented north to south . All elevators were located in the core . Each building had three stairwells , also in the core , except on the mechanical floors where the two outside stairwells temporarily left the core in order to avoid the express elevator machine rooms , and then rejoined the core by means of a transfer corridor . It was this arrangement that allowed Stairwell A of 2 WTC to remain passable after the aircraft impact on September 11 , 2001 . 
 The large , column @-@ free space between the perimeter and core was bridged by prefabricated floor trusses . The floors supported their own weight , as well as live loads , provided lateral stability to the exterior walls , and distributed wind loads among the exterior walls . The floors consisted of 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) thick lightweight concrete slabs laid on a fluted steel deck with shear connections for composite action . A grid of lightweight bridging trusses and main trusses supported the floors . The trusses had a span of 60 feet ( 18 m ) in the long @-@ span areas and 35 feet ( 11 m ) in the short span area . The trusses connected to the perimeter at alternate columns , and were on 6 @-@ foot @-@ 8 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) centers . The top chords of the trusses were bolted to seats welded to the spandrels on the exterior side and a channel welded to the core columns on the interior side . The floors were connected to the perimeter spandrel plates with viscoelastic dampers , which helped reduce the amount of sway felt by building occupants . 
 Hat trusses ( or " outrigger truss " ) located from the 107th floor to the top of the buildings were designed to support a tall communication antenna on top of each building . Only 1 WTC ( north tower ) actually had an antenna fitted , which was added in 1978 . The truss system consisted of six trusses along the long axis of the core and four along the short axis . This truss system allowed some load redistribution between the perimeter and core columns and supported the transmission tower . 
 = = = Wind effects = = = 
 The tube frame design using steel core and perimeter columns protected with sprayed @-@ on fire resistant material created a relatively lightweight structure that would sway more in response to the wind , compared to traditional structures such as the Empire State Building that have thick , heavy masonry for fireproofing of steel structural elements . During the design process , wind tunnel tests were done at Colorado State University and at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom to establish design wind pressures that the World Trade Center towers could be subjected to and structural response to those forces . Experiments were also done to evaluate how much sway occupants could tolerate . Subjects were recruited for " free eye exams , " while the real purpose of the experiment was to subject them to simulated building sway and find out how much they could comfortably tolerate . Many subjects did not respond well , experiencing dizziness and other ill effects . One of the chief engineers Leslie Robertson worked with Canadian engineer Alan G. Davenport to develop viscoelastic dampers to absorb some of the sway . These viscoelastic dampers , used throughout the structures at the joints between floor trusses and perimeter columns , along with some other structural modifications reduced the building sway to an acceptable level . 
 = = = Aircraft impact = = = 
 The structural engineers on the project also considered the possibility that an aircraft could crash into the building . In July 1945 , a B @-@ 25 bomber that was lost in the fog had crashed into the 78th and 79th floors of the Empire State Building . A year later , another airplane nearly crashed into the 40 Wall Street building , and there was another close call at the Empire State Building . In designing the World Trade Center , Leslie Robertson considered the scenario of the impact of a jet airliner , the Boeing 707 , which might be lost in the fog , seeking to land at JFK or at Newark airports . The National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) found a three @-@ page white paper that mentioned another aircraft impact analysis , involving impact of a jet at 600 mph ( 970 km / h ) , was indeed considered , but NIST could not locate the documentary evidence of the aircraft impact analysis . 
 = = = Fire protection = = = 
 <unk> @-@ fire resistant materials ( SFRMs ) were used to protect some structural steel elements in the towers , including all floor trusses and beams . Gypsum wallboard in combination with SFRMs , or in some cases gypsum wallboard alone , was used to protect core columns . <unk> plaster was used on the interior @-@ side and SFRMs on the other three sides of the perimeter columns for fire protection . The 1968 New York City building codes were more lenient in some aspects of fire protection , such as allowing three exit stairwells in the World Trade Center towers , instead of six as required under older building codes . 
 In April 1970 , the New York City Department of Air Resources ordered contractors building the World Trade Center to stop the spraying of asbestos as an insulating material . 
 More fireproofing was added after a fire in February 1975 that spread to six floors before being extinguished . After the 1993 bombing , inspections found fireproofing to be deficient . The Port Authority was in the process of replacing it , but replacement had been completed on only 18 floors in WTC 1 , including all the floors affected by the aircraft impact and fires on September 11 , and on 13 floors in WTC 2 , although only three of these floors ( 77 , 78 , and 85 ) were directly affected by the aircraft impact . 
 The 1968 New York City building codes did not require sprinklers for high @-@ rise buildings , except for underground spaces . In accordance with building codes , sprinklers were originally installed only in the underground parking structures of the World Trade Center . Following a major fire in February 1975 , the Port Authority decided to start installing sprinklers throughout the buildings . By 1993 , nearly all of 2 WTC and 85 percent of 1 WTC had sprinklers installed , and the entire complex was retrofitted by 2001 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In March 1965 , the Port Authority began acquiring property at the World Trade Center site . The Ajax Wrecking and Lumber Corporation was hired for the demolition work , which began on March 21 , 1966 to clear the site for construction of the World Trade Center . 
 = = = Twin Towers = = = 
 Groundbreaking was on August 5 , 1966 , marking the beginning of construction of the World Trade Center 's foundations . The site of the World Trade Center was located on landfill , with the bedrock located 65 feet ( 20 m ) below grade . In order to construct the World Trade Center , it was necessary to build " The Bathtub " , with the slurry wall along the West Street side of the site , to keep water from the Hudson River out . This method was used in place of conventional dewatering methods because lowering the groundwater table would cause large settlements of nearby buildings not built on deep foundations . The slurry method involves digging a trench , and as excavation proceeds , filling the space with a " slurry " mixture , composed of bentonite which plugs holes and keeps water out . When the trench was dug out , a steel cage was inserted , with concrete poured in , forcing the " slurry " out . The " slurry " method was devised by Port Authority chief engineer John M. Kyle Jr . Towards the end of 1966 , work began on building the slurry wall , led by Montreal @-@ based <unk> , a subsidiary of an Italian engineering firm , <unk> Costruzioni Opere <unk> ( <unk> ) . It took fourteen months for the slurry wall to be completed , which was necessary before excavation of material from the interior of the site could begin . The original Hudson Tubes , which carried PATH trains into Hudson Terminal , remained in service as elevated tunnels until 1971 when a new PATH station was built . 
 Construction work began on the North Tower in August 1968 with construction beginning on the South Tower by January 1969 . In January 1967 , $ 74 million in contracts were awarded to the Pacific Car and Foundry Company , Laclede Steel Company , Granite City Steel Company , and Karl Koch <unk> Company to supply steel for the project . The Port Authority chose to use many different steel suppliers , bidding on smaller portions of steel , rather than buy larger amounts from a single source such as Bethlehem Steel or U.S. Steel as a cost @-@ saving measure . Karl Koch was also hired to do all the work of erecting the steel , and a contract for work on the aluminum facade was awarded to the Aluminum Company of America . Tishman Realty & Construction was hired in February 1967 to oversee construction of the project . 
 Extensive use of prefabricated parts for the perimeter framing and floor truss systems helped speed up the construction process and reduce costs , while providing greater quality control . Steel components were freighted into a Penn Central yard in Jersey City . From there , they were brought in early morning hours through the Holland Tunnel to the construction site , and lifted into place by a crane . Larger pieces were brought to the construction site by tugboats . A special type of crane , suitable for constructing such tall buildings , that used hydraulics to lift components and provided its own power was used in construction of the World Trade Center . The <unk> Standard 2700 Crane , manufactured by <unk> Mort Ltd. of New South Wales , Australia was informally called a " kangaroo crane . " 
 In 1970 , tugboat workers went on strike , halting the transport of material to the construction site . The Port Authority attempted other means of transporting material , including via helicopter . When this method was tried , the helicopter lost its load of steel into the Kill Van Kull . Some other mishaps occurred during the construction process , including disruption of telephone service in Lower Manhattan when telephone cables were crushed by pile drivers . On March 16 , 1970 , an explosion injured six workers when a truck hit a propane tank . In all , 60 workers were killed in construction accidents while the World Trade Center was being built . 
 The topping out ceremony of 1 WTC ( North Tower ) took place on December 23 , 1970 , with 2 WTC 's ceremony ( South Tower ) occurring later on July 19 , 1971 . The first tenants moved into the North Tower on December 15 , 1970 , and into the South Tower in January 1972 . The buildings were dedicated on April 4 , 1973 ; Tobin , who had resigned the year before , was absent from the ceremonies . 
 Building the World Trade Center involved excavating 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 920 @,@ 000 m3 ) of material . Rather than transporting this material at great costs out to sea or to landfills in New Jersey , the fill material was used to expand the Manhattan shoreline across West Street . Work to demolish the piers began on January 5 , 1967 , including Pier 7 to Pier 11 which were all constructed around 1910 . The demolition work moved forward , despite conflicts between David Rockefeller , Governor Nelson Rockefeller , and Mayor John Lindsay regarding plans for Battery Park City . Landfill material from the World Trade Center was used to add land , and a cellular cofferdam was constructed to retain the material . The result was a 700 @-@ foot ( 210 m ) extension into the Hudson River , running six blocks or 1 @,@ 484 feet ( 452 m ) . This land was a " gift " to New York City , allowing more tax @-@ generating developments in Battery Park City . 
 The original estimates put forth by the Port Authority had the costs for construction of the World Trade Center at $ 350 million — an optimistic figure . In December 1966 , the Port Authority announced increased cost estimates , bringing the estimated total to $ 575 million . This announcement brought criticism of the project from private real estate developers , The New York Times , and others in New York City . The critics charged that the Port Authority figure was an unrealistically low estimate , and they estimated the project would end up costing $ 750 million . When the World Trade Center twin towers were completed , the total costs to the Port Authority had reached $ 900 million . The project was financed through tax @-@ exempt bonds issued by the Port Authority . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 The World Trade Center complex included four other smaller buildings constructed during the 1970s . 3 World Trade Center was a 22 @-@ story building , which was home to the Marriott World Trade Center . It was designed by Skidmore , Owings and Merrill in 1978 – 79 . 4 World Trade Center , 5 World Trade Center , and 6 World Trade Center were all 8 – 9 story buildings that were designed by the same team as the Twin Towers , including Minoru Yamasaki , Emery Roth & Sons , and Skilling , Helle , Christiansen , Robertson . 7 World Trade Center was built in the mid @-@ 1980s , just north of the main World Trade Center site . The 47 @-@ story building was designed by Emery , Roth & Sons , and constructed on top of a Con Edison power substation . 
 = = Modifications = = 
 Over time , numerous structural modifications were made to suit the needs of tenants in the Twin Towers . Modifications were made in accordance with the Port Authority 's Tenant Alteration Review Manual and were reviewed by the Port Authority to ensure the changes did not compromise structural integrity of the buildings . In many instances , openings were cut in the floors to accommodate new stairways to connect tenant floors . Some steel beams in the core were reinforced and strengthened to accommodate heavy live loads , such as large amounts of heavy files that tenants had on their floors . 
 Repairs to structural elements on the lower levels of 1 WTC were made following the 1993 bombing . The greatest damage occurred on levels B1 and B2 , with significant structural damage also on level B3 . Primary structural columns were not damaged , but secondary steel members experienced some damage . Floors that were blown out needed to be repaired to restore the structural support they provided to columns . The slurry wall was in peril following the bombing and loss of the floor slabs which provided lateral support to counteract pressure from Hudson River water on the other side . The refrigeration plant on <unk> B5 , which provided air conditioning to the entire World Trade Center complex , was heavily damaged and replaced with a temporary system for the summer of 1993 . The fire alarm system for the entire complex needed to be replaced , after critical wiring and signaling in the original system was destroyed in the 1993 bombing . Installation of the new system took years to complete , and replacement of some components was still underway in September 2001 . 
 = Washington , D.C. = 
 Washington , D.C. , formally the District of Columbia and commonly referred to as " Washington " , " the District " , or simply " D.C. " , is the capital of the United States . The signing of the Residence Act on July 16 , 1790 , approved the creation of a capital district located along the Potomac River on the country 's East Coast . The U.S. Constitution provided for a federal district under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Congress and the District is therefore not a part of any U.S. state . 
 The states of Maryland and Virginia each donated land to form the federal district , which included the pre @-@ existing settlements of Georgetown and Alexandria . Named in honor of George Washington , one of the United States ' founding fathers and the leader of the American Continental Army who won the Revolutionary War , the City of Washington was founded in 1791 to serve as the new national capital . In 1846 , Congress returned the land originally ceded by Virginia ; in 1871 , it created a single municipal government for the remaining portion of the District . 
 Washington had an estimated population of 672 @,@ 228 as of July 2015 . Commuters from the surrounding Maryland and Virginia suburbs raise the city 's population to more than one million during the workweek . The Washington metropolitan area , of which the District is a part , has a population of over 6 million , the sixth @-@ largest metropolitan statistical area in the country . 
 The centers of all three branches of the federal government of the United States are in the District , including the Congress , President , and Supreme Court . Washington is home to many national monuments and museums , which are primarily situated on or around the National Mall . The city hosts 176 foreign embassies as well as the headquarters of many international organizations , trade unions , non @-@ profit organizations , lobbying groups , and professional associations . 
 A locally elected mayor and a 13 ‑ member council have governed the District since 1973 . However , the Congress maintains supreme authority over the city and may overturn local laws . D.C. residents elect a non @-@ voting , at @-@ large congressional delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives , but the District has no representation in the U.S. Senate . The District receives three electoral votes in presidential elections as permitted by the Twenty @-@ third Amendment to the United States Constitution , ratified in 1961 . 
 = = History = = 
 Various tribes of the Algonquian @-@ speaking Piscataway people ( also known as the Conoy ) inhabited the lands around the Potomac River when Europeans first visited the area in the early 17th century . One group known as the <unk> ( also called the <unk> by Catholic missionaries ) maintained settlements around the Anacostia River within the present @-@ day District of Columbia . Conflicts with European colonists and neighboring tribes forced the relocation of the Piscataway people , some of whom established a new settlement in 1699 near Point of Rocks , Maryland . 
 In his Federalist No. 43 , published January 23 , 1788 , James Madison argued that the new federal government would need authority over a national capital to provide for its own maintenance and safety . Five years earlier , a band of unpaid soldiers besieged Congress while its members were meeting in Philadelphia . Known as the Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 , the event emphasized the need for the national government not to rely on any state for its own security . 
 Article One , Section Eight , of the Constitution permits the establishment of a " District ( not exceeding ten miles square ) as may , by cession of particular states , and the acceptance of Congress , become the seat of the government of the United States " . However , the Constitution does not specify a location for the capital . In what is now known as the Compromise of 1790 , Madison , Alexander Hamilton , and Thomas Jefferson came to an agreement that the federal government would pay each state 's remaining Revolutionary War debts in exchange for establishing the new national capital in the Southern United States . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 On July 9 , 1790 , Congress passed the Residence Act , which approved the creation of a national capital on the Potomac River . The exact location was to be selected by President George Washington , who signed the bill into law on July 16 . Formed from land donated by the states of Maryland and Virginia , the initial shape of the federal district was a square measuring 10 miles ( 16 km ) on each side , totaling 100 square miles ( 259 km2 ) . 
 Two pre @-@ existing settlements were included in the territory : the port of Georgetown , Maryland , founded in 1751 , and the city of Alexandria , Virginia , founded in 1749 . During 1791 – 92 , Andrew Ellicott and several assistants , including a free African American astronomer named Benjamin <unk> , surveyed the borders of the federal district and placed boundary stones at every mile point . Many of the stones are still standing . 
 A new federal city was then constructed on the north bank of the Potomac , to the east of Georgetown . On September 9 , 1791 , the three commissioners overseeing the capital 's construction named the city in honor of President Washington . The federal district was named Columbia , which was a poetic name for the United States commonly in use at that time . Congress held its first session in Washington on November 17 , 1800 . 
 Congress passed the Organic Act of 1801 , which officially organized the District and placed the entire territory under the exclusive control of the federal government . Further , the unincorporated area within the District was organized into two counties : the County of Washington to the east of the Potomac and the County of Alexandria to the west . After the passage of this Act , citizens living in the District were no longer considered residents of Maryland or Virginia , which therefore ended their representation in Congress . 
 On August 24 – 25 , 1814 , in a raid known as the Burning of Washington , British forces invaded the capital during the War of 1812 . The Capitol , Treasury , and White House were burned and gutted during the attack . Most government buildings were repaired quickly ; however , the Capitol was largely under construction at the time and was not completed in its current form until 1868 . 
 = = = <unk> and the Civil War = = = 
 In the 1830s , the District 's southern territory of Alexandria went into economic decline partly due to neglect by Congress . The city of Alexandria was a major market in the American slave trade , and pro @-@ slavery residents feared that abolitionists in Congress would end slavery in the District , further depressing the economy . Alexandria 's citizens petitioned Virginia to take back the land it had donated to form the District , through a process known as retrocession . 
 The Virginia General Assembly voted in February 1846 to accept the return of Alexandria and on July 9 , 1846 , Congress agreed to return all the territory that had been ceded by Virginia . Therefore , the District 's current area consists only of the land originally donated by Maryland . Confirming the fears of pro @-@ slavery Alexandrians , the Compromise of 1850 outlawed the slave trade in the District , although not slavery itself . 
 The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 led to expansion of the federal government and notable growth in the District 's population , including a large influx of freed slaves . President Abraham Lincoln signed the <unk> Emancipation Act in 1862 , which ended slavery in the District of Columbia and freed about 3 @,@ 100 enslaved persons , nine months prior to the Emancipation Proclamation . In 1868 , Congress granted the District 's African American male residents the right to vote in municipal elections . 
 = = = Growth and redevelopment = = = 
 By 1870 , the District 's population had grown 75 % from the previous census to nearly 132 @,@ 000 residents . Despite the city 's growth , Washington still had dirt roads and lacked basic sanitation . Some members of Congress suggested moving the capital further west , but President Ulysses S. Grant refused to consider such a proposal . 
 Congress passed the Organic Act of 1871 , which repealed the individual charters of the cities of Washington and Georgetown , and created a new territorial government for the whole District of Columbia . President Grant appointed Alexander Robey Shepherd to the position of governor in 1873 . Shepherd authorized large @-@ scale projects that greatly modernized Washington , but ultimately bankrupted the District government . In 1874 , Congress replaced the territorial government with an appointed three @-@ member Board of Commissioners . 
 The city 's first motorized streetcars began service in 1888 and generated growth in areas of the District beyond the City of Washington 's original boundaries . Washington 's urban plan was expanded throughout the District in the following decades . Georgetown was formally annexed by the City of Washington in 1895 . However , the city had poor housing conditions and strained public works . Washington was the first city in the nation to undergo urban renewal projects as part of the " City Beautiful movement " in the early 1900s . 
 Increased federal spending as a result of the New Deal in the 1930s led to the construction of new government buildings , memorials , and museums in Washington . World War II further increased government activity , adding to the number of federal employees in the capital ; by 1950 , the District 's population reached its peak of 802 @,@ 178 residents . 
 = = = Civil rights and home rule era = = = 
 The Twenty @-@ third Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified in 1961 , granting the District three votes in the Electoral College for the election of president and vice president , but still no voting representation in Congress . 
 After the assassination of civil rights leader Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . , on April 4 , 1968 , riots broke out in the District , primarily in the U Street , 14th Street , 7th Street , and H Street corridors , centers of black residential and commercial areas . The riots raged for three days until more than 13 @,@ 600 federal troops stopped the violence . Many stores and other buildings were burned ; rebuilding was not completed until the late 1990s . 
 In 1973 , Congress enacted the District of Columbia Home Rule Act , providing for an elected mayor and 13 @-@ member council for the District . In 1975 , Walter Washington became the first elected and first black mayor of the District . 
 On September 11 , 2001 , terrorists hijacked American Airlines Flight 77 and deliberately crashed the plane into the Pentagon in nearby Arlington , Virginia . United Airlines Flight 93 , believed to be destined for Washington , D.C. , crashed in Pennsylvania when passengers tried to recover control of the plane from hijackers . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Washington , D.C. , is located in the mid @-@ Atlantic region of the U.S. East Coast . Due to the District of Columbia retrocession , the city has a total area of 68 @.@ 34 square miles ( 177 @.@ 0 km2 ) , of which 61 @.@ 05 square miles ( 158 @.@ 1 km2 ) is land and 7 @.@ 29 square miles ( 18 @.@ 9 km2 ) ( 10 @.@ 67 % ) is water . The District is bordered by Montgomery County , Maryland , to the northwest ; Prince George 's County , Maryland , to the east ; and Arlington and Alexandria , Virginia , to the south and west . 
 The south bank of the Potomac River forms the District 's border with Virginia and has two major tributaries : the Anacostia River and Rock Creek . Tiber Creek , a natural watercourse that once passed through the National Mall , was fully enclosed underground during the 1870s . The creek also formed a portion of the now @-@ filled Washington City Canal , which allowed passage through the city to the Anacostia River from 1815 until the 1850s . The Chesapeake and Ohio Canal starts in Georgetown and was used during the 19th century to bypass the Great Falls of the Potomac River , located upstream ( northwest ) of Washington at the Atlantic Seaboard fall line . 
 The highest natural elevation in the District is 409 feet ( 125 m ) above sea level at Fort Reno Park in upper northwest Washington . The lowest point is sea level at the Potomac River . The geographic center of Washington is near the intersection of 4th and L Streets NW . Contrary to the urban legend , Washington was not built on a reclaimed swamp , but wetlands did cover areas along the water . 
 The District has 7 @,@ 464 acres ( 30 @.@ 21 km2 ) of parkland , about 19 % of the city 's total area and the second @-@ highest percentage among high @-@ density U.S. cities . The National Park Service manages most of the 9 @,@ 122 acres ( 36 @.@ 92 km2 ) of city land owned by the U.S. government . Rock Creek Park is a 1 @,@ 754 @-@ acre ( 7 @.@ 10 km2 ) urban forest in Northwest Washington , which extends 9 @.@ 3 miles ( 15 @.@ 0 km ) through a stream valley that bisects the city . Established in 1890 , it is the country 's fourth @-@ oldest national park and is home to a variety of plant and animal species including raccoon , deer , owls , and coyotes . Other National Park Service properties include the C & O Canal National Historical Park , the National Mall and Memorial Parks , Theodore Roosevelt Island , Columbia Island , Fort Dupont Park , Meridian Hill Park , Kenilworth Park and Aquatic Gardens , and Anacostia Park . The D.C. Department of Parks and Recreation maintains the city 's 900 acres ( 3 @.@ 6 km2 ) of athletic fields and playgrounds , 40 swimming pools , and 68 recreation centers . The U.S. Department of Agriculture operates the 446 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 80 km2 ) U.S. National Arboretum in Northeast Washington . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Washington is in the humid subtropical climate zone ( Köppen : Cfa ) However , under the Trewartha climate classification , the city has a temperate maritime climate ( Do ) . Winters are usually chilly with light snow , and summers are hot and humid . The District is in plant hardiness zone 8a near downtown , and zone 7b elsewhere in the city , indicating a humid subtropical climate . 
 Spring and fall are mild to warm , while winter is chilly with annual snowfall averaging 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 39 cm ) . Winter temperatures average around 38 ° F ( 3 @.@ 3 ° C ) from mid @-@ December to mid @-@ February . Summers are hot and humid with a July daily average of 79 @.@ 8 ° F ( 26 @.@ 6 ° C ) and average daily relative humidity around 66 % , which can cause moderate personal discomfort . The combination of heat and humidity in the summer brings very frequent thunderstorms , some of which occasionally produce tornadoes in the area . 
 Blizzards affect Washington on average once every four to six years . The most violent storms are called " nor 'easters " , which often affect large sections of the U.S. East Coast . From January 27 to January 28 , 1922 , the city officially received 28 inches ( 71 cm ) of snowfall , the largest snowstorm since official measurements began in 1885 . According to notes kept at the time , the city received between 30 and 36 inches ( 76 and 91 cm ) from a snowstorm on January 1772 . 
 Hurricanes ( or their remnants ) occasionally track through the area in late summer and early fall , but are often weak by the time they reach Washington , partly due to the city 's inland location . Flooding of the Potomac River , however , caused by a combination of high tide , storm surge , and runoff , has been known to cause extensive property damage in the neighborhood of Georgetown . 
 Precipitation occurs throughout the year . 
 The highest recorded temperature was 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) on August 6 , 1918 , and on July 20 , 1930 @.@ while the lowest recorded temperature was − 15 ° F ( − 26 ° C ) on February 11 , 1899 , during the Great Blizzard of 1899 . During a typical year , the city averages about 37 days at or above 90 ° F ( 32 @.@ 2 ° C ) and 64 nights at or below freezing . 
 = = Cityscape = = 
 Washington , D.C. , is a planned city . In 1791 , President Washington commissioned Pierre ( Peter ) Charles L 'Enfant , a French @-@ born architect and city planner , to design the new capital . The L 'Enfant Plan featured broad streets and avenues radiating out from rectangles , providing room for open space and landscaping . He based his design on plans of cities such as Paris , Amsterdam , Karlsruhe , and Milan brought from Europe by Thomas Jefferson in 1788 . L 'Enfant 's design also envisioned a garden @-@ lined " grand avenue " approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in length and 400 feet ( 120 m ) wide in the area that is now the National Mall . 
 President Washington dismissed L 'Enfant in March 1792 due to conflicts with the three commissioners appointed to supervise the capital 's construction . Andrew Ellicott , who had worked with L 'Enfant surveying the city , was then tasked with completing the design . Though Ellicott made revisions to the original plans , including changes to some street patterns , L 'Enfant is still credited with the overall design of the city . 
 By the early 1900s , L 'Enfant 's vision of a grand national capital had become marred by slums and randomly placed buildings , including a railroad station on the National Mall . Congress formed a special committee charged with beautifying Washington 's ceremonial core . What became known as the McMillan Plan was finalized in 1901 and included re @-@ landscaping the Capitol grounds and the National Mall , clearing slums , and establishing a new city @-@ wide park system . The plan is thought to have largely preserved L 'Enfant 's intended design . 
 By law , Washington 's skyline is low and sprawling . The federal Heights of Buildings Act of 1910 allows buildings that are no taller than the width of the adjacent street , plus 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Despite popular belief , no law has ever limited buildings to the height of the United States Capitol or the 555 @-@ foot ( 169 m ) Washington Monument , which remains the District 's tallest structure . City leaders have criticized the height restriction as a primary reason why the District has limited affordable housing and traffic problems caused by urban sprawl . 
 The District is divided into four quadrants of unequal area : Northwest ( NW ) , Northeast ( NE ) , Southeast ( SE ) , and Southwest ( SW ) . The axes bounding the quadrants radiate from the U.S. Capitol building . All road names include the quadrant abbreviation to indicate their location and house numbers generally correspond with the number of blocks away from the Capitol . Most streets are set out in a grid pattern with east – west streets named with letters ( e.g. , C Street SW ) , north – south streets with numbers ( e.g. , 4th Street NW ) , and diagonal avenues , many of which are named after states . 
 The City of Washington was bordered by Boundary Street to the north ( renamed Florida Avenue in 1890 ) , Rock Creek to the west , and the Anacostia River to the east . Washington 's street grid was extended , where possible , throughout the District starting in 1888 . Georgetown 's streets were renamed in 1895 . Some streets are particularly noteworthy , such as Pennsylvania Avenue , which connects the White House to the U.S. Capitol and K Street , which houses the offices of many lobbying groups . Washington hosts 297 foreign embassies and related buildings , many of which are on a section of Massachusetts Avenue informally known as Embassy Row . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The architecture of Washington varies greatly . Six of the top 10 buildings in the American Institute of Architects ' 2007 ranking of " America 's Favorite Architecture " are in the District of Columbia : the White House ; the Washington National Cathedral ; the Thomas Jefferson Memorial ; the United States Capitol ; the Lincoln Memorial ; and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . The neoclassical , Georgian , gothic , and modern architectural styles are all reflected among those six structures and many other prominent edifices in Washington . Notable exceptions include buildings constructed in the French Second Empire style such as the Eisenhower Executive Office Building . 
 Outside downtown Washington , architectural styles are even more varied . Historic buildings are designed primarily in the Queen Anne , Châteauesque , Richardsonian Romanesque , Georgian revival , Beaux @-@ Arts , and a variety of Victorian styles . <unk> are especially prominent in areas developed after the Civil War and typically follow Federalist and late Victorian designs . Georgetown 's Old Stone House was built in 1765 , making it the oldest @-@ standing original building in the city . Founded in 1789 , Georgetown University features a mix of Romanesque and Gothic Revival architecture . The Ronald Reagan Building is the largest building in the District with a total area of approximately 3 @.@ 1 million square feet ( 288 @,@ 000 m2 ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that the District 's population was 672 @,@ 228 on July 1 , 2015 , an 11 @.@ 7 % increase since the 2010 United States Census . The increase continues a growth trend since 2000 , following a half @-@ century of population decline . The city was the 24th most populous place in the United States as of 2010 . According to data from 2010 , commuters from the suburbs increase the District 's daytime population to over one million people . If the District were a state it would rank 49th in population , ahead of Vermont and Wyoming . 
 The Washington Metropolitan Area , which includes the District and surrounding suburbs , is the seventh @-@ largest metropolitan area in the United States with an estimated 6 million residents in 2014 . When the Washington area is included with Baltimore and its suburbs , the Baltimore – Washington Metropolitan Area had a population exceeding 9 @.@ 5 million residents in 2014 , the fourth @-@ largest combined statistical area in the country . 
 According to 2015 U.S. Census Bureau data , the population of Washington , D.C. was 48 @.@ 3 % Black or African American , 44 @.@ 1 % White ( 36 @.@ 1 % non @-@ Hispanic White ) , 4 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native , and 0 @.@ 2 % Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander . Individuals from two or more races made up 2 @.@ 7 % of the population . Hispanics of any race made up 10 @.@ 6 % of the District 's population . 
 Washington has had a significant African American population since the city 's foundation . African American residents composed about 30 % of the District 's total population between 1800 and 1940 . The black population reached a peak of 70 % by 1970 , but has since steadily declined due to many African Americans moving to the surrounding suburbs . Partly as a result of gentrification , there was a 31 @.@ 4 % increase in the non @-@ Hispanic white population and an 11 @.@ 5 % decrease in the black population between 2000 and 2010 . 
 About 17 % of D.C. residents were age 18 or younger in 2010 ; lower than the U.S. average of 24 % . However , at 34 years old , the District had the lowest median age compared to the 50 states . As of 2010 , there were an estimated 81 @,@ 734 immigrants living in Washington , D.C. Major sources of immigration include El Salvador , Vietnam , and Ethiopia , with a concentration of Salvadorans in the Mount Pleasant neighborhood . 
 Researchers found that there were 4 @,@ 822 same @-@ sex couples in the District of Columbia in 2010 ; about 2 % of total households . Legislation authorizing same @-@ sex marriage passed in 2009 and the District began issuing marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples in March 2010 . 
 A 2007 report found that about one @-@ third of District residents were functionally illiterate , compared to a national rate of about one in five . This is attributed in part to immigrants who are not proficient in English . As of 2011 , 85 % of D.C. residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language . Half of residents had at least a four @-@ year college degree in 2006 . D.C. residents had a personal income per capita of $ 55 @,@ 755 ; higher than any of the 50 U.S. states . However , 19 % of residents were below the poverty level in 2005 , higher than any state except Mississippi . 
 Of the District 's population , 17 % is Baptist , 13 % is Catholic , 6 % is Evangelical Protestant , 4 % is Methodist , 3 % is Episcopalian / Anglican , 3 % is Jewish , 2 % is Eastern Orthodox , 1 % is Pentecostal , 1 % is Buddhist , 1 % is Adventist , 1 % is Lutheran , 1 % is Muslim , 1 % is Presbyterian , 1 % is Mormon , and 1 % is Hindu . 
 Over 90 % of D.C. residents have health insurance coverage , the second @-@ highest rate in the nation . This is due in part to city programs that help provide insurance to low @-@ income individuals who do not qualify for other types of coverage . A 2009 report found that at least 3 % of District residents have HIV or AIDS , which the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) characterizes as a " generalized and severe " epidemic . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Crime in Washington , D.C. , is concentrated in areas associated with poverty , drug abuse , and gangs . A 2010 study found that 5 % of city blocks accounted for over one @-@ quarter of the District 's total crime . The more affluent neighborhoods of Northwest Washington are typically safe , but reports of violent crime increase in poorer neighborhoods generally concentrated in the eastern portion of the city . Approximately 60 @,@ 000 residents are ex @-@ convicts . 
 Washington was often described as the " murder capital " of the United States during the early 1990s . The number of murders peaked in 1991 at 479 , but the level of violence then began to decline significantly . By 2012 , Washington 's annual murder count had dropped to 88 , the lowest total since 1961 . The murder rate has risen since that historic low , and as of December 11 , 2015 , the District 's homicide total for the year stands at 154 , a 58 @.@ 8 % increase over the same period in 2014 . This is still a murder rate of almost half that of the early 2000s . Many neighborhoods such as Columbia Heights and Logan Circle are becoming safer and vibrant . However , incidents of robberies and thefts have remained higher in these areas because of increased nightlife activity and greater numbers of affluent residents . Even still , citywide reports of both property and violent crimes have declined by nearly half since their most recent highs in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 On June 26 , 2008 , the Supreme Court of the United States held in District of Columbia v. Heller that the city 's 1976 handgun ban violated the Second Amendment right to gun ownership . However , the ruling does not prohibit all forms of gun control ; laws requiring firearm registration remain in place , as does the city 's assault weapon ban . In addition to the District 's own Metropolitan Police Department , many federal law enforcement agencies have jurisdiction in the city as well ; most visibly the U.S. Park Police , founded in 1791 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Washington has a growing , diversified economy with an increasing percentage of professional and business service jobs . The gross state product of the District in 2010 was $ 103 @.@ 3 billion , which would rank it No. 34 compared to the 50 U.S. states . The gross product of the Washington Metropolitan Area was $ 425 billion in 2010 , making it the fourth @-@ largest metropolitan economy in the United States . As of June 2011 , the Washington Metropolitan Area had an unemployment rate of 6 @.@ 2 % ; the second @-@ lowest rate among the 49 largest metro areas in the nation . The District of Columbia itself had an unemployment rate of 9 @.@ 8 % during the same time period . 
 In 2012 , the federal government accounted for about 29 % of the jobs in Washington , D.C. This is thought to immunize Washington to national economic downturns because the federal government continues operations even during recessions . Many organizations such as law firms , independent contractors ( both defense and civilian ) , non @-@ profit organizations , lobbying firms , trade unions , industry trade groups , and professional associations have their headquarters in or near D.C. to be close to the federal government . 
 Tourism is Washington 's second largest industry . Approximately 18 @.@ 9 million visitors contributed an estimated $ 4 @.@ 8 billion to the local economy in 2012 . The District also hosts nearly 200 foreign embassies and international organizations such as the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the Organization of American States , the Inter @-@ American Development Bank , and the Pan American Health Organization . In 2008 , the foreign diplomatic corps in Washington employed about 10 @,@ 000 people and contributed an estimated $ 400 million annually to the local economy . 
 The District has growing industries not directly related to government , especially in the areas of education , finance , public policy , and scientific research . Georgetown University , George Washington University , Washington Hospital Center , Children 's National Medical Center and Howard University are the top five non @-@ government @-@ related employers in the city as of 2009 . According to statistics compiled in 2011 , four of the largest 500 companies in the country were headquartered in the District . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Historic sites and museums = = = 
 The National Mall is a large , open park in downtown Washington between the Lincoln Memorial and the United States Capitol . Given its prominence , the mall is often the location of political protests , concerts , festivals , and presidential inaugurations . The Washington Monument and the Jefferson Pier are near the center of the mall , south of the White House . Also on the mall are the National World War II Memorial at the east end of the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool , the Korean War Veterans Memorial , and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . 
 Directly south of the mall , the Tidal Basin features rows of Japanese cherry blossom trees that originated as gifts from the nation of Japan . The Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial , George Mason Memorial , Jefferson Memorial , Martin Luther King Jr . Memorial , and the District of Columbia War Memorial are around the Tidal Basin . 
 The National Archives houses thousands of documents important to American history including the Declaration of Independence , the United States Constitution , and the Bill of Rights . Located in three buildings on Capitol Hill , the Library of Congress is the largest library complex in the world with a collection of over 147 million books , manuscripts , and other materials . The United States Supreme Court Building was completed in 1935 ; before then , the court held sessions in the Old Senate Chamber of the Capitol . 
 The Smithsonian Institution is an educational foundation chartered by Congress in 1846 that maintains most of the nation 's official museums and galleries in Washington , D.C. The U.S. government partially funds the Smithsonian and its collections open to the public free of charge . The Smithsonian 's locations had a combined total of 30 million visits in 2013 . The most visited museum is the National Museum of Natural History on the National Mall . Other Smithsonian Institution museums and galleries on the mall are : the National Air and Space Museum ; the National Museum of African Art ; the National Museum of American History ; the National Museum of the American Indian ; the Sackler and Freer galleries , which both focus on Asian art and culture ; the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden ; the Arts and Industries Building ; the S. Dillon Ripley Center ; and the Smithsonian Institution Building ( also known as " The Castle " ) , which serves as the institution 's headquarters . 
 The Smithsonian American Art Museum and the National Portrait Gallery are housed in the Old Patent Office Building , near Washington 's Chinatown . The Renwick Gallery is officially part of the Smithsonian American Art Museum but is in a separate building near the White House . Other Smithsonian museums and galleries include : the Anacostia Community Museum in Southeast Washington ; the National Postal Museum near Union Station ; and the National Zoo in Woodley Park . 
 The National Gallery of Art is on the National Mall near the Capitol and features works of American and European art . The gallery and its collections are owned by the U.S. government but are not a part of the Smithsonian Institution . The National Building Museum , which occupies the former Pension Building near Judiciary Square , was chartered by Congress and hosts exhibits on architecture , urban planning , and design . 
 There are many private art museums in the District of Columbia , which house major collections and exhibits open to the public such as the National Museum of Women in the Arts ; the Corcoran Gallery of Art , the largest private museum in Washington ; and The Phillips Collection in Dupont Circle , the first museum of modern art in the United States . Other private museums in Washington include the Newseum , the O Street Museum Foundation , the International Spy Museum , the National Geographic Society Museum , and the Marian <unk> Science Museum . The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum near the National Mall maintains exhibits , documentation , and artifacts related to the Holocaust . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Washington , D.C. , is a national center for the arts . The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is home to the National Symphony Orchestra , the Washington National Opera , and the Washington Ballet . The Kennedy Center Honors are awarded each year to those in the performing arts who have contributed greatly to the cultural life of the United States . The historic Ford 's Theatre , site of the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln , continues to operate as a functioning performance space as well as museum . 
 The Marine Barracks near Capitol Hill houses the United States Marine Band ; founded in 1798 , it is the country 's oldest professional musical organization . American march composer and Washington @-@ native John Philip Sousa led the Marine Band from 1880 until 1892 . Founded in 1925 , the United States Navy Band has its headquarters at the Washington Navy Yard and performs at official events and public concerts around the city . 
 Washington has a strong local theater tradition . Founded in 1950 , Arena Stage achieved national attention and spurred growth in the city 's independent theater movement that now includes organizations such as the Shakespeare Theatre Company , Woolly Mammoth Theatre Company , and the Studio Theatre . Arena Stage opened its newly renovated home in the city 's emerging Southwest waterfront area in 2010 . The <unk> Hispanic Theatre , now housed in the historic Tivoli Theatre in Columbia Heights , was founded in 1976 and is a National Center for the Latino Performing Arts . 
 The U Street Corridor in Northwest D.C. , known as " Washington 's Black Broadway " , is home to institutions like the Howard Theatre , Bohemian Caverns , and the Lincoln Theatre , which hosted music legends such as Washington @-@ native Duke Ellington , John Coltrane , and Miles Davis . Washington has its own native music genre called go @-@ go ; a post @-@ funk , percussion @-@ driven flavor of rhythm and blues that was popularized in the late 1970s by D.C. band leader Chuck Brown . 
 The District is an important center for indie culture and music in the United States . The label Dischord Records , formed by Ian MacKaye , was one of the most crucial independent labels in the genesis of 1980s punk and eventually indie rock in the 1990s . Modern alternative and indie music venues like The Black Cat and the 9 : 30 Club bring popular acts to the U Street area . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Washington is one of 12 cities in the United States with teams from all four major professional men 's sports and is home to one major professional women 's team . The Washington Wizards ( National Basketball Association ) , the Washington Capitals ( National Hockey League ) , and the Washington Mystics ( Women 's National Basketball Association ) , play at the Verizon Center in Chinatown . Nationals Park , which opened in Southeast D.C. in 2008 , is home to the Washington Nationals ( Major League Baseball ) . D.C. United ( Major League Soccer ) plays at RFK Stadium . The Washington Redskins ( National Football League ) play at nearby FedExField in Landover , Maryland . 
 Current D.C. teams have won a combined ten professional league championships : the Washington Redskins have won five ; D.C. United has won four ; and the Washington Wizards ( then the Washington Bullets ) have won a single championship . 
 Other professional and semi @-@ professional teams in Washington include : the Washington <unk> ( World TeamTennis ) ; the Washington D.C. Slayers ( USA Rugby League ) ; the Baltimore Washington Eagles ( U.S. Australian Football League ) ; the D.C. Divas ( Independent Women 's Football League ) ; and the Potomac Athletic Club RFC ( Rugby Super League ) . The William H.G. FitzGerald Tennis Center in Rock Creek Park hosts the Citi Open . Washington is also home to two major annual marathon races : the Marine Corps Marathon , which is held every autumn , and the Rock ' n ' Roll USA Marathon held in the spring . The Marine Corps Marathon began in 1976 and is sometimes called " The People 's Marathon " because it is the largest marathon that does not offer prize money to participants . 
 The District 's four NCAA Division I teams , American Eagles , George Washington Colonials , Georgetown Hoyas and Howard Bison and Lady Bison , have a broad following . The Georgetown Hoyas men 's basketball team is the most notable and also plays at the Verizon Center . From 2008 to 2012 , the District hosted an annual college football bowl game at RFK Stadium , called the Military Bowl . The D.C. area is home to one regional sports television network , Comcast SportsNet ( CSN ) , based in Bethesda , Maryland . 
 = = Media = = 
 Washington , D.C. is a prominent center for national and international media . The Washington Post , founded in 1877 , is the oldest and most @-@ read local daily newspaper in Washington . It is probably most notable for its coverage of national and international politics and for exposing the Watergate scandal . " The Post " , as it is popularly called , had the sixth @-@ highest readership of all news dailies in the country in 2011 . The Washington Post Company also <unk> daily free commuter newspaper called the Express , which summarizes events , sports and entertainment , as well as the Spanish @-@ language paper El Tiempo Latino . 
 Another popular local daily is The Washington Times , the city 's second general interest broadsheet and also an influential paper in political circles . The alternative weekly Washington City Paper also have substantial readership in the Washington area . 
 Some community and specialty papers focus on neighborhood and cultural issues , including the weekly Washington Blade and Metro Weekly , which focus on LGBT issues ; the Washington Informer and The Washington Afro American , which highlight topics of interest to the black community ; and neighborhood newspapers published by The Current Newspapers . Congressional Quarterly , The Hill , Politico and Roll Call newspapers focus exclusively on issues related to Congress and the federal government . Other publications based in Washington include the National Geographic magazine and political publications such as The Washington Examiner , The New Republic and Washington Monthly . 
 The Washington Metropolitan Area is the ninth @-@ largest television media market in the U.S. with two million homes , approximately 2 % of the U.S. population . Several media companies and cable television channels have their headquarters in the area , including C @-@ SPAN ; Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) ; Radio One ; the National Geographic Channel ; Smithsonian Networks ; National Public Radio ( NPR ) ; Travel Channel ( in Chevy Chase , Maryland ) ; Discovery Communications ( in Silver Spring , Maryland ) ; and the Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) ( in Arlington , Virginia ) . The headquarters of Voice of America , the U.S. government 's international news service , is near the Capitol in Southwest Washington . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Article One , Section Eight of the United States Constitution grants the U.S. Congress " exclusive jurisdiction " over the city . The District did not have an elected local government until the passage of the 1973 Home Rule Act . The Act devolved certain Congressional powers to an elected mayor , currently Muriel Bowser , and the thirteen @-@ member Council of the District of Columbia . However , Congress retains the right to review and overturn laws created by the council and intervene in local affairs . 
 Each of the city 's eight wards elects a single member of the council and residents elect four at @-@ large members to represent the District as a whole . The council chair is also elected at @-@ large . There are 37 Advisory Neighborhood Commissions ( <unk> ) elected by small neighborhood districts . <unk> can issue recommendations on all issues that affect residents ; government agencies take their advice under careful consideration . The Attorney General of the District of Columbia , currently Karl Racine , is elected to a four @-@ year term . 
 Washington , D.C. , observes all federal holidays and also celebrates Emancipation Day on April 16 , which commemorates the end of slavery in the District . The flag of Washington , D.C. , was adopted in 1938 and is a variation on George Washington 's family coat of arms . 
 = = = Budgetary issues = = = 
 The mayor and council set local taxes and a budget , which must be approved by Congress . The Government Accountability Office and other analysts have estimated that the city 's high percentage of tax @-@ exempt property and the Congressional prohibition of commuter taxes create a structural deficit in the District 's local budget of anywhere between $ 470 million and over $ 1 billion per year . Congress typically provides additional grants for federal programs such as Medicaid and the operation of the local justice system ; however , analysts claim that the payments do not fully resolve the imbalance . 
 The city 's local government , particularly during the mayoralty of Marion Barry , was criticized for mismanagement and waste . During his administration in 1989 , The Washington Monthly magazine claimed that the District had " the worst city government in America . " In 1995 , at the start of Barry 's fourth term , Congress created the District of Columbia Financial Control Board to oversee all municipal spending . Mayor Anthony Williams won election in 1998 and oversaw a period of urban renewal and budget surpluses . The District regained control over its finances in 2001 and the oversight board 's operations were suspended . 
 = = = Voting rights debate = = = 
 The District is not a U.S. state and therefore has no voting representation in the Congress . D.C. residents elect a non @-@ voting delegate to the House of Representatives , currently Eleanor Holmes Norton ( D @-@ D.C. At @-@ Large ) , who may sit on committees , participate in debate , and introduce legislation , but cannot vote on the House floor . The District has no official representation in the United States Senate . Neither chamber seats the District 's elected " shadow " representative or senators . Unlike residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico or Guam , which also have non @-@ voting delegates , D.C. residents are subject to all U.S. federal taxes . In the financial year 2012 , D.C. residents and businesses paid $ 20 @.@ 7 billion in federal taxes ; more than the taxes collected from 19 states and the highest federal taxes per capita . 
 A 2005 poll found that 78 % of Americans did not know that residents of the District of Columbia have less representation in Congress than residents of the 50 states . Efforts to raise awareness about the issue have included campaigns by grassroots organizations and featuring the city 's unofficial motto , " Taxation Without Representation " , on D.C. vehicle license plates . There is evidence of nationwide approval for D.C. voting rights ; various polls indicate that 61 to 82 % of Americans believe that D.C. should have voting representation in Congress . Despite public support , attempts to grant the District voting representation , including the D.C. statehood movement and the proposed District of Columbia Voting Rights Amendment , have been unsuccessful . 
 Opponents of D.C. voting rights propose that the Founding Fathers never intended for District residents to have a vote in Congress since the Constitution makes clear that representation must come from the states . Those opposed to making D.C. a state claim that such a move would destroy the notion of a separate national capital and that statehood would unfairly grant Senate representation to a single city . 
 = = = Sister cities = = = 
 Washington , D.C. , has fourteen official sister city agreements . Listed in the order each agreement was first established , they are : Bangkok , Thailand ( 1962 , renewed 2002 ) ; Dakar , Senegal ( 1980 , renewed 2006 ) ; Beijing , China ( 1984 , renewed 2004 ) ; Brussels , Belgium ( 1985 , renewed 2002 ) ; Athens , Greece ( 2000 ) ; Paris , France ( 2000 , renewed 2005 ) ; Pretoria , South Africa ( 2002 , renewed 2008 ) ; Seoul , South Korea ( 2006 ) ; Accra , Ghana ( 2006 ) ; Sunderland , United Kingdom ( 2006 ) ; Rome , Italy ( 2011 ) ; Ankara , Turkey ( 2011 ) ; Brasília , Brazil ( 2013 ) ; and Addis Ababa , Ethiopia ( 2013 ) . Each of the listed cities is a national capital except for Sunderland , which includes the town of Washington , the ancestral home of George Washington 's family . Paris and Rome are each formally recognized as a " partner city " due to their special one sister city policy . 
 = = Education = = 
 District of Columbia Public Schools ( DCPS ) operates the city 's 123 public schools . The number of students in DCPS steadily decreased for 39 years until 2009 . In the 2010 – 11 school year , 46 @,@ 191 students were enrolled in the public school system . DCPS has one of the highest @-@ cost yet lowest @-@ performing school systems in the country , both in terms of infrastructure and student achievement . Mayor Adrian Fenty 's administration made sweeping changes to the system by closing schools , replacing teachers , firing principals , and using private education firms to aid curriculum development . 
 The District of Columbia Public Charter School Board monitors the 52 public charter schools in the city . Due to the perceived problems with the traditional public school system , enrollment in public charter schools has steadily increased . As of fall 2010 , D.C. charter schools had a total enrollment of about 32 @,@ 000 , a 9 % increase from the prior year . The District is also home to 92 private schools , which enrolled approximately 18 @,@ 000 students in 2008 . The District of Columbia Public Library operates 25 neighborhood locations including the landmark Martin Luther King Jr . Memorial Library . 
 Private universities include American University ( AU ) , the Catholic University of America ( CUA ) , Gallaudet University , George Washington University ( GW ) , Georgetown University ( GU ) , Howard University , and the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies ( <unk> ) . The Corcoran College of Art and Design provides specialized arts instruction and other higher @-@ education institutions offer continuing , distance and adult education . The University of the District of Columbia ( UDC ) is a public university providing undergraduate and graduate education . D.C. residents may also be eligible for a grant of up to $ 10 @,@ 000 per year to offset the cost of tuition at any public university in the country . 
 The District is known for its medical research institutions such as Washington Hospital Center and the Children 's National Medical Center , as well as the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda , Maryland . In addition , the city is home to three medical schools and associated teaching hospitals at George Washington , Georgetown , and Howard universities . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 There are 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) of streets , parkways , and avenues in the District . Due to the freeway revolts of the 1960s , much of the proposed interstate highway system through the middle of Washington was never built . Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) , the nation 's major east coast highway , therefore bends around the District to form the eastern portion of the Capital Beltway . A portion of the proposed highway funding was directed to the region 's public transportation infrastructure instead . The interstate highways that continue into Washington , including I @-@ 66 and I @-@ 395 , both terminate shortly after entering the city . 
 The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority ( WMATA ) operates the Washington Metro , the city 's rapid transit system , as well as Metrobus . Both systems serve the District and its suburbs . Metro opened on March 27 , 1976 and , as of July 2014 , consists of 91 stations and 117 miles ( 188 km ) of track . With an average of about one million trips each weekday , Metro is the second @-@ busiest rapid transit system in the country . Metrobus serves over 400 @,@ 000 riders each weekday and is the nation 's sixth @-@ largest bus system . The city also operates its own DC Circulator bus system , which connects commercial areas within central Washington . 
 Union Station is the city 's main train station and services approximately 70 @,@ 000 people each day . It is Amtrak 's second @-@ busiest station with 4 @.@ 6 million passengers annually and is the southern terminus for the Northeast Corridor and Acela Express routes . Maryland 's MARC and Virginia 's VRE commuter trains and the Metrorail Red Line also provide service into Union Station . Following renovations in 2011 , Union Station became Washington 's primary intercity bus transit center . 
 Three major airports serve the District . Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport is across the Potomac River from downtown Washington in Arlington , Virginia and primarily handles domestic flights . Major international flights arrive and depart from Washington Dulles International Airport , 26 @.@ 3 miles ( 42 @.@ 3 km ) west of the District in Fairfax and Loudoun counties in Virginia . Baltimore @-@ Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport is 31 @.@ 7 miles ( 51 @.@ 0 km ) northeast of the District in Anne Arundel County , Maryland . 
 According to a 2010 study , Washington @-@ area commuters spent 70 hours a year in traffic delays , which tied with Chicago for having the nation 's worst road congestion . However , 37 % of Washington @-@ area commuters take public transportation to work , the second @-@ highest rate in the country . An additional 12 % of D.C. commuters walked to work , 6 % <unk> , and 3 % traveled by bicycle in 2010 . A 2011 study by Walk Score found that Washington was the seventh @-@ most walkable city in the country with 80 % of residents living in neighborhoods that are not car dependent . 
 An expected 32 % increase in transit usage within the District by 2030 has spurred construction of a new DC Streetcar system to interconnect the city 's neighborhoods . Construction has also started on an additional Metro line that will connect Washington to Dulles airport . The District is part of the regional Capital Bikeshare program . Started in 2010 , it is currently one of the largest bicycle sharing systems in the country with over 4 @,@ 351 bicycles and more than 395 stations all provided by <unk> Urban Solutions . The city is expanding a network of marked bicycle lanes which currently exist on 56 miles ( 90 km ) of streets . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 The District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority ( i.e. WASA or D.C. Water ) is an independent authority of the D.C. government that provides drinking water and wastewater collection in Washington . WASA purchases water from the historic Washington Aqueduct , which is operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . The water , sourced from the Potomac River , is treated and stored in the city 's <unk> , Georgetown , and McMillan reservoirs . The aqueduct provides drinking water for a total of 1 @.@ 1 million people in the District and Virginia , including Arlington , Falls Church , and a portion of Fairfax County . The authority also provides sewage treatment services for an additional 1 @.@ 6 million people in four surrounding Maryland and Virginia counties . 
 Pepco is the city 's electric utility and services 793 @,@ 000 customers in the District and suburban Maryland . An 1889 law prohibits overhead wires within much of the historic City of Washington . As a result , all power lines and telecommunication cables are located underground in downtown Washington , and traffic signals are placed at the edge of the street . A plan announced in 2013 would bury an additional 60 miles ( 97 km ) of primary power lines throughout the District . 
 Washington Gas is the city 's natural gas utility and serves over one million customers in the District and its suburbs . Incorporated by Congress in 1848 , the company installed the city 's first gas lights in the U.S. Capitol building , White House , and along Pennsylvania Avenue . 
 = Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson = 
 Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson is a photo @-@ book by American singer Lady Gaga and American photographer Terry Richardson , released on November 22 , 2011 by Grand Central Publishing . The book features more than 350 pictures of Gaga as taken by Richardson during a ten @-@ month period from Gaga 's performance at The Monster Ball Tour till the 2011 Grammy Awards . In addition to photographs , it includes a foreword written by the singer about her relationship with Richardson . The duo had collaborated on other projects prior to the shooting of the book . 
 Upon release , Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson received positive reviews from critics , who praised both the provocative pictures as well as simpler shots of Gaga without makeup and stage costumes . The book appeared at number five on The New York Times Best Seller list , before fluctuating down the ranking in subsequent weeks . Due to a lawsuit against Gaga by her former assistant , in 2013 the photos taken by Richardson were asked to be submitted as evidence for the case . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson consists of photos ( in black @-@ and @-@ white and in color ) that Richardson took of Gaga during a ten @-@ month period , ranging from the singer 's performance at Lollapalooza in 2010 to the final shows of her 2009 – 11 Monster Ball Tour . More than 100 @,@ 000 pictures were taken during the time period with over 350 appearing in the book . The book also includes a Gaga @-@ written foreword about her relationship with Richardson that doubles as an examination of self . " With Terry , the relationship extends beyond the photograph , and if you 're lucky , he will teach you something truly profound about yourself . " 
 Prior to the shooting of Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson , Gaga and Richardson had worked together on several project . These include an advertisement for New York skate shop and clothing brand Supreme and photoshoots for Vogue Hommes Japan and Harper 's Bazaar . Jamie Raab ( executive vice president of Grand Central Publishing ) said " We are proud to be publishing this remarkable collaboration between Lady Gaga and Terry Richardson and anticipate that it will be one of the most stunning , provocative and coveted books of the 2011 holiday season . " 
 Gaga claimed that she held nothing back from Richardson , who was with her " every minute , every moment " during the photographing period . She explained that the images were completely unfiltered and he shot her waking up in the morning , doing her chores , as well as images taken while she got ready in her bathroom . She added that true to Richardson 's photographing style , nothing in the book was staged and he was able to make her do things in front of the camera that has not been done by anyone previously . Richardson also took pictures of Gaga 's fans for the book – which she appreciated – explaining to The Hollywood Reporter : 
 " My favorite thing , honestly , is that [ Richardson ] loved the fans . He shot the fans the same way he shot me : with no pretense . No ' Well , she ’ s put out records and they haven 't . ' None of that . The music was all of ours ... He would come backstage and he would say , ' Oh my God , the fans ! ' And I 'd say , ' I Know ... I know what you just photographed ' . And he 'd say , ' Baby , wow ! ' And then he 'd film me , like , peeing in a cup and , like , ridiculous things . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Gaga posted a video of herself reading the foreword of the book aloud on her YouTube account days before the book 's release . On November 22 , 2011 , a book party was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York where Gaga attended for book signings . Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson debuted on The New York Times Best Seller list at number five among hardcover advice / miscellaneous books for the week ending November 26 , 2011 . It fell to number fourteen in its second week and remained there for its third week before rising to number eleven in its fourth week . It reentered the top ten in its fifth week at number nine and rose to number six the following week . The book 's publishing rights for the United Kingdom were brought from Grand Central Publishing by Hodder & Stoughton ( an imprint of Hachette UK ) . 
 The book received positive reviews from critics . New York magazine 's James Lim wrote that while Gaga 's magazine covers were showing the singer in more modest poses , the book showed the " wild , funky , creative Gaga that we all know and love " . Liesl Bradner of the Los Angeles Times expressed surprise at seeing Gaga without her makeup and stage costumes . " It 's when the singer takes a moment from the madness , pulls back her hair and ditches the costumes , that we see the real girl who is the mastermind behind the monster , " Bradner wrote , adding that the release would be special for the fans . Eden Carter Wood of Diva magazine shared the same thought with Bradner and added that the book contained nice portraits of the artist . Arthur House from The Daily Telegraph was positive in his review , while finding the pictures to be glossy and enjoyable . Toronto Star 's David Graham compared the book to Madonna 's similar styled book called Sex ( released in 1992 ) . However , he found a " distinct lack of fanfare surrounding the book " . Lady Gaga x Terry Richardson , according to Graham could not generate the same amount of " shock and awe that erupted when Madonna came out with Sex " . However he still believed that there were " outrageous — even disturbing — photographs " of Gaga . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 In June 2013 , the pictures for the book and of Gaga , taken during the Monster Ball tour were introduced in the middle of a lawsuit . Gaga 's former assistant Jennifer O 'Neil had filed a case against the singer for overtime money owed to her by Gaga 's management but never paid . As evidence for her case , O 'Neil requested for the photos taken by Richardson to be presented to the court , intending to prove her " crazy " schedule while on tour with the singer and that O 'Neil was working " around the clock . " A Manhattan Federal Court judge ordered the photographer to submit over 142 @,@ 000 images , but Richardson dismissed the request . He said that the request was a " harassment " for him and the documents asked to be submitted in the subpoena were " irrelevant " in lieu of the actual case . Judge Paul G. <unk> noted in the court that " Mr. Richardson hasn 't demonstrated to [ the court ] that there is any significant burden in producing the photographs . " Writing for Complex magazine , Gregory Babcock analyzed that Richardson — who made a yearly gross of $ 58 million from his job — would lose money if he cooperated in the case . He reasoned that if the 142 @,@ 000 images were deemed as evidence for the case , then ( as per US laws ) they would enter the public record . Hence his work would be deemed free and devoid of any copyright , thus leading to attribution and reproduction by anyone . The New York Post reported in October 2013 that Richardson lost his appeal which caused his lawyer to comment that it was " immeasurable financial loss " for the photographer . 
 = Eastern mole = 
 The eastern mole or common mole ( Scalopus aquaticus ) is a medium @-@ sized , overall grey North American mole and the only member of the genus Scalopus . Its large , hairless , spade @-@ shaped forefeet are adapted for digging . The species is native to Canada ( Ontario ) , Mexico , and the eastern United States , and has the widest range of any North American mole . 
 The species prefers the loamy soils found in thin woods , fields , pastures , and meadows , and builds both deep and shallow burrows characterized by discarded excess soil collected in molehills . Its nest is composed of leaves and grasses , and its two to five young are on their own at about four weeks . Its diet consists principally of earthworms and other soil life , but the mole will eat vegetable matter . 
 Dogs , cats , foxes , and coyotes prey upon the mole , and the species hosts a variety of parasites . Unlike gophers , moles do not eat vegetation and pose no threat to human concerns ; the occasional damage to lawns is offset by the aeration provided the soil and consumption of insects . The construction of golf courses has provided the mole with ideal habitat . The species is abundant , occurs in protected areas , faces no major threats and is of little concern to conservationists . 
 = = Description = = 
 The eastern mole is a small , sturdy animal which lives principally underground and is highly specialized for a subterranean way of life . Its body is somewhat <unk> shaped with an elongated head . A fleshy , moveable snout projecting over the mouth with nostrils on the upper part is used as an organ of touch . The minute , degenerative eyes are hidden in the fur ; the eyelids are fused and sight is limited to simply distinguishing between light and dark . The ear opening is small and concealed in the fur , but hearing is fairly acute . A short , thick tail is lightly furred and is used as an organ of touch , guiding the mole when it moves backward in the tunnel . 
 The very large front feet are broader rather than long with well @-@ developed claws , and possess a specialized sesamoid bone attached to the wrist that aids digging . The front feet are normally held in a vertical position with the palms facing outward . Both the front feet and the small hind feet are fringed with sensory hairs that help the mole in its excavations . The bones of the front limbs and the breast are hugely enlarged , and provide strong support for the attached muscles used in digging . The hip girdle is narrow , permitting the mole to turn around in its tunnel by doing a partial somersault or doubling back upon itself . 
 The mole has grey @-@ brown , plush like fur with paler or browner underparts , and may appear to have a silver sheen depending on the angle it is viewed . The fur offers little resistance to backward movement in the tunnel . Compared to the female , the male tends to have a brighter orange strip on the belly being caused by secretion of skin glands in the region . <unk> occur but these may appear white , orange , or cinnamon yellow depending on the skin gland secretion . The face , feet , and tail are whitish to pink . Molting occurs in the spring and fall with the new pelage appearing first on the underparts . On the back , the new fur appears first at the tail then works forward . A distinct line usually marks the old and new fur , and there is no distinct underfur . The hairs are of equal length , and , when viewed microscopically , are seen to possess a whip @-@ like tip unlike the hairs of any other mammal . 
 The sexes are determined externally by the number of openings in the groin area : the female has three – the forward one is the urinary opening ( in the urinary papilla or projection ) , the second is the vagina , and the third is the anus at the tail . The male has two openings – the combined urinary / reproductive opening in the penis , and the anus . The testes never descend into a scrotum but remain within the body cavity . There are six teats on the belly – a pair at the chest , a pair at the groin , and a pair between the two . A rank , musky odor is emitted from a scent gland on the belly , and is left on the floor of the tunnel as the mole passes . It probably serves as a form of communication between the sexes during the breeding season , and to discourage predators . Other scent glands are found at the anus . 
 = = Measurements = = 
 The mole is about 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) in length including a 3 cm long tail and weighs about 75 g ( 2 @.@ 6 oz ) . Males collected from various parts of the species ' range showed the following extremes in measurements : total length 152 – <unk> , tail 22 – 30mm , hind foot 18 – 21 mm , and females displayed extremes of : total length 144 – 16 mm , tail 15 – 28 mm , hind foot 18 – 21 mm , weight 40 – 50 grams . Males are larger than females and males collected in the northern Midwest were largest of all . Twelve adults from northeastern Florida averaged : total length 142 , tail 24 @.@ 5 , hind foot 17 @.@ 8 mm . In Hillsborough and Pasco Counties in Florida , the eastern mole is still smaller , and in the area north of Tampa Bay , total length does not exceed 140 mm , and the hind foot rarely exceeds 17 mm . The smallest and darkest moles are those found in the Miami area . In Pennsylvania , specimens range in weight from 40 to 64 grams . The tooth count numbers 36 ( I3 / 2 ; C1 / 0 ; P3 / 3 ; M3 / 3 ) , and the chromosome diploid number is 34 . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The eastern mole is native to Canada ( Ontario ) , Mexico , and the United States , and has the widest range of any North American mole . In the United States , the species is found from southern South Dakota and southern Wisconsin to eastern Massachusetts and south to the tip of Florida and Louisiana and west to Nebraska , Kansas , and central Texas . It is absent from the Appalachian Mountains , most of Canada , and Northern New England . 
 The species is found in the southern tip of Ontario , and northern Tamaulipas , Mexico . Its distribution , however , is patchy . Colonies in southwestern Texas and Coahuila , Mexico and Tamaulipas , Mexico are isolated and small . 
 The species prefers well @-@ drained , loose , sandy or loamy soil , and avoids heavy clay , stony or gravelly soils , and very dry or very wet soils . It frequents pastures , open fields , meadows , and thin woods . In some marginal areas , human activities such as the building of roads and golf courses often provide beneficial habitat due to higher quality soils and adequate moisture . 
 = = Population characteristics = = 
 In a study from 1976 , home range areas of seven moles were calculated after each had been located periodically during periods ranging from 11 months to 3 years . The mean home range area was 0 @.@ 74 hectares ( 1 @.@ 8 acres ) ; males averaged 1 @.@ 09 hectares ( 2 @.@ 7 acres ) , and females 0 @.@ 28 hectares ( 0 @.@ 69 acres ) . Because the male range is so large , males generally predominate in samples . The species ' fossorial habit tends to limit its dispersal and gene flow , and soil character often limits populations . Eastern moles are good swimmers and not limited by rivers , but heavy clay soils associated with some waterways may limit dispersal . 
 Moles probably have a long life span due to a paucity of predators and a low reproductive rate . The young are grayer than the adults , and , with age , the skull flattens and the teeth display wear . Females live longer than males . Longevity has been estimated at 6 years with mark @-@ recapture methods in South Carolina . In Kansas , longevity was estimated at greater than 3 @.@ 5 years . The eastern mole is common in most of the United States , but populations in southern Texas and Mexico are considered extremely rare and possibly extinct . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The species is more abundant in warm climes rather than cool or cold climes , and in the southern United States , cultivated fields will often be riddled with their burrows after a penetrating rain . The eastern mole is active at all hours , with peaks in activity near dawn and at dusk . The length of time between bouts of activity averages about three hours , but may last up to 6 @.@ 5 h . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The eastern mole is voracious and will daily consume food equal to 25 to 100 % of its weight . In captivity , it will eat almost anything , including ground beef and dog food . In its natural environment , the species principally feeds on earthworms when these are available , but will eat many other foods , including slugs , snails , centipedes , larval and adult insects , scarab beetle grubs , and ants at all their life stages . Vegetable matter is consumed in great quantities and Indiana specimens collected in 1974 were found to have stomachs completely filled with grass seeds . 
 = = = Burrowing = = = 
 The eastern mole digs both deep , permanent burrows and shallow , temporary ones just under the surface , used for foraging . The regular , permanent highway is often built 25 cm or more below the surface and is used as a retreat during hot , dry weather or when frost has descended . The oxygen levels in the tunnels can be as low as 14 @.@ 3 % , and carbon dioxide as high as 5 @.@ 5 % . 
 When digging new burrows , the mole will push excess soil up through vertical shafts called " molehills " . New burrows just below the surface are marked by ridges and molehills , and such burrows appear to be used to facilitate the capture of earthworms and other soil life after a rain . In building burrows and probably at other times , the mole uses its nose as a tactile organ , poking about here and there . In friable soil , the species can burrow at a rate of 6 m / h . 
 The mole 's nest is built of leaves and grasses , and is usually situated several inches to a foot or more below the surface . It is typically found beneath a boulder , stump , or bush , and has several approaches , including one that enters from below . The eastern mole in Florida is reported to not build a nest . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 Moles vocalize by making high @-@ pitched squeals , harsh , guttural squeaks , short snorting sounds , and grating the teeth . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Gestation is usually 45 days and a single litter of two to five young is produced between mid @-@ April and June . In warm climates , the young may be born in March . They are born blind and naked , and are relatively large compared to the size of the mother . At 10 days , they exhibit a fine , velvety light @-@ gray fur which is retained for several weeks . Rapid growth permits the young to leave the nest and shift for themselves at about four weeks . 
 = = = Survival = = = 
 Dogs , cats , foxes , and coyotes are some of the predators of the species . The eastern mole harbors many parasites . One hundred four moles taken in Indiana exhibited four species of fleas , one species of sucking louse , one species of beetle , and at least 20 species of mites , several of them entirely new species , with one of them , <unk> , constituting a new genus . 
 = = Scientific and common names = = 
 Linnaeus based the original description of the species upon a specimen found dead in the water , a fact noted on the collection label . He named the species aquaticus , certainly a misnomer because the species is the least aquatic of North American moles . 
 The first part of the scientific name , Scalopus , is from two Greek words which mean " digging " and " foot " ( <unk> , " mole " , derived from the word " to dig " and pous , " foot " ) . The word refers to the species ' large front feet which are used for digging . 
 The second word of the name , aquaticus , is Latin and means " found in water " . The word is misleading but was given to the species because its webbed foot suggested it was accustomed to a water habitat , and the original specimen was found dead in water . 
 The first part of the common name , " eastern " , refers to the species ' range , and the second part , " mole " is from the Middle English molle which in turn is related to another Middle English word , mold @-@ <unk> , which means " earth @-@ thrower " . 
 = = Fossils = = 
 Fossil remains have been reported from the upper Ohio Valley in Pennsylvania and West Virginia , and Pleistocene cave faunas in Texas . 
 = = Interaction with humans and conservation = = 
 Moles till and form soil , feed on destructive insects such as cutworms and Japanese beetles , and dig tunnels that <unk> the soil and permit moisture to penetrate deeper soil layers . The pelt is small and does not take dyes well ; it is thus of no commercial interest to the fur industry . When moles disfigure lawns , damage the roots of garden plants while searching for food , or take sprouting corn , they are considered undesirable . In one anecdote , a homeowner reported the animal completely eradicated the Japanese beetles on his grounds . 
 The species is listed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List because of its wide distribution , presumed large population , occurrence in a number of protected areas , tolerance to some degree of habitat modification , and because it is unlikely to be declining at nearly the rate required to qualify for listing in a threatened category . 
