 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming started in August 2006 at the Wikimania 2006 conference , and by April 2007 the team had aggregated 100 hours of footage . Co @-@ director Hill accompanied Wales during 2007 , filming him as he journeyed around the globe . Hill took a two @-@ person film crew and traveled to China , Indonesia , India , South Africa , Australia and Europe , interviewing editors and contributors . Hill is himself an editor of Wikipedia , starting an article about a graffiti artist . Gibson and Hill required expertise in the creative and funding aspects of film @-@ making and invited Scott Glosserman to join the venture . Glosserman 's involvement with the film began during the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . After Glosserman signed on , the breadth of the endeavor became larger . The film ended up taking an additional three years to finish after Glosserman joined the production . 
 Eric <unk> served as director of photography ; he joined the team during a shift in focus in January 2008 . <unk> used a Panasonic AG @-@ <unk> P2 HD camcorder . He commented to industry publication Videography about the choice of technique , that due to the intensity of the production team 's travel schedule tape format would not have been an option . He stated he preferred using P2 cards over the HDD @-@ based format due to its superior reliability . During the editing process , Glen Echo Entertainment utilized eight Apple Macintosh computers with Intel processors , equipped with Apple 's Final Cut Pro editing software . 
 = = = Re @-@ focus = = = 
 Glosserman and the rest of the production team met together to put together a focus for the film ; they centered their efforts on answering the question : " How does Wikipedia get at the truth ? " They also wanted to provide information for everyday individuals wanting to know about Wikipedia 's background and functioning . Experts were sought out , including the author of The Age of American Unreason Susan Jacoby , to discuss Wikipedia 's approach to scholars knowledgeable about specific subject matter . Glosserman commented in an interview with IndieWire , " We tried to get people offering compelling arguments for either side of any particular topic because our intention was to be objective and to let the viewer make up his or her own mind . " The narrative structure of the film What the Bleep Do We Know ! ? served as an inspiration for Glosserman during the production process . As a non @-@ profit project , the film had received more than $ 55 @,@ 000 in donations by March 2009 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The release for the film was originally planned for 2007 , then 2008 and 2009 , before its 2010 release . Clips of the film were shown at Wikimania 2007 in Taipei prior to its completion . Editors in the audience had mixed views on the film . In 2008 , footage from the film was used in an official fundraising video by the Wikimedia Foundation . The film had its premiere at Wikimania 2010 in Gdańsk in July 2010 , before an audience of approximately 300 people . A trailer for the movie was released in October 2010 . 
 The film was screened at the Paley Center for Media in New York City on October 20 , 2010 . It was shown in conjunction with the Robert M. <unk> University Seminar Series . The Paley Center screening included an online streaming broadcast — the first simultaneous film screening and panel question @-@ and @-@ answer for online and local audiences . The panel discussion was moderated by The New York Times journalist Noam Cohen , and featured both co @-@ directors , in addition to Wikimedia Foundation representative Samuel Klein and <unk> in Residence at the British Museum Liam Wyatt . After the event , <unk> subsequently made the film available for free for six days to viewers in the United States . 
 The film was screened at the Savannah Film Festival on November 3 , 2010 , at Savannah College of Art and Design 's Trustees Theater . It was scheduled for a limited theatrical release in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wales wrote favorably about the film in 2007 during its production , and noted , " Director Nic Hill is making what looks to be a fabulous film about Wikipedia and Wikipedians worldwide . " However , Wales commented negatively about the delayed release , in a statement to <unk> . He said the movie was dated due to its delay . He commented that the documentary was lopsided towards reliance on expert commentary and did not feature enough weight towards depicting community involvement in the online project . Wales posted to a Wikimedia Foundation mailing list , " the film was poorly received in Poland , and it is seriously out of date . " Larry Sanger commented he thought the film was , " Not too bad , from what I saw . " Wikimedia Foundation board member Samuel Klein commented , " In general , I like the film a lot more after seeing it for the second time , in a very different audience ( and seeing their live reactions ) . " Sage Ross , an attendee of Wikimania 2010 , commented that the film appears to take a mainly negative point of view towards Wikipedia , " The film gives a lot of focus to some shallow or misleading lines of criticism , and on an intellectual level , it comes off as largely anti @-@ Wikipedia , contrasting the reasonable @-@ sounding arguments of mature critics with the naive optimism of youthful Wikipedians . " Author Ted Leonsis commented favorably about the documentary , at his blog , Ted 's Take , characterizing it as , " A great film about the Wikipedia movement . " He concluded , " This is a must see film , a premiere film . You gotta watch it to remain socially relevant ! " 
 Daniel D 'Addario reviewed Truth in Numbers ? Everything , According to Wikipedia for the AOL Inc. publication , Urlesque . D 'Addario commented , " the film raises interesting questions about authority , only somewhat intentionally . " He noted the dated bits observing , " Truth in Numbers ? may well be coming too late . " D 'Addario concluded his assessment by noting that at the time of his review , the Wikipedia article for the film was under threat of being deleted : " According to the site , the entry for Truth in Numbers ? is being considered for deletion – it links to few other articles on the site , and is an ' orphan . ' Given the tenor of Truth in Numbers ? , which combines avid interest in Wikipedia with wide @-@ eyed dismay at much of its particulars , this is either very surprising or not surprising at all . " 
 In his review for the Savannah Film Festival , Carlos Serrano of District wrote that though the subject matter covered a lot of ground , it utilized an efficient presentation : " Sounds like a lot to put in to one movie , but the film manages to make good use of its 85 minute running time . " Serrano commented on the presentation of Jimmy Wales during the film , " In the end , I came out of the theater thinking of him as a three @-@ dimensional figure , very much a man with passion but neither completely good or evil . To be honest , this is very important in a film like this and is a definite plus for the movie . " Serrano recommended the documentary , and concluded , " This is definitely a solid film . ... This film is definitely worth a viewing . It ’ s interesting , well made , and presents varied perspectives on Wikipedia that help the narrative stay interesting . " 
 = Hope Highway = 
 The Hope Highway , also known as the Hope Road <unk> , is a Forest Highway located in the Kenai Peninsula Borough , in the U.S. state of Alaska . The highway connects the city of Hope to the Seward Highway , and travels through 17 miles ( 27 km ) of the Chugach National Forest . The road passes the ghost town of Sunrise City and several smaller settlements , remnants of the gold rush that occurred in that area . The highway was created circa 1928 and was designated as Forest Highway 14 by the Federal Highway Administration . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Hope Highway begins at an intersection with the Seward Highway ( AK @-@ 1 ) , inside Chugach National Forest . The highway proceeds north , traveling through several miles of pine forest , in a valley in the Kenai Mountain range . The highway passes alongside the Resurrection Creek , which was the source for the settlement of this area . The road proceeds through the abandoned settlement of Sunrise City , which was an old mining town . The roadway proceeds to the <unk> Arm , and turns in a westward direction . The road continues along the arm for several miles before entering the city of Hope . The highway passes through Hope , intersecting the Old Hope Highway and several smaller streets before exiting the town and reentering the forest . The highway reaches its northern terminus , an access road to the Porcupine Creek Campgrounds . The entire length of the Hope Highway is located in the Chugach National Forest . No portion of the highway is listed on the National Highway System . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 Traffic on the Hope Highway is very low , with the highest traffic count being just over 400 vehicles daily , at its intersection with the Seward Highway . The daily average vehicle count for the highway is just under 300 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Hope Highway was first established in 1928 . The original highway connected the city of Hope to Moose Pass , which then took people to Anchorage via the Alaska Railroad . The Seward Highway was completed in 1951 , which allowed travelers to get to Hope without having to transport their vehicle on a train . The highway operated as an improved dirt road until 1952 or 1953 , when the highway was finally paved . The portion of the highway that connected Hope to the campgrounds was created in the 1970s . Around the same time as the extension of the route , the Hope Highway was rerouted around the city of Hope , with the original path that traveled through the city being renamed the Old Hope Highway . In 1982 , during the expansion of the Federal Forest Highway System , the Hope Highway was added to the system , due to its location and local importance . 
 = = Major junctions = = 
 The entire highway is in Kenai Peninsula Borough . 
 = = Old Hope Highway = = 
 The Old Hope Highway is a short , historic route of the Hope Highway located in the city of Hope . The road is just 0 @.@ 259 miles ( 0 @.@ 417 km ) long , and connects the Hope Highway to the central region of Hope . The road has an unpaved , gravel surface , and passes several small businesses and homes located in Hope . The road was part of the original Hope Highway , which was created in 1928 , and remained part of the highway until circa 1970 , when the highway was rerouted around Hope . 
 = Super Mario Land = 
 Super Mario Land is a 1989 side @-@ scrolling platform video game , the first in the Super Mario Land series , developed and published by Nintendo as a launch title for their Game Boy handheld game console . In gameplay similar to that of the 1985 Super Mario Bros. , but resized for the smaller device 's screen , the player advances Mario to the end of 12 levels by moving to the right and jumping across platforms to avoid enemies and pitfalls . Unlike other Mario games , Super Mario Land is set in Sarasaland , a new environment depicted in line art , and Mario pursues Princess Daisy . The game introduces two Gradius @-@ style shooter levels . 
 At Nintendo CEO Hiroshi Yamauchi 's request , Game Boy creator Gunpei Yokoi 's Nintendo R & D1 developed a Mario game to sell the new console . It was the first portable version of Mario and the first to be made without Mario creator and Yokoi protégé Shigeru Miyamoto . Accordingly , the development team shrunk Mario gameplay elements for the device and used some elements inconsistently from the series . Super Mario Land was expected to showcase the console until Nintendo of America bundled Tetris with new Game Boys . The game launched alongside the Game Boy first in Japan ( April 1989 ) and later worldwide . Super Mario Land was later rereleased for the Nintendo 3DS via Virtual Console in 2011 again as a launch title , which featured some tweaks to the game 's presentation . 
 Initial reviews were laudatory . Reviewers were satisfied with the smaller Super Mario Bros. , but noted its short length . They considered it among the best of the Game Boy launch titles . The handheld console became an immediate success and Super Mario Land ultimately sold over 18 million copies , more than that of Super Mario Bros. 3 . Both contemporaneous and retrospective reviewers praised the game 's soundtrack . Later reviews were critical of the compromises made in development and noted Super Mario Land 's deviance from series norms . The game begot a series of sequels , including the 1992 Super Mario Land 2 : 6 Golden Coins , 1994 Wario Land : Super Mario Land 3 , and 2011 Super Mario 3D Land , though many of the original 's mechanics were not revisited . The game was included in several top Game Boy game lists and debuted Princess Daisy as a recurring Mario series character . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As a side @-@ scrolling platform game and the first in the Super Mario Land series , Super Mario Land is similar in gameplay to its forebears : as Mario , the player advances to the end of the level by moving to the right and jumping across platforms to avoid enemies and pitfalls . In Super Mario Land , Mario travels to Sarasaland to save Princess Daisy from <unk> , an evil spaceman . Two of the game 's twelve levels are " forced @-@ scrolling " Gradius @-@ style shooters where Mario helms a submarine or airplane and fires projectiles towards oncoming enemies and bosses . Levels end with a platforming challenge to reach an alternative exit located above the regular exit . The former leads to a bonus minigame that awards extra lives . 
 Unlike other Mario games , which take place in the Mushroom Kingdom , Super Mario Land is set in Sarasaland and drawn in line art . Mario pursues Princess Daisy , in her debut , rather than the series standard damsel in distress , Princess Peach . Koopa shells explode rather than slide , Mario throws bouncing balls rather than fireballs , 1 @-@ Up Mushroom power @-@ ups are depicted as hearts , and the level @-@ end flagpoles are replaced with a platforming challenge . Some elements recur from previous Mario games , such as blocks suspended in midair , pipes that lead to other areas , and Goomba enemies . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Mario Land was developed by Nintendo R & D1 and published by Nintendo in 1989 as a launch title for their Game Boy handheld console . Nintendo CEO Hiroshi Yamauchi believed that fun games sold consoles , so when the company created the Game Boy handheld console , he wanted a fun game that would feature Nintendo 's mascot , Mario , and subsequently sell consoles . The job fell to Nintendo R & D1 , a development team led by Game Boy inventor Gunpei Yokoi . Yokoi had previously created the Game & Watch series and worked with his protégé , Shigeru Miyamoto , on the game that invented Mario , Donkey Kong . Super Mario Land was the fourth Super Mario title , the first portable Mario game , and the first in the series to be made without Miyamoto . 
 Absent Miyamoto 's direction , the development team used elements new and inconsistent with the series as Super Mario Land shrunk elements of the series to fit the portable device 's small screen . Yokoi , the head of R & D1 , served as producer , and Satoru Okada served as director . They had previously developed Metroid ( 1986 ) and Kid Icarus ( 1986 ) together , and the two subsequently designed the Game Boy — Yokoi on its industrial design , and Okada on its engineering . Their Super Mario Land was planned as the portable console 's showcase title until Henk Rogers brought Tetris to Nintendo of America and convinced Minoru Arakawa that the addictive computer game would help Nintendo reach the largest audience . The company subsequently chose to bundle Tetris with every Game Boy purchase . 
 The Game Boy was released in Japan in April 1989 , North America in July , and Europe in September 1990 , and Super Mario Land was a launch title . The game 's official first released was on April 21 , 1989 , in Japan , and its North American release followed in August . About 22 years later , Super Mario Land was released for the Nintendo 3DS via Virtual Console on June 6 , 2011 , as one of its opening titles . Its added features include an increased size ( about 60 percent zoom ) and an optional " shades of green " color palette to match the effect of the original Game Boy 's monochrome . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics saw Super Mario Land as a " smaller " and shorter version of Super Mario Bros. IGN 's Lucas Thomas wrote that the protagonist , enemies , and overall game were shorter , and noted that Mario himself was just 12 pixels in height on the Game Boy 's small screen . With this in mind , Thomas was concerned about player " eyestrain " in rereleases of the game . Still , IGN 's Levi Buchanan thought the game made no compromises in its size reduction . At the time of its release in 1989 , reviewers were excited to have a portable Mario game . Paul Rand of Computer and Video Games called the game " an arcade machine in your pocket " and the graphics " remarkable " for their size . French games magazine Player One felt that Super Mario Land adequately compromised where necessary to bring Mario to a portable device . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Steve Harris considered the game " fantastic " and " very fun to play " , albeit short . Ed Semrad and Donn Nauert of the same outlet both declared Super Mario Land " easily the best Game Boy cart " of the time . Complex 's Gus Turner wrote that the graphics were " simple " , and Official Nintendo Magazine said the game was " ridiculously short " . Eurogamer reported that the game could be finished in under an hour . 
 Complex 's Gus Turner wrote that the game had the fun , intuitiveness , and difficulty associated with the series , and Tony Mott of <unk> said the game proved that Nintendo 's Game Boy " had playability to match " its competitors . Matt Regan of Mean Machines agreed : " <unk> to the nth degree ! " British magazines Mean Machines and The Games Machine both commented on the game 's number of secrets to find . Eurogamer 's Chris Schilling called Hirokazu Tanaka 's soundtrack " surely one of the all @-@ time greats " , and Official Nintendo Magazine said it was among the " greatest videogame music ever composed " . Player One , Eurogamer , and Complex too complimented the music . Player One further pronounced Super Mario Land a " masterpiece " , " the pinnacle of portable video gaming " . 
 Following the Game Boy 's " overnight success " , Super Mario Land sold over 18 million copies — more than that of Super Mario Bros. 3 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game begot a Super Mario Land series of portable Mario games . Super Mario Land 2 : 6 Golden Coins added a non @-@ linear overworld and introduced Wario , an evil version of Mario , as the game 's villain . The subsequent Wario Land : Super Mario Land 3 began the Wario franchise . After 19 years , the 2011 title Super Mario 3D Land for the Nintendo 3DS became Mario 's first game in stereoscopic 3D . Audrey Drake of IGN argued that both Wario Land and Super Mario 3D Land were not " legitimate sequels " , and wrote that the latter felt more like " Super Mario Bros. 3 with Mario Galaxy influences " than a successor to Super Mario Land 2 . 
 Super Mario Land is remembered for its miniaturized Super Mario elements and " twist on just about every Mario mainstay imaginable " . Many of its new elements did not recur later in the series , making Super Mario Land strange compared to the rest of the series , or what IGN 's Thomas described as a " singular oddball " . IGN 's Marc Nix felt retrospectively that Super Mario Land was the only uninspired Mario game , with " funky voids of white " and UFOs instead of the " strikingly original " Mushroom Kingdom . Mean Machines was also put off by the alien theme , easy difficulty , and dot matrix screen blur . IGN 's Travis Fahs wrote that the game was comparatively not as " ambitious " as Super Mario Bros. 3 . Mean Machines felt as if it was not " a true Mario game " , not worth its originally high review score , and " in retrospect , not really a classic " . 
 Eurogamer 's Schilling wrote that Mario felt different — lighter , with more friction — and that the game felt " radical and distinctive " for the risks it took . IGN 's Thomas cited " out of place " gameplay elements like the shooter levels , exploding Koopa shells , non @-@ extinguishing fireballs , and non @-@ Princess Peach plot as departures from the series . Thomas attributed this to Mario creator Miyamoto 's lack of involvement in the game 's development , which he described as " famously hands @-@ off " . Schilling of Eurogamer instead blamed the Game Boy 's technical limitations . But he too was perplexed by the new sphinx , seahorse , and Moai head enemies , and considered the exploding Koopa shells a " cruel trick " disdainful of the series ' core gameplay . Super Mario Land 's shooter levels , new to the series , were not revisited in subsequent series games . And subsequent series games such as Super Mario Land 2 both dropped the original 's tiny scale and chose the classic fire flower fireballs over the first installment 's bouncing balls . 
 The game was included in multiple rankings of top Game Boy games , and Official Nintendo Magazine listed it at 73 in its top 100 Nintendo games . After her debut in Super Mario Land , Princess Daisy reaffiliated as Luigi 's girlfriend and appears in later Mario series sports and racing games . 
 = Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! = 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ( ストップ ! ! <unk> ! , <unk> ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Hisashi Eguchi . It was serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump from October 1981 to November 1983 , and the chapters were published in four tankōbon volumes by Shueisha from November 1982 to January 1984 . The series was adapted into a 35 @-@ episode anime television series by Toei Animation that aired on Fuji Television from May 1983 to January 1984 . The story focuses on Kōsaku Sakamoto , a high school student who goes to live with yakuza boss Ibari Ōzora and his four children — Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume — after the death of his mother . Kōsaku is shocked to learn that Hibari , who looks and behaves as a girl , was assigned male at birth . 
 Eguchi wanted to create a romantic comedy manga where the main female character is a cross @-@ dressing boy so as to poke fun at the genre . He took more time to draw the chapters compared to his earlier manga , and as the serialization continued , he found it increasingly difficult to keep up a weekly pace for the chapters . He eventually abandoned the series after the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Weekly Shōnen Jump refused his request to release the chapters every other week . From July 2009 to February 2010 , Shogakukan published a three @-@ volume Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! Complete Edition omnibus collection , which features various revisions to the originally published chapters in addition to newly drawn cover art . 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! has been described as achieving a dizzying reality with Hibari by contrasting a girlish exterior with a male interior . The series has been praised for its overall light and pop literary style , and the delicate touch in how Hibari is drawn has been described as so attractive that it makes the reader forget that it is a gag manga . However , the jokes surrounding the yakuza characters have been criticized as extreme and no longer humorous in modern times . The series has been described as having had a hand in paving the way for the J @-@ pop phenomenon . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! follows Kōsaku Sakamoto , a high school student whose mother tells him on her deathbed to live with her friend and yakuza boss Ibari Ōzora and his family in Tokyo after she dies . Although Kōsaku is initially unsure about his situation , he is relieved when he meets Ibari 's four children : Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume . Kōsaku is attracted to Hibari from the start , but he is shocked to learn that Hibari , who looks and behaves as a girl , was assigned male at birth — something only known within the Ōzora Group and Hibari 's family . A group of four girls led by Kaori Hanazono begin to suspect that Hibari may be a guy , but Tsubame takes Hibari 's place during a health checkup , effectively quelling any suspicions . Hibari begins to show an immediate interest in Kōsaku , so in an effort to distance himself from Hibari , Kōsaku joins the Wakaba Academy boxing club . Also in the club is Makoto Shiina , who is attracted to Hibari , and Rie Kawai , the club manager who Kōsaku likes . Hibari soon joins the club as its second manager shortly before they go on a training camp in Kujūkuri at the end of the year . 
 At the start of the new school year , Hibari is scouted to join the girl 's volleyball team after the captain , Jun Ōtori , witnesses Hibari 's athletic prowess . Although Hibari refuses , Jun continues to pursue Hibari until Jun is overwhelmed by Hibari 's superhuman ability to spike the ball . After Kaori and her friends try to embarrass Hibari during swim class , they once again suspect that Hibari may be a guy , but Hibari prevents them from getting any proof during the school sponsored summer camp . After Hibari refuses several advances from a popular guy at school named Takuto Honda , Hibari starts openly flirting with Kōsaku at school . Shiina becomes enraged at Kōsaku for earning Hibari 's affection , but Shiina and Kōsaku grow closer as friends after they fight it out and Kōsaku reassures him that there is nothing going on between him and Hibari . 
 When Kōsaku is out jogging one day , he helps out a girl named Sayuri Kōenji who was being harassed by three guys from the Kokuryū High School boxing club , although Hibari deals with them before Kōsaku can do anything . Despite this , Sayuri is instantly enamored by Kōsaku and hires a detective to find out more about him , leading her to discover Hibari 's secret . Hibari has another run @-@ in with the Kokuryū boxing club members after they harass Tsubame at a festival . The Kokuryū boxing club challenges the Wakaba boxing club to some inter @-@ school matches , but this turns out to be a ruse to get a chance to gang up on Hibari . However , the Ōzora Group intercedes , allowing Hibari to knock out the Kokuryū boxing club 's leader . Sayuri transfers into Kōsaku 's class , and she blackmails him into going on a date with her in exchange for not revealing Hibari 's secret . During the school festival , Kōsaku 's class acts out a Sleeping Beauty play with Kōsaku as the prince and Hibari as the princess , culminating in Hibari giving Kōsaku a French kiss on stage . Ibari agrees to look after <unk> Taiga , the son of one of his close friends , who Kōsaku is surprised to learn is a trans man . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Kōsaku Sakamoto ( <unk> <unk> , Sakamoto Kōsaku ) is the protagonist of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ! and is originally from <unk> 33 He is a pure @-@ hearted high school student who constantly refuses Hibari 's advances toward him , Ch . 2 , 3 , 10 , 17 but as time goes on , he becomes increasingly concerned that he is being influenced by Hibari.Ch. 8 , 22 , 35 , 38 Kōsaku treats Hibari kindly , and helps to maintain Hibari 's <unk> 25 , 50 , 51 Initially unskilled at fighting , Ch . 3 he joins the Wakaba Academy boxing club in an effort to get stronger because of Hibari 's inherent strength , Ch . 8 which he achieves as the series <unk> 38 Kōsaku is voiced by Tōru Furuya . 
 Hibari Ōzora ( 大空 <unk> , Ōzora Hibari ) is the titular character of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! ! . Hibari is a high school student assigned male at birth who looks and behaves as a girl , much to Ibari 's <unk> 2 , 4 , 8 Hibari prefers being referred to as Ibari 's daughter , Ch . 6 , 8 , 15 and has expressed an interest in having <unk> 6 According to Suzume , Hibari becomes more feminine after Kōsaku starts living at the Ōzora <unk> 8 Hibari show an interest in Kōsaku early on , Ch . 9 and continues to make advances toward him throughout the <unk> 17 , 22 , 35 Hibari gets bolder as the series progresses , including openly flirting with Kōsaku at school , Ch . 37 and kissing him.Ch. 18 , 48 , 51 Hibari is extremely athletic and intelligent , in addition to being physically strong despite Hibari 's relatively small body <unk> 5 , 7 , 8 , 22 Hibari is voiced by Satomi Majima . 
 Ibari Ōzora ( 大空 <unk> , Ōzora Ibari ) is the boss of the Ōzora Group , a yakuza <unk> 1 As the father of Tsugumi , Tsubame , Hibari and Suzume , he wants the Ōzora Group to be family @-@ <unk> 4 Ibari is extremely distressed by Hibari 's usual behavior , partly because Hibari is his only choice to inherit the Ōzora <unk> 2 He has a weak heart and frequently gets attacks whenever he is overly excited or shocked by <unk> 2 , 4 , 8 , 28 Ibari had been in love with Kōsaku 's mother , but she ended up marrying a <unk> <unk> 19 Ibari is voiced by <unk> <unk> . 
 Tsugumi Ōzora ( 大空 <unk> , Ōzora Tsugumi ) is the eldest daughter who has acted as a motherly figure to her family after their mother died . She dropped out of art school in her second year and became a professional <unk> 31 Tsugumi is voiced by Fumi Hirano . 
 Tsubame Ōzora ( 大空 <unk> , Ōzora Tsubame ) is the second daughter and is two years older than Hibari . Like her father , Tsubame is against Hibari acting as a girl , Ch . 5 , 7 and constantly gets mad at Hibari for wearing her clothes , Ch . 4 , 23 , 44 although Tsubame sometimes wears Hibari 's clothes , <unk> 6 Tsubame and Hibari are nearly identical except for their hair and eye color , and they impersonate each other on certain <unk> 7 , 13 , 18 Tsubame is voiced by Kyōko <unk> . 
 Suzume Ōzora ( 大空 <unk> , Ōzora Suzume ) is the youngest daughter and is a precocious elementary school <unk> 14 , 19 , 48 She is scared of flat @-@ faced <unk> 4 , 28 Suzume is voiced by <unk> Suzuki . 
 Sabu ( <unk> ) is a member of the Ōzora Group . He is in love with <unk> 32 Sabu is voiced by Norio Wakamoto . 
 Seiji ( <unk> ) is a member of the Ōzora Group . He looks scary , but he has a timid <unk> 2 , 4 , 18 He scares Kōsaku awake in the <unk> 6 , 9 , 20 Seiji is voiced by Toku <unk> . 
 Makoto Shiina ( 椎名 <unk> , Shiina Makoto ) is Kōsaku 's classmate who likes Hibari.Ch. 3 , 12 He is a member of the boxing club , and initially hates Kōsaku for earning Hibari 's affection , Ch . 8 but as the series progresses , the two become <unk> 38 Shiina is voiced by Katsuji Mori . 
 Rie Kawai ( <unk> <unk> , Kawai Rie ) is a normal girl with a gentle personality who is attracted to <unk> 12 She joined the boxing club as a manager because of him.Ch. 17 She leaves the boxing club when she learns Shiina likes Hibari , Ch . 30 but she rejoins the club after she gets over him.Ch. 50 Rie is voiced by Hiromi Tsuru . 
 Mitsuo Kaji ( <unk> <unk> , Kaji <unk> ) is one of Tsubame 's classmates and is the boxing club <unk> 10 , 13 He is an overbearing guy and is very pushy towards Tsubame whom he <unk> 13 , 18 His family members have the same face as him.Ch. 18 He is voiced by Kōzō <unk> . 
 Kaori Hanazono ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Kaori ) is Kōsaku 's <unk> 23 She is jealous of Hibari 's popularity at school , Ch . 6 and takes pride in her devious <unk> 7 , 27 Along with her three friends , they try to embarrass Hibari.Ch. 24 , 27 Kaori is voiced by Seiko Nakano . 
 Sayuri Kōenji ( <unk> <unk> , Kōenji Sayuri ) is a rich girl one year younger than <unk> 50 She falls in love easily and will do anything she can to bring her love to fruition . When something surprises her , she composes a <unk> 43 Sayuri is voiced by Yuriko Yamamoto . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! is written and illustrated by Hisashi Eguchi . Following the conclusion of his manga Hinomaru Gekijō ( <unk> ) in 1981 , Eguchi wanted to go against the notion at the time that there was currently a golden age of romantic comedy manga in shōnen manga magazines . In response , Eguchi thought of creating a romantic comedy manga where the main female character is a cross @-@ dressing boy , and in doing so , poke fun at the genre by developing it as the antithesis of a romantic comedy . Eguchi drew up the storyboard for the first chapter in about 30 minutes in a cafe , and came up with the title Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! as a reference to Hisashi <unk> 's manga Stop ! Nii @-@ chan ( ストップ ! <unk> ) . In wanting to highlight the comedy of having a character like Hibari , Eguchi realized that the cuter he could draw Hibari , the more effective the jokes would be , so he tried to draw Hibari as cute as he could . 
 Eguchi had often rushed when drawing his earlier manga <unk> ! ! Pirates ( <unk> ! ! <unk> ) , but starting with Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! , he raised the standards he held for his art and had to began taking more time to draw the chapters . In addition , Eguchi was very particular about the appearance of his manuscripts , so he never used white @-@ out to correct any drawing errors because he disliked how it looked . As the serialization continued , Eguchi found it increasingly difficult to keep up a weekly pace for the chapters , leading him to take frequent hiatuses and later say that " drawing weekly isn 't something humans can do . " Furthermore , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Weekly Shōnen Jump at the time , Shigeo Nishimura , refused his request to release the chapters every other week . When it came time to draw what would end up being the last serialized chapter , Eguchi completed the chapter 's storyboard , but ultimately submitted only about two @-@ thirds of the chapter , leaving out the last five pages . After he submitted the chapter 's manuscript , Eguchi fled to a hotel and secluded himself for a day , only coming out after Nishimura called him to say that he could not deal with him anymore on a weekly basis . As a result , Eguchi abandoned the serialization and the editorial department decided to discontinue the series . 
 Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! was serialized in the manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump from the October 19 , 1981 issue to the November 28 , 1983 issue . The individual chapters were collected and published in four tankōbon volumes by Shueisha from November 1982 to January 1984 . Inspired by Katsuhiro Otomo , Eguchi fought against the established design format for the volumes that at the time was " set in stone " for series serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump . Futabasha later published it in three volumes in July 1991 , and again in two volumes in February 1995 . Shueisha republished it in four volumes from May to June 2001 . Home @-@ sha published it in two volumes in January 2004 . In an interview in 2007 , Eguchi expressed a desire to continue some of his older series , but stated that a continuation of Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! would be difficult . 
 Starting in 2009 , Eguchi began working with Shogakukan on releasing a Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! Complete Edition omnibus collection , which features various revisions to the originally published chapters in addition to newly drawn cover art . Not wanting to end the Complete Edition with an abrupt conclusion like he had done before , Eguchi found the storyboard for the final chapter and used it as a basis to newly draw the last five pages he had omitted 27 years earlier . Shogakukan published the Complete Edition in three volumes from July 2009 to February 2010 ; Shogakukan later republished the series in another three volumes from May to July 2012 . In 2010 , Eguchi did not rule out the possibility of someday drawing a continuation of the series , but he said it probably would not be a story under the title Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 35 @-@ episode anime television series adaptation , produced by Toei Animation and directed by Takashi <unk> . It aired from May 20 , 1983 to January 27 , 1984 on Fuji Television . The screenplay was written by : Shigeru Yanagawa , Tokio Tsuchiya , Hiroshi Toda , Tomomi Tsutsui , Takeshi Shudo and Yumi Asano . The character design used in the anime was provided by Yoshinori <unk> , and the music was composed by Kōji Nishimura . The series was later released by Universal J to two DVD compilation volumes from February to March 2003 . A DVD box set was released by TC Entertainment in September 2014 . The opening theme is " Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! " ( ストップ ! ! <unk> ! ) sung by Yuki Yukino and the ending theme is " Kongara Connection " ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) sung by Ai Hoshino . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Psychologist Tamaki Saitō described Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! as achieving a " dizzying reality " with Hibari " by contrasting a girlish exterior with a male interior " , and went on to say that the series could be seen as a " continuation of the sartorial perversion lineage " of cross @-@ dressing characters . Manga critic <unk> Nakano has called Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! a unique and outstanding gag manga for its juxtaposition of Hibari being a boy and the heir to a yakuza organization . Nakano largely attributes this successful combination to Eguchi 's ability to draw girls that are not only cute , but also have good taste and sex appeal . The delicate touch in how Hibari is drawn has been described as so attractive that it makes the reader forget that it is a gag manga . 
 In writing for the magazine <unk> , manga critic <unk> wrote that because of its overall light and pop literary style , none of the indecency or immorality cross @-@ dressing may engender comes through , which he surmises is why the anime was able to air during prime time . <unk> notes the more extreme nature of the jokes surrounding the yakuza characters in comparison to the jokes involving cross @-@ dressing , and that some jokes such as those involving drugs would not be humorous today . Manga commentator Nobunaga Minami lauded Eguchi for being a pioneer in drawing characters with a high fashion sense in Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! , which he says effectively changed fashion in shōnen manga from being seen as a " symbol " to now being treated as an " accessory " . Eguchi 's attention to detail is also praised , such as drawing Kōsaku wearing Chuck Taylor All @-@ Stars in one chapter . 
 The series has been called effervescent and having had a hand in paving the way for the J @-@ pop phenomenon . When <unk> Bachi author Hiroyuki Asada read Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! in junior high school , he admired its novel sensibility , and Eguchi 's art also influenced him . According to Eguchi , some people who read Stop ! ! Hibari @-@ kun ! were influenced to start cross @-@ dressing . 
 = Guitar Hero = 
 The Guitar Hero series ( sometimes referred to as the Hero series ) is a series of music rhythm games first published in 2005 by RedOctane and Harmonix , and distributed by Activision , in which players use a guitar @-@ shaped game controller to simulate playing lead , bass guitar , and rhythm guitar across numerous rock music songs . Players match notes that scroll on @-@ screen to colored fret buttons on the controller , strumming the controller in time to the music in order to score points , and keep the virtual audience excited . The games attempt to mimic many features of playing a real guitar , including the use of fast @-@ fingering hammer @-@ ons and pull @-@ offs and the use of the whammy bar to alter the pitch of notes . Most games support single player modes , typically a Career mode to play through all the songs in the game , and both competitive and cooperative multiplayer modes . With the introduction of Guitar Hero World Tour in 2008 , the game includes support for a four @-@ player band including vocals and drums . The series initially used mostly cover versions of songs created by WaveGroup Sound , but most recent titles feature soundtracks that are fully master recordings , and in some cases , special re @-@ recordings , of the songs . Later titles in the series feature support for downloadable content in the form of new songs . 
 In 2005 , RedOctane , a company specializing in the manufacture of unique game controllers , was inspired to create Guitar Hero based on RedOctane 's experience creating hardware for Konami 's Guitar Freaks arcade game . They enlisted Harmonix , who previously developed several music video games , for development assistance . The first game in the series was made on a budget of $ 1 million . The series became extremely successful , leading to the acquisition of RedOctane by Activision in 2007 . Harmonix was acquired by MTV Games and went on to create the Rock Band series of music games in the same vein as Guitar Hero . Activision brought Neversoft ( primarily known for their Tony Hawk series of skateboarding games ) on board for future development duties . Additional companies , such as Budcat Creations and Vicarious Visions have assisted in the adaptation of the games for other systems . 
 The series currently has eight major releases ( six Guitar Hero games , two DJ Hero games and Band Hero ) and five expansions on gaming consoles . There are spin @-@ offs for Windows and Macintosh systems , mobile phones , the Nintendo DS ( the Guitar Hero : On Tour series ) , and an arcade game . The Guitar Hero franchise was a primary brand during the emergence of the popularity of rhythm games as a cultural phenomenon in North America . Such games have been utilized as a learning and development tool for medical purposes . The first game in the series was considered by several journalists to be one of the most influential video games of the first decade of the 21st century . The series has sold more than 25 million units worldwide , earning US $ 2 billion at retail , claimed by Activision to be the 3rd largest game franchise after the Mario and Madden NFL franchises ; the third main title of the series , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock is also claimed by Activision to be the first single video game title to exceed $ 1 billion in sales . 
 Despite early success , the series , along with the overall rhythm game genre , suffered from poor sales starting in 2009 . Activision had stated in early 2011 that the series was on hiatus for 2011 , while a seventh main title in the series was under development ; this title was later cancelled due to the poor quality of the emerging product . Activision later shut down sales of the series ' downloadable content , although users who purchased material from it previously may still play what they bought . 
 In 2015 , Activision announced the first new title to the series in 5 years , Guitar Hero Live , released in October 2015 . The title is considered a reboot of the series , with development being performed by FreeStyleGames , who had developed the DJ Hero games previously . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and development at Harmonix ( 2005 @-@ 2006 ) = = = 
 Guitar Hero was created from a partnership between RedOctane , then their own company that produced specialized video game controllers , and Harmonix , a music video game development company who had previously produced Frequency , Amplitude and Karaoke Revolution . RedOctane was seeking to bring in a Guitar Freaks @-@ like game , highly popular in Japan at the time , into Western markets , and approached Harmonix about helping them to develop a music game involving a guitar controller . Both companies agreed to it , and went on to produce Guitar Hero in 2005 . The title was highly successful , leading to the development of its successful sequel Guitar Hero II in 2006 . While the original controllers for the first Guitar Hero game were designed by Ryan Lesser , Rob Kay , Greg LoPiccolo and Alex <unk> of Harmonix and built by the Honeybee Corporation of China , subsequent iterations and future controllers were developed inhouse at RedOctane , with development led primarily by Jack McCauley . 
 = = = Sale to Activision and development by Neversoft ( 2006 @-@ 2009 ) = = = 
 Both RedOctane and Harmonix experienced changes in 2006 . RedOctane was bought by Activision in June — who spent US $ 100 million to acquire the Guitar Hero franchise — while it was announced in October that Harmonix would be purchased by MTV Networks . As a result of the two purchases , Harmonix would no longer develop future games in the Guitar Hero series . Instead , that responsibility would go to Neversoft , a subsidiary of Activision known for developing the Tony Hawk 's series of skateboarding games . Neversoft was chosen to helm the Guitar Hero series after Neversoft founder , Joel Jewett , admitted to the RedOctane founders , Kai and Charles Huang , that his development team for Tony Hawk 's Project 8 went to work on weekends just to play Guitar Hero . Activision CEO Bobby Kotick believed that Neversoft would help them bring great games to the series , but on reflection , stated that had Activision explored Harmonix further as a continued developer for the series , things " may have turned out differently " . In addition , Activision began seeking other markets for the game ; a Nintendo DS version of the series was developed by Vicarious Visions , while a Guitar Hero Mobile series was created for mobile phones . The company also began considering the expansion of the series to band @-@ specific titles with Guitar Hero : Aerosmith . Later , in November 2008 , Activision acquired Budcat Creations , another development studio that had helped with the PlayStation 2 versions of Guitar Hero III and World Tour , announcing that they would be helping to develop another game in the Guitar Hero series . 
 In 2007 , Harmonix and MTV Games released a new music title through rival publisher Electronic Arts , called Rock Band . It expanded upon the gameplay popularized by the Guitar Hero series by adding drum and microphone instruments , allowing players to simulate playing songs as bands . Activision followed suit with the release of Guitar Hero World Tour in 2008 , which supported multiple instruments . In 2009 , Activision tripled its Guitar Hero offerings , and in addition to further continuation of the existing main series with Guitar Hero 5 and expansions , they introduced the titles Band Hero , geared towards more family @-@ friendly pop music , and DJ Hero , a game based on turntablism and featuring a number of mixes . With the release of Guitar Hero 5 , Activision considered the series to have moved away from its heavy metal basis into a broader selection of music . Guitar Hero 5 is the first game in the series to use a new version of the series ' logo ; previous games used a logo in a font with sharper " points " on the letters , which was considered " idiosyncratic with a vengeance " to match the games ' emphasis on heavy metal music . Activision used the services of the Pentagram design studio to refashion the game 's logo . Pentagram developed a new font , removing some of the " aggressive odd " features to make the typeface more suitable and amendable to design feature incorporation to other games such as Band Hero and DJ Hero . 
 = = = Decline and hiatus ( 2009 @-@ 2015 ) = = = 
 The results of the expanded offerings did not contribute well to the series , alongside the late @-@ 2000s recession ; sales of most rhythm games including Guitar Hero and DJ Hero did not meet expectations , falling about 50 % short of projected targets . Activision announced it would be cutting back to only 10 SKUs within 2010 instead of the 25 in 2009 . Though RedOctane and Neversoft continued to develop the 6th main game , Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , until its completion , both studios were later shuttered by Activision , moving key personnel into Activision directly for future game development , and in the case of Neversoft , closing its Guitar Hero division , while transferring future development duties for the series to Vicarious Visions , another Activision studio which had been fundamental in building the Wii and Nintendo DS versions of the games . In November 2010 , Activision also closed Budcat Creations , the arm of the publisher that was primarily responsible for porting the Guitar Hero games to the PlayStation 2 . 
 Ahead of Activision 's 2010 fourth quarter financial report in February 2011 , Activision disbanded its Guitar Hero business unit and announced that it would cease development of the planned 2011 Guitar Hero game . Activision cited " continued declines in the music genre " to explain its decision . The closure also affected the DJ Hero series , as Activision stated that there were no plans to publish a music game during 2011 . Activision 's vice president Dan Winters later clarified that the company was " just putting Guitar Hero on hiatus " and that they were " just not making a new game for next year , that 's all " . 
 In a July 2011 interview with Forbes , Kotick stated that while the publisher was " going to stop selling Guitar Hero altogether " , they were " going to go back to the studios and we ’ re going to use new studios and reinvent " the series , but a former <unk> of Vicarious Visions has stated that as of 2012 , all development of Guitar Hero has come to an end within Activision . Another source close to Vicarious Visions had reported to Kotaku that while Guitar Hero 7 was in development under an Activision studio , the game was considered a " disaster " . The cancelled game omitted the additional instruments and used only a guitar peripheral , redesigning the unit to include a 6 @-@ button mechanism replacing the strum bar ; the resulting unit was considered too expensive to manufacture and purchase . The developers had also started the game development from scratch to try to create new characters and venues that would be more reactive to the actual songs being played to give the feel of a music video , but ultimately this proved too much of a challenge and had to be scrapped . Further , with a limited budget , the song selection was limited to " low @-@ budget " hits of the 1990s , or at times reusing songs that had previously been included in Guitar Hero games . Though the team had a two @-@ year development cycle , it was closed down after Activision president Eric <unk> had seen the current state of the project at the one @-@ year point . 
 Another potential Guitar Hero project was discovered by the archival site <unk> for a game titled Hero World , a massively multiplayer online game that would link the Guitar Hero and DJ Hero games . The game had been developed by <unk> Games , sometime after the release of DJ Hero 2 , with the main development duties passed to Virtual Fairground , using their platform The Ride , an Adobe Flash @-@ based platform that would let the game be played in a web browser . The game was cancelled in 2011 along with other pending Guitar Hero projects . 
 No further downloadable content for either Guitar Hero or DJ Hero was made after February 2011 , though Activision committed to releasing content that was already in development by that time due to fan response ; later , in a move described by Game Informer as " the final nail in [ the series ' ] coffins " , Activision announced it would discontinue all DLC sales for the series ( although customers can still play tracks they have already bought ) as of March 31 , 2014 . Though Activision had moved away from the Guitar Hero series , the lessons learned helped them and developer Toys for Bob to handle the manufacturing and outsourcing issues that came with the highly successful Skylanders toy and video game franchise . 
 = = = Guitar Hero Live = = = 
 In April 2015 , Activision announced a new entry in the series , titled Guitar Hero Live . The title was developed by Activision 's internal studio FreeStyleGames , who previously had worked on the DJ Hero spinoff titles . FreeStyleGames were given free reign to reboot the Guitar Hero series for next @-@ generation consoles . One of their first innovations was to drop the standard five @-@ button guitar controller , ultimately designing a six @-@ button guitar controller , with two rows of three buttons each , allowing them to mimic actual guitar fingering . Guitar Hero Live was released with both career and an online mode . The career mode used full @-@ motion video taken from the perspective of a lead guitarist underneath the note highway , to create an immersive experience to the player . The online mode , called GHTV , discarded the previous downloadable content approach and used a music video channel approach to stream playable songs to players , adding new songs to the catalog on a weekly basis . The game was released in October 2015 . 
 Though the game was praised as a reinvention of the Guitar Hero series , the game did not sell as well as Activision expected ; due to lowered forecasts , Activision let go of a significant fraction of FreeStyleGames ' developers . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Main titles = = = 
 The original Guitar Hero was released on the PlayStation 2 in November 2005 . Guitar Hero is notable because it comes packaged with a controller peripheral modeled after a black Gibson SG guitar . Rather than a typical gamepad , this guitar controller is the primary input for the game . Playing the game with the guitar controller simulates playing an actual guitar , except it uses five colored " fret buttons " and a " strum bar " instead of frets and strings . The development of Guitar Hero was inspired by Konami 's Guitar Freaks video game , which at the time , had not seen much exposure in the North American market ; RedOctane , already selling guitar @-@ shaped controllers for imported copies of GuitarFreaks , approached Harmonix about creating a game to use an entirely new Guitar controller . The concept was to have the gameplay of Amplitude with the visuals of Karaoke Revolution , both of which had been developed by Harmonix . The game was met with critical acclaim and received numerous awards for its innovative guitar peripheral and its soundtrack , which comprised 47 playable rock songs ( most of which were cover versions of popular songs from artists and bands from the 1960s through modern rock ) . Guitar Hero has sold nearly 1 @.@ 5 million copies to date . 
 The popularity of the series increased dramatically with the release of Guitar Hero II for the PlayStation 2 in 2006 . Featuring improved multiplayer gameplay , an improved note @-@ recognizing system , and 64 songs , it became the fifth best @-@ selling video game of 2006 . The PlayStation 2 version of the game was offered both separately and in a bundle with a cherry red Gibson SG guitar controller . Guitar Hero II was later released for the Xbox 360 in April 2007 with an exclusive Gibson Explorer guitar controller and an additional 10 songs , among other features . About 3 million units of Guitar Hero II have sold on the PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360 . 
 Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock was released in late 2007 for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , Microsoft Windows , and Mac OS X platforms . The title is the first installment of the series to include wireless guitars bundled with the game and also the first to release a special bundle with two guitars . The game includes Slash and Tom Morello as playable characters in addition to the existing fictional avatars ; both guitarists performed motion capture to be used for their characters ' animation in the game . 
 Guitar Hero World Tour , previously named Guitar Hero IV , is the fourth full game in the series and was released on October 26 , 2008 for PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Wii . Analysts had expected that future Guitar Hero games in 2008 would include additional instrument peripherals to compete against Rock Band ; Guitar Hero World Tour was confirmed as in development following the announcement of the merger between Activision and Vivendi Games in December 2007 . Activision 's CEO Bobby Kotick announced on April 21 , 2008 that Guitar Hero World Tour will branch out into other instruments including vocals . Guitar Hero World Tour includes drums and vocals , and can be bought packaged with a new drum set controller , a microphone , and the standard guitar controller . A larger number of real @-@ world musicians appear as playable characters , including Jimi Hendrix , Billy Corgan , Hayley Williams , Zakk Wylde , Ted Nugent , Travis Barker , Sting , and Ozzy Osbourne . Guitar Hero World Tour also features custom song creation that can be shared with others . 
 Guitar Hero 5 , the fifth main entry in the series , was confirmed in December 2008 . It was released on September 1 , 2009 , and includes 85 songs from 83 different artists . The game includes new game modes and features , including its ' Party Mode , ' which gives players the ability to drop @-@ in and out and change difficulties in the middle of a song . Artists including Johnny Cash , Matt Bellamy , Carlos Santana , Kurt Cobain and Shirley Manson appear as playable characters in the game . 
 Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , the sixth main console game in the series , was released on September 28 , 2010 . It is the last game in the series developed by Neversoft 's Guitar Hero division prior to its dissolution , with Vicarious Visions assisting on the Wii version with added Nintendo DS functionality . The game has been described as returning to the roots of the Guitar Hero series ; while it still allows for full band play , the soundtrack 's focus is on rock and roll music and an emphasis on guitar " shredding " . The game introduced a career @-@ based " Quest Mode " , narrated by Gene Simmons , that guides the players to complete songs to unlock " warriors of rock " to join them in saving " demigod of rock " and his guitar from his imprisonment by " the Beast " . 
 Following a five @-@ year hiatus , as described below , Activision announced Guitar Hero Live for release in late 2015 on most seventh @-@ generation and eighth @-@ generation consoles . Live was developed to rebuild the game from the ground up , and while the gameplay remains similar to the earlier titles , focusing primarily on the lead guitar , it uses a 3 @-@ button guitar controller with each button having " up " and " down " positions , making for more complex <unk> . The game using live footage of a rock concert , taken from the perspective of the lead guitarist , as to provide a more immersive experience . 
 = = = Series expansions = = = 
 Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s for the PlayStation 2 , which was released in July 2007 , was the final game developed by Harmonix for the series . Though it was produced after Harmonix were purchased by MTV Games , it was part of their contractual obligation to complete the game . The game , as suggested by its name , features tracks primarily from the 1980s . 
 Guitar Hero : Aerosmith was the first band @-@ centric game for the series . On September 4 , 2007 , Billboard announced that the band Aerosmith was " working closely with the makers of Guitar Hero IV , which will be dedicated to the group 's music . " On February 15 , 2008 , Activision announced that Guitar Hero : Aerosmith would be released on June 29 , 2008 . Guitar Hero : Aerosmith is developed by Neversoft for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions , while the Wii version of the game is developed by Vicarious Visions and the PlayStation 2 version is developed by Budcat Creations . The game features a track selection composed of 60 % of Aerosmith songs , with other songs from Joe Perry 's solo work or artists that have inspired or performed with Aerosmith , including Run D.M.C .. 
 The series ' next band @-@ centric title , Guitar Hero : Metallica , was released on March 29 , 2009 . Guitar Hero : Metallica is based on the full band experience of World Tour while offering similar features on Metallica 's history and music as found in Guitar Hero : Aerosmith . In addition , Metallica 's album , Death Magnetic , was available as downloadable content for Guitar Hero III simultaneously with the release of the album , with the content being forward @-@ compatible with Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero : Metallica . Since the PlayStation 2 version does not support downloading , three extra songs were included from Death Magnetic and are as follows : " Broken , Beat , and Scarred " , " Cyanide " , and " My Apocalypse " . A new feature in the game , where the drummer can access a mode called Expert + , has also been added . Expert + mode was implemented to allow faster bass pedal beats , fast to the point where it would normally be out of the playable range of a single bass pedal , and was intended for a dual bass pedal . 
 Guitar Hero Smash Hits ( titled Guitar Hero : Greatest Hits in Europe and Australia ) was released in June 2009 . It features full @-@ band versions of 48 songs from earlier Guitar Hero games that only used the guitar controller . Unlike the previous versions , each of the songs is based on a master recording that includes some live tracks . The game follows a similar model as Guitar Hero : Metallica , and was developed by Neversoft and Beenox Studios for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 2 , and Wii . 
 Guitar Hero : Van Halen was released on December 22 , 2009 , though customers that purchased Guitar Hero 5 under a special promotion received a copy of the game early . Like the other band @-@ centric games , Guitar Hero : Van Halen includes 25 songs from the band Van Halen , including 3 guitar solos by Eddie Van Halen , in addition to 19 guest acts such as Queen , Weezer , Blink @-@ 182 , Foo Fighters , The Offspring and Queens of the Stone Age . 
 Another new title to the series , Band Hero , was announced in May 2009 . Band Hero features Top 40 hits aimed at family audiences , and include the full band play style of Guitar Hero 5 . The game was developed for the Nintendo DS , using the Guitar Hero On Tour Guitar Grip , a new " drum skin " to fit the DS Lite , and the DS 's microphone to support the full band experience . Musician Taylor Swift appears as a playable character in the game , as do the members of No Doubt . 
 DJ Hero was announced by Activision in May 2009 . Prior to the announcement , the company had purchased FreeStyleGames , a small developer of music games , to help produce localized downloadable content for Guitar Hero games and a then @-@ unannounced music game , later revealed to be DJ Hero . DJ Hero uses a special turntable @-@ based controller for players to perform with on various song mixes in the game . The game also incorporates the use of a Guitar Hero controller on ten specially arranged tracks ; Bright has suggested that future Guitar Hero games after Guitar Hero 5 may include the use of the turntable control . 
 A sequel , DJ Hero 2 , was officially announced in June 2010 for release in the last quarter of 2010 , featuring more than 70 mashups from over 85 artists . The game includes several new gameplay modes , including an " Empire " career mode , head @-@ to @-@ head DJ battles , social multiplayer modes , and a jump @-@ in and out Party Play mode similar to Guitar Hero 5 . The game also includes more vocal options for singing and rapping to songs , and a freestyle mode for players . 
 = = = Portable versions = = = 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour was released on the Nintendo DS hand @-@ held system on June 22 , 2008 . The game includes a peripheral , dubbed the " Guitar Grip " , a rectangular device that fits into the second slot of the Nintendo DS or DS Lite . The peripheral only features the first four fret buttons and a strap so the Nintendo DS can be held sideways comfortably for play . The game also includes a guitar pick shaped stylus for use with strumming in the game , which players move across the touchscreen . Guitar Hero : On Tour was developed by Vicarious Visions , who also ported the Guitar Hero games to Nintendo 's Wii console . 
 A sequel , Guitar Hero On Tour : Decades , was released in November 2008 , featuring music spanning four decades . A third title in the series , Guitar Hero On Tour : Modern Hits , was announced following various rumors of its existence , and was released in June 2009 , featuring songs recorded since the year 2000 . Both games use the " Guitar Grip " controller , and allow two players to compete against each other using any version of the On Tour series , with songs being shared between versions . 
 Band Hero was also ported to the Nintendo DS by Vicarious Visions , expanding the play to include vocals ( through the DS microphone ) and drumming . The drumming uses a special " drum skin " adapter designed for the Nintendo DS Lite to map the unit 's face buttons to four drum pads . However , the peripheral is not compatible with the original Nintendo DS model or the Nintendo DSi . However , since the drum skin is not electronic but a rubber cover switch that duplicates certain buttons on the DS Lite , a player can simply press the buttons in time to play the drums . The game includes four @-@ player local wireless play in a similar manner as Guitar Hero 5 allowing any combination of instruments to be used . The game has a set of 30 songs ; some are from Band Hero and others are from several Guitar Hero games ' set lists . 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour does not work on the Nintendo DSi and Nintendo 3DS because unlike the Nintendo DS , they do not have Game Boy Advance slots . Band Hero is limited to vocals and drums on the two consoles for the same reason . 
 = = = Mobile phone versions = = = 
 Guitar Hero III Mobile was released for mobile phones in 2007 and 2008 , and was developed by MachineWorks Northwest LLC . The base version of the game includes 15 songs from both Guitar Hero II and Guitar Hero III , and has released a three @-@ song add @-@ on pack every month since January 2008 . The title has been downloaded by users one million times , with both Verizon and Hands @-@ On Mobile claiming that over 250 @,@ 000 songs are played a day on the platform . The two companies produced two other mobile @-@ based Guitar Hero games ; Guitar Hero III : Backstage Pass , released in July 2008 , adds role @-@ playing elements to manage the band 's success in addition to the core rhythm game , while the mobile version of Guitar Hero World Tour , released in December 2008 , expands each included track for play on both lead guitar and drums , mimicking the expansion of the console series to the full band . 
 Glu Mobile developed the mobile version of Guitar Hero 5 , released in the last quarter of 2009 . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Activision and RedOctane also worked with Basic Fun , Inc. to produce Guitar Hero <unk> , a handheld electronic game that features 30 and 60 @-@ second clips of ten of the songs from Guitar Hero and Guitar Hero II . 
 Activision and Konami , who had previously worked together to make sure that the Guitar Hero series meets with Konami 's patents on music games , developed an arcade console version of the game , titled Guitar Hero Arcade , distributed to arcades in early 2009 . The game is completely based on the Guitar Hero III gameplay , but reducing some of the features such as the use of the Whammy bar , Star Power Button ( Star Power may only be activated by lifting the Guitar ) and Practice Modes , but keeping the ability to download new songs for the cabinet from the Internet . The arcade game has come under some scrutiny by the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) , who believe the use of the game in arcades is equivalent to " public performances " and seek additional fees to be paid by operators of the game . 
 = = = Planned games = = = 
 No more Guitar Hero games were released on the PlayStation 2 after 2009 , with the double release of Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero . It was expected that the 2010 entry for Guitar Hero , Warriors of Rock , would be the final entry developed by Neversoft , based on claims that Neversoft would be letting go of its Guitar Hero division , with Vicarious Visions likely poised to take over future development . Further industry rumors pointed at the closure of RedOctane Studios and Underground Development ( the development studio for Guitar Hero : Van Halen ) as further results from the scaling @-@ back ; Activision moved the controller hardware development within their own division to continue to support the series , with RedOctane founders Kai and Charles Huang remaining with Activision . A week prior to these announcements , the Guitar Hero division CEO at Activision , Dan Rosensweig , left the company , leading to some speculation on whether Rosensweig 's departure influenced these changes . Activision and RedOctane had trademarked the titles " Guitar Villain " , " Drum Villain " , " Keyboard Hero " and " Sing Hero " . RedOctane originally trademarked the titles " Drum Hero " and " Band Hero " , but the work performed towards the Drum Hero title was eventually folded into the gameplay for Guitar Hero World Tour , and Band Hero became its own game . Later , as of October 2009 , Activision reapplied for a Drum Hero trademark . Pi Studios , which had previously helped to port Rock Band to the Wii , had started work on the karaoke title Sing Hero before Activision cancelled its development . 
 Dave Mustaine , frontman for Megadeth , stated he had been in talks with Activision and Neversoft for a Guitar Hero @-@ related product . It was later revealed that Dave Mustaine was working with Activision for music in Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , including an original track ( " Sudden Death " ) recorded specifically for the game . 
 Two Guitar Hero products that were announced but never released were a Red Hot Chili Peppers @-@ themed title and a PlayStation Portable title that would have featured a drum component . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The core gameplay of the Guitar Hero games is a rhythm game similar to Konami 's Guitar Freaks and to a lesser extent Harmonix 's previous music games such as Frequency and Amplitude . The guitar controller is recommended for play , although a standard console controller can be used instead . However , the guitar controller has been required for play ever since the inclusion of drum and vocal parts in the series . The game supports toggling the handedness of the guitar , allowing both left @-@ handed and right @-@ handed players to utilize the guitar controller . 
 While playing the game , an extended guitar neck is shown vertically on the screen ( the frets horizontal ) , often called the " note highway " , and as the song progresses , colored markers or " gems " indicating notes travel down the screen in time with the music ; the note colors and positions match those of the five fret keys on the guitar controller . Once the note ( s ) reach the bottom , the player must play the indicated note ( s ) by holding down the correct fret button ( s ) and hitting the strumming bar in order to score points . Success or failure will cause the on @-@ screen Rock Meter to change , showing how well the player is playing ( denoted by red , yellow , and green sections ) . Should the Rock Meter drop below the red section , the song will automatically end , with the player booed off the stage by the audience . Successful note hits will add to the player 's score , and by hitting a long series of consecutive successful note hits , the player can increase their score multiplier . There is a window of time for hitting each note , similar to other rhythm games such as Dance Dance Revolution , but unlike these games , scoring in Guitar Hero is not affected by accuracy ; as long as the note is hit within that window , the player receives the same number of points . 
 Selected special segments of the song will have glowing notes outlined by stars : successfully hitting all notes in this series will fill the " Star Power Meter " . The Star Power Meter can also be filled by using the whammy bar during sustained notes within these segments . Once the Star Power Meter is at least half full , the player can activate " Star Power " by pressing the select button or momentarily lifting the guitar into a vertical position . When Star Power is activated , the scoring multiplier is doubled until Star Power is depleted . The Rock Meter also increases more dramatically when Star Power is activated , making it easier for the player to make the Rock Meter stay at a high level . Thus , Star Power can be used strategically to play difficult sections of a song that otherwise might cause the player to fail . In the earlier entries of the series ( up until Guitar Hero : Aerosmith ) , activating Star Power meant that players could not accrue more Star Power until the Star Power meter was fully drained and the effect ended . Starting with Guitar Hero : World Tour , more Star Power can be collected even if the effect is active by completing more Star Power phrases , extending the Star Power 's duration by doing so . When playing in cooperative play ( with a bassist / rhythm guitarist in Guitar Hero II through Guitar Hero : Aerosmith or as a band in Guitar Hero : World Tour ) , Star Power is shared between all the players and activation of Star Power is dependent on all players simultaneously activating it . 
 Notes can be a single note , or composed of two to five notes that make a chord . Both single notes and chords can also be sustained , indicated by a colored line following the note marker ; the player can hold the sustained note ( s ) keys down for the entire length for additional points . During a sustained note , a player may use the whammy bar on the guitar to alter the tone of the note . Also , regardless of whether sustains are hit early or late , if the fret is held for the full duration of the hold , the game will always award the same amount of score increase for the note . In addition , the games support virtual implementations of " hammer @-@ ons " and " pull @-@ offs " , guitar @-@ playing techniques that are used to successfully play a fast series of notes by only changing the fingering on the fret buttons without having to strum each note . Sequences where strumming is not required are indicated on @-@ screen by notes with a white outline at the top of the marker instead of the usual black one , with Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock adding a white @-@ glowing effect to make these notes clearer . Guitar Hero World Tour features transparent notes that are connected by a purple outline ; players may either simply tap the correct fret for these notes without strumming or utilize a touchpad on World Tour 's guitar controller to mimic the slide technique . In addition , notes can now be played while a sustained note is being played . World Tour also adds an open string note for bass players , represented by a line across the fret instead of any note gems , that is played by strumming without holding down any fret buttons ( the sixth installment , Warriors of Rock , features an open note sustain for bass instruments as well ) . 
 Guitar Hero World Tour introduced drums and vocal tracks in addition to lead and bass guitar . Drum tracks are played similar to guitar tracks ; the player must strike the appropriate drum head or step down on the bass drum pedal on the controller when the note gems pass the indicated line . Certain note gems , when using a drum controller that is velocity @-@ sensitive , are " armored " , requiring the player to hit the indicated drum pad harder to score more points . Vocal tracks are played similar to games such as Karaoke Revolution where the player must match the pitch and the pacing of the lyrics to score points . Guitar Hero 5 allows players to create a band of up to four players using any combination of instruments . 
 While the song is playing , the background visuals feature the players ' chosen avatar , along with the rest of the band performing in one of several real and fictional venues . The reaction of the audience is based on the performance of the player judged by the Rock Meter . Guitar Hero II added special lighting and other stage effects that were synchronized to the music to provide a more complete concert experience . The games developed by Neversoft feature a simple storyline , usually about a band 's quest for fame , which is told through animations played throughout the game . These animations were created by Chris <unk> and his studio , Titmouse , Inc . , who have also done animations for the animated show Metalocalypse . 
 = = = Game modes = = = 
 The main mode of play in the Guitar Hero games is Career Mode , where the player and in @-@ game band travel between various fictional performance arenas and perform sets of four to six songs . It is by completing songs in this mode that the songs are unlocked for play across the rest of the game . Players can choose their on @-@ stage character , their guitar of choice , and the venue in which they wish to play . In this mode , the player can earn money from his / her performances that is redeemable at the in @-@ game store , where bonus songs , additional guitars and finishes , your characters clothing and bonus content can be unlocked . Quick Play mode is a quicker method of playing songs , as it allows the player to select a track and difficulty , selecting the character , venue , and guitar and guitar skin for the player based on the song chosen . After successfully completing a song , the player is given a score , a percentage of how many notes they hit and a rating from three to five stars , and two in rare cases depending on his / her final score on the song , with money being awarded in Guitar Hero World Tour . 
 The games have also added multiplayer modes . Cooperative modes allow two players to play lead and either bass or rhythm guitar on the same song , working together towards the same score . A competitive Face @-@ Off mode allows two players to play against each other at different difficulty levels , each attempting to earn the best score on a song . Each player plays different portions of the song . There is also a Pro Face @-@ Off mode , where two players battle at the same difficulty level . Unlike standard Face @-@ off , each player attempts to play all of the notes in a song , while still trying to earn the highest score . In Guitar Hero World Tour this was advanced on , as players could play a Pro Face @-@ Off game against each other on any difficulty level , the lower your difficulty , the more points were awarded so a player on a low difficulty could potentially beat a player on a more challenging difficulty . Guitar Hero III introduced Boss Battles , in which two players face off against each other , attempt to collect " distractions " to throw at their opponent , trying to make them fail . With Guitar Hero World Tour , up to four players can play cooperatively on lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals , while a total of eight players can compete in a Battle of the Bands . The Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii versions of the games support multiplayer modes over their respective network services . 
 The four difficulty levels for each song afford the player a learning curve in order to help him / her progress in skill . The first difficulty level , Easy , only focuses on the first three fret buttons while displaying a significantly reduced amount of notes for the player to play . Medium introduces the fourth ( blue ) fret button , and Hard includes the final fret button while adding additional notes . The addition of the orange fret button forces players to move their fingers up and down the neck . Expert does not introduce any other frets to learn , but adds more notes in a manner designed to challenge the player and to simulate the player 's hands to move in a sequence similar to a real guitar . A difficulty added in World Tour is Beginner , which only requires the player to strum to the basic rhythm ; holding the fret buttons becomes unnecessary . Another new difficulty only for drums was added to Metallica known as Expert + , which uses the double bass pedal . 
 Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock is the sixth installment in the franchise and introduced a new take on the Career mode of previous games . Rather than being a quest for fame and glory with the band travelling through different venues , Warriors of Rock features the " Quest Mode " as the primary campaign mode . Quest Mode tells the story of an ancient warrior who was defeated by a powerful monster and his mystical guitar was lost . The player must amass a team of rockers to help recover this guitar and defeat the monster ( called " The Beast " ) . As the player progresses through the mode , the rockers joining them will transform based on the number of stars earned from songs played . These transformations will empower the player with extra abilities in a song such as constant score multipliers or Star Power bonuses . These abilities are each unique to the individual rockers and by using them effectively , it is possible now to earn up to forty stars for a single song . 
 = = = Characters and customization = = = 
 When playing through Career mode or in other parts of the Guitar Hero games , the player has the option to select one of several pre @-@ created avatar characters , who will be shown performing on stage as the player attempts a song , but otherwise has no effect on the gameplay . A certain number of characters are available at the start of the game , but the player must spend in @-@ game money earned by successful performances to unlock other characters . Many of the characters reappear throughout the series , with the character roster changing as new characters are added or removed . Standby characters that have appeared in nearly all the games include the metalhead Axel Steel , extreme / Viking / thrash metalhead Lars <unk> , punk rocker Johnny Napalm , alternative rocker Judy Nails , and hard rocker Casey Lynch . The developers utilized these characters in more detail within Warriors of Rock , where each was given a unique setlist and venue based on their musical style , as well as a unique power within the game 's Quest mode . 
 Several games in the series feature caricatures of celebrity artists , such as Slash , Tom Morello and Bret Michaels in Guitar Hero III , Ozzy Osbourne and Jimi Hendrix in World Tour , Kurt Cobain in Guitar Hero 5 , and Taylor Swift and the band No Doubt in Band Hero . The band @-@ specific games , Aerosmith , Metallica , and Van Halen also feature the members of the respective bands . However , in late 2009 , both Courtney Love and the members of No Doubt sought legal action against Activision for the misuse of their in @-@ game characters singing or performing songs by other artists , which the musicians believe fell outside of their contract . 
 The ability for the players to create their own avatars was added in Guitar Hero World Tour , and was based on Neversoft 's existing character creation tools from the Tony Hawk series . Later games on the Xbox 360 and Wii allowed players to use the respective console 's avatars as members of the band . In addition to unlocking characters , in @-@ game money can be used to buy clothing , accessories and instruments that they are seen playing with . The guitars can also be customized with special finishes purchasable through the in @-@ game store . Guitar Hero World Tour includes the ability to fully customize any component of the guitar . The in @-@ game store in the series is also used to unlock bonus songs or special videos with interviews about the game or with the artists involved . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Most of the games in the Guitar Hero series feature a selection of songs ranging from the 1960s to present day rock music from both highly successful artists and bands and independent groups . Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s features songs primarily from the 1980s , while Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , Metallica , and Van Halen feature music from the respective bands and groups that inspired or worked with the bands . Songs with profanities have been censored . 
 Many of the Guitar Hero games developed for the recent generation of consoles ( Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii ) support downloadable content , allowing players to purchase new songs to play in the respective titles . Songs each cost approximately $ 2 through the various online stores for the console 's platform . Prior to Guitar Hero 5 , downloadable content for earlier games will not work in other games in the series , save for songs from Metallica 's Death Magnetic , which were available for Guitar Hero III , World Tour , and Metallica . Existing World Tour downloadable content for World Tour will be forward @-@ compatible with Guitar Hero 5 , Band Hero and Guitar Hero Warriors of Rock , and for a small fee , some songs from both Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero Smash Hits can be exported to both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero , limited by music licensing . Activision has also stated that they are considering a monthly subscription service to deliver downloadable content to user for future games . Guitar Hero World Tour introduced a music creation mode that will allow players to create and share songs ( excluding vocals ) via the " GHTunes " service , which was also used in all other Guitar Hero games and Band Hero since its inclusion . The creation tools were improved with Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero to allow longer songs and other means of generating songs in real @-@ time . 
 In the first two games and the 2007 expansion Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s , the majority of the songs on the main career mode set lists are covers of the original song ; for example , a song may be presented as " Free Bird as made famous by Lynyrd Skynyrd " . Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock introduces a much larger range of original recordings , and World Tour featured a setlist that contained all master recordings . The covers throughout the games are mostly recreated by WaveGroup Sound who has worked before to create songs for Beatmania , Dance Dance Revolution , and Karaoke Revolution , making small changes to the guitar portions to make them more adaptable for gameplay . Almost all of the unlockable bonus songs are songs performed by the original artist for the game ( the only exception is the song " She Bangs the Drums " by The Stone Roses , which is featured in Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock ) . 
 Prior to the release of Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , Activision worked with the iTunes Store to provide more than 1300 tracks of Guitar Hero @-@ related music across more than 20 compilations , including most of the tracks from the games in the series , called " Guitar Hero Essentials " . These compilations , such as " Killer Guitar Solos " and " Guitar Anthems of the ' 80s " , include songs related to but not contained within the Guitar Hero series . Dusty Welch of RedOctane stated , " Where there ’ s music , there ’ s Guitar Hero , and with iTunes , we are able to provide fans with a central location for downloading their favorite rock anthems . " Following the merger of Activision and Blizzard , the new company announced that it planned on creating an alternative to iTunes based on the Guitar Hero brand that would allow for downloading songs and their associated note tracks for the Guitar Hero games . 
 = = Reception and sales = = 
 Games in the Guitar Hero series have been generally well received by critics . The initial games were highly praised by reviewers . Neversoft 's first entry to the series , Guitar Hero III , was considered to be too difficult , with many difficult songs presenting players with " walls of notes " ; the developers later acknowledged this . Subsequent efforts in Guitar Hero : Aerosmith and Guitar Hero World Tour were seen to have some improvements , with Guitar Hero : Metallica considered to be a well @-@ polished title and , at that time , the best Guitar Hero title Neversoft has produced . Guitar Hero 5 's improvements toward social gameplay were complemented by reviewers and considered a further improvement upon the series . Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , " best @-@ of " list , saying , " An addictive videogame provides the illusion of musical mastery for even the least gifted : . How do you get to Carnegie Hall ? Tap , tap , tap . " 
 Upon release , the first game was seen as an unexpected hit , earning over US $ 45 million with about 1 @.@ 5 million copies sold . Guitar Hero II was significantly more financially successful , with over 1 @.@ 3 million copies sold and sales over US $ 200 million . Guitar Hero III , according to Activision , was the first single video game to sell more than US $ 1 billion at retail , with nearly 3 @.@ 5 million copies sold during the first seven months of 2008 . World Tour continued the series ' high sales records with 3 @.@ 4 million units sold in the United States during 2008 . More than 60 million downloadable tracks have been purchased across the series as of February 2010 . Both Guitar Hero III and World Tour were listed on a March 2011 list from the NPD Group of top grossing games in unadjusted sales in the United States since 1995 ; Guitar Hero III tops the list with total sales of $ 830 @.@ 9 million . 
 Overall , the Guitar Hero series has sold more than 25 million units worldwide , earning US $ 2 billion at retail . Activision claimed the series to be the 3rd largest game franchise in 2009 after the Mario and Madden NFL franchises . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The Guitar Hero series has made a significant cultural impact , becoming a " cultural phenomenon " . The series has helped to rekindle music education in children , influenced changes in both the video game and music industry , has found use in health and treatment of recovering patients , and has become part of the popular culture vernacular . Several journalists , including 1UP.com , Wired , G4TV , the San Jose Mercury News , Inc . , The Guardian , and Advertising Age , considered Guitar Hero to be one of the most influential products of the first decade of the 21st century , attributing it as the spark leading to the growth of the rhythm game market , for boosting music sales for both new and old artists , for introducing more social gaming concepts to the video game market , and , in conjunction with the Wii , for improving interactivity with gaming consoles . 
 = = Legal and practical issues = = 
 = = = PlayStation 3 incompatibility = = = 
 Sony 's PlayStation 3 console has no compatibility with the PlayStation 2 Guitar Hero controller on the system . While Guitar Hero and Guitar Hero II are fully backward @-@ compatible through the hardware PlayStation 2 emulation in the initial North American release of the console , it was impossible at launch to use the guitar controller to play either game . Kai Huang , of RedOctane , states that they are " working on that with Sony right now – looking at how we can get all the PlayStation 2 guitars that are out there , and all the owners of them , to use them on the PlayStation 3 . " Nyko , an accessories company , was poised to make a special PlayStation 2 controller adapter for the PlayStation 3 , but put the product on hold due to technical difficulties . Tac , another accessories company , also made a PlayStation 2 controller adapter for a PlayStation 3 game console so players could use their Guitar Hero guitar controllers that were made for the PlayStation 2 with a PlayStation 3 . However , the May 2007 PlayStation 3 <unk> system update has made the guitar controller compatible with generic PlayStation 2 controller to USB adapters when playing Guitar Hero and Guitar Hero II . In addition , Pelican Accessories has released a special controller adapter that supports both games , including the ability to switch the handedness of the guitar . 
 = = = Patent litigation = = = 
 Gibson Guitar Corporation , whose guitar likenesses have appeared in the Guitar Hero series from the first game to Guitar Hero Aerosmith , informed Activision on January 7 , 2008 , that it believed the games infringe its U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 990 @,@ 405 . Gibson claimed that this covers technology that simulates a concert performance via pre @-@ recorded audio and a musical instrument . In response , Activision filed a suit seeking a declaration that it was not in violation of the Gibson patent ; Activision also asserted that Gibson had given an implied license by waiting to assert the patent and that the patent was invalid . On March 17 , 2008 , Gibson sued six retailers ( GameStop , Amazon.com , Wal @-@ Mart , Target , Toys " R " Us and Kmart ) for selling Guitar Hero products . Subsequently , on March 21 , 2008 , Gibson also filed a lawsuit against EA , MTV , and Harmonix over their game Rock Band also for violation of its patent , to which a Harmonix spokesperson stated that Gibson 's claims are " completely without merit " . Activision lawyer Mary Tuck stated in their legal filings that they believe that Gibson initiated the lawsuit due to the fact that " Activision was not [ interested ] in renewing the License and Marketing Support Agreement " with Gibson Guitars . In February 2009 , the United States District Court for the Central District of California ruled against Gibson in their case against Activision , stating that the controllers are not musical instruments but " toys that represent other items " , and that Gibson 's patent only covers instruments that send out analog signals . Activision and Gibson settled the suit following this ruling . 
 Activision , through John <unk> , owns all of <unk> Enterprises ' US and international patents that deal with music games . All patents issued by the USPTO are presumed valid . 
 In February 2010 , Activision was sued by the Patent Compliance Group ( PCG ) for releasing Guitar Hero products with false patent claims , with the PCG asserting that games like Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero were marked with up to 10 patents that are not used within the games along with several other improper patent pending claims . PCG claims that " Acts of false marketing deter innovation and stifle competition in the marketplace . " PCG 's qui tam lawsuit is seeking up to $ 500 per unit sold if Activision is found liable . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Many critics believed that the number of releases of Guitar Hero games was " milking " the brand name and <unk> the market . PaRappa the Rapper creator Masaya Matsuura stated that the video game market was growing stale and needed to move beyond games that simply challenge the player to mimic the playing of licensed music . Ryan Geddes of IGN stated that he " hit the wall with play @-@ along music games " , and challenged the game makers to explore other ways to combine music and video games . Analysts stated that such games must continue to innovate instead of just providing more songs in order to prevent " genre fatigue " . Jesse Divnich of Electronic Entertainment and Design Research commented that , much like Dance Dance Revolution , Guitar Hero and other music games explosively grew initially due to significant new features from other games but have become stagnant due to focusing on content over features , and suggested that for the genre to continue to grow , they must look to incremental changes as done with the first @-@ person shooter genre . Former CEO for RedOctane , Kelly Sumner , believed that Activision " abused " the series , as " they tried to get too much out of the franchise too quickly " . 
 The series has also been criticized for its release model in contrast to the Rock Band series , causing some players to hold contempt towards Activision . Harmonix considered the Rock Band series as a " music platform " , and supported it with downloadable content and the ability to import songs from its games and expansions into most other games of the series . Critics argued that Guitar Hero should have been doing the same , either through releasing expansions that could be incorporated into the main games of the series , or by issuing the songs as downloadable content . The release of Guitar Hero : Smash Hits , reworking older songs from the series to full four @-@ instrument band support but otherwise adding no additional material , was called " the definition of ' milking ' " by reviewers , with no observable technical limitation as to why the songs could not be added as downloadable content . Ars Technica recognized that licensing issues might have limited when songs from one single game could be played in others of the series ( such as the case for The Beatles : Rock Band ) , but that such cross @-@ compatibility should have been a high priority for rhythm games . Furthermore , some expansions were praised for the additional content beyond the note @-@ matching gameplay ; Guitar Hero : Metallica is considered to be one of the series ' best works to be developed by Neversoft in part due to the care that the developers took with imaging the band and the available extras for the game . Activision later revealed that both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero would support playing songs from both Guitar Hero World Tour ( both on @-@ disc and downloadable content ) and Guitar Hero Smash Hits , with music licensing being the only limiting factor on which songs could be made forward @-@ compatible . 
 The large number of Guitar Hero and Rock Band titles on the market is considered to be partially responsible for the sharp decline of music game sales in the latter half of 2009 , along with the effects of the late @-@ 2000s recession . The market for rhythm games was $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in 2008 , but dropped to $ 700 million in 2009 even though more titles were available that year . Former Neversoft project director Brian Bright noted that at one point in 2009 , they were responsible for the release of three games that year ( Guitar Hero 5 , Metallica , and Band Hero ) and supporting other studios for the development of two additional games , causing the studio to lose focus both in development and marketing efforts . According to Bright , sales of all the Guitar Hero games released in 2009 totaled the number of sales of the 2008 title World Tour , demonstrating the dilution of the marketing . Though Activision had originally planned on tripling the offerings of the Guitar Hero series in 2010 , the company readjusted their plans , reducing the number of offerings and focusing more on selling digital downloadable content for the series . Only two titles , Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock and DJ Hero 2 were released in 2010 , both scheduled for the " back half of 2010 " . Analysts believe that the market will evolve to support a smaller number of titles each year , averaging at a " healthy " value $ 500 – 600 million in revenues annually . Kotick believed that part of the downfall of Guitar Hero was due to Activision 's introduction of DJ Hero , which they gave too much focus and left the core Guitar Hero games without the " nourishment and care " needed to continue to innovate in the series . 
 Activision Publishing chief executive Mike Griffith , in response to questions about Activision 's approach to the Guitar Hero market , noted that Guitar Hero continues to outsell the Rock Band series in both number of sales and revenue , with consumers continuing to buy the separate games on the market , and considered the market acceptance of the multiple games as validation for their model . Regardless , after releasing 25 different SKUs ( between games and bundle packages ) in 2009 , Activision opted to reduce that number to 10 in 2010 , recognizing the music game genre was not as profitable as it once was . Activision later opted to put future development of the series on hold in early 2011 citing weak sales in the rhythm game genre , a move that many journalists attributed to Activision 's earlier oversaturation . 
 = = List of games = = 
 All games are published by Activision , except the first Guitar Hero and the PS2 version of Guitar Hero II , which were published by RedOctane . 
 = <unk> = 
 The fieldfare ( Turdus pilaris ) is a member of the thrush family Turdidae . It breeds in woodland and scrub in northern Europe and Asia . It is strongly migratory , with many northern birds moving south during the winter . It is a very rare breeder in the British Isles , but winters in large numbers in the United Kingdom , Southern Europe , North Africa and the Middle East . It is omnivorous , eating a wide range of molluscs , insects and earthworms in the summer , and berries , grain and seeds in the winter . 
 Fieldfares often nest in small colonies , possibly for protection from predators . The nest is built in a tree where five or six eggs are laid . The chicks are fed by both parents and leave the nest after a fortnight . There may be two broods in southern parts of the range but only one further north . Migrating birds and wintering birds often form large flocks , often in the company of Redwings . 
 The fieldfare is 25 cm ( 10 in ) long , with a grey crown , neck and rump , a plain brown back , dark wings and tail and white underwings . The breast and flanks are heavily spotted . The breast has a reddish wash and the rest of the underparts are white . The sexes are similar in appearance but the females are slightly more brown . The male has a simple chattering song and the birds have various guttural flight and alarm calls . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English common name fieldfare dates back to at least the eleventh century . The Anglo @-@ Saxon word <unk> perhaps meant traveller through the fields . 
 The species was described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae ( 1758 ) under its current scientific name . The name Turdus pilaris comes from two separate Latin words for thrush . No subspecies are recognised . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fieldfare is easily recognisable with its slate @-@ grey head , nape and rump , dark brown back , blackish tail and boldly speckled breast . In flight , its white under wing @-@ coverts and axillaries are conspicuous . The harsh flight call " tsak tsak " is also distinctive . 
 The forehead and crown of the male are bluish @-@ grey and each feather has a central brownish @-@ black band . The lores and under @-@ eye regions are black and there are faint , pale streaks above the eyes . The ear coverts , nape , hind neck and rump are bluish @-@ grey , usually with a white streak near the shaft of each rump feather . The scapulars and mantle feathers are dark chestnut @-@ brown with dark central streaks and pale tips . There are fourteen tail feathers each with a pointed tip , the outer two slightly shorter than the others giving a rounded tail . They are brownish @-@ black , with inconspicuous darker bars visible in some lights . The outer edge of each tail feather is fringed with grey near the base and the outer pair of feathers have a narrow white border on the inner edge . The chin , throat and upper breast are creamy @-@ buff with bold streaks and speckles of brownish @-@ black . The lower breast is creamy @-@ white with a diminishing buff tinge and fewer speckles and the belly is similarly creamy @-@ white , with the speckles restricted to the uppermost parts . The primaries are brownish @-@ black with the leading edge fringed grey and the inner edge of the outer feathers grey near the base whereas the inner feathers are fringed with brown near the base . The secondaries are similar but fringed with chestnut @-@ brown on the leading edge . The upper wing @-@ coverts are brownish @-@ black and similar to the outer primaries in their margin colouration . The axillaries and under wing @-@ coverts are white and the under tail @-@ coverts have dark greyish @-@ brown bases and margins and white centres and tips . The beak is strong , with a slight curve and a notch near the tip . It is orange @-@ yellow in winter , with the upper mandible somewhat brownish and both mandible tips brownish @-@ black . In the summer both mandibles of the male 's beak are yellow . The irises are dark brown and the legs and feet are brown . The average adult length is 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) , the <unk> is 14 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) and the tarsal length 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) . 
 The female is very similar to the male but the upper parts are somewhat more brownish and the feathers on the crown have narrower black central stripes . The throat and breast are paler with fewer , smaller markings . The beak is similar to the male 's winter beak . The juvenile are a duller colour than the adults with pale coloured streaks on the feathers that have dark streaks in the adult . The young assume their adult plumage after their first moult in the autumn . 
 The call is mostly uttered in flight and is a harsh " tsak tsak <unk> " . The same sound , but softer , is made more conversationally when individuals gather in trees . When angry or alarmed they emit various warning sounds reminiscent of the mistle thrush ( Turdus <unk> ) . The male has a rather feeble song that he sings in the breeding season . It is a mixture of a few phrases like those of the common blackbird ( Turdus merula ) interspersed with whistles , guttural squeaks and call notes . This is sung on the wing and also from a tree and a subdued version of this song with more warbling notes is sung by a group of birds at communal roosts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The fieldfare is a migratory species with a palearctic distribution . It breeds in northern Norway , northern Sweden , Finland , Belgium , Germany , Switzerland , Austria , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Poland and Siberia as far east as Transbaikal , the Aldan River and the Tian Shan Mountains in North West China . Its winter range extends through West and South Europe to North Africa , though it is uncommon in the Mediterranean region . Eastern populations migrate to Anatolia , Israel , Iran and Northwest India , and occasionally Northeast India . It is a vagrant to Iceland , Greenland , Spitsbergen , the Canary Islands , the Balearic Islands , Madeira , Corsica , Sardinia , Sicily , Malta and Cyprus . 
 In the summer the fieldfare frequents mixed woodland of birch , alder , pine , spruce and fir , often near marshes , moorland or other open ground . It does not avoid the vicinity of humans and can be seen in cultivated areas , orchards , parks and gardens . It also inhabits open tundra and the slopes of hills above the tree line . In the winter , groups of fieldfares are chiefly found in open country , agricultural land , orchards and open woodland . They are nomadic , wandering wherever there is an abundance of berries and insects . Later in the year they move on to pastureland and cultivated fields . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The flight of the fieldfare is slow and direct . It takes several strong beats then closes its wings briefly before flapping on . It is highly gregarious , quite shy and easily scared in the winter and bold and noisy in the breeding season . When a group is in a tree they all tend to face in the same direction , keeping up a constant chatter . When foraging on the ground , often in association with redwings , the group works its way up wind , each bird pausing every so often to stand erect and gaze around before resuming feeding . When alarmed they fly off down wind and the feeding group reforms elsewhere . In woodland they do not skulk in the undergrowth as do blackbirds or song thrushes , instead they perch in the open on bushes and high branches . They roost socially , sometimes in overgrown hedges and shrubberies but usually on the ground . Common sites are in rough grass among bushes or clumps of rushes , in young plantations , on stubble and in the furrows of ploughed fields . 
 Migration southwards from the breeding range starts in October but the bulk of birds arrive in the United Kingdom in November . Some of these are still on passage and carry on into continental Europe but others remain . The passage @-@ migrants return in April and they and the resident migrants depart from the United Kingdom mostly by early May . 
 The fieldfare is omnivorous . Animal food in the diet includes snails and slugs , earthworms , spiders and insects such as beetles and their larvae , flies and grasshoppers . When berries ripen in the autumn these are taken in great number . Hawthorn , holly , rowan , yew , juniper , dog rose , Cotoneaster , Pyracantha and Berberis are all relished . Later in the winter windfall apples are eaten , <unk> attacked in the field and grain and seeds eaten . When these are exhausted , or in particularly harsh weather , the birds may move to marshes or even the foreshore where molluscs are to be found . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 The breeding season starts in May in Poland but further north in Scandinavia may not start until early July . The female fieldfare builds a cup @-@ shaped nest with no attempt at concealment . The location is often in woodland but may be in a hedgerow , garden , among rocks , in a pile of logs , in a hut or on the ground . Fieldfares usually nest in close proximity to others of the same species . The adults will defend the nest aggressively and nesting gregariously may offer protection from predators . The nest is built of dried grasses and weeds with a few twigs and a little moss , with a lining of mud and an inner lining of fine grasses . There are usually five to six eggs in a clutch , but occasionally three , four , seven or eight eggs are laid . The eggs vary in size from 28 @.@ 8 by 20 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 13 in × 0 @.@ 82 in ) to 33 @.@ 5 by 23 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 32 in × 0 @.@ 92 in ) and are variable in colour . Many are pale blue speckled with fine brown dots and resemble those of the common blackbird . Others are bright blue , with or without larger red @-@ brown splotches . Incubation starts before all the eggs are laid and lasts for thirteen to fourteen days . The female does all or most of the incubation . The chicks are altricial and both parents bring food to them . They are usually ready to leave the nest after fourteen to sixteen days and there may be two broods in the season , especially in the southern parts of the breeding range . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The fieldfare has an extensive range , estimated at 10 million square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 8 million square miles ) , and a large population , including an estimated forty two to seventy two million individuals in Europe . There are thought to be up to twenty thousand individuals in Russia and the global population is estimated to be between forty four and ninety six million individuals . The population size appears to be stable and the bird is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criteria of the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as being of " Least Concern " . 
 In the United Kingdom , at the extreme edge of the fieldfare 's breeding range , only a handful of pairs breed . It is therefore classified by the RSPB as a Red List species as of January 2013 . 
 = Type 94 Nambu pistol = 
 The Type 94 Nambu 8 mm Pistol ( Type 94 Handgun , Japanese : <unk> <unk> @-@ Shiki <unk> ) is a semiautomatic pistol developed by <unk> Nambu and his associates for the Imperial Japanese Army . Development of the Type 94 pistol began in 1929 , and after several redesigns the final prototype was tested and officially adopted by the Japanese Army in late 1934 ( Japanese calendar , 2594 ) . The Type 94 pistol entered production in 1935 . Approximately 71 @,@ 000 pistols were manufactured before production ended in 1945 . 
 The Type 94 pistol was designed for , and popular among , Japanese tank and aircraft crews who preferred a smaller , lightweight design . Japanese weapons experts have subsequently criticized some design elements of the Type 94 ; in particular the pistol could be fired unintentionally before the breech was fully locked if the sear bar on the side of the receiver was jarred loose and the pistol was improperly handled . Additionally , the process to disassemble the pistol is overly complex and awkward . The build quality of the Type 94 pistol declined over its production run ; " last ditch " pistols made in 1945 were crudely manufactured . 
 = = History = = 
 The Type 94 Nambu pistol was designed by Kojiro Nambu after he retired from the Japanese Army and founded the Nambu Rifle Manufacturing Company . Design for the Type 94 Nambu pistol commenced in 1929 with the goal of reducing the bulk and price of previous Nambu designs . The Imperial Japanese Army felt a smaller pistol of domestic design that could accommodate the standard 8 × 22mm Nambu cartridge was needed to substitute the larger , heavier , and only official military pistol , the Type 14 Nambu . The demand for officer 's handguns had increased as a result of Japan 's invasion of Manchuria during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . A new design was also wanted by the Japanese Army to include a magazine safety , to prevent unintentional discharges during cleaning that were common among Japanese personnel . Naming of the Type 94 pistol reflects the change in Japanese nomenclature with the 94 reckoning back to the mythical foundation of Japan in 660 BC therefore year 2594 instead of the traditional emperor reign period used to name the Type 26 revolver or Type 14 Nambu pistol . The final prototype for the Type 94 was officially adopted by the Japanese Army in late 1934 after several redesigns . Production began under the supervision of the Nagoya Army Arsenal at the Nambu Rifle Manufacturing Company and later its successor , Chuo <unk> Company , Ltd . An estimated 71 @,@ 000 pistols were produced for the military but the exact quantity is unknown because of the production of <unk> pistols and undated pistols . During World War II the pistol became a preferred weapon for tank crews and paratroopers who required a smaller , more convenient pistol . The Type 94 was never officially adopted by the Imperial Japanese Navy but was available to officers through the Japanese officer 's union . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Type 94 pistol is operated by a different mechanism than previous Japanese sidearms . Unlike previously designed Nambu pistols , the Type 94 operates with a concealed hammer and with a firing pin rather than a hammer . According to authors , Harry L. Derby and James D. Brown , the firing pin is inherently weak and is prone to breakage because of a recess cut provided for the crossbolt and is prone to breaking at this point . The sturdier hammer firing mechanism was developed and included in the Type 94 to replace the poor striker on the Type 14 Nambu . The locking system is a rising @-@ block type which floats independently between the lugs underneath the chamber end of the barrel . The single coil mainspring is positioned around the barrel around the barrel instead of to the rear of the barrel as found on other Nambu pistols . The grip is smaller than other Japanese pistols and is finished with smooth wood but according to author Jeff <unk> , are more comfortable for use by men with smaller hands . The magazine holds a maximum of six rounds because of the smaller grip and it is considered difficult to reload the weapon , with pressure from the bolt holding it inside the pistol . The magazine catch protrudes far enough to occasionally disengage when the pistol is placed on its left side on a hard surface . The magazine could also disengage if squeezed into or jarred in a holster . The manual safety lever is located on the left rear of the frame and has the kanji for fire and safe stamped onto the frame . The front blade sight on the muzzle of the Type 94 pistol and the rear fixed V were occasionally inaccurately positioned making them useless when the weapon is being aimed . The rear sight was reduced from a U @-@ shape to a simple notch in 1944 with the front blade being left unchanged but less attention to detail being applied as World War II progressed . 
 = = = Final production = = = 
 The quality of Type 94 Nambu pistols decreased towards the end of World War II as the Japanese faced bombing raids from allied forces and material shortages increased . This drastic change in quality from late March 1945 , onwards with all quality standards appearing to disappear towards the end of June 1945 . The smooth wooden finished grip was replaced by a bakelite checkered pattern . Many pistols were not serialized and no pistols have been reported that bear July 1945 manufacture date . Only four <unk> and undated pistols are known to exist and include mismatch parts with no inspection marks , lanyard loops , and extractors . A small number of pistols made during the final production stages include earlier production dates and appear to have been salvaged from previously discarded pistols that had minor or cosmetic defects . 
 = = Disassembly = = 
 Disassembly of the Type 94 Nambu pistol is considered difficult and can lead to damage to the pistol if done carelessly . After clearing the Type 94 , the operator must draw the slide against the magazine follower to hold the bolt to the rear of the pistol . This will allow the crossbolt to be released after the firing pin is depressed . Removal of the crossbolt without depressing the firing pin will damage both the firing pin and the crossbolt . Removing the crossbolt is further complicated as the <unk> hands are both holding the pistol and depressing the firing pin . 
 = = Holster = = 
 Holsters for the Type 94 pistol were generally made from either pigskin or cowhide leather and ranged in color from tan to dark reddish brown . Holsters faced the same degradation in quality as the Type 94 pistol . As supplies of leather were exhausted in Japan , holsters manufactured in 1944 became fabricated from olive drab fabric . The Type 94 pistol holster is distinguishable from other Japanese holsters having a pointed closure flap and a vertically positioned magazine pouch . The pouch tow has a narrow extension to accommodate a cleaning rod . The majority of holsters were made in civilian owned tanneries with some ink stamped with arsenal and inspection marks . A belt loop and two shoulder strap " D " rings are provided on the rear of the holster and are made from brass , galvanized steel , or nickel plating . 
 = = <unk> firing = = 
 The poor design of the breech allowed the Type 94 Nambu to be fired unintentionally . The sear bar on the Type 94 Nambu converts the forward pull of the trigger into a lateral movement that frees the hammer . Because the sear bar is on the outside of the pistol , it could be jarred loose during engagement if the pistol was cocked and handled carelessly . The forward end of the sear bar would need to be depressed approximately 2mm to cause the weapon to fire . The ability to fire the Type 94 without pulling the trigger gave rise to war stories of Japanese soldiers surrendering , only to fire the pistol , earning the pistol monikers such as the " suicide special " and the " surrender pistol " . These stories are widely discredited because of the difficulty to fire the weapon by squeezing the sear bar . If the safety is engaged on the Type 94 it is impossible for the weapon to discharge unintentionally . 
 = Jifna = 
 Jifna ( Arabic : <unk> , <unk> ) is a Palestinian village in the Ramallah and al @-@ Bireh Governorate in the central West Bank , Palestine , located 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) north of Ramallah and 23 kilometers ( 14 mi ) north of Jerusalem . A village of about 1 @,@ 400 people , Jifna has retained a Christian majority since the 6th century CE . Its total land area consists of 6 @,@ 015 dunams , of which 420 are designated as built @-@ up areas , most of the remainder being covered with olive , fig and apricot groves . Jifna is governed by a village council , led ( 2008 ) by chairman <unk> Na 'im Kamil . 
 Jifna was known as <unk> ( In Hebrew <unk> ) at the time of the First Jewish @-@ Roman War , and after its conquest became a Roman regional capital . Later the town grew less significant politically , but nevertheless prospered under Byzantine and Arab rule due to its location on a trade route . St. George 's Church in Jifna was built in the 6th century CE , but fell into disrepair and was not rebuilt until the arrival of the Crusaders in the late 10th century . However , it again fell into ruin after the Crusaders were driven out by the Ayyubids . In modern times , the ruins of St. George 's Church have become a tourist attraction . During the period of Ottoman control in Palestine the tower of an ancient Roman structure in Jifna became the location of a jail house . 
 Jifna has local traditions and legends relating to the Holy Family , and to the village water @-@ spring . It is also locally known for its apricot harvest festival ; each year , during the late Spring period , hundreds travel to the village to harvest the fruit during its brief season . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Biblical era and Roman / Byzantine rule = = = 
 It was suggested by Edward Robinson that Jifna was <unk> of Benjamin , mentioned in the Book of Joshua as one of the " twelve cities . " Nothing thereafter is recorded in its history until the time of the Roman conquest during the 1st century BCE , when it appears in various records as " Gophna " . Gophna was described by Flavius Josephus as the second city of Judea , after Jerusalem , in his account of the First Jewish @-@ Roman Wars during the 1st century CE . The town is depicted as Gophna in the Map of Madaba , situated north of <unk> ( al @-@ Jib ) , and is also mentioned in the Talmud as Ben <unk> , a " city of priests " . The latter portion of its Talmudic name derives from the Hebrew root word <unk> , meaning " vine " . 
 Known by the Romans as <unk> , Jifna was a regional capital in the Iudaea Province under the Roman Empire . Around 50 BCE the Roman general Cassius sold the population into slavery , for failure to pay taxes . They were freed , however , by Mark Antony shortly after he came to power . Jifna was within the area under Hananiah 's command in 66 CE , during the First Jewish @-@ Roman War , and was the headquarters of one of the twelve <unk> ( minor realms ) of Judea . The Roman emperor Vespasian occupied the town in 68 CE , established an army garrison there , and concentrated within the city Jewish priests and other local notables who had surrendered to him . Titus , the future Roman emperor , passed through Gophna during his march to besiege Jerusalem in 70 CE . 
 The building of a church dedicated to Saint George during the 6th century CE indicates that by this time Jifna , now under Byzantine rule , had become a Christian town . Besides the church , other remains from this era are located in Jifna , including a Jewish tomb , a tower ( Burj Jifna ) once used by the Ottomans as a prison , a Roman villa , an olive oil press and a winery . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Jifna , along with most of Palestine , was annexed by the Rashidun Caliphate under Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab after the Battle of Ajnadayn in 634 . The town became less politically significant under the Arab dynasties of the Umayyads , Abbasids and Fatimids , but remained a major regional center for trade and commerce , due to its location along the Jerusalem – Nazareth road . It was known by the Arabs as <unk> . 
 Sources are vague , but it is likely that St. George 's Church fell into disrepair during the early decades of Islamic rule , and that unfavorable circumstances for the Christian population prevented them from rebuilding it . However , it was partially rebuilt with old materials by the Crusaders , who conquered the area in 1099 . The Crusaders built a large courtyard building in Jifna . It had a monumental gate with a portcullis , with a large vaulted hall and thick walls of fine masonry . After their defeat to the Ayyubids under Saladin in 1187 , the church again fell into ruin . A document dated 1182 with the signature of one <unk> de <unk> , might indicate a Christian presence at this time . According to the American biblical scholar Edward Robinson , there are remains of massive walls in the center of the village , now filled by houses . They were relics of a castle built by the Crusaders . However , the masonry has no characteristics of the Crusader period ; rather , the remains display the Arab architectural style of the post @-@ Crusader period , most likely of the 18th century , judging by the dressing of the stones . 
 = = = Ottoman era = = = 
 After the Crusaders were succeeded by the Ayyubids and then the Mamluks , the Ottoman Empire conquered Palestine in 1517 , and Jifna came under their control for the following 400 years . In 1596 it appeared in the tax registers under the name of " Jifna an @-@ <unk> " , being in the nahiya ( subdistrict ) of Jerusalem of the Jerusalem Sanjak , with a population of 21 households . The villagers paid a fixed tax @-@ rate of 33 @.@ 3 % on agricultural products , including wheat , barley , olive trees , vineyards , fruit trees , goats and beehives , in addition to occasional revenues ; a total of 6 @,@ 470 akçe . It was under the administration of the Bani Zeid subdistrict , part of the larger Jerusalem District , throughout Ottoman rule , being the only all @-@ Christian village in the district . During this period , the main commodity of Jifna was olive oil . Ottoman activity in the village was minimal , but they used the remains of Jifna 's castle , known as " Burj Jifna " , as a jail house sometime during the 19th century . In the early 1830s , Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt conquered most of the Levant , including Palestine . In 1834 there was a revolt against the Egyptian authorities in the Jifna area ; 26 residents of Jifna were subsequently exiled to Egypt for their alleged participation in the uprising . They were joined , voluntarily , by two prominent local priests . 
 An Eastern Orthodox Church was built in the village in 1858 , and a larger Latin ( Roman Catholic ) church dedicated to St. Joseph was built in 1859 , adjacent to the ruins of St. George 's Church . In the courtyard of St. George 's Church is a sarcophagus . St. George 's Church has continued to serve as a place of worship into the modern era and has been the site of archaeological excavation since the mid @-@ 19th century . Mass is still held at its altar on certain occasions . In 1882 the Palestine Exploration Fund 's Survey of Western Palestine described Jifna as an Important Christian village , with a Latin Church and a convent . Also in the 1880s , Jifna was frequently taxed by Ottoman authorities . It also came into consistent armed conflict with another Christian village , Bir Zeit , which in one incident , resulted in the deaths of five men from that village . In retaliation , residents of Bir Zeit uprooted and burned 125 of Jifna 's olive groves . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 In 1917 , during World War I , the Ottomans were defeated by British and Arab forces . After a brief period of military rule , Jifna and its region came under the control of the League of Nations British Mandate , in 1922 . In 1947 the United Nations proposed the partitioning of Palestine into separate Jewish and Arab states , with Jifna being a part of the projected Arab state . However , after the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War the whole West Bank region , including Jifna , was annexed by Transjordan to form the Kingdom of Jordan , and the Arab state was stillborn . In 1967 Israel occupied the West Bank , after their victory in the Six @-@ Day War . 
 After the 1995 Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip between the Palestinian National Authority ( PNA ) and Israel , Jifna was placed in " Area B " . Thus , its administrative and civil affairs were transferred to the PNA , while security matters remained in Israeli control . Throughout the ongoing Second Intifada , which began in 2000 , Jifna has not experienced violence to the same extent as other parts of the West Bank , such as in nearby Ramallah , but its residents face travel restrictions and economic hardship . 
 On 31 July 2015 a 15 @-@ year @-@ old resident was shot dead by an IDF sniper after allegedly throwing a firebomb at an army outpost . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Jifna is located on the slope of a hill , standing at an elevation of about 661 meters ( 2 @,@ 169 ft ) above sea level . It is situated at the intersection of two ancient trade routes , the mountainous north @-@ south route and the east @-@ west route connecting the Jordan Valley with the Mediterranean seacoast . In 1945 its land area consisted of 5 @,@ 939 dunams , 52 dunams of which were classified as built @-@ up area in 1945 . Today Jifna has a total jurisdiction over 6 @,@ 015 dunams , 420 of which are designated as built @-@ up and roughly 2 @,@ 000 planted with olive , apricot and other fruit trees . 
 The village is located 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) northwest of Ramallah and al @-@ Bireh and about 23 kilometers ( 14 mi ) north of Jerusalem . The Palestinian refugee camp of <unk> was built on Jifna 's southern lands and is connected to the village by road . The villages of Dura al @-@ <unk> ' and Ein <unk> are located adjacent to Jifna to the east and northeast respectively . Other nearby localities include Abu <unk> to the southwest , <unk> to the southeast , Ein <unk> to the east , ' Atara to the north and Bir Zeit to the northwest . Jifna is connected to the main Ramallah @-@ Nablus highway by a road at the eastern side of the village . 
 Jifna experiences a temperate Mediterranean climate . Based on data for nearby Ramallah , average monthly high temperatures range from 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) in January to 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) in July / August , the corresponding lows being 39 ° F ( 4 ° C ) and 63 ° F ( 17 ° C ) . Rain is usually restricted to the winter season , from around November until the end of April . The months that receive the most precipitation are January and December and the annual rainfall is 23 @.@ 2 inches ( 590 mm ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to Edward Robinson , Jifna 's population in 1838 consisted of about 200 people , of whom only 42 were adult males . In a 1945 land and population survey carried out by Sami Hadawi , Jifna had 910 inhabitants . The modern inhabitants of Jifna belong mainly to eight families , four of whom are originally from the village , while the other five have , at various times , migrated from other countries such as Syria . 
 In 1994 , Jifna experienced a wave of emigration , with about half of its population leaving the town to pursue better livelihoods elsewhere . The first census carried by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics ( PCBS ) shows that Jifna had a population of 961 , of whom 623 ( 64 @.@ 8 % ) were classified as refugees in 1997 . The gender distribution was 465 males ( 48 @.@ 4 % ) and 494 females ( 51 @.@ 6 % ) . The age distribution was : Under 15 , 330 ( 34 % ) ; 15 – 29 , 275 ( 29 % ) ; 30 – 65 , 304 ( 32 % ) ; Over 65 , 50 ( 5 % ) . 
 The population of Jifna continues to grow . According to the PCBS , Jifna 's mid @-@ year population estimate for 2006 was 1 @,@ 358 . An informal estimate from Autumn 2006 gives the population as 1 @,@ 500 , " 25 % of whom have had to move to Jerusalem or Ramallah to find jobs " . The 2007 census by the PCBS listed Jifna 's population as 1 @,@ 716 , of which 856 were males and 860 females . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The remains of the Byzantine @-@ era church in Jifna testifies to the existence of a Christian community prior to the Muslim conquest . It continued to exist during the Middle Ages and the village is still inhabited mainly by Christians . The names of Christian inhabitants from Jifna appeared in a 10th @-@ century inscription on a stone above the gate of St. George 's Monastery in the Wadi <unk> . 
 Ottoman tax records from the late 16th century reveal that Jifna had a Christian population at the time also . An informal survey in 1927 found 550 inhabitants , of whom 325 were Catholics and the remainder reportedly " Christians of other denominations " . Palestinian Christians make up about 80 % of the residents , while the remaining 20 % are Muslims , mostly refugees . 
 It is certain that most of the Christian residents of Jifna in the 12th century were local inhabitants . Apart from local Christians there was also a Frankish settlement , as is attested by the ruins of a maison forte ( manor ) built in the lower part of the village . In Jifna , like in many other sites in Palestine , the Crusaders built their settlement in the heart of the local Christian settlement . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Although most of Jifna 's cultivable land is covered with olive groves as well as fig , walnut and apricot trees and grape vines , agriculture is no longer the village 's main source of income . Many of the village 's former farmers are living off other businesses , including restaurants , other small family @-@ owned industries , and simple commerce . 
 Unlike some other West Bank localities , unemployment is a minor issue in Jifna . However , the average income is low because of the unstable political situation in the Palestinian territories , Israeli checkpoints , the West Bank barrier and the 2006 freezing by Israel of funds to the Palestinian territories — although the latter no longer applies to the West Bank . 
 According to the PCBS , 98 @.@ 5 % of Jifna 's 201 households are connected to electricity through a public network . The same percentage is connected to a sewage system , mostly through a cesspit . Pipe water is provided for 98 % of the households primarily through a public network ( 97 @.@ 5 % ) , but some residents receive water through a private system ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) . The village is home to the Jifna Women 's Charitable Society which offers health services and recreational activities for women and children . 
 = = = Small businesses = = = 
 There are three restaurants in Jifna : Al @-@ Burj Restaurant , Red Valley Restaurant and Garden , and Tabash Restaurant , as well as a hotel : al @-@ <unk> Pension . In 2003 , the <unk> family of Jifna opened a leisure complex — called the Dream Day Resort — in the village . The complex , containing a half @-@ Olympic @-@ size swimming pool , a children 's pool and a jacuzzi is frequented by residents in Jifna and the surrounding area . 
 Al @-@ Burj Restaurant — also known as " Burj Jifna " — specializes in Palestinian cuisine and contains a café and a Palestinian culture hall . Situated in the center of the village , the restaurant is the site of Jifna 's old city . With international funding , the local youth club restored the area , adding bright accents to the stone masonry . The restaurant has become a center of tourism and the complex provides tours for its rooms , olive oil presses and ancient ramparts . Tabash Restaurant was founded in 1962 by a Palestinian refugee family from Jaffa . Initially known as al @-@ Wadi Bar , it received its current name in 1972 . The owners and the employees of the restaurant are from the Tabash family . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 There are a number of local traditions in Jifna . A prominent legend among Jifna 's inhabitants is that the Holy Family rested near an oak tree in the town on their way from Jerusalem . The legend 's origins are due to Jifna 's location along the ancient Jerusalem @-@ Nazareth road . 
 A nearby mountain was named Jabal ad @-@ Dik ( " Mount of the Rooster " ) because of a traditional story . According to the tradition , a Jew that lived in Jifna had visited Jerusalem during the Passion . Seeing Jesus rise from the dead , the man immediately converted and told his wife what he saw . His wife refused to believe him unless the rooster she had just killed would come back to life . Instantly , the rooster flew away towards the mountain . The story was recited in some monasteries on Holy Thursday together with other biblical readings . 
 A legend exists about Jifna 's spring — which the village has used for centuries — concerning how it periodically runs low on water . Popular belief is that this is the work of the <unk> ( female spirit ) . According to Palestinian researcher Tawfiq Canaan , " In Jifna the priest has to go on such an occasions to the dry spring to repeat prayers and burn incense , and thus reconcile the <unk> or force her to let the water flow " . 
 Like many Palestinian villages , the women of Jifna have their own traditional dress . Costumes in the village , known as <unk> <unk> ( " Greek White " ) and <unk> <unk> ( " Greek Black " ) , were dresses of hand @-@ woven linen embroidered with the Jifna 's own motifs . Preparing <unk> , a sweet pudding @-@ like dish made from whole grain wheat , on the Feast of Saint Barbara has been a tradition in Jifna for several centuries . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 In April – May 2005 Jifna hosted the first annual International Artists ' Workshop in Palestine . The festival , known as the " Jifna Spring " was the first held in a rural village instead of a major city such as Hebron or Ramallah . During the festival , dozens of artists from all over the world collaborated on several projects , including stone sculptures , metalwork , photography , mural paintings and installation pieces . Many of the works were influenced by the " specificity and qualities " of Jifna , while others dealt with the subject of Palestinian identity . 
 Jifna , locally famous for its apricot harvest , hosts an annual two @-@ day apricot festival in the first week of May . Hundreds of West Bankers flock to participate in the harvest . The festival is also used by Palestinian politicians as an opportunity to give speeches praising Palestinian farmers and encouraging boycotts on Israeli products and reliance on domestic agriculture . 
 = = Government = = 
 Jifna is governed by a village council consisting of ten members including the chairman . The council was founded in 1954 , when a prominent resident , Nasri Ilias Samara , pressured the Jordanian authorities to recognize the institution , even though a village was normally required to have a population of at least 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants for permission to establish a village council . The decision was approved by Jordan 's then prime minister . Representatives from Jifna 's largest families formed the original council 's body , appointing <unk> as chairman and Salim Issa <unk> as vice chairman . <unk> Na 'im Kamil was elected as the chairman in 2005 and the <unk> ( Alternative ) list — which represents a leftist alliance of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the Palestinian People 's Party — won most of the council seats . 
 = = Education = = 
 Jifna contains one gender @-@ mixed primary school and kindergarten , founded by the Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem in 1856 and managed by Jifna 's Catholic church . The school 's staff comprises eight teachers and two nuns , as well as four teachers for the kindergarten . Students who have graduated from the school commute to Ramallah or Bir Zeit daily for their secondary and tertiary education . Most university students attend the nearby Bir Zeit University . 
 = Ha ' K 'in Xook = 
 Ha ' K 'in Xook ( Mayan pronunciation : [ <unk> k ’ in <unk> ] ) , also known as Ruler 6 , was an ajaw of Piedras Negras , an ancient Maya settlement in Guatemala . He ruled during the Late Classic Period , from 767 – 780 AD . Ha ' K 'in Xook was a son of Itzam K 'an Ahk II , and he ascended the throne upon the death of his brother , Yo 'nal Ahk III . Ha ' K 'in Xook 's reign seems to have ended either with his death or his abdication in favor of his brother K 'inich Yat Ahk II ; archaeologists and Mayanists have not come to a clear consensus on this . Ha ' K 'in Xook left behind several monuments , including stelae at Piedras Negras and a stone fragment from El Porvenir . In addition , a stone seat known as Throne 1 which was erected by K 'inich Yat Ahk II , records either the death or abdication of Ha ' K 'in Xook . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Reign of Piedras Negras = = = 
 Ha ' K 'in Xook , who has also been referred to as Ruler 6 , was likely the son of Itzam K 'an Ahk II , based on a translation of Stela 23 . According to both Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube , as well as Johnson , Ha ' K 'in Xook 's name translates to " Water Sun Shark " . Of note , his name does not feature a turtle glyph , a feature found in all the previous rulers of Piedras Negras , as well as his successor . He ascended the throne on February 14 , 767 AD ( 9 @.@ 16 @.@ 16 @.@ 0 @.@ 4 , 7 K 'an 17 Pop in the Long Count ) , following the death of his brother Yo 'nal Ahk III . Ha ' K 'in Xook 's kingship of Piedras Negras had originally been overlooked by Tatiana Proskouriakoff , who instead assigned the title Ruler 6 to a misidentified sajal — or Maya leader — of La Mar. 
 Not much is known about the rule of Ha ' K 'in Xook ; his reign , along with that of Yo 'nal Ahk III , has been referred to as " shadowy " by Flora Clancy , and James L. Fitzsimmons argues that Ha ' K 'in Xook seems to have been a weaker ruler when compared to the reign of Itzam K 'an Ahk II because Ha ' K 'in Xook erected few monuments , and he did not reinforce his power on a larger scale , choosing only to do so at local polities . The only notable recorded event that has been preserved during the life of Ha ' K 'in Xook is of an incident that took place at El Cayo , most likely related to the burial of a contemporary sajal . According to Zachary Nathan Nelson , the reign of Ha ' K 'in Xook seems to have been relatively free from war , as none of his extant stelae show representation of captives , and known records do not indicate any sort of " bellicose action " in the region during his reign . 
 = = = Death or abdication = = = 
 Ha ' K 'in Xook yielded the throne on March 24 , 780 AD ( 9 @.@ 17 @.@ 9 @.@ 5 @.@ 11 10 <unk> 19 Sip ) . The reason why his reign came to an end has been a topic of debate . Some believe that his reign ended with his abdication . Throne 1 , when translated , notes that he " abandoned / transferred rulership " , which American Mayanist Stephen D. Houston interprets to mean that he abdicated in favor of his brother , K 'inich Yat Ahk II . Mayanist David Stuart also noted that the wording on the throne " implies a more active event on the ruler 's part " , but that " ' lose ' might be more neutral as far as an interpretation goes . " 
 However , the exact phrase on the monument is <unk> <unk> , which is the same wording that was used when the " burden " of leadership passed from K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat , the k 'ul ahaw of Quiriguá , to his successor Sky Xul during his burial ten days after his demise in 785 AD . As such , this may suggest that , rather than abdicating , Ha ' K 'in Xook died in 780 AD , and his successor , K 'inich Yat Ahk II , took up rule later . The deciphered glyphs on Throne 1 note that K 'inich Yat Ahk II later " remembered " Ha ' K 'in Xook at the Paw Stone Place in some way , and that the new king may have possibly wept at the memory of Ha ' K 'in Xook , according to anthropologist Oswaldo Chinchilla Mazariegos . 
 Regardless , K 'inich Yat Ahk II took up the throne on May 31 , 781 AD ( 9 @.@ 17 @.@ 10 @.@ 9 @.@ 4 1 K 'an 7 <unk> 'in ) , almost a year following the end of Ha ' K 'in Xook 's reign . Despite this lengthy gap , there appears to be no evidence of anyone ruling Piedras Negras between the two kings . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 = = = Stelae = = = 
 Several stelae have been found that were erected by Ha ' K 'in Xook , including Stelae 13 , 18 , and 23 . Stela 13 would appear to be the earliest , showing the oldest dedicatory date assigned to Ha <unk> Xook , and it " captures the essence of the period @-@ ending celebration . " This 2 @.@ 39 @-@ metre ( 7 @.@ 8 ft ) tall stela retains stylistic elements of other niche stelae , but also shows a different form . It depicts the king scattering incense , similar to iconography found on Piedras Negras Stelae 2 and 32 . Clancy has argued that the stela contains iconography pertaining to three motifs : divination , " the quest " , and accession . Divination is shown via the act of Ha ' K 'in Xook scattering the incense . This motif had been introduced earlier in the iconography of Piedras Negras by K 'inich Yo 'nal Ahk II . The stela also features Ha ' K 'in Xook wearing a unique headdress ; it is depicted as being composed of three knots and forehead scrolls , a projecting Water Lily Jaguar , and a flexible rectangular emblem made from a jaguar pelt and a thick net . It has been postulated that this headdress was inspired by the headdress worn by an enthroned figure from the underworld featured on Stela 5 . Clancy argues that this headdress is a representation of " the royal theme of quest " , due to its iconographic similarity to other stelae at Piedras Negras . In addition , Stela 13 remains Ha ' K 'in Xook 's only extant image . 
 Not much remains of Stela 18 , and what is left is badly worn . However , archaeologist Sylvanus Morley claimed that it expressed a Calendar Round date of 6 <unk> 13 K <unk> ( corresponding to a Long Count date of 9 @.@ 17 @.@ 5 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 or Dec. 27 , 775 ) , which Martin and Grube note is within Ha ' K 'in Xook 's reign . Stela 23 is the king 's accession monument . Originally carved on all four faces , this stela is in poor condition because it tipped over and shattered . The largest portions remaining include the base , and remnants of a basal panel of glyphs that feature the feet of two individuals . Similar to Stela 18 , Martin and Grube argue that Stela 23 dates to the rulership of Ha ' K 'in Xook because the Calendar Round date on the monument is contemporary with the date found on Stela 13 . This stele details a <unk> <unk> <unk> ceremony for Ha ' K 'in Xook 's dead father , Itzam K 'an Ahk II , and , when translated , reads " Ruler 6 [ Ha ' K 'in Xook ] , child of Ruler 4 [ Itzam K 'an Ahk II ] … acceded to the rulership " , seemingly proving that Ha ' K 'in Xook was indeed the offspring of Itzam K 'an Ahk II . 
 All three of the stelae were discovered by Teoberto Maler in 1901 near one of the site 's main temple , the O @-@ 13 pyramid . Stela 13 was possibly erected on a terrace reached by the pyramid 's main stairway , and Stela 18 lies in a row on the plaza in front of the aforementioned stairway . Stela 23 , on the other hand , was erected at the very base of the pyramid . This pyramid was most likely the burial place for Itzam K 'an Ahk II , and — seeing as how Ha ' K 'in Xook , Yo 'nal Ahk III , and K 'inich Yat Ahk II all revered the site as a dynastic shrine — it is further evidence to back the argument that Ha ' K 'in Xook was the son of Itzam K 'an Ahk II . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 As mentioned before , Throne 1 details either the death or abdication of Ha ' K 'in Xook . However , it should be noted that the throne was not constructed by the king himself , but rather by his successor , K 'inich Yat Ahk II . The throne was later deliberately broken apart by Piedras Negras 's enemies , but has since been reconstructed . In addition to on @-@ site remains and relics , a fragment of stone found at El Porvenir and aptly called the " El Porvenir Fragment " was also discovered that bore the name of Ha ' K 'in Xook . 
 = Tommy Lawton = 
 Thomas " Tommy " Lawton ( 6 October 1919 – 6 November 1996 ) was an English football player and manager . A strong centre @-@ forward with excellent all @-@ round attacking skills , he was able to head with the ball with tremendous power and accuracy . Despite losing much of his best years to World War II , he scored 260 goals in 433 league and cup competitions in 14 full seasons in the Football League . 
 Born in Farnworth and raised in Bolton , he played amateur football at Rossendale United , before he turned professional at Burnley on his 17th birthday . He also played cricket for Burnley Cricket Club , before his potential as a footballer won him a £ 6 @,@ 500 move to Everton in January 1937 . He went on to finish as the First Division 's top @-@ scorer in 1937 – 38 and 1938 – 39 , helping Everton to finish as champions of the Football League in the latter campaign . League football was then suspended for seven full seasons due to the outbreak of war in Europe , during which time he scored 24 goals in 23 appearances for England whilst guesting for Everton and a number of other clubs . In November 1945 , he moved to Chelsea for £ 14 @,@ 000 , and scored a club record 26 goals in 34 league games in the 1946 – 47 season . 
 In November 1947 , he made a surprise move to Third Division South club Notts County for a British record transfer fee of £ 20 @,@ 000 . He helped the club to win promotion as champions in 1949 – 50 , before he moved on to Brentford in March 1952 for a club record £ 16 @,@ 000 . In January 1953 , Brentford appointed him player @-@ manager , though he would only remain in charge for nine months . He joined Arsenal as a player in November 1953 for £ 10 @,@ 000 , where he saw out the remainder of his playing career . He had a promising start to his managerial career by leading Kettering Town to the Southern League title in 1956 – 57 , but then only had two more seasons as manager , getting relegated with Notts County in 1957 – 58 and then relegated with Kettering Town in 1963 – 64 . During the 1970s he struggled with debt and related legal problems , which were reported in the media as an example of a celebrated person having fallen from grace . 
 He scored 22 goals in his 23 England appearances over a ten @-@ year international career from 1938 to 1948 , including four against Portugal in May 1947 . He helped England to win two British Home Championship titles outright ( 1946 – 47 and 1947 – 48 ) , and to share the Championship in 1938 – 39 . He fell out of international contention at the age of 28 due to his contempt for manager Walter Winterbottom , his decision to drop out of the First Division , and the emergence of Jackie Milburn and Nat Lofthouse . As well as his England caps , he also represented The Football League XI and played in a special Great Britain game against Europe in 1947 . He married twice , and had two children and one step @-@ child . His ashes are held in the National Football Museum , and he was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Lawton was born on 6 October 1919 to Elizabeth Riley and Thomas Lawton senior in Farnworth , Lancashire . His father was a rail @-@ road signalman of Irish extraction , and his mother worked as a weaver at <unk> Mill . His father left the family 18 months after Lawton was born , and Elizabeth moved back into her parents ' home in Bolton . Elizabeth 's father , James Hugh " Jim " Riley , became Lawton 's surrogate father . Lawton 's natural footballing ability earned him a place on the Bolton Town Schools team in 1930 . He was picked by Lancashire Schools at the age of 13 . Despite scoring a hat @-@ trick in a trial game for England Schoolboys , he never earned a full England Schoolboy cap . At the age of 14 he began playing for Hayes Athletic in the Bolton Senior League , and went on to score 570 goals in three seasons . The FA 's rules meant he was unable to turn professional at a club until he was 17 , and Lawton 's grandfather rejected Bolton Wanderers 's offer for Lawton to work as a delivery driver for two years before turning professional at the club . Lawton instead played as an amateur for Rossendale United in the Lancashire Combination , scoring a hat @-@ trick on his debut against Bacup . He took up temporary work at a tannery , and then joined Burnley as assistant groundsman after his mother rejected an offer from Sheffield Wednesday as she objected to him travelling to Sheffield on a daily basis . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Burnley = = = 
 Lawton played his first game for Burnley Reserves against Manchester City Reserves in September 1935 , and though he struggled in this game he went on to become a regular Reserve team player by the age of 16 . After a poor run of form from Cecil Smith , Lawton was selected ahead of Smith for the Second Division game against Doncaster Rovers at Turf Moor on 28 March 1936 ; aged 16 years and 174 days , this made him the youngest centre @-@ forward ever to play in the Football League . Rovers centre @-@ half Syd <unk> , also making his league debut , marked Lawton out of the game , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw . Burnley had played poorly , though Lawton was praised for his " keen and fearless " performance by the Express & News newspaper . He retained his place for the following game , and scored two goals in a 3 – 1 victory over Swansea Town at Vetch Field . He picked up a groin strain in his third appearance which caused him to miss two fixtures , before he returned to the first team for the final four games of the 1935 – 36 season ; he claimed three more goals to take his season tally to five goals from seven games . 
 Lawton continued to train his heading skills intensely in the summer of 1936 , and also played cricket for Burnley Cricket Club as a batsman in the Lancashire League . He scored a six against both Learie Constantine and Amar Singh . He scored 369 runs in 15 completed innings for an average of 24 @.@ 06 . 
 He turned professional at Burnley at the age of 17 on wages of £ 7 a week . His grandfather attempted to negotiate a £ 500 signing @-@ on fee on his behalf but was rebuffed after the club alerted Charles Sutcliffe , Secretary of the Football League , who informed them that any attempt to circumvent the league 's maximum wage was illegal . Lawton scored in his first appearance since signing the contract after just 30 seconds , before going on to record a hat @-@ trick in a 3 – 1 win over Tottenham Hotspur , scoring a goal with either foot and one with his head . 
 = = = Everton = = = 
 In January 1937 , First Division club Everton paid Burnley £ 6 @,@ 500 to secure Lawton 's services , and also gave his grandfather a job as deputy groundsman at Goodison Park ; the fee was a record for a player under 21 . The move to Everton made him a teammate of Dixie Dean , his boyhood idol , who he was expected to gradually replace as first choice centre @-@ forward . He later recalled that on his way to Goodison Park on his first day as an Everton player he was told by a tram conductor that " You 're that young Lawton , aren 't you ? You 'll never be as good as Dixie . " Dean was finally rested on 13 February , which allowed Lawton to make his first team debut against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux ; the match ended in a 6 – 2 defeat , though Lawton scored a penalty . He spent the rest of the season at inside @-@ left , with Dean at centre @-@ forward , and ended the 1936 – 37 campaign with four goals in 11 games . He started the 1937 – 38 season in the Reserves , but was installed as first choice centre @-@ forward in September after Dean was dropped for punching club secretary Theo Kelly . On 2 October , Lawton scored the winning penalty in a 2 – 1 victory over Merseyside derby rivals Liverpool at Anfield . He ended the campaign with 28 goals in 39 appearances to become the division 's top @-@ scorer . 
 Everton had a young but highly effective team for the 1938 – 39 campaign , and Lawton was praised for the way he led the attack , with the Evening Standard 's Roland Allen describing Lawton as a " clever footballer , bringing his wing men into the game with shrewd flicks and widely flung and accurate passes " after Everton recorded a 2 – 1 victory over Arsenal at Highbury . The game against Arsenal was part of a run of six wins in the first six games of the campaign , during which time Lawton scored eight goals . Everton lost their lead at the top of the table to Derby County over Christmas , but returned to form and to first position by Easter . They faced a difficult final run of games , but beat Chelsea and recorded two victories over Sunderland to secure the club 's fifth league title , finishing four points ahead of second @-@ place Wolverhampton Wanderers . Lawton scored 34 goals in 38 league games to finish as the division 's top @-@ scorer for the second successive season . However , in the summer he wrote to Leicester City to request that the club buy him from Everton ; it was reported that he reached out to Leicester as they were managed by Tom <unk> , his former Burnley manager . Everton were fifth in the league and Lawton was the division 's top @-@ scorer with four goals when league football was suspended three games into the 1939 – 40 season due to the outbreak of World War II . Lawton later remarked that " I 'm convinced that if it hadn 't been for the War , we 'd have won the Championship again , the average age of those players was about 24 or 25 " . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Lawton continued to play for both Everton and England during the war . However the FA decided to not award full caps for England appearances during the war , and as a result his 24 goals in 23 international games were not counted in statistics for the official England team . As was common for footballers during the war , he also made guest appearances for a number of clubs besides Everton , including Leicester City , Greenock Morton , Chester City , Aldershot , and Tranmere Rovers . He was called up to the British Army in January 1940 , and his status as an England international saw him recruited to the Royal Army Physical Training Corps . He also played for the British Army team and his Area Command team . He was posted in Birkenhead , which allowed him to frequently appear for Everton . On Christmas Day 1940 , he played for Everton against Liverpool at Anfield in the morning and for Tranmere Rovers at Crewe Alexandra in the afternoon . Explaining this later , he said , ' The Tranmere people came into the dressing room and asked if anyone wanted to play as they were two men short . I said , " Go on , I 'll help you out . " And I did . ' In 1942 he scored a hat @-@ trick for England in a 5 – 4 win over Scotland at Hampden Park . Later in the year he scored six goals for Aldershot in a 9 – 0 win over Luton Town . On 16 October 1943 , he scored four goals in an 8 – 0 victory over Scotland at Maine Road . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 In July 1945 , Lawton handed in a transfer request at Everton as he wanted a move to a Southern club so as to see more of his increasingly estranged wife . In November 1945 , he was sold to Chelsea for a fee of £ 14 @,@ 000 . Chelsea continued to play regional wartime fixtures as national league football had not resumed for the 1945 – 46 season , and Lawton also continued his uncapped appearances for the England national team . In the summer of 1946 , following his demobilisation , he coached for the FA in a summer camp in Switzerland . He scored a club record 26 goals in 34 league games in the 1946 – 47 season . However he struggled to settle at Stamford Bridge and came into conflict with manager Billy Birrell after refusing to go on a pre @-@ season tour of Sweden in 1947 , which resulted in him requesting a transfer . He favoured a move to Arsenal , but this was ruled out by the Chelsea hierarchy . Lawton turned down an approach by Sunderland manager Bill Murray as he held out hope that Chelsea would relent and allow him a move to Arsenal . 
 = = = Notts County = = = 
 In November 1947 , Lawton was sold to Notts County of the Third Division South for a British record transfer fee of £ 20 @,@ 000 . He made the surprise decision to drop down two divisions so as to be reunited with manager Arthur Stollery , his former masseur and friend at Chelsea , and because he was promised a job outside of football upon his retirement by vice @-@ chairman Harold Walmsley . Walmsley told the Nottingham Guardian Journal that " we are prepared to spend to the limit to put this old club back where it belongs " . He scored two goals on his home debut , a 4 – 2 win over Bristol Rovers in front of 38 @,@ 000 spectators at Meadow Lane – a massive increase on previous home games of typically 6 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 supporters . He ended the 1947 – 48 season with 24 goals in as many games , though was resented by the club 's directors after he insisted on pay rises for his teammates and stopped the practice of director 's friends and family travelling to away games on the team coach . 
 He formed a productive forward partnership with Jackie Sewell in the 1948 – 49 campaign , and scored 23 goals in 40 league and cup appearances . County finished in mid @-@ table despite scoring 102 goals , 15 more than champions Swansea . Stollery was sacked and upon Lawton 's suggestion the club appointed Eric Houghton as manager after Lawton turned down the role as player @-@ manager . Lawton and Sewell 's understanding grew throughout the 1949 – 50 campaign , and Lawton finished as the division 's top @-@ scorer with 31 goals in 37 league games as County won promotion as champions , seven points ahead of second @-@ placed Northampton Town . Promotion was secured with a 2 – 0 win over local rivals Nottingham Forest at Meadow Lane on 22 April . 
 However he struggled with poor form during the 1950 – 51 season as his first marriage was coming to an end and he came into increasing conflict with his teammates . He was angered when the club sold Jackie Sewell to Sheffield Wednesday in March 1951 – breaking Lawton 's own transfer record in the process – as he felt the move showed a lack of ambition from the club 's directors . He also found that the well paid job he was promised outside of football did not transpire . His tally of nine goals in 31 games in 1950 – 51 and 13 goals in 31 games in 1951 – 52 was disappointing , and he was made available for transfer . 
 = = = Brentford = = = 
 In March 1952 , Lawton joined Second Division side Brentford for a club record £ 16 @,@ 000 fee . Manager Jackie Gibbons left the club at the start of the 1952 – 53 season and was succeeded by his assistant Jimmy Bain , who proved ill @-@ suited to management , and so in January 1953 Lawton was appointed as player @-@ manager , with Bain as his assistant . However he lost the dressing room due to his excessive demands of the players , and the strains of management were having a negative impact on his form . Brentford also lost their best players having sold both Ron Greenwood and Jimmy Hill . He signed two veterans in former Notts County teammate Frank Broome and Ian McPherson to play on the wings , who , with Lawton , formed an attacking trio with a combined age of 104 . They got off to a poor start to the 1953 – 54 season , and Lawton resigned as manager after the Griffin Park crowd began to mock the forward line by singing Dear Old Pals . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 In November 1953 , Lawton was traded to First Division champions Arsenal for £ 7 @,@ 500 plus James Robertson ( valued at £ 2 @,@ 500 ) . He was signed by manager Tom Whittaker , who had previously found success in bringing in veterans such as Ronnie Rooke and Joe Mercer . However Lawton was limited to ten appearances in the 1953 – 54 campaign after picking up an injury on his debut . He also played in the 1953 Charity Shield , scoring one goal as Arsenal beat Blackpool 3 – 1 . He scored seven goals in 20 appearances throughout the 1954 – 55 season , including winning goals against Chelsea and Cardiff City . He scored a hat @-@ trick past Cardiff City on the opening day of the 1955 – 56 season , before he announced his decision to leave Arsenal to pursue a career in management eight games into the campaign . 
 " More than 20 years of soccer . What glorious years . Years that all the money in the world couldn 't buy . I have been lucky . I have played with great clubs ; I have escaped serious injury ; I have played for my country ; I have even captained my country ; I have won many of the game 's top honours . Soccer has been good to me and I hope that I have repaid the game in some small way . I have had great experiences . I have met some wonderful people . I have memories that nobody can take away from me . If I could turn the clock back 20 years , I would still go into the game as a full @-@ time professional and I can say to any lad who is contemplating a career in football : Go ahead son ... providing you are willing to work and work hard and providing you are willing to learn the craft thoroughly . You will meet some of the grandest fellows you could ever wish to meet and you will have a pleasant , healthy life and be quite well paid for it . 
 = = International career = = 
 Lawton was called up to play for The Football League XI against a League of Ireland XI at Windsor Park on 21 September 1938 , and scored four goals in what finished as an 8 – 2 win . A month later he went on to win his first cap for England on 22 October , England 's first game of the 1938 – 39 British Home Championship , a 4 – 2 defeat to Wales at Ninian Park , and converted a penalty kick to mark his first England appearance with a goal . This made him the youngest player to score on his England debut , a record which lasted until Marcus <unk> broke it in 2016 . Four days after Lawton 's debut , he scored again for England at Highbury in a 3 – 0 win over ' The Rest of Europe ' , a team of players selected from Italy , Germany , France , Belgium , Hungary and Norway . Later in the year he also scored in victories over Norway and Ireland . He played in all four games of 1939 , scoring against Scotland and Italy ; the goal against Scotland secured a 2 – 1 win in front of 149 @,@ 269 spectators at Hampden Park . 
 Newly appointed England manager Walter Winterbottom played Lawton in England 's first official match in seven years on 28 September 1946 , a 7 – 2 win over Ireland . He played the remaining three fixtures of 1946 , and scored four goals in a 8 – 2 victory over the Netherlands at Leeds Road on 27 November . On 10 May 1947 , he scored two goals playing for the Great Britain XI in a 6 – 1 victory over a Rest of Europe XI that was billed as the ' Match of the Century ' . Five days later he scored four goals in a 10 – 0 victory over Portugal at Lisbon 's Estádio Nacional . On 21 September , he scored after just 12 seconds in a 5 – 2 win over Belgium at Heysel Stadium . 
 He retained his place in the England team following his club move to Notts County , and in doing so became the first Third Division footballer to represent England when he scored from the penalty spot in a 4 – 2 win over Sweden on 19 November . However he only won three further caps in 1948 , his final appearance coming in a 0 – 0 draw with Denmark in Copenhagen on 26 September . He had become increasingly disillusioned with the England set @-@ up , and told <unk> that " if you think you can teach Stanley Matthews to play on the wing and me how to score goals , you 've got another think coming ! " <unk> was also frustrated by Lawton 's smoking habit , and preferred Jackie Milburn ahead of Lawton . Hopes of any future comeback were ended by the emergence of powerful centre @-@ forward Nat Lofthouse , who made his England debut in November 1950 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Lawton was widely regarded as the finest centre @-@ forward of his generation . He boasted a strong physique and good ball control skills , as well as a great passing range and a powerful shot . He was naturally right @-@ footed , though worked to improve his left foot to a good enough standard to be considered a two @-@ footed player . His greatest strength though was his ability to head the ball , as he possessed muscular legs to give himself a strong jump and long hang @-@ time , and was also able to time his jumps to perfection . Stanley Matthews surmised that " Quite simply , Tommy was the greatest header of the ball I ever saw . " Lawton was never booked throughout his career . 
 = = Coaching career and later life = = 
 An Arsenal director helped Lawton to find employment as player @-@ manager at Southern League side Kettering Town on wages of £ 1 @,@ 500 a year . He signed a number of players from Football League clubs , including Jim Standen ( Arsenal ) , Amos Moore ( Aston Villa ) , Jack Wheeler ( Huddersfield Town ) , Jack Goodwin ( Brentford ) , Bob Thomas ( Fulham ) , Norman Plummer ( Leicester City ) , Harry McDonald ( Crystal Palace ) and Geoff Toseland ( Sunderland ) . Kettering were ten points clear at the top of the table by Christmas . In January 1956 he turned down an approach from Notts County to return as manager . Kettering won the league title in 1956 – 57 , finishing eight points ahead of Bedford Town , with Lawton scoring 15 of Kettering 's 106 league goals . 
 He was appointed as Notts County manager in May 1957 , controversially replacing caretaker @-@ manager Frank Broome , who had steered the club away from the Second Division relegation zone ; Broome was installed as his assistant . He was unable to make new signings as he was unable to move on any of the club 's 33 playing staff . He did though take on forwards Jeff Astle and Tony Hateley as apprentices , who would both go on to have long careers in the First Division . Lawton agreed to go without his wages for six months so as to improve the club 's finances . County were relegated at the end of the 1957 – 58 season , finishing one point short of safety , and Lawton was sacked . He received a total of just three months pay for his time at the club , having only a verbal offer of a three @-@ year contract to fall back on , and nothing in writing . 
 After being sacked as Notts County manager , Lawton ran the Magna Charta public house in <unk> from October 1958 . An employee stole £ 2 @,@ 500 from the business and Lawton decided to leave the pub trade after four years . He then took up a job selling insurance . He returned to football management with Kettering Town for the 1963 – 64 season as a caretaker following the resignation of Wally Akers , but the season ended with Kettering being relegated from the Southern League Premier Division . He was offered the job on a permanent basis , but turned it down so as to concentrate on his job as an insurance salesman . He lost his job in insurance in 1967 , and then opened a sporting goods shop that bore his name after going into partnership with a friend , but was forced to close the business after just two months due to poor sales . After a period on unemployment benefits he found work at a betting company in Nottingham . 
 He returned to Notts County to work as a coach and chief scout from 1968 to 1970 . He was sacked after new manager Jimmy Sirrel decided to appoint his own backroom staff , and Lawton returned to unemployment . In May 1970 , he wrote to Chelsea chairman Richard Attenborough asking for a loan of £ 250 and for possible employment ; Attenborough lent him £ 100 . He was interviewed by Eamonn Andrews on ITV 's Today programme on his fall from England star to the unemployment line . After his financial troubles became public knowledge he was offered a lucrative job as director of his own subsidiary furniture company by a large furnishing company on Tottenham Court Road , however the company went into liquidation the following year . He continued to write cheques in the company 's name , and in June 1972 pleaded Guilty to seven charges of obtaining goods and cash by deception . He was sentenced to three years probation , and ordered to pay £ 240 compensation and £ 100 in costs . 
 In 1972 a testimonial match was organised by Everton on Lawton 's behalf to help him pay off his debts of around £ 6 @,@ 000 . However his financial situation was still bleak , and on two occasions he narrowly avoided a prison sentence for failing to pay his rates after an Arsenal supporters club and later an anonymous former co @-@ worker stepped in to pay the bill for him . In August 1974 , he was again found Guilty of obtaining goods by deception after failing to repay a £ 10 debt to a publican , and was sentenced to 200 hours of Community service and ordered to pay £ 40 costs . In 1984 he began writing a column for the Nottingham Evening Post . Brentford also organised a testimonial match for him in May 1985 . 
 Lawton 's health deteriorated in his old age and he died in November 1996 , aged 77 , as a result of pneumonia . His ashes were donated to the National Football Museum . He was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lawton married Rosaleen May Kavanagh in January 1941 ; the marriage bore one child , Amanda . Rosaleen never watched Lawton play football during their ten @-@ year marriage . Divorce was granted with a decree nisi in March 1951 after Rosaleen was found to have committed adultery with Notts County director Adrian Van Geffen ; Lawton never saw Amanda again and was not required to pay child support . He would not hear from his daughter until she was convicted of stealing from playwright George Axelrod in 1968 , by which time Rosaleen was on her fourth marriage and living in Jamaica . Lawton married second wife Gladys Rose in September 1952 , who bore him a son , Thomas Junior . Gladys was also divorced , and her ex @-@ husband cited Lawton as a co @-@ respondent in the divorce proceedings as the pair had begun their relationship whilst Gladys was still married ; her family were staunch Catholics , and Gladys was ostracised by her family following her divorce . Gladys had a daughter , Carol , from her previous marriage , who Lawton raised as his own . Thomas Junior went on to play rugby union for Leicester Tigers . 
 He starred alongside Thora Hird and Diana Dors in 1953 film The Great Game , playing himself in a cameo role . Throughout the 1950s he went on to appear on What 's My Line ? amongst other radio and television programmes . He published a total of four books : Tommy Lawton 's all star football book ( 1950 ) , Soccer the Lawton way ( 1954 ) , My Twenty Years of Soccer ( 1955 ) , and When the Cheering Stopped ( 1973 ) . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club playing statistics = = = 
 Sourced from Tommy Lawton profile at the English National Football Archive ( subscription required ) 
 = = = International playing statistics = = = 
 Sourced from Tommy Lawton profile at the England Football Online website 
 = = = Managerial statistics = = = 
 Sourced from Tommy Lawton profile at the English National Football Archive ( subscription required ) 
 Notes 
 Statistics at Kettering Town not recorded . 
 = = Honours = = 
 England 
 British Home Championship winner : 1938 – 39 ( shared ) , 1946 – 47 , 1947 – 48 
 Everton 
 Football League First Division champion : 1938 – 39 
 Notts County 
 Football League Third Division South champion : 1949 – 50 
 Arsenal 
 Charity Shield winner : 1953 
 Kettering Town 
 Southern Football League champion : 1956 – 57 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 = Trials and Tribble @-@ ations = 
 " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " is the 104th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , the sixth episode of the fifth season . It was written as a tribute to the original series of Star Trek , in the 30th anniversary year of the show ; sister series Voyager produced a similar episode , " Flashback " . The idea for the episode was suggested by René Echevarria , and Ronald D. Moore suggested the link to " The Trouble with Tribbles " . The pair were credited for their work on the teleplay , with the story credit going to Ira Steven Behr , Hans Beimler and Robert Hewitt Wolfe . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , Captain Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) and the crew travel back in time to prevent the assassination of Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) of the USS Enterprise by a Klingon using a booby @-@ trapped tribble . 
 Moore had originally suggested re @-@ visiting the planet seen in The Original Series episode " A Piece of the Action " but was convinced by Echevarria that the digitally inserted shots previously seen in Forrest Gump ( 1994 ) could be done on a small budget . After a test shot was completed , the rest of the production team were also convinced that it could be achieved . The budget was set at $ 3 million , with extensive work completed on matching the film techniques used during The Original Series . 
 Some original costumes were found for the Klingons while others were made from patterns created by Robert Blackman . Greg Jein created new models of the Enterprise as well as Deep Space Station K7 and the Klingon cruiser , while 1 @,@ 400 tribbles were purchased from a company owned by Majel Barrett . Charlie Brill returned to Star Trek to appear once more as Arne Darvin , and Deidre L. <unk> was cast in part due to her being friends with one of the production crew members . Walter Koenig , who portrayed Ensign Pavel Chekov in The Original Series , showed the Deep Space Nine cast how to work the consoles on the Enterprise sets . 
 " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was warmly received by critics with praise directed at the nostalgia and level of detail seen on screen . It was the most watched episode of the fifth season . " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was nominated in three Primetime Emmy Award categories and for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation but did not win any awards . It was released on VHS initially alongside " The Trouble with Tribbles " , and later as part of the normal release schedule . It was subsequently released as part of the season five DVD set . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On board Deep Space Nine , Captain Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) is being queried by Department of Temporal Investigations agents Dulmer ( Jack Blessing ) and Lucsly ( James W. Jansen ) . The Captain explains that he was on the USS Defiant , returning from Cardassian space with the Bajoran Orb of Time . They had picked up a hitchhiker on the way , a human called Barry Waddle . Suddenly the ship found itself some 200 light years away from its previous location and a hundred years in the past , near Deep Space Station K7 and found the USS Enterprise in orbit . They discover that the hitch @-@ hiker was Arne Darvin ( Charlie Brill ) , a Klingon agent who had previously been caught by Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) on K7 whilst trying to poison a shipment of grain . 
 Fearing that Darvin may be attempting to assassinate Kirk , the crew dress in period uniforms and investigate the Enterprise . They attempt to interact with history as little as possible whilst investigating Darvin . The crew does not initially recognize the Klingons of the time period , and when Worf ( Michael Dorn ) is asked about the difference in appearance , he replies that the matter is not discussed with outsiders ( this is further expanded on in the Star Trek : Enterprise episodes " Affliction " and " Divergence " ) . Doctor Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) and Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) get involved in a bar brawl between the Enterprise crew and a number of Klingons on shore leave . Captain Kirk disciplines them on the Enterprise alongside Chief Engineer Montgomery Scott ( James Doohan ) and Ensign Pavel Chekov ( Walter Koenig ) . Bashir and O 'Brien notice that the ship is covered with tribbles . Lieutenant Commander Worf ( Michael Dorn ) and Odo ( René Auberjonois ) trail Darvin as he returns to the Defiant . There , Darvin admits that he planted a bomb in a tribble to kill Kirk . 
 Sisko and Lieutenant Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) board the Enterprise but can find no trace of a bomb . They travel to K7 , and scans indicate that the bomb is in the grain storage compartments . They enter the compartments and discover that the poisoned grain has all been eaten by tribbles , who are now all dead . Suddenly Captain Kirk opens the compartment and is covered in falling tribbles . Dax and Sisko find the bomb before it can kill Kirk and the Defiant transports it into space where it explodes . The crew of the Defiant use the Bajoran Orb to travel back to the present time , and Sisko finishes explaining the situation to the Temporal Agents . The episode ends with Quark ( Armin Shimerman ) in his bar on Deep Space Nine 's promenade , with numerous tribbles around him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Premise and writing = = = 
 As the 30th anniversary of Star Trek was approaching , a number of plans were being put into place . The film Star Trek : First Contact was entering production , a television special was planned to celebrate the franchise and George Takei had been cast to appear in the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Flashback " . Producer Ira Steven Behr later recalled that he thought that Deep Space Nine might end up being missed out as he considered it to be the " middle child " of the franchise . However , Rick Berman contacted Behr and asked him if he would be interested in doing something to celebrate the anniversary . Behr agreed to discuss it with the staff writers . Initially , there was concern that if the proposed episode aired during the actual anniversary week ( around September 8 ) , that it would have to serve as the season opener , pre @-@ empting the already planned opener . 
 The writers discussed potential ideas . Ronald D. Moore had previously brought back Montgomery Scott for the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " Relics " and since Takei was appearing in Voyager , they felt that having a member of the main cast from The Original Series return would be repetitive . Some consideration was given by Moore to sending the DS9 crew to the gangster @-@ type planet visited by Kirk in the episode " A Piece of the Action " . It was René Echevarria who suggested a time @-@ travel episode , which was seen as an expensive proposition . Echevarria , however , pressed for the idea . Moore suggested inserting the DS9 crew into " The Trouble with Tribbles " , suggesting it could resolve the question of why a constant stream of tribbles kept hitting Kirk in the head . 
 When the discussion came to inserting the DS9 crew into the bar @-@ brawl scene , Berman liked the idea but was unsure if it could actually be done . Visual effects supervisor Gary Hutzel created test footage and screened it for Behr and Moore , who thought that it was simply footage from the original episode . Once Hutzel revealed that an additional security officer had been seamlessly added to the sequence , the episode was green @-@ lit . During the scripting process , " The Trouble with Tribbles " was regularly consulted , so the writers could decide where to insert characters . The Temporal Agents , Dulmer and Lucsly , were so named as they were anagrams of Mulder and Scully from The X @-@ Files . 
 Original " Tribbles " creator David Gerrold was contacted by The New York Times , who wanted to interview him about the anniversary and the rumored " tribbles " episode . When he questioned Berman about the episode , Berman initially denied it . Gerrold responded that he didn 't want to embarrass anyone , but would like to be able to endorse the project . Berman asked what the endorsement would cost , to which Gerrold requested public acknowledgement of his work and to be cast as an extra in the episode . Berman agreed . Gerrold compared inserting new footage into an existing episode to Back to the Future Part II ( 1989 ) and later said that he would have gone in a different direction had he written the story . Nonetheless , he felt the final product ended up being better than anything he would have created . 
 = = = Directing , cinematography and music = = = 
 A number of directors were considered for the episode , with Jonathan West being given the job . West had previously been the cinematographer on staff for both Deep Space Nine and The Next Generation , as well as directing several episodes of the franchise . He had nine days of preparation time before shooting began . He sought to match the same production values as The Original Series but found that lighting style and color saturation to film had changed in the intervening years . Visual effects supervisor Dan Curry directed some of the second @-@ unit sequences , and together with West and cinematographer Kris <unk> worked to rectify these issues . This was achieved by switching to a finer grain of film , by utilizing different lenses as well as by shooting from specific angles . With Gerrold on set as an extra , West used him as an unofficial advisor on matching the scenes from " The Trouble with Tribbles " . 
 The actual digital insertion of actors was conducted in the same manner as seen in the film Forrest Gump ( 1994 ) . The original footage was remastered , and was seen as such an improvement that it inspired the subsequent clean @-@ up and re @-@ release of all of " Original Series " episodes . This remaster was conducted by Hutzel and was the first transfer since 1983 , when a version was created for VHS and laser disc release . Hutzel identified 19 scenes from " The Trouble with Tribbles " which were matched in " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " . The scene matching between the new footage and the old took nine weeks to complete with a budget of $ 3 million . It involved both two @-@ dimensional and three @-@ dimensional tracking shots as well as insertion of matte shots and the use of both blue and green screens for the actors . Not all shots seen in the episode were actually taken from " The Trouble with Tribbles " . The scene where Sisko meets Kirk on the bridge towards the end of the episode was instead taken from the episode " Mirror , Mirror " . 
 Due in part to the special effects , the costuming , the set re @-@ constructions and the residual payments to The Original Series cast , Behr later described " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " as " probably the most expensive hour of episodic TV ever produced " . The only member of The Original Series cast who was spoken to directly by the producers was Leonard Nimoy , who was enthusiastic about the idea and was surprised that it had taken them so long to come up with the idea . The remaining cast members were each contacted through Paramount 's legal department . Dennis McCarthy wanted to re @-@ work the Jerry Fielding score previously used on " The Trouble with Tribbles " . He said that he intended to use the production equipment and orchestra available to bring the score up to the same scale previously seen on Deep Space Nine . However , the producers wanted a new score and so McCarthy explained that he composed it in a Fielding @-@ inspired mindset . The only piece that was directly re @-@ recorded by McCarthy was the Alexander Courage " Theme from Star Trek " , which involved a 45 piece orchestra . 
 = = = Design and makeup = = = 
 Art director Randy <unk> led the set re @-@ creation for the Enterprise and K7 , describing the excitement over working on the episode as " contagious " . <unk> spent a fair amount of time getting the window angles correct on the sets . Mike Okuda re @-@ created the graphics seen on the Enterprise sets using a computer , whilst others were re @-@ drawn by artist Doug Drexler . Some sets were not re @-@ created in full , such as the bridge , which required parts of it to be later added digitally . The captain 's chair from the bridge re @-@ creation was later one of the Star Trek items to be auctioned by Christie 's . Set designer Laura <unk> watched " The Trouble with Tribbles " carefully looking for small details to replicate on the new sets , such as the legs of benches in the bar on K7 . However , she said her biggest challenge was tracking down the chairs seen on the space station . She contacted John M. Dwyer , who had worked on the original episode . He explained to her that the company which created the original chairs had gone out of business . After searching shops selling retro furniture , the production team found a single chair that matched those seen in the original episode . It was purchased and a mold was made to create more chairs . The actors were impressed when they saw the resulting sets , with Terry Farrell exclaiming " Wow , we 're on the Enterprise ! " 
 Greg Jein had already been working on a new model of the USS Excelsior for the " Flashback " episode of Voyager when he saw the test footage for " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " . He promised to make a new model of the Enterprise too , but warned that he didn 't know when he would have time to do it . He actually started work on it immediately , and together with his colleagues he not only built a 5 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) long model of the Enterprise , but created a new model of Deep Space Station K7 and the Klingon cruiser as well . The Enterprise model was the first to be built of the original Star Trek starship in more than 30 years . Other props were also recreated , with around 1 @,@ 400 tribbles created for the various scenes . They were purchased from Lincoln Enterprises , a company set up by Majel Barrett , widow of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry . The rest of the era @-@ specific props were newly created , and were made by Steve <unk> . 
 Costume designer Robert Blackman was concerned over the re @-@ creation of the Klingon uniforms seen in The Original Series as he thought that the metallic material used would be nearly impossible to create accurately . He was subsequently relieved to have found four original costumes and an additional shirt in the costume archives , calling them a " godsend " . His team created patterns from other costumes to remake them . Make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore had previously worked on a television series during the 1960s and recalled what type of make @-@ up was available at the time . He had the team restrict themselves to techniques of that era to ensure that the DS9 crew blended properly into the scenes . The hairstyles of the crew were also meant to be reminiscent of The Original Series , with Alexander Siddig sporting a style previously seen on James Doohan . René Auberjonois said that his new hairstyle reminded him of Jerry Lee Lewis . 
 = = = Filming and casting = = = 
 The cast and crew were enthusiastic on set , with editor Steve Tucker calling it a " giddy party " . Behr said of the cast and crew in the episode that " They all were having fun . Just sitting on those sets , being on that bridge , it was a hoot , a real hoot . " Deidre L. <unk> was brought in at the last minute to play Lt. Watley , as she was a friend of one of the production crew and had previously appeared as a <unk> pleasure girl in The Next Generation episode " Captain 's Holiday " . She was brought in because none of the actresses the producers had seen during the casting process could say the role 's one line ( " Deck 15 " ) convincingly enough . Her involvement led to the role 's being expanded into a second scene where she was revealed to be Bashir 's great @-@ grandmother . 
 Charlie Brill returned to film new scenes as Klingon agent Arne Darvin , while original series writer Gerrold was allowed to appear as an extra in two scenes as a crewman from the Enterprise . In one of those scenes he was holding an original tribble from " The Trouble with Tribbles " . Walter Koenig was on hand as well during the filming of the episode to teach the DS9 actors how the consoles were operated on the Enterprise . Koenig later commented that he was paid eight times as much for this and the residual payment as he had been for the original episode . A string of other visitors came to the set during filming , including Majel Barrett and former The Next Generation producer ( and TOS co @-@ producer ) Bob Justman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Before the episode was shown , a half @-@ hour special was shown on the Sci Fi Channel about the making of " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " on November 2 , 1996 . Paramount also promoted the episode by arranging the placement of around 250 @,@ 000 tribbles in subways and buses across the United States . It received Nielsen ratings of 7 @.@ 7 % , placing it in sixth place in the timeslot . This meant that it had been watched by 7 @.@ 7 % of all households . It was the most watched episode of the fifth season during its initial broadcast . The last time the series had received similar ratings was nearly a year earlier with season four 's " Little Green Men " . 
 Two reviewers watched the episode for Tor.com. Torie Atkinson described " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " as a " perfect episode " , and " one of the best Star Trek episodes ever made , in any series . " She praised the humour and the references , and found Dax in her role as a stand @-@ in for fans of The Original Series . She gave the episode a score of six out of six . Eugene Myers wasn 't disappointed following the hype about the episode , saying that it was " steeped in nostalgia " . He thought that the bomb @-@ in @-@ a @-@ tribble plot was ingenious and allowed the episode to step outside of merely being good due to the success of " The Trouble with Tribbles " . His favourite scene was the constant stream of tribbles hitting Kirk in the head because Sisko and Dax were throwing them out of the grain compartment while looking for the bomb . He also gave the episode a score of six out of six . 
 Zack Handlen in his review for The A.V. Club , called the episode a " delight " and a " lark " . He thought that having Brill film new scenes showed some continuity between the old and the new , and thought that the special effects worked well enough . He summed it up by saying , " It 's not tightly plotted , and once the initial rush of nostalgia fades , there isn 't a lot of depth or suspense to replace it . But there are laughs , more than enough to justify the experiment , and the nostalgia never fades away entirely . " In the book Deep Space and Sacred Time : Star Trek in the American Mythos , Jon Wagner and Jan <unk> compared the temporal agents seen in " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " to the police detectives seen in the television series Dragnet . Gem Wheeler , in her list of the best episodes of Deep Space Nine for website Den of Geek , listed " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " as the sixth best . In a list of the top 100 episodes of the Star Trek franchise , " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was placed in 32nd place by Charlie Jane Anders at io9 . 
 " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was nominated for three Creative Arts Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Art Direction for a Series , Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series and Outstanding Special Visual Effects . However , it was not successful in any of those categories . It was also nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , as " The Trouble with Tribbles " had been in 1968 . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The tie @-@ in novelization of " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was written by Diane Carey and published by Pocket Books . In 1998 , a " Talking Tribble Gift Set " was released which contained both " The Trouble with Tribbles " and " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " on VHS . " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was first released in the normal run of VHS issues as part of a two episode cassette alongside " The Assignment " in the United Kingdom on October 1 , 1999 . A single episode release followed in the United States and Canada on July 10 , 2001 . It was released on DVD as part of the season five box set on October 7 , 2003 . 
 = Tintin in the Congo = 
 Tintin in the Congo ( French : Tintin au Congo ; French pronunciation : ​ [ tɛ ̃ <unk> o kɔ ̃ go ] ) is the second volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . Commissioned by the conservative Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle for its children 's supplement Le Petit Vingtième , it was serialised weekly from May 1930 to June 1931 before being published in a collected volume by Éditions de Petit Vingtième in 1931 . The story tells of young Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy , who are sent to the Belgian Congo to report on events in the country . Amid various encounters with the native Congolese people and wild animals , Tintin unearths a criminal diamond smuggling operation run by the American gangster Al Capone . 
 Following on from Tintin in the Land of the Soviets and bolstered by publicity stunts , Tintin in the Congo was a commercial success within Belgium and was also serialised in France . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Tintin in America in 1932 , and the series subsequently became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . In 1946 , Hergé re @-@ drew and coloured Tintin in the Congo in his distinctive ligne @-@ claire style for republication by Casterman , with further alterations made at the request of his Scandinavian publisher for a 1975 edition . In the late 20th century , Tintin in the Congo came under criticism for both its perceived racist colonial attitude toward the Congolese and for its glorification of big @-@ game hunting ; accordingly , attempts were made in Belgium , Sweden , the United Kingdom , and the United States to either ban the work or restrict its availability to children . Critical reception of the work has been largely negative , with commentators on The Adventures of Tintin describing it as one of Hergé 's weakest works . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy travel to the Belgian Congo , where a cheering crowd of native Congolese greet them . Tintin hires a native boy , Coco , to assist him in his travels , and shortly after , Tintin rescues Snowy from a crocodile . A criminal stowaway attempts to kill Tintin , but monkeys throw coconuts at the stowaway that knock him unconscious . A monkey kidnaps Snowy , but Tintin saves him . 
 The next morning , Tintin , Snowy , and Coco crash their car into a train , which the reporter fixes and tows to the village of the Babaorum tribe . He meets the king , who accompanies him on a hunt the next day . A lion knocks Tintin unconscious , but Snowy rescues him by biting off its tail . Tintin gains the admiration of the natives , making the Babaorum witch @-@ doctor Muganga jealous . When he cures a man using quinine , he is hailed as a <unk> <unk> ( " Breaker of rocks " ) . With the help of the criminal stowaway , Muganga accuses Tintin of destroying the tribe 's sacred idol . The enraged villagers imprison Tintin , but then turn against Muganga when Coco shows them footage Tintin had made of the witch @-@ doctor and the stowaway conspiring to destroy the idol . Tintin becomes a hero in the village , and a local woman bows down to him , saying , " White man very great ! Has good spirits ... White mister is big juju man ! " 
 Angered , Muganga starts a war between the Babaorum and their neighbours , the M <unk> , whose king leads an attack on the Babaorum village . Tintin outwits them , and the M <unk> cease hostilities and come to idolise Tintin . Muganga and the stowaway plot to kill Tintin and make it look like a leopard attack , but Tintin survives and saves Muganga from a boa constrictor ; Muganga pleads mercy and ends his hostilities . The stowaway attempts to capture Tintin again and eventually succeeds disguised as a Catholic missionary . They fight across a waterfall , and the stowaway is eaten by crocodiles . After reading a letter from the stowaway 's pocket , Tintin finds that someone called " A.C. " has ordered his elimination . Tintin captures a criminal who tried to rendezvous with the stowaway and learns that " A.C. " is the American gangster Al Capone , who is trying to gain control of African diamond production . Tintin and the colonial police arrest the rest of the diamond smuggling gang and Tintin and Snowy return to Belgium . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Georges Remi — best known under the pen name Hergé — was employed as editor and illustrator of Le Petit Vingtième ( " The Little Twentieth " ) , a children 's supplement to Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , a staunchly Roman Catholic , conservative Belgian newspaper based in Hergé 's native Brussels . Run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez , the paper described itself as a " Catholic Newspaper for Doctrine and Information " and disseminated a far @-@ right , fascist viewpoint . According to Harry Thompson , such political ideas were common in Belgium at the time , and Hergé 's milieu was permeated with conservative ideas revolving around " patriotism , Catholicism , strict morality , discipline , and naivety " . 
 In 1929 , Hergé began The Adventures of Tintin comic strip for Le Petit Vingtième , a series about the exploits of a fictional Belgian reporter named Tintin . Following the success of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , serialised weekly in Le Petit Vingtième from January 1929 to May 1930 , Hergé wanted to send Tintin to the United States . Wallez insisted he write a story set in the Belgian Congo , then a Belgian colony and today the Democratic Republic of the Congo . Belgian children learned about the Congo in school , and Wallez hoped to encourage colonialist and missionary zeal in his readership . He believed that the Belgian colonial administration needed promotion at a time when memories " were still fairly fresh " of the 1928 visit to the colony by the Belgian King Albert and Queen Elisabeth . He also hoped that some of his readers would be inspired to work in the Congo . 
 Hergé characterised Wallez 's instructions in a sarcastic manner , saying Wallez referred to the Congo as " our beautiful colony which has great need of us , <unk> , <unk> " . He already had some experience in illustrating Congolese scenes ; three years previously , Hergé had provided two illustrations for the newspaper that appeared in an article celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of Henry Morton Stanley 's expedition to the Congo . In one of these , Hergé depicted a native Congolese bowing before a European , a scene that he repeated in Tintin in the Congo . 
 As in Land of the Soviets , where Hergé had based his information about the Soviet Union almost entirely on a single source , in Tintin in the Congo he used limited source material to learn about the country and its people . He based the story largely on literature written by missionaries , with the only added element being that of the diamond smugglers , possibly adopted from the " Jungle Jim @-@ type serials " . Hergé visited the Colonial Museum of Tervuren , examining their ethnographic collections of Congolese artefacts , including costumes of the Leopard Men . He adopted hunting scenes from André Maurois 's novel The Silence of Colonel Bramble , while his animal drawings were inspired by Benjamin <unk> 's prints . He also listened to tales of the colony from some of his colleagues who had been there , but disliked their stories , later claiming : " I didn 't like the colonists , who came back bragging about their exploits . But I couldn 't prevent myself from seeing the Blacks as big children , either . " 
 = = = Original publication , 1930 – 31 = = = 
 Tintin in the Congo was serialised under the French title of Tintin au Congo in Le Petit Vingtième from 5 May 1930 to 11 June 1931 ; it was syndicated to the French Catholic newspaper Cœurs Vaillants . Drawn in black and white , it followed the same formula employed in Land of the Soviets , remaining " essentially plotless " according to Michael Farr , and consisting of largely unrelated events that Hergé improvised each week . Hergé later commented on the process of writing these early adventures , stating , " The Petit Vingtième came out on Wednesday evening , and I often didn 't have a clue on Wednesday morning how I was going to get Tintin out of the predicament I had put him in the previous week . " The strip 's visual style was similar to that of Land of the Soviets . In the first instalment of Tintin in the Congo , Hergé featured Quick and Flupke , two young boys from Brussels whom he had recently introduced in another Le Petit Vingtième comic strip , in the crowd of people saying goodbye to Tintin . 
 Like Land of the Soviets , Tintin in the Congo was popular in Belgium . On the afternoon of 9 July 1931 , Wallez repeated the publicity stunt he had used when Soviets ended by having a young actor , Henry de <unk> , dress up as Tintin in colonial gear and appear in Brussels and then Liège , accompanied by 10 African bearers and an assortment of exotic animals hired from a zoo . Co @-@ organised with the Bon Marché department store , the event attracted 5 @,@ 000 spectators in Brussels . In 1931 , Brussels @-@ based Éditions de Petit Vingtième collected the story together into a single volume , and Casterman published a second edition in 1937 . By 1944 the book had been reprinted seven times , and had outsold each of the other seven books in the series . The series ' success led Wallez to renegotiate Hergé 's contract , giving him a higher salary and the right to work from home . 
 = = = Second version , 1946 = = = 
 In the 1940s , after Hergé 's popularity increased , he redrew many of the original black @-@ and @-@ white Tintin stories in colour using the ligne claire ( " clear line " ) drawing style he had developed , so that they fitted in visually with the newer Adventures of Tintin that he had produced . Hergé first made some changes in this direction in 1940 , when the story was serialised in the Flemish @-@ language Het <unk> Nieuws . 
 At Casterman 's prompting , Tintin in the Congo was subsequently fully re @-@ drawn , and the new version was published in 1946 . As a part of this modification , Hergé cut the page length from 110 plates to the standard 62 pages , as suggested by the publisher Casterman . He also made several changes to the story , cutting many of the references to Belgium and colonial rule . For example , in the scene where Tintin teaches Congolese school children about geography , he states in the 1930 – 31 version , " My dear friends , today I 'm going to talk to you about your country : Belgium ! " whereas in the 1946 version , he instead gives them a mathematics lesson . Hergé also changed the character of Jimmy MacDuff , the owner of the leopard that attacks Tintin , from a black manager of the Great American Circus into a white " supplier of the biggest zoos in Europe . " 
 In the 1946 colour version , Hergé added a cameo appearance from Thomson and Thompson , the two detectives that he had introduced in the fourth Tintin story , Cigars of the Pharaoh ( 1932 – 34 ) , which was chronologically set after the Congolese adventure . Adding them to the first page , Hergé featured them in the backdrop , watching a crowd surrounding Tintin as he boards a train and commenting that it " Seems to be a young reporter going to Africa ... " In the same frame , Hergé inserted depictions of himself and his friend Edgar P. Jacobs ( the book 's colourist ) into the crowd seeing Tintin off . 
 = = = Later alterations and releases = = = 
 When Tintin in the Congo was first released by the series ' Scandinavian publishers in 1975 , they objected to page 56 , where Tintin drills a hole into a live rhinoceros , fills it with dynamite , and blows it up . They asked Hergé to replace this page with a less violent scene , which they believed would be more suitable for children . Hergé agreed , as he regretted the scenes of big @-@ game hunting in the work soon after producing it . The altered page involved the rhinoceros running away unharmed after accidentally knocking down and triggering Tintin 's gun . 
 Although publishers worldwide had made it available for many years , English publishers refused to publish Tintin in the Congo because of its racist content . In the late 1980s , Nick Rodwell , then agent of Studios Hergé in the United Kingdom , told reporters of his intention to finally publish it in English and stated his belief that publishing the original 1931 black and white edition would cause less controversy than releasing the 1946 colour version . After more delay , in 1991 — sixty years after its original 1931 publication — it was the last of The Adventures of Tintin to see publication in English . The 1946 colour version appeared in English in 2005 , published by Egmont . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline believed that Hergé 's drawing became more assured throughout the first version of the story without losing any of its spontaneity . He thought that the story began in " the most inoffensive way " , and that throughout the story Tintin was portrayed as a Boy Scout , something he argued reflected Hergé 's " moral debt " to Wallez . Biographer Benoît Peeters opined that Tintin in the Congo was " nothing spectacular " , with some " incredibly cumbersome " monologues , but he thought the illustrations " a bit more polished " than those in Land of the Soviets . Believing the plot to be " extremely simple " , he thought that Tintin 's character was like a child manipulating a world populated by toy animals and lead figurines . Michael Farr felt that , unlike the previous Tintin adventure , some sense of a plot emerges at the end of the story with the introduction of the American diamond @-@ smuggling racket . Philippe Goddin thought the work to be " more exciting " than Land of the Soviets and argued that Hergé 's depiction of the native Congolese was not mocking but a parody of past European militaries . By contrast , Harry Thompson believed that " Congo is almost a regression from Soviets " , in his opinion having no plot or characterisation ; he described it as " probably the most childish of all the Tintin books . " Simon Kuper of the Financial Times criticised both Land of the Soviets and Tintin in the Congo as the " worst " of the Adventures , opining that they were " poorly drawn " and " largely plot @-@ free " . 
 Farr saw the 1946 colour version as poorer than the black and white original ; he said it had lost its " vibrancy " and " atmosphere " , and that the new depiction of the Congolese landscape was unconvincing and more like a European zoo than the " parched , dusty expanses of reality " . Peeters took a more positive attitude towards the 1946 version , commenting that it contained " aesthetic improvements " and " clarity of composition " because of Hergé 's personal development in draughtsmanship , as well as an enhancement in the dialogue , which had become " more lively and fluid . " 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the series , Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès highlighted that in the Congolese adventure , Tintin represented progress and the Belgian state was a model for the natives to imitate . In doing so , he argued , they could become more European and thus civilised from the perspective of Belgian society , but that instead they ended up appearing as parodies . Opining that Tintin was imposing his own view of Africa onto the Congolese , Apostolidès remarked that Tintin appeared as a god @-@ figure , with evangelical overtones in the final scene . Literary critic Tom McCarthy concurred that Tintin represented the Belgian state , but also suggested that he acted as a Christian missionary , even being " a kind of god " akin to the character of Kurtz in Joseph Conrad 's Heart of Darkness ( 1899 ) . McCarthy compared the scene where Tintin exposes Muganga as a fraud to that in which the character of Prospero exposes the magician in William Shakespeare 's The Tempest . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Racism = = = 
 In the late 20th and early 21st centuries , several campaigners and writers characterised Tintin in the Congo as racist due to its portrayal of the Congolese as infantile and stupid . According to Tom McCarthy , Hergé depicted the Congolese as " good at heart but backwards and lazy , in need of European mastery . " There had been no such controversy when originally published , because it was only following the Wind of Change and decolonisation , which occurred during the 1950s and 1960s , that Western attitudes towards indigenous Africans shifted . Harry Thompson argued that one must view Tintin in the Congo in the context of European society in the 1930s and 1940s , and that Hergé had not written the book to be " deliberately racist " . He argued that it reflected the average Belgian view of Congolese people at the time , one that was more " patronising " than malevolent . Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès supported this idea , as did biographer Benoît Peeters , who asserted , " Hergé was no more racist than the next man . " After meeting Hergé in the 1980s , Farr commented , " You couldn 't have met someone who was more open and less racist . " 
 Contrastingly , biographer Pierre Assouline stated that in 1930s Belgium , Hergé would have had access to literature by the likes of André Gide and Albert Londres that was critical of the colonial regime . Assouline claimed that Hergé instead chose not to read such reports because they conflicted with the views of his conservative milieu . Laurence Grove — President of the International Bande Dessinée Society and an academic at the University of Glasgow — concurred , remarking that Hergé adhered to prevailing societal trends in his work , and that " [ w ] hen it was fashionable to be a colonial racist , that 's what he was . " Comic book historian Mark McKinney noted that other Franco @-@ Belgian comic artists of the same period had chosen to depict the native Africans in a more favourable light , citing the examples of Jijé 's 1939 work Blondin et <unk> ( Blondy and Shoe @-@ Black ) , in which the protagonists are adopted brothers , one white , the other black , and <unk> et <unk> , which was serialised in Spirou from 1939 to 1940 and in which the Congolese aid the Belgians against their American antagonists . 
 Farr and McCarthy stated that Tintin in the Congo was the most popular Tintin adventure in Francophone Africa . According to Thompson , the book remained hugely popular in the Congo even after the country achieved independence in 1960 . Nevertheless , government figures in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) have criticised the book . In 2004 , after the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs Karel De <unk> described President Joseph Kabila 's provisional DRC government as incompetent , Congolese Information Minister Henri <unk> <unk> accused him of " racism and nostalgia for colonialism " , remarking that it was like " Tintin in the Congo all over again . " De <unk> refused to retract his statement . 
 In July 2007 , British human rights lawyer David Enright complained to the United Kingdom 's Commission for Racial Equality ( CRE ) that he came across the book in the children 's section of Borders bookshop while shopping with his wife and two sons . The CRE called on bookshops to remove the comic , stating that it contained " hideous racial prejudice " by depicting Congolese who " look like monkeys and talk like <unk> . " Responding that it was committed to letting its " customers make the choice " , Borders moved the book to an area reserved for adult graphic novels . UK bookseller Waterstone 's followed suit . Another British retailer , WHSmith , said that the book was sold on its website , but with a label that recommended it for readers aged 16 and over . The CRE 's attempt to ban the book was criticised by Conservative Party politician Ann Widdecombe , who remarked that the organisation had more important things to do than regulate the availability of historical children 's books . The media controversy increased interest in the book , and Borders reported that its sales of Tintin in the Congo had been boosted 4 @,@ 000 % , while it also rose to eighth on the Amazon.com bestseller list . Publisher Egmont UK also responded to racism concerns by placing a protective band around the book with a warning about its content and writing an introduction describing its historical context . 
 Tintin in the Congo also came under criticism in the United States ; in October 2007 , in response to a complaint by a patron , the Brooklyn Public Library in New York City placed the graphic novel in a locked back room , only permitting access by appointment . Tintin in the Congo became part of a drawn @-@ out media debate in Sweden after national newspaper Dagens Nyheter reported the removal of <unk> in the Congo from a children 's library in <unk> in Stockholm in September 2011 . The incident , nicknamed " Tintin @-@ gate " , led to heated discussions in mainstream and social media concerning accusations of racism and censorship . 
 In August 2007 , Congolese student <unk> <unk> Mondondo filed a complaint in Brussels , claiming that the book was an insult to the Congolese people and required banning . Public prosecutors investigated and initiated a criminal case . The matter was eventually transferred to a civil court in April 2010 . Mondondo 's lawyers argued that Tintin in the Congo amounted to " a justification of colonisation and of white supremacy " , and Mondondo called it " racist and xenophobic " . Alain <unk> , lawyer for both Moulinsart , the company which controls Hergé 's estate , and Casterman , the book 's publisher , argued that the cartoonist 's depiction of the Congolese " wasn 't racism but kind paternalism " . He said that banning it would set a dangerous precedent for the availability of works by other historical authors , such as Charles Dickens or Jules Verne , which contain similar stereotypes of non @-@ white ethnicities . The court ruled in February 2012 that the book would not be banned , deciding that it was " clear that neither the story , nor the fact that it has been put on sale , has a goal to ... create an intimidating , hostile , degrading , or humiliating environment " , and that it therefore did not break Belgian law . Belgium 's Centre for Equal Opportunities warned against " over @-@ reaction and hyper political correctness " . Shortly after , Swedish @-@ Belgian Jean @-@ <unk> <unk> filed a similar complaint , which was supported by <unk> , an interest group for Swedes of African descent . The complaint to the Chancellor of Justice was turned down as violations of hate speech restrictions in the Swedish Fundamental Law on Freedom of Expression must be filed within one year of publication , and the latest Swedish edition of Tintin in the Congo appeared in 2005 . 
 The South African comics writer Anton <unk> has parodied the perceived racist nature of the book to highlight what he sees as the continuing racist undertones of South African society . In his Pappa in Afrika ( 2010 ) , a satire of Tintin in the Congo , he portrays Tintin as an Afrikaner with racist views of indigenous Africans . 
 = = = Hunting and animal cruelty = = = 
 Tintin in the Congo shows Tintin taking part in what Michael Farr described as " the wholesale and gratuitous slaughter " of animals ; over the course of the Adventure , Tintin shoots several antelope , kills an ape to wear its skin , rams a rifle vertically into a crocodile 's open mouth , injures an elephant for ivory , stones a buffalo , and ( in earlier editions ) drills a hole into a rhinoceros before planting dynamite in its body , blowing it up from the inside . Such scenes reflect the popularity of big @-@ game hunting among whites and affluent visitors in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa during the 1930s . Hergé later felt guilty about his portrayal of animals in Tintin in the Congo and became an opponent of blood sports ; when he wrote Cigars of the Pharaoh ( 1934 ) , he had Tintin befriend a herd of elephants living in the Indian jungle . 
 Philippe Goddin stated that the scene in which Tintin shoots a herd of antelope was " enough to upset even the least ecological reader " in the 21st century . When India Book House first published the book in India in 2006 , that nation 's branch of the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals issued a public criticism , and chief functionary Anuradha Sawhney stated that the book was " replete with instances that send a message to young minds that it is acceptable to be cruel to animals . " 
 = Andrew Johnston ( singer ) = 
 Andrew Johnston ( born 23 September 1994 ) is a British singer who rose to fame when he appeared as a boy soprano on the second series of the UK television talent show Britain 's Got Talent in 2008 . Although he did not win the competition , he received a contract to record with Syco Music , a label owned by the Britain 's Got Talent judge Simon Cowell . Johnston 's debut album , One Voice , was released in September of the same year , and reached number four on the UK Albums Chart . Although Johnston originally performed as a treble , his voice has since matured to baritone , and he is now a member of the National Youth Choir . 
 Johnston was born in Dumfries , Scotland , and his parents separated when he was an infant . He and his mother moved to Carlisle , where they lived in " poverty " . He became head chorister at Carlisle Cathedral , and was bullied at school because of his love of classical music . While some journalists have argued Britain 's Got Talent producers took advantage of Johnston 's background , others have hailed his story as inspirational . In 2009 , he graduated from Trinity School . Johnston now studies full @-@ time at the Royal Northern College of Music . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early life and Carlisle Cathedral Choir = = = 
 Johnston was born on 23 September 1994 in Dumfries , Scotland , the son of Andrew Johnston and Morag Brannock . He was given the extensive name Andrew Aaron Lewis Patrick Brannock John Grieve Michael Robert Oscar Schmidt Johnston . Johnston 's parents separated when he was eight months old , and from that time he lived with his mother and three older siblings in Carlisle , Cumbria , in the north of England , where he attended Trinity School . Johnston tried out for Carlisle Cathedral Choir at the age of six at the recommendation of Kim Harris , a teacher at his primary school . He was auditioned by the choirmaster Jeremy Suter and accepted into the choir at the age of seven . Johnston 's mother , who had no previous association with the cathedral , described her feelings of being overwhelmed by emotion at having her boy singing in such a " stunning building among those extraordinary voices " . His mother also described Johnston 's busy regimen of practice four times a week and all day Sundays , saying that it took up all of their spare time . However , she said that the cathedral staff became like a family to her son , and that " it was such a lovely , safe , close feeling for him " . Johnston , who attended Trinity School , was subject to abuse and threats from bullies which drove him to contemplate quitting the choir , but he was helped through the ordeal by his choirmaster and the dean and canons of the cathedral . By the time of his participation in Britain 's Got Talent , Johnston was head chorister . 
 In September 2008 , after his appearance on Britain 's Got Talent but before the release of his first album , Johnston embarked on a tour of Norway with the choir , performing at Stavanger Cathedral and <unk> Abbey , among other places . The tour was conceived because the Diocese of Stavanger is connected with the Diocese of Carlisle through the Partnership for World Mission . This was Johnston 's last tour with the choir . Johnston features as head chorister on one of the choir 's albums , The Choral Music of <unk> <unk> , released in November 2008 . 
 = = = Britain 's Got Talent = = = 
 Johnston was entered as a competitor in the second series of Britain 's Got Talent by his mother . He passed the first public audition , singing " Pie Jesu " from Andrew Lloyd Webber 's Requiem . Amanda Holden , one of the competition 's judges , was brought to tears , and the audience offered Johnston a standing ovation . Johnston was tipped as the favourite to win the competition . Later , Johnston described his initial audition as daunting , saying that " it was scary singing in front of 2 @,@ 500 people . I had never sang on stage before – then there was also Simon , Amanda and Piers " . He won his semi @-@ final heat on 27 May 2008 , receiving the most public votes on the night and thereby qualifying for the final . He sang " Tears in Heaven " by Eric Clapton ; judge Holden told him he had " a gift from God in [ his ] voice " . At the final on 30 May , he again sang " Pie Jesu " . He finished in third place , behind the winner , the street dancer George Sampson and runners @-@ up , the dance group Signature . Johnston left the stage in tears , later saying that he " was upset . But when you see the talent that was there , it was an honour just to be in the final " . The day after the final , Cowell 's publicist Max Clifford said that it was " quite possible " that Cowell would be offering record contracts to some of the finalists , including Johnston . Johnston and other contestants then embarked on a national arena tour . 
 During his initial audition , Johnston claimed that he was bullied and victimised from the age of six because of his singing . When asked how he dealt with the issue , he stated " I carry on singing . " There were claims in the Daily Mail , a UK @-@ based tabloid newspaper , that the programme 's producers had deliberately overstated the extent of Johnston 's bullying as a " sob story " , suggesting that sympathy rather than his singing got him many of the votes . However , in The Times , Johnston 's success story was described as " the stuff of fairytales " , as he was successful despite having been raised in " poverty " . Johnston said he did not talk about being bullied because he was told to do so by producers , but " because I believed it would help people who were going through what I had gone through be stronger " . Johnston has subsequently visited schools and elsewhere to help other victims of bullying . He said " I want to use my experience of bullies to help other kids " . 
 = = = One Voice = = = 
 On 12 June 2008 , while Johnston was travelling with the Britain 's Got Talent Live Tour , it was announced that Johnston had signed a record deal with Syco Music , a division of Sony BMG , and that his first album would be produced after the tour . The deal was reportedly for £ 1 million . After signing with Syco , Johnston made public appearances , including performing at Andrew Lloyd Webber 's birthday celebrations on 14 September , and at Carlisle United 's Brunton Park . 
 Johnston 's debut album , One Voice , was released on 29 September 2008 . It includes a cover of " Walking in the Air " , performed with Faryl Smith . The album was recorded over a six @-@ week period in London , and the track listing was chosen by Cowell . Johnston described the recording process as " brilliant " , and that it was " really good – just to be in a recording studio and meet the different people " . The album debuted in the British charts at number five , and finished the week at number four . The album was later certified gold , having sold 100 @,@ 000 copies , and Johnston was presented a gold disc by daytime television presenter Penny Smith . Critics responded positively to the album , with Kate Leaver , writing for the Korea JoongAng Daily , saying Johnston " has truer talent than hordes of his musical elders " and that " the vulnerability " of Johnston 's performance on the album " makes for a haunting musical experience " . In Music Week , the album was described as " highly @-@ anticipated " , and Johnston was called " exceptionally @-@ talented " . 
 After the album 's release , Johnston became involved in the Sing Up campaign , appearing in schools around the country to encourage other young people to join choirs . In December 2008 , Johnston made a guest appearance at Whitehaven 's Christmas fair , and performed at a carol service in Bradford . Johnston was also invited to turn on the Carlisle Christmas lights and perform at the celebrations . Mike <unk> , of Carlisle City Council , described Johnston as " one of our local heroes " . 
 = = = Hiatus and 2010s = = = 
 In September 2009 , Johnston announced that he would be taking a year off from singing as his voice had broken , changing him to a tenor . He had previously performed as a treble . He said " the tutors at [ the Royal Northern College of Music ] said they 'll be able to train my voice up again . It 's the same as it ever was , just deeper " . Johnston 's voice then changed from a tenor to a baritone . After remaining out of the spotlight for two years , he joined the National Youth Choir , saying " I 'm just another lad in there – no one focuses on Britain 's Got Talent and I 'm happy about that " . In 2011 , he was awarded a Royal School of Church Music Gold medal ; public performances that year included a charitable concert , alongside organists John Bromley and Tony Green , at St Paul 's Church , <unk> in November . 
 In September 2013 , Johnston began to study for a Bachelor of Music degree at the Royal Northern College of Music , under the tutelage of Jeff Lawton , who had previously tutored him at the Junior College . He immediately joined the college 's Chamber Choir and the Manchester Cathedral choir , but said that he intended to still sing with the Carlisle Cathedral choir where possible . While a student , Johnston 's singing was adversely affected by a broken nose , the result of an unprovoked attack in a Carlisle nightclub on New Year 's Day , 2014 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnston 's family home is in Stanwix , Carlisle . His mother , Morag Brannock , worked for the Office for National Statistics before giving up her job to support her son 's career . Prior to his Britain 's Got Talent appearances , he attended Trinity School , and later received tuition from a personal tutor . Johnston said that he " had a lot of support from local people when ... taking part in Britain 's Got Talent " , and was given a civic award for outstanding achievement by Carlisle City Council in March 2009 . 
 Johnston 's interests include jujitsu , in which he has a black belt . The Carlisle newspaper News and Star reported in September 2012 that Johnston had become the youngest person in the world to be granted a licence to teach the sport . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 = Illinois ( Sufjan Stevens album ) = 
 Illinois ( styled Sufjan Stevens Invites You To : Come On Feel the Illinoise on the cover ; sometimes written as Illinoise ) is a 2005 concept album by American indie folk songwriter Sufjan Stevens . It is his fifth studio album , and features songs referencing places , events , and persons related to the U.S. state of Illinois . Illinois is Stevens ' second based on a U.S. state — part of a planned series of fifty that began with the 2003 album Michigan that Stevens has since acknowledged was a gag . 
 Stevens recorded and produced the album at multiple venues in New York City using low @-@ fidelity studio equipment and a variety of instruments between late 2004 and early 2005 . The artwork and lyrics explore the history , culture , art , and geography of the state — Stevens developed them after analyzing criminal , literary , and historical documents . Following a July 4 , 2005 release date , Stevens promoted Illinois with a world tour . 
 Critics praised the album for its well @-@ written lyrics and complex orchestrations ; in particular , reviewers noted Stevens ' progress as a songwriter since the release of Michigan . Illinois was named the best @-@ reviewed album of 2005 by review aggregator Metacritic , and was included on several reviewers ' " best of the decade " lists — including those of Paste , NPR , and Rolling Stone . The album amounted to Stevens ' greatest public success to date : it was his first to place on the Billboard 200 , and it topped the Billboard list of " Heatseekers Albums " . The varied instrumentation and experimental songwriting on the album invoked comparisons to work by Steve Reich , Neil Young , and The Cure . Besides numerous references to Illinois history , geography , and attractions , Stevens continued a theme of his songwriting career by including multiple references to his Christian faith . 
 = = Background , recording , and tour = = 
 Stevens launched his 50 @-@ state project in 2003 with the album Michigan and chose to focus on Illinois with this recording because " it wasn 't a great leap " , and he liked the state because he considered it the " center of gravity " for the American Midwest . Before creating the album , Stevens read literature by Illinois authors Saul Bellow and Carl Sandburg , and studied immigration records and history books for the state — he made the deliberate decision to avoid current events and focused on historical themes . He also took trips through several locations in Illinois and asked friends and members of Internet chat rooms for anecdotes about their experiences in the state . Although he began work in 2004 on Oregon @-@ themed songs and briefly considered releasing a Rhode Island 7 " , Stevens has since not released another album focused on a state , saying in a November 2009 interview with Paste that " the whole premise was such a joke , " and telling Andrew Purcell of The Guardian in October 2009 " I have no qualms about admitting [ the fifty states project ] was a promotional gimmick . " An Arkansas @-@ related song was released through NPR as " The Lord God Bird " and material intended for New Jersey and New York became The BQE . 
 All of the songs on Illinois were written , recorded , engineered , and produced by Stevens , with most of the material being recorded at The Buddy Project studio in Astoria , Queens , and in Stevens ' Brooklyn apartment . As with his previous albums , Stevens recorded in various locations , with additional piano recorded in St. Paul 's Church in Brooklyn ; strings and vocals performed in collaborators ' apartments ; electronic organ recorded in the New Jerusalem Recreational Room in <unk> , New Jersey ; and vibraphone played at Carroll Music Studios in New York City . Stevens mostly created the album without collaboration , focusing on the writing , performance , and technical creation of the album by himself : " I was pretty nearsighted in the construction of Illinois . I spent a lot of time alone , a few months in isolation working on my own and in the studio . I let things germinate and cultivate independently , without thinking about an audience or a live show at all . " 
 Stevens employed low @-@ fidelity recording equipment , which allowed him to retain creative control and keep costs low on recording Illinois . Typically , his process involved recording to 32 kHz 8 @-@ track tape using inexpensive microphones such as the Shure SM57 and AKG <unk> . He then employed Pro Tools for mixing and other production tasks . 
 After consulting with Michael Kaufmann and Lowell <unk> of Asthmatic Kitty about the amount of material he had recorded , Stevens decided against a double album , saying that would be " arrogant " . In 2006 , several tracks recorded during these sessions were sent to Seattle @-@ based musician and producer James McAllister for additional instrumentation and production , and were released in 2006 on the follow @-@ up album The Avalanche : Outtakes and Extras from the Illinois Album . Among these outtakes are three separate recordings of the song " Chicago " — including the " Multiple Personality Disorder Version " , which was produced during a subsequent tour . The " Adult Contemporary Easy Listening Version " of the song was supposed to appear on the Illinois album , but was changed at the last minute . 
 Illinois was released on July 4 , 2005 , through Rough Trade Records in Europe and was distributed domestically by Asthmatic Kitty Records starting July 5 , 2005 . Although he initially had no plans to perform this material live , less than two weeks after the release of Illinois , Stevens embarked on a North American tour to promote the album , performing with a string section of eight to ten members named the <unk> . He deliberately chose to avoid television as a promotional tool and focused on the tour performances themselves . He was supported on some dates by opening acts Liz Janes ( who is also signed to Asthmatic Kitty ) and Laura Veirs as well as Illinois collaborator Shara Nova 's solo project My Brightest Diamond . He toured in support of the album again from September through November 2006 , this time including dates in several European cities . During the 2006 dates , Stevens and his band transitioned from wearing University of Illinois @-@ themed outfits to butterfly suits and bird wings . 
 = = Musical style and thematic elements = = 
 Reviewers have noted similarities between this album and those of musicians and composers in several musical genres — from pop to contemporary classical , even show tunes and jazz @-@ based time signatures . The lyrics and their rich thematic elements have been noted for their literary quality , earning comparisons to Ralph Waldo Emerson , Henry David Thoreau , William Carlos Williams , and Walt Whitman . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Reviewers of Illinois have compared Stevens ' style to Steve Reich , Vince Guaraldi , the Danielson <unk> , Neil Young , Nick Drake , and Death Cab for Cutie . Stevens ' use of large orchestral arrangements in his music — much of it played by himself through the use of multi @-@ track recording — has been noted by several reviewers . Rolling Stone summarized the musical influences of Illinois , saying " the music draws from high school marching bands , show tunes and ambient electronics ; we can suspect Steve Reich 's Music for 18 Musicians is an oft @-@ played record in the Stevens household , since he loves to echo it in his long instrumental passages . " A review in The A.V. Club referred to some of the vocal work as " <unk> twee communalism " , but found Stevens ' music overall to be " highly developed " . The song " Come On ! Feel the Illinoise ! " uses a saxophone part from " Close to Me " by The Cure . 
 The creation of Illinois marked a shift in Stevens ' emphasis on songwriting and studio work toward live performance and more abstract concepts of motion and sound — subsequent tours and albums emphasized electronic music and modern dance over the indie folk material on Michigan and Illinois . He has ceased writing songs about individual characters with straightforward narratives or concept albums and briefly considered quitting the music business entirely after creating and promoting this album . He also found that the way in which he listened to music had changed after producing Illinois : 
 I think now I listen more as a technician and a researcher . I 'm always hearing music in terms of what I can take out of it , and I think I 've always listened like that . I have a hard time just listening for pleasure . I 'm much less about instinct , and more of a utilitarian listener . Like , what is the use of this song ? What is the usefulness of this melody for this theme or statement ? What are they doing that 's unusual sounding , and how can I learn from that ? 
 Stevens is a classically trained oboist and his knowledge of classical and baroque music influenced many of his arrangements . Stevens himself has noted the influence of composers Igor Stravinsky , Sergei Rachmaninoff , and Edvard Grieg ; along with contemporary composers Terry Riley , Steve Reich , and Philip Glass . The music on this album was written to be grandiose , to match the history of the territory . Stevens used time signature changes in the composition of Illinois for dynamic effect — for instance , " Come On ! Feel the Illinoise ! " begins with a 5 / 4 time signature and then changes to a standard 4 / 4 later in the song . 
 = = = Illinois themes = = = 
 Many of the lyrics in Illinois make references to persons , places , and events related to the state of the same name . " Concerning the UFO Sighting Near Highland , Illinois " is about a UFO sighting by police officers near Highland , Illinois , where several persons reported seeing a large triangular object with three lights flying at night . " Come on ! Feel the Illinoise ! " makes reference to the World 's Columbian Exposition , which took place in Chicago in 1893 . 
 " John Wayne Gacy , Jr . " documents the story of the 1970s Chicago @-@ based serial killer of the same name . Several lyrics make explicit references to events in his life : " [ w ] hen the <unk> hit his head " refers to an event in Gacy 's childhood , when a swing hit his head and caused a blood clot in his brain ; " He dressed up like a clown for them / with his face paint white and red " alludes to the nickname given to Gacy — the " Killer Clown " ; and " He put a cloth on their lips / Quiet hands , quiet kiss on the mouth " references Gacy 's use of chloroform to subdue and molest his victims . The song ends with the narrator turning inward with the lyrics : " And in my best behavior , I am really just like him / Look beneath the floorboards for the secrets I have hid . " Stevens stated in a 2009 interview with Paste that " we 're all capable of what [ Gacy ] did . " 
 " Casimir Pulaski Day " interweaves a personal story with the state holiday Casimir Pulaski Day . " The Man of Metropolis Steals Our Hearts " makes references to Superman , whose fictional hometown of Metropolis was partially modeled after Chicago ( the town of Metropolis , Illinois has also capitalized on this association ) . Jessica Hopper of the Chicago Reader noted that Ray Middleton — who was the first actor to play the comic book superhero — was also born in Chicago . " They Are Night Zombies ! ! They Are Neighbors ! ! They Have Come Back from the Dead ! ! Ahhhh ! " makes references to ghost towns of Illinois . Stevens relates experiences from a summer camp he went to as a child in Michigan for " The Predatory Wasp of the Palisades Is Out to Get Us ! " , but moved the locale to Illinois for the sake of the album . The track " Decatur , or , Round of Applause for Your Stepmother ! " includes references to Decatur , Illinois , but Stevens stated the track also acted as " an exercise in rhyme schemes " . Some references to Decatur included in the song were alligator sightings in the area , the equipment manufacturer Caterpillar , and a flood that exhumed a graveyard of soldiers from the Civil War . 
 Other allusions to the state 's people , places , and events include the Black Hawk War , author Carl Sandburg , Stephen A. Douglas , Abraham Lincoln , the Sangamon River , the Chicago Cubs , the Sears Tower dubbed " Seer 's Tower " ( now called Willis Tower ) , and the localities of Jacksonville , Peoria , Metropolis , Savanna Caledonia , Secor , Magnolia , Kankakee , Evansville , and the several locations named Centerville , Illinois . During the tour following the release of Illinois , Stevens ' band wore cheerleader outfits based on those of the University of Illinois . 
 = = = Christianity = = = 
 Although Illinois is a concept album about the U.S. state , Stevens also explored themes related to Christianity and the Bible . As a Christian , he has written and recorded music about spiritual themes throughout his career — particularly on the 2004 album Seven Swans — and prefers to talk about religious topics through song rather than directly in interviews or public statements . The song " Decatur , or , Round of Applause for Your Stepmother ! " includes the line " It 's the great I Am " — taken from the response God gave when Moses asked for his name in the Book of Exodus ( Exodus 3 : 14 ) . " Casimir Pulaski Day " describes the death of a girlfriend due to bone cancer , and the narrator questions God in the process . More abstract allusions appear in " The Man of Metropolis Steals Our Hearts " , which utilizes Superman as a Christ figure and " The Seer 's Tower " , which references the Book of Revelation and the Second Coming of Christ . Songs which were not written with an explicit theological focus — such as " John Wayne Gacy , Jr . " — also feature religious themes such as sin and redemption . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 Divya Srinivasan created the album artwork , depicting a variety of Illinois @-@ related themes , including Abraham and Mary Todd Lincoln , the Sears Tower , and Black Hawk . The album cover reads , " Sufjan Stevens Invites You To : Come On Feel the Illinoise ! " as a wordplay on the common mispronunciation of the state 's name as " ill @-@ i @-@ <unk> " and a reference to the Slade song " Cum On Feel the Noize " made famous in the United States by the metal band Quiet Riot . The text on the cover caused some confusion over the actual title of the album — it is officially titled Illinois , as opposed to Come on Feel the Illinoise or Illinoise . Paste listed Illinois as having the seventh best album art of the decade 2000 – 2009 . The album also won the PLUG Independent Music Award for Album Art / Packaging of the Year in 2006 . 
 Shortly after the release of the album , reports arose that DC Comics had issued a cease and desist letter to Asthmatic Kitty because of the depiction of Superman on the cover . However , on October 4 , 2005 , Asthmatic Kitty announced that there had been no cease and desist letter ; the record company 's own lawyers had warned about the copyright infringement . On June 30 , 2005 , Asthmatic Kitty 's distributor Secretly Canadian asked its retailers not to sell the album ; however , it was not recalled . On July 5 , the distributor told its retailers to go ahead and sell their copies , as DC Comics agreed to allow Asthmatic Kitty to sell the copies of the album that were already manufactured , but the image was removed from subsequent pressings . Soon after it was made public that the cover would be changed , copies of the album featuring Superman were sold for as high as $ 75 on eBay . On the vinyl edition released on November 22 , 2005 , Superman 's image is covered by a balloon sticker . The image of the balloon sticker was also used on the cover of the Compact Disc and later printings of the double vinyl release . Stevens himself was surprised by the development and also had to pay a fee for referencing lyrics from Woody Guthrie 's folk anthem " This Land Is Your Land " in the track " No Man 's Land " , which was later released on The Avalanche . 
 The 10th anniversary vinyl reissue of Illinois features the Marvel character Blue Marvel , who hails from Chicago , in place of Superman . Asthmatic Kitty obtained permission from Marvel to use the character 's likeness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Illinois was Sufjan Stevens ' greatest commercial and critical success to date . For the first time , his work charted on the Billboard 200 and received several awards from critics . 
 = = = Sales figures and chart performance = = = 
 In its first week of sales , Illinois sold 9 @,@ 000 copies , 20 % coming from online sales . Overall , the album sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies by November 2005 and over 300 @,@ 000 by the end of 2009 . It was the first Sufjan Stevens release to place on the Billboard 200 , reaching No. 121 within eight weeks on the chart . It also placed number one on Billboard 's " Heatseekers Albums " list and number four on the " Independent Albums " list , remaining on them for 32 and 39 weeks respectively . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reception of Illinois was overwhelmingly positive . Review aggregator Metacritic compiled 40 critic reviews of Illinois and gave the album a 90 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , designating it the best @-@ reviewed album of 2005 . Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club said that Stevens " has grown into one of the best song @-@ makers in indie rock " with the album . Tim Jonze of NME called Illinois " a brainy little fucker " and described Stevens as " prolific , intelligent and — most importantly — brimming with heart @-@ wrenching melodies . " Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone responded favorably to the album , praising the " over @-@ the @-@ top arrangements " and Stevens ' " breathy , gentle voice " . Sheffield criticized " John Wayne Gacy , Jr . " , stating that it " symbolizes nothing about American life except the existence of creative @-@ writing workshops " , but elsewhere praised the personal nature of songs such as " Chicago " and " Casimir Pulaski Day " . Michael Metivier of PopMatters described " John Wayne Gacy , Jr . " as " horrifying , tragic , and deeply sad without proselytizing . " Amanda Petrusich of Pitchfork Media described Illinois as " strange and lush , as excessive and challenging as its giant , gushing song titles . " Dave Simpson of The Guardian echoed this sentiment by saying that the music sounds like " The Polyphonic Spree produced by Brian Eno . " The diversity in instrumentation also received a positive review from Entertainment Weekly 's Kristina Feliciano . 
 Jesse <unk> of Paste praised the playful nature of Illinois , commenting that it had " sing @-@ song " melodies and " jaunty " orchestrations . <unk> also noted ironic lyrics , citing a line from " The Predatory Wasp of the Palisades is Out to Get Us ! " : " I can 't explain the state I 'm in ... " after a section of the song that references many Illinois landmarks . Q called Illinois a " sizeable step forward " from Michigan , and said Stevens ' love for the state of Illinois is infectious . Uncut 's Andy Gill dubbed the album " an extraordinary achievement " . Catherine Lewis of The Washington Post responded favorably to the album , stating that it has well @-@ written lyrics , comparing Stevens ' rhyming to that of <unk> Merritt . Lewis cited " Casimir Pulaski Day " as one of the most memorable songs of the album . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Illinois achieved lasting fame with inclusion on numerous reviewers ' " best of the year " and " best of the decade " lists . In particular , the album topped the best of the decade list appearing in the November 2009 issue of Paste and NPR named Illinois on their list of " The Decade 's 50 Most Important Recordings " . Pitchfork Media called Illinois the sixteenth best album of the decade , with Stevens ' previous album — Michigan — placing 70 on that same list . The album also won the 2005 New Pantheon Award — a type of Shortlist Music Prize . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Finally , Paste listed Stevens as one of their " 100 Best Living Songwriters " in 2006 , primarily due to the writing on Michigan and Illinois . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Note that the titles of the songs vary slightly from the Compact Disc , digital , and vinyl releases . Full titles come directly from the vinyl album and have been adapted to the English capitalization standards . 
 All songs written and composed by Sufjan Stevens and published by New Jerusalem Music , ASCAP . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Sufjan Stevens – acoustic guitar ; piano ; Wurlitzer ; bass guitar ; drums ; electric guitar ; oboe ; alto saxophone ; flute ; banjo ; glockenspiel ; accordion ; vibraphone ; alto , sopranino , soprano , and tenor recorders ; Casiotone MT @-@ 70 ; sleigh bells ; shaker ; tambourine ; triangle ; electronic organ ; vocals ; arrangement ; engineering ; recording ; production 
 Julianne Carney – violin 
 Alan Douches – mastering at West West Side Music , Tenafly , New Jersey 
 Jon Galloway – remixing on " Chicago " ( To String Remix ) 
 Marla Hansen – viola 
 The <unk> Choir – backing vocals and clapping on " The Black Hawk War , or , How to Demolish an Entire Civilization and Still Feel Good About Yourself in the Morning , or , We Apologize for the <unk> but You 're Going to Have to Leave Now , or , ' I Have Fought the Big Knives and Will Continue to Fight Them Until They Are Off Our Lands ! ' " , " Chicago " , " The Man of Metropolis Steals Our Hearts " , " They Are Night Zombies ! ! They Are Neighbors ! ! They Have Come Back from the Dead ! ! Ahhhh ! " , and " The Tallest Man , the Broadest Shoulders " 
 Tom Eaton 
 Jennifer Hoover 
 Katrina Kerns 
 <unk> Lock 
 Tara McDonnell 
 Maria Bella Jeffers – cello 
 Katrina Kerns – backing vocals on " Concerning the UFO Sighting Near Highland , Illinois " , " Come On ! Feel the Illinoise ! " , " Jacksonville " , " Prairie Fire That Wanders About " , " The Predatory Wasp of the Palisades Is Out to Get Us ! " , " The Seer 's Tower " , " The Tallest Man , the Broadest Shoulders " , and " The Avalanche " 
 James McAlister – drums , drum engineering 
 Craig <unk> – trumpet , backing vocals on " They Are Night Zombies ! ! They Are Neighbors ! ! They Have Come Back from the Dead ! ! Ahhhh ! " 
 Rob Moose – violin 
 Matt Morgan – backing vocals on " Decatur , or , Round of Applause for Your Stepmother ! " 
 Daniel and Elin Smith – backing vocals and clapping on " Decatur , or , Round of Applause for Your Stepmother ! " 
 Divya Srinivasan – artwork 
 Shara Worden – backing vocals on " Concerning the UFO Sighting Near Highland , Illinois " , " Come On ! Feel the Illinoise ! " , " John Wayne Gacy , Jr . " , " Casimir Pulaski Day " , " Prairie Fire That Wanders About " , " The Predatory Wasp of the Palisades Is Out to Get Us ! " , " The Seer 's Tower " , " The Tallest Man , the Broadest Shoulders " , and " The Avalanche " 
 = Mycena galericulata = 
 Mycena galericulata is a mushroom species commonly known as the common bonnet , the toque <unk> , or the rosy @-@ gill fairy helmet . The type species of the genus Mycena was first described scientifically in 1772 , but was not considered a Mycena until 1821 . It is quite variable in color , size , and shape , which makes it somewhat difficult to reliably identify in the field . The mushrooms have caps with distinct radial grooves , particularly at the margin . The cap 's color varies from grayish @-@ brown to dark brown and the shape ranges from bell @-@ like to bluntly conical to flattened with an umbo . The stem is hollow , white , tough and thin , without a ring and often roots deeply into the wood on which it grows . The gills are white to grayish or even pinkish when mature and are connected by distinct cross @-@ veins . The caps can reach 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , and have a mealy odor and taste . The spore print is white and the gills are pink at maturity , which can lead to possible confusion with species of the Pluteus genus . M. galericulata mushrooms grow mostly in clusters on the well @-@ decayed stumps of deciduous and coniferous trees from spring to autumn . The species can generally be considered inedible . It is common and widespread in the entire temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere , but it has also been reported from Africa . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and naming = = 
 The fungus was first described scientifically as Agaricus <unk> by Italian mycologist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in 1772 , and sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 Systema Mycologicum . That same year , Samuel Frederick Gray transferred the species to the genus Mycena . Synonyms for the species include Agaricus <unk> named by William Hudson in 1778 , Agaricus crispus described by August Johann Georg Karl Batsch in 1893 , <unk> <unk> by Franklin Sumner Earle in 1909 , and Prunulus <unk> by William Alphonso Murrill in 1916 . 
 Mycena galericulata is the type species of the genus Mycena . It is classified in section Mycena of Mycena in the infrageneric scheme of Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus . In the older ( 1947 ) classification of Alexander H. Smith , he placed it in the subgenus <unk> , section <unk> — " a most monotonous series of blackish , brown , gray , bluish @-@ gray , or brownish @-@ gray species mostly with ascending gills and generally large to moderate stature . " 
 The specific epithet galericulata is derived from the Latin <unk> , and means " with a small hat " . Gray called it the " <unk> high @-@ stool " . It is commonly known as the " common bonnet " , the " toque <unk> " , or the " rosy @-@ gill fairy helmet " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. galericulata is roughly conical when young , and eventually becomes broadly bell @-@ shaped or with a broad umbo that can reach diameters of 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) . The cap margin is initially somewhat curved inward , but soon evens out or even becomes uplifted , and often splits radially in age . The surface has radial grooves that extend nearly to the center , and feels greasy but not sticky . The color is somewhat buff @-@ brown on the margin , and fades gradually to pale dirty tan to dirty cinnamon @-@ brown . The flesh is thick in the center of the cap and tapers evenly to the margin , and is watery gray , with a cartilage @-@ like texture . The odor and taste are mildly to strongly farinaceous ( similar to the smell of freshly ground flour ) , to radish @-@ like . 
 The gills are narrowly attached ( adnexed ) to broadly attached or sinuate . The gill spacing ranges from close to somewhat distantly spaced , with 26 – 36 gills reaching the stem ; there are additionally three or four tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend completely from the cap margin to the stem ) . The gills are strongly intervenose ( possessing cross @-@ veins ) , moderately broad ( 5 – 7 mm ) , white or grayish white , soon flushed with pale pink , with even edges . The stem is 5 – 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long , 2 – 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 16 in ) thick , equal in width throughout , and with a cartilaginous texture . It is hollow , not hairy , either smooth or twisted with longitudinal striations , often with a long pseudorrhiza ( a subterranean elongation of the stem ) at the base . The stem color is pale grayish @-@ white on the upper portion , and pale grayish @-@ black below ; the base becomes somewhat dirty brown in age , but does not develop reddish stains . 
 Mycena galericulata produces a white spore print . The spores are ellipsoid , 8 – 10 by 5 @.@ 5 – 7 μm , and amyloid — which means they will turn blue @-@ black to black when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) have stout sterigmata , and measure 34 – 40 by 7 – 9 μm . They may be either two @-@ spored or four @-@ spored . There are numerous club @-@ shaped to rounded cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) , that measure 32 – 40 by 8 – 12 μm ; their apices or the entire enlarged portion bear rodlike projections that become increasingly elongated and branched in age . There are no pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) . The gill tissue has a very thin cuticle , under which is a narrow hypoderm , while the remainder of the tissue comprises densely matted tufts of mycelia , and stains deep vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of the four @-@ spored forms . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Opinions on the edibility of the mushroom vary . One source considers them to have a " delicate flavor and texture " , and suggests that they are good when " stewed gently in their own juice and then seasoned with salt , pepper and butter . " Others list the species as inedible , and notes that they have a " mildly rancid " smell , and with a taste ranging from rancid to farinaceous . Another says " unknown , but not recommended . " At any rate , the species falls into the general category of brownish Mycenas that are generally unappetizing as food due to their small size and delicate consistency . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The winter bonnet ( M. <unk> ) is a northern European species that is much smaller ( cap diameter up to 2 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) across ) and has a brown cap , and has ragged hairs at the base . It generally appears in late autumn to early winter on the stumps of deciduous trees , especially beech . It has pip @-@ shaped spores that are smaller than M. galericulata , around 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 8 µm . M. maculata develops pink stains on its gills as it matures ; its spores are 7 – 9 by 4 – 5 μm . Another similar species is M. <unk> , which can be distinguished by gills bearing reddish spots , which may become entirely red with age . It also has whitish , slender , threadlike flecks on the stalk . M. <unk> is thinner , and more fragile . Another Mycena that grows in clusters on decaying hardwoods is M. haematopus , but this species has a vinaceous @-@ brown cap with a scalloped margin , and a stem that bleeds reddish @-@ brown juice when injured . M. <unk> closely resembles M. galericulata , but can be distinguished microscopically by the presence of both smooth and roughened cystidia ( bearing finger @-@ like projections ) . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena galericulata is saprobic , and grows on decaying hardwood and softwood sticks , chips , logs , and stumps . It can also grow from submerged wood , which may give it a terrestrial appearance . It typically grows in small clusters or sometimes singly . The fungus fruits from late spring to early winter . A study of litter @-@ decomposing fungi in a coniferous forest in Finland showed that M. galericulata produces extracellular hydrolytic enzymes in the humus and <unk> soil , including β @-@ glucosidase , β @-@ <unk> , α @-@ glucosidase , butyrate esterase and <unk> . The enzymes form complexes with inorganic and organic particles in the soil and break down ( <unk> ) biopolymers such as cellulose , hemicellulose , and starch , which contributes to the cycling of carbon and nutrients . The presence of lead contamination in the soil decreases both the growth and the extracellular hydrolytic enzyme activity of M. galericulata . 
 Mycena galericulata is a very common and widely distributed species , found throughout the entire temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere . In the United States , it occurs throughout eastern North America and also along the Pacific Coast . It has also been collected in Edo State , Nigeria . Although the mushroom has occasionally been reported from Australia , these collections are probably based on misidentifications , and " Australian records of Mycena galericulata are best regarded as erroneous " . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Smith AH . ( 1947 ) . North American species of Mycena . Ann Arbor , Michigan : University of Michigan Press . 
 = Crash Boom Bang ! = 
 For the Roxette album with a similar name , see Crash ! Boom ! Bang ! 
 Crash Boom Bang ! ( known in Japan as Crash Bandicoot Festival ) ( <unk> ・ <unk> <unk> , Kurasshu <unk> <unk> ) is a party game developed by Dimps and published by Vivendi Universal Games in Japan and by Sierra Entertainment internationally for the Nintendo DS . It was released in Japan on July 20 , 2006 , in North America on October 10 , 2006 , in Europe on October 27 , 2006 , and in Australia on November 2 , 2006 . It is the only game in the Crash Bandicoot series to be developed by a Japanese company and the first to be released in Japan before North America . It was also the final game in the series to be released in Japan . 
 Crash Boom Bang ! is the first game to be released exclusively for the Nintendo DS , and the second party game of the series , after Crash Bash . The game 's story centers on a multi @-@ millionaire who uses the characters of the series to unearth a powerful object dubbed the " Super Big Power Crystal " . The game has received largely negative reception from reviewers , who criticized it for having unoriginal , dull gameplay and poor controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash Boom Bang ! ' s stages resemble board games , as each play area is split into a number of squares . The game takes place among four players , with the computer assigned to spare players . All players simultaneously roll dice . The number each player rolls is the amount of squares they move forward . Depending on the type of square that the player lands on , Wumpa Fruit ( which is used as points during the race ) can be won or lost , an item can be obtained , a special event might be triggered , or a mini @-@ game might commence . If a player lands on a fork in the road , the player will have to select the desired direction with either the stylus or the control pad . 
 In the Adventure Mode , the characters compete in a race for the Super Big Power Crystal . This race is made up of six stages , each containing smaller sub @-@ maps . The host of the race , the Viscount , sets a task for each stage . This task must be completed before the player can continue to another map . The player with the most points is the winner of the stage . The overall winner of all the stages is the winner of the Viscount 's race . In the Festival Mode , the gameplay is fundamentally the same as in the Adventure Mode , with the exception of the ability to select stages to play freely . In the My Room mode , the player 's character has his or her own private room in which he or she can either play minigames that have been collected in Adventure Mode , view a collection of items obtained in Adventure Mode , or create a Motion Panel , a unique in @-@ game communication tool can allow customized messages to be sent mid @-@ game to help friends or distract other players ' gameplay . The decorations in My Room is different for each character . 
 Crash Boom Bang ! features forty mini @-@ games that can be played alone or remotely against friends . Balance , timing , and intelligence are required to win these mini @-@ games . When a player is not taking part in a mini @-@ game , he or she can bet Wumpa Fruit on the winner . The player can help players that have been bet on or obstruct players that have not been bet on by using the Motion Panel . If the player has a special item , the player can access the Shop screen from the Bet screen and buy or sell items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 A number of characters from past Crash Bandicoot games return in Crash Boom Bang ! , though only eight are playable . The playable characters include Crash Bandicoot , Coco Bandicoot , Crunch Bandicoot , Pura , Doctor Neo Cortex , Tawna , Pinstripe Potoroo , and Fake Crash . All of the characters physically appear as they do in official Japanese Crash Bandicoot artwork and promotions ( which was the only Sierra Entertainment video game to be introduced the official Japanese Crash Bandicoot artwork and promotions ) , though Crash 's model was altered for the non @-@ Japanese releases to closer resemble his Crash Twinsanity model . The host of the party , the Viscount , is an original character designed specifically for the game . His name in the original Japanese version is " Viscount Devil " , a reference to the Tasmanian devil native to Australia . Other past characters make cameos in the game at one point or another , such as the Lab Assistants , Doctor N. Gin , Tiny Tiger , Doctor Nefarious Tropy and Polar . Aku Aku serves as the player 's tutor , while Uka Uka makes a cameo appearance as a <unk> item in the shop . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 While developing a resort in Tasmania , the Viscount finds a map of an ancient city containing the fabled Super Big Power Crystal . He attempts to find it himself , but due to the large amount of puzzles , he fails miserably . In the resort , the Viscount decides to gather up the world 's cleverest and strongest bunch of characters and con them into finding the Crystal for him . He sends an invitation to Coco Bandicoot , inviting her and Crash to the World Cannonball Race , where the winner earns $ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 The race starts in Port Town , with the winners traveling in a boat to a large desert . Legend has it that four stone tablets are buried somewhere in the desert , and the contestants are sent out to dig for them and bring them to the Viscount . According to the stone tablets , the actual location of the Crystal is hidden somewhere on the ancient map . Before he can investigate the matter further , Doctor Neo Cortex swoops in and snatches the map . As the two struggle for the map , the map is torn to shreds . 
 Cortex sends his loyal Lab Assistants to find the pieces of the map scattered throughout the big City and bring them to him . Now that the contestants know about the map , the Viscount decides to reveal his true intentions : the Super Big Power Crystal can grant a single wish who whoever obtains it , and the Viscount is willing to give a large sum of money to those who help him find it . Finding the Power Crystal is impossible without the Final Key , so the Viscount boards his plane to travel to the North Atlantic Ocean in search for the Final Key . But the plane is full , and only a select number of the contestants are able to board . Propelled to the skies by an explosive volcano , the contestants are able to board the Viscount 's plane . 
 On the Viscount 's ship , the Viscount tells the group the story of an explorer who found the Final Key , but was unable to find the Power Crystal . That explorer was the Viscount 's grandfather . As the explorer sailed back to his homeland to recollect his thoughts , his ship crashed into an iceberg and sank , taking the Viscount 's grandfather to a watery grave . " Sounds like a movie " , remarks one of the attendees . The Viscount tells them to dive to the sunken ship and retrieve the Final Key , much to their shock , considering the near @-@ freezing temperatures . Despite this , the group is able to find the Final Key before freezing to death . With all the pieces of the puzzle at hand , the Viscount victoriously enters the Tower , where the Super Big Power Crystal awaits its owner . Just as the Viscount is about to make his wish , Crash steps forward and makes his wish of a large pile of Wumpa Fruit , much to the Viscount 's grief . " May peace prevail on Earth " , says Coco . 
 = = Development = = 
 On developing the mobile phone version of Crash Boom Bang ! , producer Elodie <unk> described adapting a party game for the mobile phone as a " big challenge " . Not wanting to make " another multiplayer game where the players just pass the phone to each other " and hoping to attract both old and new fans of the series , the development team decided to integrate the mobile phone itself into the minigames , creating such minigame gimmicks as playing with one hand behind the back , with one eye closed , playing with the chin , etc . The biggest challenge for the team was keeping the minigames inside the phone 's memory , which was cited as slightly inferior to the first PlayStation console . The WarioWare series was described as an influence in making the game . 
 Crash Boom Bang ! is the first game in the series to exclusively feature the Japanese voice cast in all regional versions of the game . The voice cast includes Makoto Ishii in the dual role of Crash and Fake Crash , Risa Tsubaki as Coco , Yōsuke Akimoto as Doctor Cortex , Shinya <unk> as Crunch , Akiko Toda as Tawna , Asuka <unk> as Pura , and Takahiro Yoshino as Pinstripe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash Boom Bang ! received mostly negative reviews , with the game receiving an average ranking of 42 @.@ 45 % at Game Rankings , and a score of 37 out of 100 based on fourteen reviews at Metacritic . Frank Provo of GameSpot criticized the game for its dull minigames and purely cosmetic Crash license , citing that " apart from the way the characters look and the way the Nitro boxes explode , [ ... ] there isn 't a whole lot that 's Crash @-@ like about Crash Boom Bang ! " . Nintendo Power recommended the game only to die @-@ hard Crash fans and advised others to wait for Crash 's next outing . Lesley Smith of Eurogamer criticized the game for a number or reasons , including bad stylus recognition , boring gameplay , terrible graphics and rigged , repetitive mini @-@ games . IGN 's review was one of the most scathing , dubbing Crash Boom Bang ! " a terrible , terrible game with poor organization " and " easily one of the worst games on the system " . More middling reviews have come in from Official Nintendo Magazine , who felt the game was hampered by dodgy controls and a testing user interface , and Pocket Gamer 's Jon Jordan , who dismissed the game 's collection of minigames as " distinctly average and oddly passionless " . Despite the negative reception , Crash Boom Bang ! was the seventh best @-@ selling game in Australia on the week of June 4 to June 10 , 2007 . 
 = Grade I listed buildings in Somerset = 
 The Grade I listed buildings in Somerset , England , demonstrate the history and diversity of its architecture . The ceremonial county of Somerset consists of a non @-@ metropolitan county , administered by Somerset County Council , which is divided into five districts , and two unitary authorities . The districts of Somerset are West Somerset , South Somerset , Taunton Deane , Mendip and Sedgemoor . The two administratively independent unitary authorities , which were established on 1 April 1996 following the breakup of the county of Avon , are North Somerset and Bath and North East Somerset . These unitary authorities include areas that were once part of Somerset before the creation of Avon in 1974 . 
 In the United Kingdom , the term listed building refers to a building or other structure officially designated as being of special architectural , historical , or cultural significance ; Grade I structures are those considered to be " buildings of exceptional interest " . Listing was begun by a provision in the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 . Once listed , strict limitations are imposed on the modifications allowed to a building 's structure or fittings . In England , the authority for listing under the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 rests with English Heritage , a non @-@ departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture , Media and Sport ; local authorities have a responsibility to regulate and enforce the planning regulations . 
 Each of the districts include Norman- or medieval @-@ era churches , many of which are included in the Somerset towers , a collection of distinctive , mostly <unk> Gothic architecture church towers . The prolific construction of the towers — some started before 1360 — was typically accomplished by a master mason and a small team of itinerant masons , supplemented by local parish labourers , according to Poyntz Wright . But other authors reject this model , suggesting instead that leading architects designed the parish church towers based on early examples of Perpendicular design and ornamentation developed for cathedrals — their most important commissions . Contract builders carried out the plans , adding a distinctive mix of innovative details and decorations as new designs emerged over the years . These are included in the List of towers in Somerset . 
 Apart from the churches , each area has its own characteristics . Most of Bath 's Grade I listed buildings are made from the local golden @-@ coloured Bath Stone , and date from the 18th and 19th centuries . Their dominant architectural style is Georgian . In the Mendip district , the greatest concentrations of these cluster around the cathedral and abbey in Wells and in Glastonbury . North Somerset features bridges and piers along with a selection of Manor houses . The Sedgemoor district has many buildings related to trade and commerce centered on Bridgwater ; while in South Somerset abbeys , priories and farmhouses predominate . Taunton Deane includes the defensive Taunton Castle , similarly Dunster Castle and related buildings in Dunster feature in West Somerset . 
 = = Bath and North East Somerset = = 
 Bath and North East Somerset ( commonly referred to as BANES or B & NES ) is a unitary authority created on 1 April 1996 , following the abolition of the County of Avon . Bath and North East Somerset occupies an area of 220 square miles ( 570 km2 ) , two @-@ thirds of which is green belt . BANES stretches from the outskirts of Bristol , south into the Mendip Hills and east to the southern Cotswold Hills and Wiltshire border . The city of Bath is the principal settlement in the district , but BANES also covers Keynsham , Midsomer Norton , Radstock and the Chew Valley . BANES has a population of 170 @,@ 000 , about half of whom live in Bath , making it 12 times more densely populated than the rest of the district . 
 Bath and North East Somerset has 663 Grade I listed buildings , one of the highest concentrations in the country , covered by about 100 English Heritage listings . The oldest sites within Bath are the Roman Baths , for which the foundation piles and an irregular stone chamber lined with lead were built during the Roman occupation of Britain , although the current building is from the 18th century . Bath Abbey was a Norman church built on earlier foundations , although the present building dates from the early 16th century and shows a late Perpendicular style with flying buttresses and crocketed pinnacles decorating a crenellated and pierced parapet . The medieval era is represented by the remains of the city walls in Upper Borough Walls . 
 Most of Bath 's Grade I listed buildings are made from the local golden @-@ coloured Bath Stone , and date from the 18th and 19th centuries . Their dominant architectural style is Georgian , which evolved from the Palladian revival style that became popular during the early 18th century . This led to the entire city 's designation as a World Heritage Site . 
 Much of the development , and many of the buildings , were the vision of John Wood , the Elder . The Circus is seen as the pinnacle of Wood 's work . It consists of three long , curved terraces that form a circular space or theatre intended for civic functions and games . The games give a clue to the design , the inspiration for which was the Colosseum in Rome . The best known of Bath 's terraces is the Royal Crescent , built between 1767 and 1774 and designed by Wood 's son , John Wood , the Younger . Around 1770 the neoclassical architect Robert Adam designed Pulteney Bridge , a three @-@ arched bridge spanning the Avon . He used as his prototype an original , but unused , design by Palladio for the Rialto Bridge in Venice . The heart of the Georgian city was the Pump Room , which together with its associated Lower Assembly Rooms was designed by Thomas Baldwin , a local builder responsible for many other buildings in the city , including the terraces in Argyle Street . Great Pulteney Street , where Baldwin eventually lived , is another of his works : this wide boulevard , constructed c . 1789 and over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) long and 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide , is lined on both sides by Georgian terraces . 
 Outside the city of Bath most of the Grade I listed buildings are Norman- or medieval @-@ era churches . Manor houses such as Claverton Manor , which now houses the American Museum in Britain , and the 18th @-@ century Newton Park , which has a landscape garden designed by Capability Brown , also appear in the list ; Newton Park now forms part of the Bath Spa University . The most recent building is the agricultural Eastwood Manor Farm Steading , completed in 1860 . 
 = = Mendip = = 
 Mendip is a local government district which covers a largely rural area of 285 square miles ( 738 km2 ) ranging from the Mendip Hills through on to the Somerset Levels . It has a population of approximately 11 @,@ 000 . The administrative centre of the district is Shepton Mallet . 
 There are 90 Grade I listed buildings in the Mendip district . There are churches in the various towns and villages , however the greatest concentrations of Grade I listed buildings are in Wells and Glastonbury . In Wells these are clustered around the 10th @-@ century Cathedral Church of St Andrew , better known as Wells Cathedral , and the 13th @-@ century Bishop 's Palace . Glastonbury is the site of the Abbey , where construction started in the 7th century , and its associated buildings . The ruined St Michael 's church , damaged in an earthquake of 1275 , stands on Glastonbury Tor , where the site shows evidence of occupation from Neolithic times and the Dark Ages . The Chalice Well has been in use since Pre @-@ Christian times . Glastonbury Abbey had a wider influence outside the town : tithe barns were built at Pilton and West Bradley to hold tithes , and a Fish House was built at Meare along with a summer residence for the Abbot ( now Manor Farmhouse ) . 
 Medieval structures include Farleigh Hungerford Castle , fortified around 1370 , and The George Inn at Norton St Philip , used as an army headquarters during the Monmouth Rebellion in 1685 , and then as a courtroom to try the rebels in the Bloody Assizes . Manor houses such as the 15th @-@ century <unk> Court Farmhouse at Beckington and The Old Manor at Croscombe . Mells Manor followed in the 16th century and in the 17th century <unk> House in Cranmore was built . Ston Easton Park and <unk> House in Kilmersdon were both completed in the 18th century . The most recent buildings included in the list are churches : the Church of St Peter at <unk> , built in 1872 – 74 by Sir Thomas Graham Jackson to replace a medieval church on the same site , and Downside Abbey at Stratton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Fosse , more formally known as " The Basilica of St Gregory the Great at Downside " , a Roman Catholic Benedictine monastery and the Senior House of the English Benedictine Congregation . The current buildings were started in the 19th century and are still unfinished . 
 = = North Somerset = = 
 North Somerset is a unitary authority which is administered independently of the non @-@ metropolitan county of Somerset . Its administrative headquarters are located in the town hall of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and has a resident population of 193 @,@ 000 living in 85 @,@ 000 households . 
 There are 37 Grade I listed buildings in North Somerset , including the Clifton Suspension Bridge , which joins North Somerset to Bristol and Clevedon Pier which was built between the 1860s and 1890s . It was removed following damage in 1970 and restored , before being rebuilt and reopened to the public in 1998 . Of the listed buildings , manor houses are well represented . They include Clevedon Court , built in the 14th century , and from the 15th century , Ashton Court and Nailsea Court . North Somerset has many religious structures ; the largest number are from the Norman or medieval eras . The oldest is the Church of St. <unk> and St. <unk> in Tickenham which dates from the 11th century , and there are 8 others from the 12th century . 
 The most recent Grade I building in North Somerset is Tyntesfield , a Victorian Gothic Revival estate near Wraxall . It was acquired by the National Trust in June 2002 after a fund raising campaign to prevent it being sold to private interests and ensure it be opened to the public . The appeal by the National Trust collected £ 8 @.@ 2 million from the public in just 100 days and the Trust also received the largest single grant ever by the National Heritage Memorial Fund ( at £ 17 @.@ 4 million ) , which caused some controversy . The house is built of Bath stone , and is highly picturesque , bristling with turrets and possessing an elaborate roof . 
 = = Sedgemoor = = 
 Sedgemoor district is a low @-@ lying area of land close to sea level between the Quantock and Mendip hills , historically largely marsh ( or moor ) . It contains the bulk of the area also known as the Somerset Levels , including Europe 's oldest known engineered roadway , the Sweet Track . 
 There are 53 Grade I listed buildings in Sedgemoor , 14 of which are in Castle Street , Bridgwater . In 1834 , Castle Street was built on the site of the demolished Bridgwater Castle , as homes for the merchants trading in the town 's port . Outside the town of Bridgwater , the largest concentration of Grade I listed buildings are in the village of Cannington , where the 12th @-@ century Cannington Court and 14th @-@ century Church of St Mary were both associated with a Benedictine nunnery . Cannington is also the site of the 13th @-@ century Gurney Manor and Blackmoor Farmhouse , which was built around 1480 with its own chapel . Although 11th @-@ century churches such as the Church of St Michael at Brent Knoll and the Church of St Mary at <unk> near Spaxton are still standing only blue lias rubble walling standing on a conical earthwork with a ditch approximately 820 feet ( 250 m ) in circumference are the only remains of Stowey Castle which was destroyed in the 15th century , which may have been as a penalty for the local Lord Audley 's involvement in the Second Cornish Uprising of 1497 led by Perkin Warbeck . 
 Many of the more recent structures in the list are manor houses such as Halswell House , where the south range was built in the 16th @-@ century for Sir Nicholas Halswell and the main north range in 1689 for Sir Halswell Tynte . The most recently constructed building in the list is the Corn Exchange in Bridgwater , built in 1834 . 
 = = South Somerset = = 
 The South Somerset district occupies an area of 370 square miles ( 958 km2 ) , stretching from its borders with Devon and Dorset to the edge of the Somerset Levels . The district has a population of about 158 @,@ 000 , and has Yeovil as its administrative centre . 
 There are 94 Grade I listed buildings in South Somerset . Most are Norman- or medieval @-@ era churches , but there are other religious buildings as well . Muchelney Abbey consists of the remains and foundations of a medieval Benedictine Abbey and an early Tudor house dating from the 16th century , formerly the lodgings of the resident abbot . <unk> Priory was built as a priory church in the 13th century and was converted into a private residence in 1533 . The Hamstone Stoke sub Hamdon Priory is a 14th @-@ century former priest 's house of the chantry chapel of St Nicholas , which after 1518 become a farm known as Parsonage Farmhouse . It remained a farm until about 1960 , and has been owned by the National Trust since 1946 . 
 Since the Reformation the 13th @-@ century Hanging Chapel in Langport has been a town hall , courthouse , grammar school , museum , and armoury before becoming a masonic hall in 1891 . The house known as The Abbey in Charlton Mackrell takes its name from the site on which it was built , the Chantry Chapel of the Holy Spirit , founded in 1237 . Naish Priory , built around 1400 in East Coker , was never a priory , and similarly the Abbey Farm House and Abbey Barn in Yeovil which date from around 1420 , have always been in lay @-@ ownership ; " abbey " was added to their names in the 19th century . The 140 @-@ foot ( 43 m ) Burton Pynsent Monument was designed in 1757 , by Capability Brown for William Pitt , as a monument to Sir William Pynsent . King Alfred 's Tower , a 161 feet ( 49 m ) high , triangular edifice , stands near Egbert 's stone , where it is believed that Alfred the Great , King of Wessex , rallied the Saxons in May 878 before the Battle of Ethandun . The towers funder , Henry Hoare , planned for it to commemorate the end of the Seven Years ' War against France and the accession of King George III . The other Grade I listed buildings in South Somerset are manor houses , built over long periods by local Lords of the Manor . The Tudor Barrington Court was the first country house acquired by the National Trust , in 1907 , on the recommendation of the antiquarian Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley . Newton Surmaville was built between 1608 and 1612 for Robert Harbin , a Yeovil merchant , on the site of an earlier building , but was extensively altered and enhanced in the 1870s . Lytes Cary and its associated chapel and gardens have parts dating to as early as the 14th century . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner praised it , saying " Yet all parts blend to perfection with one another and with the gentle sunny landscape that surrounds them . " The 17th @-@ century house at Tintinhull is surrounded by a small 20th @-@ century Arts and Crafts garden . Ven House , which stands on an artificially raised terrace , has a rectangular plan of seven bays by five bays , and is built of red brick in Flemish bond , with local Hamstone dressings ; its north and south fronts are divided by two giant Corinthian pilasters . The small William and Mary style house was completed sometime between 1698 and 1700 . It was enlarged between 1725 and 1730 by Decimus Burton , who provided a new drawing @-@ room for Sir W. <unk> and also an orangery attached to the house . Brympton d 'Evercy , built in stages between about 1220 and the 18th century , has been described , by Auberon Waugh , as " the most beautiful house in England " . 
 = = Taunton Deane = = 
 Taunton Deane has borough status . The district of Taunton Deane covers a population of approximately 100 @,@ 000 in an area of 462 square kilometres ( 178 sq mi ) . It is centered on the town of Taunton , where around 60 @,@ 000 of the population live and the council are based , and includes surrounding suburbs and villages . 
 There are 38 Grade I listed buildings in Taunton Deane . The oldest buildings are churches built before the end of the 12th century , and the Castle Bow , which has been incorporated into the Castle Hotel in Taunton but was originally a gateway into Taunton Castle . The castle was created between 1107 and 1129 , when William Giffard , the Chancellor of King Henry I , fortified the bishop 's hall . It was his successor , Henry of Blois , who transformed the manor @-@ house into a castle in 1138 , during the Civil War that raged during the reign of his brother , King Stephen . Taunton is also the site of Gray 's <unk> , which dates from 1635 , and two buildings in Fore Street from the 16th century . Many of the more recent structures in the list are manor houses such as <unk> Manor and Greenham Barton which were built in <unk> in the 15th century . <unk> Park and Cothelstone Manor were both built in the 16th century and Hatch Court in 1755 . 
 The most recent building included in the list is in the Quantock Hills . The original 16th century <unk> House , was rebuilt in 1909 . In addition to being a listed building the estate is designated Grade I on the English Heritage Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England . The house was used as the headquarters of the British 8th Corps in the Second World War , and has been owned by Somerset County Council since 1951 . It is used as an administrative centre and is the current base for the Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service . 
 = = West Somerset = = 
 The West Somerset local government district covers a largely rural area , including parts of Exmoor , with a population , according to the 2001 census , of 35 @,@ 075 in an area of 740 square kilometres ( 290 sq mi ) . The largest centres of population are the coastal towns of Minehead and Watchet . The council 's administrative headquarters are in the village of Williton . 
 There are 33 Grade I listed buildings in West Somerset . The oldest is either Culbone Church , one of the smallest churches in England , and pre @-@ Norman in origin , or Tarr Steps , which may originate in the Bronze Age , although other sources date them from around 1400 . Dunster has the greatest concentration of Grade I listed buildings , including Dunster Castle , which was built in 1617 on a site which had supported a castle for the previous 600 years ; the Yarn Market , which was built in 1609 ; Gallox Bridge , which dates from the 15th century and the Priory Church of St George which is predominately from the 15th century but includes part of the earlier church on the same site . Other sites include manor houses such as the medieval buildings at Nettlecombe Court and Orchard Wyndham . 
 = Gertrude Barrows Bennett = 
 Gertrude Barrows Bennett ( 1883 – 1948 ) was the first major female writer of fantasy and science fiction in the United States , publishing her stories under the pseudonym Francis Stevens . Bennett wrote a number of highly acclaimed fantasies between 1917 and 1923 and has been called " the woman who invented dark fantasy " . 
 Her most famous books include Claimed ( which Augustus T. Swift , in a letter to The Argosy called " One of the strangest and most compelling science fantasy novels you will ever read " ) and the lost world novel The Citadel of Fear . 
 Bennett also wrote an early dystopian novel , The Heads of Cerberus ( 1919 ) . 
 = = Life = = 
 Gertrude Mabel Barrows was born in Minneapolis in 1883 . She completed school through the eighth grade , then attended night school in hopes of becoming an illustrator ( a goal she never achieved ) . Instead , she began working as a stenographer , a job she held on and off for the rest of her life . 
 In 1909 Barrows married Stewart Bennett , a British journalist and explorer , and moved to Philadelphia . A year later her husband died while on an expedition . With a new @-@ born daughter to raise , Bennett continued working as a stenographer . When her father died toward the end of World War I , Bennett assumed care for her invalid mother . 
 During this time period Bennett began to write a number of short stories and novels , only stopping when her mother died in 1920 . In the mid @-@ 1920s , she moved to California . Because Bennett was estranged from her daughter , for a number of years researchers believed Bennett died in 1939 ( the date of her final letter to her daughter ) . However , new research , including her death certificate , shows that she died in 1948 . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 Bennett wrote her first short story at age 17 , a science fiction story titled " The Curious Experience of Thomas Dunbar " . She mailed the story to Argosy , then one of the top pulp magazines . The story was accepted and published in the March 1904 issue . 
 Once Bennett began to take care of her mother , she decided to return to fiction writing as a means of supporting her family . The first story she completed after her return to writing was the novella " The Nightmare , " which appeared in All @-@ Story Weekly in 1917 . The story is set on an island separated from the rest of the world , on which evolution has taken a different course . " The Nightmare " resembles Edgar Rice Burroughs ' The Land That Time Forgot , itself published a year later . While Bennett had submitted " The Nightmare " under her own name , she had asked to use a pseudonym if it was published . The magazine 's editor chose not to use the pseudonym Bennett suggested ( Jean Vail ) and instead credited the story to Francis Stevens . When readers responded positively to the story , Bennett chose to continue writing under the name . 
 Over the next few years , Bennett wrote a number of short stories and novellas . Her short story " Friend Island " ( All @-@ Story Weekly , 1918 ) , for example , is set in a 22nd @-@ century ruled by women . Another story is the novella " Serapion " ( Argosy , 1920 ) , about a man possessed by a supernatural creature . This story has been released in an electronic book entitled Possessed : A Tale of the Demon Serapion , with three other stories by her . Many of her short stories have been collected in The Nightmare and Other Tales of Dark Fantasy ( University of Nebraska Press , 2004 ) . 
 In 1918 she published her first , and perhaps best , novel The Citadel of Fear ( Argosy , 1918 ) . This lost world story focuses on a forgotten Aztec city , which is " rediscovered " during World War I. It was in the introduction to a 1952 reprint edition of the novel which revealed for the first time that " Francis Stevens " was Bennett 's pen @-@ name . 
 A year later she published her only science fiction novel , The Heads of Cerberus ( The Thrill Book , 1919 ) . One of the first dystopian novels , the book features a " grey dust from a silver phial " which transports anyone who inhales it to a totalitarian Philadelphia of 2118 AD 
 One of Bennett 's most famous novels was Claimed ( Argosy , 1920 ; reprinted 1966 and 2004 ) , in which a supernatural artifact summons an ancient and powerful god to 20th century New Jersey . Augustus T. Swift called the novel , " One of the strangest and most compelling science fantasy novels you will ever read " ) . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Bennett has been credited as having " the best claim at creating the new genre of dark fantasy " . It has been said that Bennett 's writings influenced both H. P. Lovecraft and A. Merritt , both of whom " emulated Bennett 's earlier style and themes " . Lovecraft was even said to have praised Bennett 's work . However , there is controversy about whether or not this actually happened and the praise appears to have resulted from letters wrongly attributed to Lovecraft . 
 As for Merritt , for several decades critics and readers believed " Francis Stevens " was a pseudonym of his . This rumor only ended with the 1952 reprinting of Citadel of Fear , which featured a biographical introduction of Bennett by Lloyd Arthur Eshbach . 
 Critic Sam Moskowitz said she was the " greatest woman writer of science fiction in the period between Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley and C.L. Moore " . 
 Because Bennett was the first American woman to have her fantasy and science fiction widely published , she has been recognized in recent years as a pioneering female fantasy author . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 The Citadel of Fear ( 1918 ; reprinted in Famous Fantastic Mysteries , February 1942 , and in paperback form in 1970 , [ NY : Paperback Library ] and 1984 [ NY : Carroll & Graf ] ) 
 The Labyrinth ( serialized in All @-@ Story Weekly , July 27 , August 3 , and August 10 , 1918 ; later reprinted as a paperback novel ) 
 The Heads of Cerberus 1st book edition . 1952 , Cloth , also leather backed , Reading , PA . Polaris Press ( Subsidiary of Fantasy <unk> , Inc . ) ill . Ric Binkley . Intro by Lloyd Arthur Eshbach ( Thrill Book , 15 August 1919 ; reprinted as a paperback novel in 1952 and 1984 ) 
 Avalon ( serialized in Argosy , August 16 to September 6 , 1919 ; not reprinted ) 
 Claimed ( 1920 ; reprinted in 1985 , 1996 , and 2004 ) <unk> , cloth and paper , Sense of Wonder Press , James A. Rock & Co . , Publishers in trade paperback and hard cover . 
 = = = Short stories and novellas = = = 
 " The Curious Experience of Thomas Dunbar " ( Argosy , March , 1904 ; as by G. M. Barrows ) 
 " The Nightmare , " ( All @-@ Story Weekly , April 14 , 1917 ) 
 " Friend Island " ( All @-@ Story Weekly , September 7 , 1918 ; reprinted in Under the Moons of Mars , edited by Sam Moskowitz , 1970 ) 
 " Behind the Curtain " ( All @-@ Story Weekly , September 21 , 1918 , reprinted in Famous Fantastic Mysteries , January 1940 ) 
 " Unseen @-@ Unfeared " ( People 's Favorite Magazine Feb. 10 , 1919 ; reprinted in Horrors Unknown , edited by Sam Moskowitz , 1971 ) 
 " The Elf @-@ Trap " ( Argosy , July 5 , 1919 ) 
 " Serapion " ( serialized in Argosy Weekly , June 19 , June 26 , and July 3 , 1920 ; reprinted in Famous Fantastic Mysteries , July 1942 ) 
 " Sunfire " ( 1923 ; original printed in two parts in Weird Tales , July – August 1923 , and Weird Tales , September 1923 ; also reprinted as trade paperback in 1996 by Apex International ) 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 Possessed : A Tale of the Demon Serapion ( 2002 ; contains the novella " Serapion " , retitled , and the short stories " Behind the Curtain " , " Elf @-@ Trap " and " Unseen @-@ Unfeared " ) 
 Nightmare : And Other Tales of Dark Fantasy ( University of Nebraska Press , 2004 ; contains all Stevens ' known short fiction except " The Curious Experience of Thomas Dunbar " , i.e. " The Nightmare " , " The Labyrinth " , " Friend Island " , " Behind the Curtain " , " " Unseen @-@ Unfeared " , " The Elf @-@ Trap " , " Serapion " and " Sunfire " ) 
 = Man Down ( song ) = 
 " Man Down " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . Singer Shontelle and production duo Rock City wrote the song with its main producer , Sham . They wrote it during a writing camp , in Los Angeles of March 2010 , held by Rihanna 's record label to gather compositions for possible inclusion on the then @-@ untitled album . Rock City were inspired by Bob Marley 's 1973 song " I Shot the Sheriff " and set out to create a song which embodied the same feel but female perspective . It is a reggae ballad which incorporates elements of ragga and electronic music . Lyrically , Rihanna is a fugitive after she shoots a man , an action she later regrets . Several critics singled out " Man Down " as Loud 's highlight , while others commented on her prominent West Indian accent and vocal agility . 
 Def Jam released " Man Down " on May 3 , 2011 , as the fifth single from the album . In the United States , the single reached number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 9 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It has been certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song topped the chart in France for five consecutive weeks and reached the top three in Belgium and the Netherlands . Anthony Mandler directed its music video , in which Rihanna 's character shoots a man after he rapes her . The video was criticized by the Parents Television Council , Industry Ears and Mothers Against Violence , who faulted Rihanna for suggesting that murder is an acceptable form of justice for rape victims . However , actress Gabrielle Union , a rape victim , praised the video for being relatable . " Man Down " was on the set list for three of Rihanna 's tours – the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , the Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) and The Anti World Tour ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 2010 , record label Def Jam held a writing camp in Los Angeles for songwriters and producers to compose material for possible inclusion on Rihanna 's then @-@ untitled fifth studio album , Loud . Def Jam rented out nearly every recording studio in Los Angeles in order to create as many songs as possible . Ray Daniels , the manager of musical duo Rock City ( brothers Theron and Timothy Thomas ) , was present during the sessions , and stated that a writing camp typically involves the label hiring ten recording studios for two weeks at the cost of $ 25 @,@ 000 per day . Daniels revealed that it is where songwriters have lyrics but no music , and where producers have music but no lyrics . 
 Shama Joseph , professionally known as Sham , was hired as one of the producers to work on crafting songs at the camp . Sham 's manager had arranged his attendance at the camp through an acquaintance who was an employee of the record label . Sham explained that he found a flight to Los Angeles and began working on music as soon as he arrived , stating that he had " nothing to lose and everything to gain " . He was inspired by a vision of Rihanna performing songs at a concert that were Caribbean themed . Sham felt that Rihanna had not explored Caribbean @-@ themed music since her debut album , Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 According to Daniels , Rock City knew Sham but they had not heard the West Indian / Caribbean @-@ themed music that he had composed during the camp . Sham played the music to them , to which the brothers responded " Let 's give Rihanna a one @-@ drop ! Like , a response to ' I shot the sheriff ' ! " Together , Sham and Rock City wrote the lyrics to " Man Down " in twelve minutes . In an MTV News interview , Rock City said they intended to write a song that would embody Bob Marley 's " I Shot the Sheriff " ( 1973 ) from a female perspective and to " tap [ Rihanna 's ] island origins in a way that sounded authentic " . Singer Shontelle said that Rihanna called her during the Last Girl on Earth tour and asked her to be involved with the song . She confirmed that Rihanna was present when she was writing her part in the recording studio . Shontelle elucidated that following one of Rihanna 's concerts , the singer exited the stage and immediately returned to the tour bus to work in the studio . Daniels said that once the writing camp had concluded , Rihanna listened to all of the songs which had been composed for her and chose her favorites . In September 2010 , several months after Sham attended the writing camp , Rihanna called him and said that she wanted to record " Man Down " for inclusion on Loud . 
 Rihanna later described the sentiment she wanted to express as " gangsta " , and elaborated on how reggae culture has influenced her musical style : " I 'm super inspired by reggae music [ and it ] has been a part of me since I was born , and I grew up listening to it . I was exciting for me to take this on as my own and do a song like this , especially with the lyrics being like that . " The track was composed during Rihanna 's Last Girl on Earth tour . The song 's instrumental was recorded by Cary Clark at The Village in Los Angeles . Kuk Harrell produced Rihanna 's vocals with Josh Gudwin and Marcos Tovar at Westlake Recording Studios , also in Los Angeles . Bobby Campbell assisted with vocal production and recording . The song was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Sound Studios in Los Angeles , assisted by Erik Madrid and Christian Plata . 
 Daniels estimated the total cost of the writing camp to be approximately $ 200 @,@ 000 , averaging $ 18 @,@ 000 for each of the eleven songs which were included on Loud ; the camp consisted of forty writers and producers . Daniels confirmed that Rock City received $ 15 @,@ 000 and Sham $ 20 @,@ 000 for their part in the production of " Man Down " . He said that " to get that twelve minutes of inspiration from a top songwriting team is expensive — even before you take into account the fee for the songwriters " . A cost of $ 53 @,@ 000 for " Man Down " was already incurred prior to Rihanna entering the studio with a vocal producer . Although Makeba Riddick did not serve as the song 's vocal producer , Daniels cited her as an example of how the process works and how much she would charge . It is the responsibility of the vocal producer to tell a singer how to sing the song correctly to achieve the desired sound . Daniels said that Riddick 's fee varies from $ 10 @,@ 000 to $ 15 @,@ 000 , and that the final part of the process is for the song to be mixed and mastered , which incurs a similar fee . He estimated the final cost of writing , producing , vocal producing , mixing and mastering " Man Down " to be $ 78 @,@ 000 . When combined with the marketing and promotional costs , the total expense was $ 1 @,@ 078 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Man Down " is a " murder fantasy " reggae song with " Caribbean @-@ rhythms " and elements of ragga and electronic music . The song , in the key of C minor , has a tempo of 77 beats per minute . Rihanna 's voice spans more than one and a half octaves , from F3 to E ♭ 5 . Slant Magazine critic Sal Cinquemani described " Man Down " as one of Rihanna 's " most confident vocal performances " with her strong Barbadian patois . Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that the singer " plays up her West Indian accent " , and August Brown of the Los Angeles Times described the vocals as reasserting " her Caribbean lilt " . Entertainment Weekly writer Leah Greenblatt described " Man Down " as a song with " island rhythms " . Lyrically , Rihanna is a fugitive after she shoots a man , but later regrets it . Rihanna slowly relays the chain of events which led up to the murder . She cries to her mother about the act that she has committed – " Mama , I just shot a man down " – expressing guilt and remorse for not meaning to kill her attacker , and that he is somebody 's son . As the track develops , Rihanna 's Bajan accent becomes stronger and exaggerated , which climaxes during the bridge as she declares " Why deed I pull dee treeguh , pull dee treeguh , pull dee treeguh , BOOM ! " MuuMuse writer Bradley Stern thought that the track took on a confessional tone . 
