 Today the River Fleet has been reduced to a trickle in a culvert under New Bridge Street that emerges under Blackfriars Bridge , but before the development of London it was the largest river in the area after the Thames . It formed the western boundary of the Roman city of London and the strategic importance of the junction of the Fleet and the Thames means that the area was probably fortified from early times . Richard of Cirencester suggests that Canute spent Christmas at such a fort in 1017 , where he had Eadric Streona executed . Some accounts claim this was triggered by an argument over a game of chess ; Historian William Page suggests that Eadric held the fort as Ealdorman of Mercia and after his death it may have been granted to <unk> <unk> , who was a " <unk> " , a standard @-@ bearer and representative of the king ( see Privileges section ) . 
 This fort was apparently rebuilt after the Norman invasion by Ralph Baynard , a follower of William the Conqueror and sheriff of Essex . It was on the riverfront inside the Roman walls ; a second Norman fort , Montfichet 's Tower was <unk> metres ( 230 ft ) to the north . The site of Baynard 's Castle was adjacent to the church of St. Andrew @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Wardrobe , on the southern side of 160 Queen Victoria Street ( the former Times office and now The Bank of New York Mellon Centre ) ; archaeologists have found fortifications stretching at least 50 metres ( 160 ft ) south , onto the site of the proposed development at 2 Puddle Dock . This may be the <unk> mentioned in the Domesday Survey ( 1087 ) who gave his name to springs near Paddington called Baynard 's Watering , later shortened to Bayswater . 
 The castle was inherited by Ralph 's son Geoffrey and his grandson William Baynard , but the latter forfeited his lands early in the reign of Henry I ( 1100 – 1135 ) for supporting Henry 's brother Robert Curthose in his claim to the throne . After a few years in the hands of the king , the castle passed to Eustace , Count of Boulogne by 1106 . John Stow gives 1111 as the date of forfeiture . Later in Henry 's reign , the lordship of Dunmow and honour or soke of Baynard 's Castle were granted to the king 's steward , Robert Fitz Richard ( 1064 – 1136 ) . The soke was coterminous with the parish of St. Andrew @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Wardrobe , which was adjacent to the Norman castle ; the soke roughly corresponds to the eponymous ward of the City of London . Both Dunmow and Baynard 's Castle were eventually inherited by his grandson , Robert Fitzwalter ( d . 1234 ) . 
 = = Fitzwalter and the barons ' revolt = = 
 Fitzwalter was the leader of the barons ' revolt against King John which culminated in the Magna Carta of 1215 . The Chronicle of Dunmow relates that King John desired Fitzwalter 's daughter , Matilda the Fair , and Fitzwalter was forced to take up arms to defend the honour of his daughter . This romantic tale may well be propaganda giving legitimacy to a rebellion prompted by Fitzwalter 's reluctance to pay tax or some other dispute . He plotted with the Welsh prince Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Eustace de <unk> of Alnwick Castle in 1212 . John got wind of the plot and exiled Fitzwalter and de <unk> , who fled to France and Scotland respectively . On 14 January 1213 the king destroyed Castle Baynard . Fitzwalter was forgiven under the terms of the king 's submission to Pope Innocent III in May 1213 . His estates were restored on 19 July 1213 and according to Stow he was given licence to repair Castle Baynard and his other castles . 
 It is not clear to what extent the castle was rebuilt , but in 1275 Fitzwalter 's grandson , also called Robert , was given licence to sell the site to Robert Kilwardby , the Archbishop of Canterbury for the precinct of the great Dominican Priory at Blackfriars built in 1276 . Montfichet 's Tower was included in the sale , having also been destroyed by King John in 1213 . The building of the priory required the Roman walls to be rerouted , and the military functions of the castle were taken up by a new " tower " in the river at the end of the walls . Started under the great castle @-@ builder Edward I , it was completed during the reign of Edward II ( 1307 – 1327 ) and demolished in 1502 . This was probably the tower of Legate 's Inn given by Edward III to William de Ros . 
 = = Privileges = = 
 The lord of Castle Baynard appears to have had held a special place among the nobility of London . Robert explicitly retained all the franchises and privileges associated with the Barony of Baynard when he made the sale . He claimed them in 1303 , his son Robert tried again before the King 's Justices in 1327 and his brother John FitzWalter tried again in 1347 in front of the Mayor and Common Council , all without success . 
 These suits centred around a claim to be the chief banneret of London . Created in the reign of Edward I ( 1272 – 1307 ) , Knights banneret led troops into battle under their own banner rather than that of someone else . It seems that the castellany of Castle Baynard had entitled FitzWalter 's ancestors to carry the banner of London , and hence be leaders of the London forces . In 1136 Robert Fitz Richard had claimed the lordship of the Thames from London to Staines , as the king 's banner @-@ bearer and as guardian of the whole city of London . 
 In times of peace , the soke of Castle Baynard had a court which sentenced criminals convicted before the mayor at the Guildhall , and maintained its a prison and stocks . Traitors were drowned while tied to a post , as the tide overwhelmed them at Wood Wharf . Fitzwalter was invited to the Court of Privilege , held at the Great Council in the Guildhall , but sitting next to the Lord Mayor making pronouncements all judgements . This may represent a combination of the post @-@ Conquest roles of the feudal constable and local justiciar with the pre @-@ Norman office of <unk> . The latter was the king 's standard @-@ bearer in war who was his spokesman at the Danish thing , or 11th century governing assembly . 
 = = New site = = 
 A " Hospice called le Old Inne by Pauls Wharfe " is listed in the possessions of Edward , Duke of York , who was killed at Agincourt in 1415 . He may have acquired the house by his marriage to Philippa de Mohun , widow of Walter Fitzwalter ( d . 1386 ) . 
 A declaration of 1446 appears to identify this building with a town @-@ house built on land reclaimed from the river , 100 metres ( 110 yd ) southeast of the original castle . Humphrey , Duke of Gloucester rebuilt the house after a " great fire " in 1428 , there were four wings in a trapezoidal shape around a courtyard . Excavations have shown that the Roman riverside wall , on the south side of the medieval Thames Street , formed the foundation of the north wall of the new house . It seems that the nearby waterfront was known as Baynard 's Castle even after the original castle was destroyed , and the name was transferred to the building on the new site . 
 Gloucester died within days of being arrested for treason in 1447 . The house passed to the crown before being occupied by Edward 's nephew Richard Plantagenet , 3rd Duke of York by 1457 . The former Lord Protector kept 400 gentlemen and men @-@ at @-@ arms at the castle in his pursuit of his claim to the throne , but was killed at the Battle of Wakefield in 1460 . This London powerbase allowed York 's son to take the crown in the hall of the castle as Edward IV whilst Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou were campaigning in northern England . Edward gave the castle to his mother on 1 June 1461 , a few weeks before his coronation , and he put his family there for safety before the decisive Battle of Barnet . After Edward V and his brother Richard were declared illegitimate in 1483 and imprisoned in the Tower of London , Edward 's brother Richard assumed the title of King at Baynard 's Castle , as depicted in Shakespeare 's play Richard III . 
 = = Tudors = = 
 In 1501 Henry VII " <unk> or rather new builded this house , not <unk> , or so strongly fortified Castle like , but farre more beautiful and commodious for the <unk> of any Prince or greate Estate " . Henry 's alterations included five projecting towers between two existing polygonal corner towers on the riverfront . Henry is recorded as staying at the castle when attending functions at St Paul 's . His son gave the castle to Catherine of Aragon on 10 June 1509 , the day before their wedding , and the queen took up residence there . Later one of Henry 's favourite courtiers , Sir William Sidney ( 1482 ? – 1554 ) , tutor to the future Edward VI , lived in the castle and made his will there in 1548 . 
 The house passed to William Herbert , 1st Earl of Pembroke by 1551 , the year in which this influential courtier was made Earl of Pembroke . Thus it was at Baynard 's Castle that the Privy Council met to end the reign of Lady Jane Grey and proclaim Mary as Queen of England . Pembroke 's wife Anne Parr , the sister of Henry VIII 's queen Catherine Parr , died in the castle in 1552 . The house was extended to the west around 1550 with three wings of brick , faced with stone on the riverfront . The second courtyard formed by this extension is clearly visible on Hollar 's view of London before the Great Fire . Old prints show a large gateway in the middle of the south side , a bridge of two arches and steps down to the river . 
 The house remained in the Pembroke family until the 4th Earl , Philip Herbert , who was appointed Chancellor of the University of Oxford there in 1641 . Herbert preferred to live in Whitehall while his wife Anne ( 1590 – 1676 ) took up residence in Baynard 's Castle , describing it in her memoirs as " a house full of riches , and more secured by my lying there " . Pembroke sided with the parliamentarians in the First English Civil War and died in 1650 . By the time of the Restoration , the house was occupied by the Earl of Shrewsbury , who had fought on the side of the Royalist army in their defeat at Worcester in 1651 . Samuel Pepys records that on 19 June 1660 " My Lord went at night with the King to Baynard 's Castle to supper ... [ the next morning he ] lay long in bed this day , because he came home late from supper with the King " . Charles II had only arrived in London on 29 May , and would appoint Pepys ' " lord " , Edward Montagu as Earl of Sandwich a few weeks later . 
 = = After the Great Fire = = 
 Baynard Castle was destroyed in the Great Fire of London in 1666 . The engraver Wenceslaus Hollar depicted considerable ruins standing after the fire , including the stone facade on the river side , but only a round tower was left when Strype was writing in 1720 . This tower had been converted into a dwelling , the rest of the site became timber yards and wood wharves with <unk> Lane running through the site from Thames Street . Richard Horwood 's map of c . 1813 shows a copper wharf , which in 1878 belonged to the Castle Baynard Copper Company . The remaining tower ( some sources say two survived ) was pulled down in the 19th century to make way for warehouses of the Carron Company . In the 1970s the area was redeveloped , with the construction of the Blackfriars underpass and Baynard House , a Brutalist office block occupied by BT Group . Most of the site under Baynard House is a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 Most of the archaeological evidence for the second Baynard 's Castle comes from excavations in 1972 – 5 , before the construction of Baynard House . Parts of the north wing of both the original house and extension were found , including the north gate and <unk> , and the cobbled entrance from Thames Street . Two east @-@ west " limestone " walls were found ; the excavator suggested that the more northerly one was the curtain wall of the pre @-@ 1428 castle , and the other was a post @-@ 1428 replacement . The latter was surmounted by a brick facing with a rubble core , to which a rectangular pier was attached . The castle had foundations of chalk , ragstone and mortar and was built entirely on reclaimed land . Several phases of building in the late 17th century were also identified . Excavations in 1981 at the City of London School uncovered the SE corner tower of the Tudor castle . The London Archaeological Archive codes for the excavations are <unk> / <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = HMS Grenade ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Grenade ( <unk> ) was a G @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy during the 1930s . She was transferred from the Mediterranean Fleet shortly after the beginning of World War II for service in home waters . The ship participated in the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign in April 1940 . German Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers sank Grenade as she evacuated Allied troops during Operation Dynamo on 29 May 1940 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Grenade displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Grenade carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft defence Grenade had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Grenade was laid down by Alexander Stephen and Sons in Glasgow , Scotland on 3 October 1934 , launched on 12 November 1935 and completed on 28 March 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 252 @,@ 560 . She was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . Grenade was given a post @-@ completion overhaul in Malta between 20 March and 24 April 1937 . After returning home to give her crew leave and be refitted in Chatham Dockyard between 27 May and July 1938 , the ship was then briefly transferred to the Red Sea in October 1938 . 
 When World War II began in September 1939 , Grenade was in Alexandria , but she , and her entire flotilla , was transferred to the Western Approaches Command at Plymouth in October . On 7 November she collided with her flotilla leader , Grenville and her repairs were not completed until 9 December . During the next several months she was assigned to contraband control duties in the Downs . She , and her sister ship , Griffin , rescued 117 survivors from Grenville after the latter ship struck a mine on 19 January 1940 . The ship was refitted in London between 27 January and 27 February , but was struck by the ocean liner Orion on 27 February and was only temporarily repaired there . Grenade received permanent repairs in Harwich from 2 March to 3 April and was assigned to Home Fleet at Scapa Flow after their completion . 
 When Britain received word that the Germans were preparing to invade Norway on 7 / 8 April , Grenade was part of the escort of Convoy <unk> and was recalled , along with the rest of the escort , to join the Home Fleet . The ship , and the destroyer Encounter , escorted the oil tanker British Lady to Flakstadøya in the Lofoten Islands where a refuelling and repair base was being set up to support British naval operations in northern Norway . For the rest of the month Grenade escorted the battleship Warspite and the aircraft carrier Ark Royal in Norwegian waters . The ship provided cover during the evacuation of British and French troops from Namsos in early May and tied up to the French destroyer Bison to rescue survivors after the latter 's forward magazine had been hit by a bomb from a Junkers Ju 87 dive bomber and exploded on 3 May . Four men on Grenade were wounded by splinters from near misses during this time and she rescued 36 sailors , but twenty of them died of their wounds before the ship reached Scapa Flow on 5 May . 
 Grenade was then transferred to the English Channel and collided with the anti @-@ submarine trawler Clayton Wyke on 14 May in heavy fog . Her repairs were completed at Sheerness Dockyard on 25 May . During the initial stages of the evacuation from Dunkirk the ship provided cover in the northern part of the Channel to the evacuation forces and took part in the rescue of 33 survivors on 28 May from the coaster SS Abukir , which had been torpedoed by an E @-@ boat . She made one trip to Dunkirk during the night of 28 / 29 May and was caught in Dunkirk harbour by German Stukas during the following day . Grenade was hit by two bombs which set her afire and killed 14 sailors and mortally wounded another four men . The ship was cast off from her berth , in case she sank there , and then drifted into the harbour channel . The trawler John <unk> towed Grenade over to the west side of the outer harbour where her magazines exploded later that evening . 
 = Kenny McLean = 
 Kenneth " Kenny " McLean ( born 8 January 1992 ) is a Scottish professional footballer who plays for Aberdeen as a central midfielder or left midfielder . 
 After being released by Rangers ' youth team , McLean started his senior career at SPL club St Mirren . He went on loan to Second Division side Arbroath for the second half of the 2009 – 10 season , before returning to St Mirren and breaking into the first team . He moved to current club Aberdeen in 2015 . 
 He has represented Scotland at the under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 21 international levels . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 McLean was born in Rutherglen and attended Cathkin High School in Cambuslang . He played in Rangers ' youth squad when he was younger . After being released by them he joined St Mirren . 
 = = = Arbroath ( loan ) = = = 
 McLean moved on loan from St Mirren to Second Division club Arbroath in December 2009 . Arbroath signed McLean , along with Kilmarnock striker Daniel McKay , to cover for injuries . On 12 December , McLean made his debut for Arbroath in a 4 – 3 loss to Stirling Albion . Shortly after this match , Arbroath signed McLean 's St Mirren team mate Kyle Faulds on loan . On 10 April , McLean scored his only goal for Arbroath , a penalty kick in a 4 – 2 loss against Stirling Albion . He made a total of 23 appearances during the second half of the 2009 – 10 season . Arbroath were relegated to the Third Division at the end of the season , after losing to Forfar Athletic in the relegation play @-@ off . McLean has said that his loan spell at Arbroath helped him develop as a player and also to become more mature . 
 = = = St Mirren = = = 
 Eighteen @-@ year @-@ old McLean made his debut on 17 October 2010 , coming on as a substitute in a 2 – 2 draw against Hamilton . St Mirren were 2 – 0 down when he came on and their manager , Danny Lennon , thought that they were going to lose anyway so he would bring a youngster on . However , The Herald noted that McLean 's " drive and energy " lifted St Mirren and helped them to turn the game around and get a draw . Three days after his debut , McLean made his first start for St Mirren , in a 3 – 0 loss to Hearts . Later in the week he signed a three @-@ year contract extension , tying him to the club until 2014 . He then made his first home start , in a 1 – 0 loss to Celtic on 16 November . After this match he thanked his manager for having faith in him and also said that he was amazed by the fact that only six months before he was playing in the Second Division relegation play @-@ off , but was now playing against some of the best players in the country . He went on to make a total of 23 appearances during the 2010 – 11 season . 
 Sky Sports said that during the 2011 – 12 season McLean had begun to emerge as one of the top young talents in the SPL . His first game of the season was on 6 August , in a 1 – 1 draw against Dundee United , where he came on as an 80th @-@ minute substitute . His first start came a week later in a 1 – 0 loss to Motherwell . McLean then played regularly in the first team over the next few months and was in excellent form . He scored his first senior goal in a 1 – 0 win over St Johnstone on 29 October and was rewarded with the SPL Young Player of the Month award for October 2011 . After this , team @-@ mate Gary Teale said that he thought McLean was very similar to former Rangers and Scotland captain Barry Ferguson , and that he thought McLean would have a brilliant future in the game . In the weeks leading up to his award , McLean had been watched by English Championship clubs Burnley and Crystal Palace , with Celtic also reportedly interested in him . Lennon encouraged interest from other clubs , saying that he took it as a compliment to McLean 's development . But he also said that he would not consider selling McLean in the near future and expressed his delight at the fact that he had already signed McLean on a long @-@ term contract . On 19 November , McLean scored his second goal for St Mirren , in a 2 – 1 win over Dunfermline Athletic . He then scored St Mirren 's first goal , on 10 December , as they came from behind to secure a 2 – 2 draw against Aberdeen . McLean was one of the four players nominated for the SPL young Player of the Year Award . In January 2014 it was announced that McLean would be out @-@ of @-@ action for 6 weeks following knee surgery . 
 On 2 July 2014 it was announced that McLean had a signed a two @-@ year contract extension with the club , following much speculation that he would leave the club in the summer . 
 = = = Aberdeen = = = 
 McLean signed a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract with Aberdeen on 2 February 2015 , for a reported transfer fee of around £ 300 @,@ 000 . He made his debut for the club the following weekend in a league game against Ross County , which Aberdeen won 4 – 0 . On 16 July 2015 , McLean scored his first goal for Aberdeen in a 3 – 0 win away to <unk> Rijeka in the second qualifying round first leg of the Europa League . McLean scored his first league goal for Aberdeen in a 1 – 0 win over Dundee United on the opening day of the 2015 – 16 season . 
 = = International career = = 
 McLean earned his first call @-@ up for Scotland under @-@ 19 squad in October 2010 , coming on as a 58th @-@ minute substitute in a 4 – 2 win over Norway . 
 In March 2011 , he was then called up to the under @-@ 21 team . Making his debut , again from the bench , as Scotland beat Belgium 1 – 0 . He was not selected for the Scotland under @-@ 21 team to play in a 2013 European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship qualification match against the Netherlands on 14 November 2011 . St Mirren manager Danny Lennon expressed his surprise at McLean being left out of the squad . The Herald said that this was understandable given that he was " among the on @-@ form midfielders of his age group " at the time . 
 McLean received his first call @-@ up to the senior Scotland squad in March 2016 , for a friendly against Czech Republic . McLean made his international debut in that game , playing 57 minutes . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 23 July 2016 
 = = Style of play = = 
 McLean 's favoured position is as a central midfielder , but he can also play as a left midfielder . He has said that he favours playing in the centre because he can get more of the ball and influence play more than when he is on the left . He is a naturally attacking player and when playing in the centre he makes runs to and beyond the striker which adds an extra dimension to his team 's play . 
 Former Scotland international , and McLean 's teammate at St Mirren , Gary Teale has compared him to Barry Ferguson . Teale said that McLean had shown incredible maturity at such a young age and that from their first training session together he could see McLean 's talent . McLean has an excellent first touch and is also very composed and assured on the ball . McLean also has very high energy , work rate and athleticism which enable him to make lots of attacking runs . McLean 's manager at St Mirren , Danny Lennon , said that he thought McLean was an excellent passer and that he could " open a tin of beans " with his left foot and was also decent with his right . Lennon also said that McLean was a rare type of Scottish player because he was always looking for a ' slide @-@ rule ' pass and he was actually capable of delivering them . 
 = Priscus ( general ) = 
 Priscus or <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ; died 613 ) was a leading East Roman ( Byzantine ) general during the reigns of the Byzantine emperors Maurice ( reigned 582 – 602 ) , Phocas ( r . 602 – 610 ) and Heraclius ( r . 610 – 641 ) . Priscus comes across as an effective and capable military leader , although the contemporary sources are markedly biased in his favour . Under Maurice , he distinguished himself in the campaigns against the Avars and their Slavic allies in the Balkans . Absent from the capital at the time of Maurice 's overthrow and murder by Phocas , he was one of the few of Maurice 's senior aides who were able to survive unharmed into the new regime , remaining in high office and even marrying the new emperor 's daughter . Priscus , however , also negotiated with and assisted Heraclius in the overthrow of Phocas , and was entrusted with command against the Persians in 611 – 612 . After the failure of this campaign , he was dismissed and tonsured . He died shortly after . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Under Maurice = = = 
 Priscus first appears in the historical sources when he was appointed , in late 587 or early 588 , to command in the East against the Persians as magister militum per Orientem , replacing Philippicus . He only reached the East in spring , and assumed his new command at <unk> in April . Priscus immediately ran into trouble with the soldiers : his haughty manner in refusing to mingle with them made him unpopular , and when a decree by Emperor Maurice which reduced army pay by a quarter was announced , the soldiers mutinied on Easter day , 18 April 588 . Priscus not only failed to restore order , but was himself attacked and forced to flee to Constantina , while the soldiers elected the dux of Phoenice , Germanus , as their leader . Priscus 's attempts from Constantina to calm the soldiers by employing the local bishops as mediators and rescinding the decree also failed . Philippicus was restored to command by Maurice , while Priscus returned to Constantinople . 
 Despite this debacle , in the same summer he was entrusted with the post of magister militum for Thrace , and tasked with campaigning against the Avars at the head of an improvised force . His deputy ( hypostrategos ) <unk> with 1 @,@ 000 cavalry was sent to hold the passes of the Haemus Mountains , but after two days was forced by the Avars ' numerical superiority to withdraw . The Avars sacked the city of Anchialos , but an attempted siege of <unk> was broken off and the Avars marched south , reaching Heraclea Perinthus and cutting Priscus 's forces off from Constantinople . <unk> , Priscus retreated to <unk> , where he was besieged by the Avars . The 7th @-@ century historian Theophylact Simocatta reports that after a few days , Priscus devised a stratagem to force the Avars to withdraw : he allowed one of his guards to be captured , bearing a fake letter purportedly coming from Maurice that informed Priscus of a seaborne attack against the Avars ' homeland . The Avar khagan was persuaded that the letter was true and prepared to return home in haste ; he arranged for a truce in exchange for the renewed payment of an annual tribute . The 12th @-@ century history of Michael the Syrian gives this as 800 pounds of gold ( some 60 @,@ 000 solidi ) , a considerably reduced sum compared to the 100 @,@ 000 solidi agreed in 584 . The Avars departed for their country , while Priscus disbanded his army and returned to Constantinople . Priscus disappears for the next few years , as he fell into disfavour with Maurice . By 593 , he had recovered his position , as a letter by Pope Gregory the Great which congratulates him on returning to the emperor 's favour testifies . The Pope 's letter also testifies that by this time , Priscus had been given the Empire 's supreme honorary rank , that of patrikios . 
 In spring 593 , Priscus was re @-@ appointed in command as commander of the cavalry in Thrace , with <unk> leading the infantry . Priscus , as the more senior of the two , also held overall command . Both generals marched to Dorostolon on the Danube , and campaigned with success against the Slavic tribes preparing to cross the river under their leaders <unk> and <unk> . Crossing the river , both Slavic hosts were annihilated in surprise night attacks . At the same time , however , Priscus reportedly quarrelled with his men over the distribution of the booty captured , and especially the considerable portion Priscus allocated to the imperial family . The soldiers were eventually placated , and the booty sent back to the capital with an escort . Maurice also sent orders for the army to winter north of the river , but this caused great resentment and unrest amongst the soldiers . Priscus chose to disobey the emperor 's order and crossed again with his army to winter in the southern bank . In the autumn of 593 , he was replaced by Maurice with his own brother Peter . Before the latter could assume command , however , Priscus arranged for a truce with the khagan , to whom he returned all Avar captives , some 5 @,@ 000 in number , a fact for which he was criticized by Maurice . 
 In late 594 , however , after Peter was heavily defeated by the Slavs , Priscus was again appointed to command as magister militum of Thrace , a post he proceeded to hold continuously for several years . In 595 , he marched up the Danube , crossing the river and marching along its northern bank to Novae , despite the khagan 's protests . There , he learned that Singidunum had been captured by the Avars . He sailed his army to the city and , after failed face @-@ to @-@ face negotiations with the khagan , sent the <unk> <unk> to recapture it . The Avars , having razed the city 's walls , abandoned it at the approach of the Byzantine force . Next the Avars launched a raid against Dalmatia . <unk> was dispatched with 2 @,@ 000 men to shadow them . He managed to ambush the Avar detachment carrying their booty , recovered it and sent it to Priscus . After these events , the khagan turned west to campaign against the Bavarians and the Franks , leaving the Byzantine territories quiet for a period of a year and a half , until the summer of 597 . Nevertheless , Priscus and his army remained on watch along the Danube border . 
 When the Avars resumed their operations with a large invasion in autumn 597 , they appear to have caught Priscus , who was probably operating with his army at the eastern Stara Planina , off guard . They advanced quickly , and even managed to bottle up and besiege Priscus and his men at the port of Tomi , until the approach of a freshly raised army under Comentiolus forced them to abandon the siege on Easter day , 30 March 588 . Priscus , however , remained strangely inactive , and Comentiolus 's inexperienced army was routed in battle . The Avars then advanced south into Thrace , forcing Maurice to garrison the Anastasian Wall to prevent an attack on Constantinople . The Avar army , however , was decimated by a plague , and a treaty was quickly concluded , whereby the Avars retreated beyond the Danube in exchange for an increased annual tribute of 120 @,@ 000 solidi . The Byzantines used the time to regroup their forces , and in the summer of 599 , two armies under Priscus and Comentiolus headed west along the Danube . At Viminacium , Comentiolus fell ill and Priscus assumed sole command of the campaign . His army crossed the river , and fought three successive battles over ten days . These battles were won by the Byzantines , who , according to the account of Theophylact Simocatta , killed 28 @,@ 000 barbarians in total , including some of the sons of the khagan . Priscus pursued the fleeing khagan and invaded the Avar homeland in Pannonia . There , a fourth battle was fought near the river Tisza , which was also won by the Byzantines . On the very next day , Priscus dispatched a reconnaissance force across the river , which attacked three Gepid settlements by surprise . According to Simocatta , 30 @,@ 000 were killed and many were taken captive . Nineteen days later , another great battle was fought by the Tisza , which ended in a decisive Byzantine victory : the Avars and especially their Slavic allies suffered greatly , and Priscus took 3 @,@ 000 Avars , 8 @,@ 000 Slavs , and 6 @,@ 200 other barbarians captive , who were sent south as slaves . Maurice , who had not yet realized the extent of his army 's victory , ordered their release as a gesture of goodwill to the khagan . Nevertheless , Priscus 's campaign was a remarkable act of aggressive defence . In the words of Michael Whitby , the main modern expert on Maurice 's reign , it was " without parallel in the sixth century " for the Danube frontier , and which essentially decided the war for Byzantium . 
 After this success , which secured the Balkans , Maurice intended to consolidate Roman control by bringing in Armenian settlers who would be given land in exchange for military service . To this end , Priscus was sent to Armenia to recruit men and their families . His mission there , however , was interrupted by a large @-@ scale military revolt that brought about the downfall of Maurice . In 602 , Maurice again ordered his troops on the Danube frontier to winter north of the river . Again , this provoked widespread discontent , and when Peter , who had replaced Priscus , refused to bow down and rescind the order , an outright mutiny broke out . The army chose the officer Phocas as its new leader and marched down to Constantinople . Without any credible military forces of his own , Maurice had to flee , but was captured with his family and executed by Phocas , who now became emperor . 
 = = = Under Phocas = = = 
 Due to his absence from Constantinople at the time of Phocas 's takeover , and because he retained a large measure of support within the soldiery , Priscus was the only one of Maurice 's senior generals who was retained by the new regime , whereas Comentiolus and Peter were executed and Philippicus was banished to a monastery . A possible explanation for this comes from the later historian Paul the Deacon , who records , possibly based on early 7th @-@ century sources , that Phocas had once served as an equerry under Priscus . At any rate , Priscus was soon counted among the main supporters of the new regime . In the winter of 602 / 603 , he was made comes excubitorum , commander of the imperial bodyguard . In 606 or 607 , he also married Phocas 's daughter , <unk> , becoming the effective heir @-@ apparent to the <unk> ruler . In the games celebrated at the Hippodrome to honor the event , however , Phocas reacted violently when he saw portraits of Priscus and <unk> carried alongside his by the citizens . From this moment on , the chroniclers report , Priscus turned against Phocas . 
 Phocas 's rule lacked legitimacy and quickly came to be resented by the populace and the elites of the Byzantine Empire . What prestige he had further eroded when the Persian shah Khosrau II ( r . 590 – 628 ) declared war , and when the Byzantine forces began to suffer their first defeats . According to a later tradition , Priscus sent a letter to the Exarch of Africa , Heraclius the Elder , urging him to revolt . This is probably a later invention , but if true , it would indicate the level of dissent even within Constantinople . Whatever the truth of the matter , in 608 Africa rose in revolt , and the Exarch 's son , Heraclius the Younger , was dispatched against Constantinople at the head of a fleet . Unopposed by Phocas 's forces , he landed at the suburb of Hebdomon on October 3 and marched to the capital , where pro @-@ Heraclian riots had broken out . At this juncture , Priscus pretended to be ill , and withdrew to his mansion at the <unk> quarter , where he assembled the <unk> and his own retainers ( bucellarii ) , thus depriving Phocas of his main source of armed support . He is also recorded by John of <unk> to have safeguarded the women of Heraclius 's family from retribution by Phocas . 
 = = = Under Heraclius = = = 
 After Phocas 's fall , Heraclius became emperor of Byzantium . The Patriarch Nikephoros claims in his Short History that the crown was first offered to Priscus , who refused it . As commander of the <unk> , a <unk> ( first among the patrician order ) and one of the few senior and influential officials with ties to past regimes , Priscus represented a potential threat to Heraclius . Nevertheless , facing a critical situation in the East , where the Persians had overrun much territory and were raiding Anatolia , Heraclius appointed Priscus in command of the Anatolian army in the autumn of 611 . The Persian general Shahin captured Caesarea in Cappadocia , only to be blockaded and besieged there by Priscus . Heraclius himself decided to visit the army camp at Caesarea during winter , but Priscus refused to meet him , on the pretext of an illness . This snub alienated Heraclius from his general , and when Shahin and his army managed to break out and escape in summer , Priscus was recalled to Constantinople , ostensibly to become godfather to the Byzantine emperor 's son , Heraclius Constantine . At the capital , he was removed from his post as comes excubitorum , which went to Heraclius 's cousin Nicetas , while command in Anatolia went to the other surviving general of Maurice , Philippicus , brought out of retirement . Priscus was brought before the Byzantine Senate and accused by Heraclius of treason . In the end , he was tonsured as a monk on 5 December 612 and confined in the Monastery of the Chora , where he died in 613 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Priscus comes across as an able and versatile military leader . In many instances , his operations against the Slavs resemble the prescriptions of the most influential Byzantine military manual , the Strategikon , ascribed to Emperor Maurice . Despite his reputation as a strict disciplinarian and his aloof stance which led to the mutiny of 588 , in later campaigns he showed ability in dealing with the soldiers and calming their discontent . This cleverness was also employed against the Avar khagan . For instance , during the siege of Tomi in 598 , Priscus managed to persuade the Avars to supply the Byzantine army , which was in fact close to starvation , with grain . As the scholar Walter Kaegi comments , Priscus 's policy in defending the Danube frontier consisted in keeping the peace with the khagan " by sly negotiations " , allowing him focus his efforts against the Slavs raiding imperial territory . 
 The main Byzantine source for the period , Theophylact Simocatta , displays a marked bias in favour of Priscus , especially in its account of the Balkan campaigns , where the other generals are denigrated and made to appear incompetent , with their achievements regularly belittled while Priscus 's successes are extolled and his defeats glossed over . This may be due to the fact that for this period , Simocatta relied on a semi @-@ official " campaign log " compiled during the years of Emperor Phocas , when Priscus was pre @-@ eminent while most of his rivals were either executed or in exile . 
 = Charles Critchfield = 
 Charles Louis Critchfield ( June 7 , 1910 – February 12 , 1994 ) was an American mathematical physicist . A graduate of George Washington University , where he earned his PhD in Physics under the direction of Edward Teller in 1939 , he conducted research in ballistics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton and the Ballistic Research Laboratory at the Aberdeen Proving Ground , and received three patents for improved sabot designs . 
 In 1943 , Teller and Robert Oppenheimer persuaded Critchfield to come to the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos National Laboratory , where he joined the Ordnance Division under Captain William Parsons on the gun @-@ type fission weapons , Little Boy and Thin Man . After it was discovered that the Thin Man design would not work , he was transferred to Robert Bacher 's Gadget Division as the leader of the Initiator group , which was responsible for the design and testing of the " Urchin " neutron initiator that provided the burst of neutrons that kick @-@ started the nuclear detonation of the Fat Man weapon . 
 After the war he became a professor at the University of Minnesota , and then vice president for research at the Convair division of General Dynamics , where he worked on the Atlas family of rockets . In 1961 , J. Carson Mark and Norris Bradbury offered him a position at Los Alamos , which he held until he retired in 1977 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Louis Critchfield was born in Shreve , Ohio , on June 7 , 1910 , and grew up in Washington , D.C. He received his B.S. ( 1934 ) and M.A. ( 1936 ) degrees in Mathematics from George Washington University , where he also earned a PhD in Physics ( 1939 ) under the direction of Edward Teller . 
 During Critchfield 's graduate studies , Teller 's colleague George Gamow introduced him to Hans Bethe , with whom he wrote a paper in 1938 , which analyzed the nuclear fusion of protons into deuterons . The next year , Bethe showed that this process is a key link in the proton @-@ proton chain reaction and the CNO cycle , which are the major ways that nuclear energy is released in the solar core and in massive stars . In 1967 , Bethe was awarded the Nobel Prize for this work on stellar nucleosynthesis . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After he graduated , Critchfield taught optics for a year at the University of Rochester at the invitation of Victor Weisskopf . In 1940 , he was awarded a National Research Council fellowship , and went to work under Eugene Wigner at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton . At this time , Robert Kent had just recruited John von Neumann to the advisory board of the Ballistic Research Laboratory at the Aberdeen Proving Ground . Critchfield joined von Neumann and Wigner there on several visits . 
 In 1942 , after a brief stay at Harvard University , Critchfield went to the Carnegie Institution of Washington , where he continued his ballistic studies , which resulted in three patents for improved sabot designs . Because of his experience with ballistics , Teller and Robert Oppenheimer persuaded Critchfield to come to the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos National Laboratory in 1943 , where he joined the Ordnance Division under Captain William Parsons . As leader of the target , projectile , and source group , he worked on the gun @-@ type fission weapons , Little Boy and Thin Man . 
 In April 1944 , the Manhattan Project experienced a crisis when Emilio Segrè discovered that plutonium made in nuclear reactors would not work in Thin Man . In response , Oppenheimer completely reorganized the laboratory to focus on development of an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon in August . He reassigned Critchfield to a new Gadget Division under Robert Bacher , as the leader of the Initiator group . This group was responsible for the design and testing of the " Urchin " neutron initiator , which provided a burst of neutrons that kick @-@ started the nuclear detonation of the Fat Man weapon . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 Critchfield left Los Alamos in 1946 and returned to George Washington University , but soon left to join Wigner at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory . In 1947 he became an assistant professor at the University of Minnesota , where he participated , with Edward P. Ney and John R. Winckler , in a classified project to improve balloon technology . Here , with Leland S. Bohl , he invented and patented the natural shape balloon , and participated , with Ney and his student Sophie <unk> , in an early search for primary cosmic ray electrons . 
 In 1955 , after advancing to full professor at Minnesota , Critchfield became vice president for research at the Convair division of General Dynamics . Here , he worked on the Atlas family of rockets , which began as a series of ICBMs and evolved into launch vehicles for Project Mercury and many other space missions . He also created the Convair Scientific Research Laboratory whose staff were expected to serve as consultants for the company 's engineering divisions and to carry out basic scientific research . In 1957 , Critchfield 's student William C. Erickson joined the staff , and created the Clark Lake Radio Observatory . In 1963 , this facility , where observations focused on long wavelength radio waves , was transferred to the University of Maryland , where Erickson had become a professor . Although the original observatory has been abandoned , similar research continues at the much larger Long Wavelength Array in central New Mexico . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In early November 1959 , President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy selected Critchfield to be head of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . McElroy hoped that Critchfield would be able to fix the nation 's trouble missile program , but Critchfield was reluctant to serve at the director 's $ 19 @,@ 000 salary . McElroy then offered to let Critchfield serve without pay , with the government paying only his expenses of $ 15 per day , while allowing Critchfield to continue to draw his Convair salary of around $ 40 @,@ 000 . Critchfield accepted this offer , but ran into a storm of political and media criticism over the conflict of interest involved in heading an agency that did $ 4 million worth of business with Convair each year . Critchfield then withdrew his name from consideration . 
 In 1961 , Critchfield accepted a professorship at the University of Wisconsin , but before he moved to Madison , his friends at Los Alamos , J. Carson Mark and Norris Bradbury offered him a position there that he took instead . He held this position until he retired in 1977 , but he continued his association with the laboratory until his death after a long battle with cancer on February 12 , 1994 . His obituary in Physics Today was written by Carson Mark , Louis Rosen , Edward Teller , and Roger Meade . 
 Charles Critchfield is buried next to his wife , Jean , in Guaje Pines Cemetery in Los Alamos County , New Mexico . 
 = = External Links = = 
 1993 Audio Interview with Charles Critchfield by Richard Rhodes Voices of the Manhattan Project 
 = Biogenesis ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Biogenesis " is the twenty @-@ second episode and the sixth season finale of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States and Canada on May 16 , 1999 on the Fox Network , and aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on July 25 , 1999 on Sky1 . It was written by executive producers Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Rob Bowman . " Biogenesis " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 4 , being watched by 15 @.@ 86 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a bizarre rock inscribed with Navajo writing found in Côte d 'Ivoire , and the death of the African scientist involved . While its appearance in Washington begins to affect Mulder ’ s mental health , leading him to turn to Agent Fowley for help ; a disturbed Scully — determined to disprove the theory that life on Earth began with aliens — heads to New Mexico and finds a dying Albert Hosteen — who has discovered that the rock includes passages from the Bible , and a map of the human genome . While Mulder breaks down in a mental institution , Scully journeys unexpectedly to Africa . 
 " Biogenesis " was a story milestone for the series , along with " The Sixth Extinction " and " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati , " and introduced new aspects to the series ' overarching mythology . The episode was written due to series creator Chris Carter 's fascination with the possibility that extraterrestrials were involved in the great extinctions that had happened millions of years ago . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a beach in Côte d 'Ivoire , a metallic artifact with inscriptions is discovered by Solomon Merkmallen , a biology professor . When he takes it to his office and places it together with a similar artifact , the two suddenly fuse and fly across the room , becoming embedded in a Bible . Merkmallen then travels to the United States to meet with Steven Sandoz , an American University biologist who has a third artifact . However , he is murdered by a man posing as Sandoz ; when the real Sandoz finds the body , he flees . 
 Walter Skinner assigns Fox Mulder and Dana Scully to investigate Sandoz 's disappearance , giving them a rubbing of Merkmallen 's artifact . Mulder tells Skinner that both Merkmallen and Sandoz espoused panspermia , a theory suggesting an extraterrestrial origin to life on Earth . Mulder begins suffering from a headache and is unable to hear Scully speak , a condition seemingly caused by the rubbing . At the university , the agents meet Dr. Barnes — the man who posed as Sandoz — who professes disbelief in his theories . Mulder 's condition worsens , but he refuses to go to the hospital and , due to seeming telepathic abilities , realizes that Barnes murdered Merkmallen . Later , in Mulder 's office , Chuck Burks tells them that the symbols on the artifact are from Navajo . 
 In Sandoz 's apartment , Mulder and Scully find a picture of him with Albert Hosteen ; they also find Merkmallen 's dismembered body in a trash bag . The agents report to Skinner , with Mulder believing that Sandoz is being framed and that the artifact emits galactic radiation . He also seems to know that someone else is involved on the case , but Skinner remains silent . However , after the agents leave , Skinner hands a video tape of their conversation to Alex Krycek , who later provides it to Barnes . Scully travels to New Mexico and discovers that Hosteen is dying of cancer ; Scully runs into Sandoz and corners him . Sandoz claims that Albert was helping him translate the artifacts , which had included passages from the Bible . Meanwhile , Mulder goes to the university to tail Barnes , but is overcome by his headache and passes out in the stairwell . 
 Scully contacts Mulder , who is now resting at home . He believes that the artifact proves that humanity was created by aliens . Diana Fowley , who is with Mulder , contacts the Cigarette Smoking Man . A healing ceremony is held for Albert , but Scully is forced to leave when Skinner contacts her , telling her Mulder is in the hospital . Mulder is being held in a padded cell and is displaying abnormal brain activity . Scully , after learning that Skinner knows about their earlier conversation with Burks , calls him and Fowley liars and leaves . Scully is about to find a surveillance camera in the X @-@ Files office when she is called by Sandoz telling her that the artifact contains information on human genetics . Sandoz is killed by Krycek shortly afterwards . Scully then heads to the West African Coast where she discovers that the artifact is part of a large spacecraft partially buried in the beach . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode started a new mythology for the series questioning the origin of human life . Series creator Chris Carter claimed to be interested in the subject for a while , citing the possibility of extraterrestrial involvement in great extinctions that had happened millions of years ago . Carter claimed that early in the show he had met with a man who was one of the people responsible for leading the project of mapping the human genome and that he was interested enough in the subject to tie it into the show 's alien mythology . The scientific basis for extraterrestrials persuaded the writers to help Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) beliefs come together , which was furthered in the later seasons of the show . Frank Spotnitz claimed that the ideas used in this episode had been discussed between him and Carter for a few years , and had become easier to bring up after clearing away elements of the conspiracy in the episodes " Two Fathers " and " One Son " . Carter developed the script in Vancouver , Canada while working on the pilot for his series Harsh Realm , providing pages to the production crew via the fax machine . 
 Professor Solomon Merkmallen was portrayed by Michael <unk> , who had moved to the U.S. ten years earlier and had previously tried out for the episode " Teliko " in season four . A number of Los Angeles , California based African immigrants were used for the fishermen on the African coast . Duchovny expressed anxiety during filming due to the imminent birth of his first child , who was born two days after filming concluded . 
 The University scenes were shot at UCLA . The African coastline was filmed at Leo Carillo State Beach . Conditions meant that the crew only had approximately 45 minutes per day for filming there . The spacecraft was created digitally and the effect ended up costing approximately $ 150 @,@ 000 . The extraterrestrial writing on the artifacts was based on the <unk> Incident , where an extraterrestrial object appeared in a small town in December 1965 . Hosteen <unk> , who previously assisted with the episode " The Blessing Way " oversaw the Navajo symbols and religious ceremonies in the episode . 
 A large portion of the episode was based on the ancient astronaut theory , which proposes that intelligent extraterrestrial beings have visited Earth in antiquity or prehistory and made contact with humans . Frank Spotnitz later remarked that he was astounded at how little negative fan mail the show received , despite the fact that the " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " story arc heavily hinted that aliens were the originators of the notion of God and religion . He credited the manner in which the show handled this delicate subject , saying , " Often in the past , we 've done stuff where I was sure we would get angry letters . But we rarely do . And the reason is because of the way we handle things . In ' Amor Fati ' we treated the religious side with respect . " The ancient astronaut themes were later revisited in the two season nine episodes " Provenance " and " Providence . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Biogenesis " first aired in the United States on May 16 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , with a 14 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 86 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on July 25 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 55 million viewers and was the eighth most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " You 've heard every theory about how man evolved ... except for one . " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode a positive review , writing " ' Biogenesis ' gave us a Mulder gone mad , duplicitous allies and enemies , a rising body count , and Scully on the brink of an amazing discovery . It was pure X @-@ Files and a terrific conclusion to a standout sixth season . " Den of Geek writer Nina Sordi ranked " Biogenesis , " along with " The Sixth Extinction " and " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati , " as the fifth best episode of the series , writing , " it is evident that as [ The X @-@ Files ] progressed , the episodes surrounding those storylines and the breaking points Mulder and Scully endured push them further and further towards total , irreversible defeat . This is especially poignant when viewing this anxiety inducing trio of episodes . " Monica S. Kuebler from Exclaim magazine called " Biogenesis " , along with " The Sixth Extinction " and " Amor Fati " , one of the " best " episodes during the show 's " colonization " phase . Michigan Daily reviewer Melissa Runstrom said " Biogenesis , " along with " One Son " and " Two Fathers , " were the highlights of the sixth season . 
 Zack Handlen awarded the episode a " B " and called it " crazy enough at the end that , if nothing else , I really want to know what happens next " . He enjoyed the basic premise , involving the idea that aliens were active in the development of humanity — comparing it to Stanley Kubrick ’ s film 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Ridley Scott ’ s movie Prometheus . However , Handlen , since he was reviewing the series retrospectively , was slightly disappointed that the plot was dropped in subsequent season . In the end , he noted that the entry was " ambitious , but it doesn ’ t exactly make sense , which is pretty much where [ The X @-@ Files ' mythology ] is at now . " 
 Other reviews were more critical . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five . The two heavily criticized the episode for recycling story lines , writing , " With the Syndicate destroyed , this episode was widely touted as the beginning of a fresh new mythology for the show . So why does watching it give such a strong sense of déjà vu ? " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris summarized the episode as " if someone took the script to ' Anasazi ' — one of the best X @-@ Files episodes ever — changed the plot a bit , and then stripped it of virtually all human interest . " 
 = Winnipeg = 
 Winnipeg ( / <unk> / ) is the capital and largest city of the province of Manitoba in Canada . It is located near the longitudinal centre of North America , at the confluence of the Red and Assiniboine Rivers . 
 The city is named after the nearby Lake Winnipeg ; the name comes from the Western Cree words for muddy or brackish water . The region was a trading centre for aboriginal peoples long before the arrival of Europeans . French traders built the first fort on the site in 1738 . A settlement was later founded by the Selkirk settlers of the Red River Colony in 1812 , the nucleus of which was incorporated as the City of Winnipeg in 1873 . As of 2011 , Winnipeg is the seventh most populated municipality in Canada . Being located very far inland , the local climate is extremely seasonal even by Canadian standards with average January lows of around − 21 ° C ( − 6 ° F ) and average July highs of 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) . 
 Known as the " Gateway to the West " , Winnipeg is a railway and transportation hub with a diversified economy . This multicultural city hosts numerous annual festivals , including the Festival du Voyageur , the Winnipeg Folk Festival , the Jazz Winnipeg Festival , the Winnipeg Fringe Theatre Festival , and Folklorama . Winnipeg was the first Canadian host of the Pan American Games . It is home to several professional sports franchises , including the Winnipeg Blue Bombers ( Canadian football ) , the Winnipeg Jets ( ice hockey ) , Manitoba Moose ( ice hockey ) and the Winnipeg Goldeyes ( baseball ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Winnipeg lies at the confluence of the Assiniboine and the Red River of the North , a location now known as " The Forks " . This point was at the crossroads of canoe routes travelled by First Nations before European contact . Winnipeg is named after nearby Lake Winnipeg ; the name is a transcription of the Western Cree words for muddy or brackish water . The area was populated for several thousands of years by First Nations peoples . Evidence provided by archaeology , petroglyphs , rock art and oral history indicates that native peoples used the area in prehistoric times for camping , harvesting , hunting , tool making , fishing , trading and , farther north , for agriculture . Estimates of the date of first settlement in this area are varied and range from 11 @,@ 500 years ago for a site southwest of the present city to 6 @,@ 000 years ago at The Forks . 
 In 1805 , Canadian colonists observed First Nations peoples engaged in farming activity along the Red River . The practice quickly expanded , driven by the demand by traders for provisions . The rivers provided an extensive transportation network linking northern First Peoples with those to the south along the Missouri and Mississippi rivers . The Ojibwe made some of the first maps on birch bark , which helped fur traders navigate the waterways of the area . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 Sieur de La Vérendrye built the first fur trading post on the site in 1738 , called Fort Rouge . French trading continued at this site for several decades before the arrival of the British Hudson 's Bay Company after France ceded the territory following its defeat in the Seven Years ' War . Many French and later British men who were trappers married First Nations women ; their mixed @-@ race children hunted , traded , and lived in the area . They gradually developed as an ethnicity known as the Métis because of sharing a traditional culture . 
 Lord Selkirk was involved with the first permanent settlement ( known as the Red River Colony ) , the purchase of land from the Hudson 's Bay Company , and a survey of river lots in the early 19th century . The North West Company built Fort Gibraltar in 1809 , and the Hudson 's Bay Company built Fort Douglas in 1812 , both in the area of present @-@ day Winnipeg . The two companies competed fiercely over trade . The Métis and Lord Selkirk 's settlers fought at the Battle of Seven Oaks in 1816 . In 1821 , the Hudson 's Bay and North West Companies merged , ending their long @-@ standing rivalry . Fort Gibraltar was renamed Fort Garry in 1822 and became the leading post in the region for the Hudson 's Bay Company . The fort was destroyed by a flood in 1826 and was not rebuilt until 1835 . A rebuilt section of the fort , consisting of the front gate and a section of the wall , can be found near the modern @-@ day corner of Main Street and Broadway Avenue in downtown Winnipeg . 
 In 1869 – 70 , present @-@ day Winnipeg was the site of the Red River Rebellion , a conflict between the local provisional government of Métis , led by Louis Riel , and newcomers from eastern Canada . General Garnet Wolseley was sent to put down the uprising . The Manitoba Act of 1870 made Manitoba the fifth province of the three @-@ year @-@ old Canadian Confederation . On 8 November 1873 , Winnipeg was incorporated as a city , with the Selkirk settlement as its nucleus . Métis legislator and interpreter James McKay named the city . 
 Winnipeg developed rapidly after the coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1881 . The railway divided the North End , which housed mainly Eastern Europeans , from the richer Anglo @-@ Saxon southern part of the city . It also contributed to a demographic shift beginning shortly after Confederation that saw the francophone population decrease from a majority to a small minority group . This shift resulted in Premier Thomas Greenway controversially ending legislative bilingualism and removing funding for French Catholic Schools in 1890 . 
 By 1911 , Winnipeg was Canada 's third @-@ largest city . However , the city faced financial difficulty when the Panama Canal opened in 1914 . The canal reduced reliance on Canada 's rail system for international trade ; the increase in shipping traffic helped Vancouver to surpass Winnipeg in both prosperity and population by the end of World War I. 
 = = = 1919 strike to present = = = 
 More than 30 @,@ 000 workers walked off their jobs in May 1919 in what came to be known as the Winnipeg general strike . The strike was a product of postwar recession , labour conditions , the activity of union organizers and a large influx of returning World War I soldiers seeking work . After many arrests , deportations , and incidents of violence , the strike ended on 21 June 1919 ; when the Riot Act was read and a group of Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers charged a group of strikers . Two strikers were killed and at least thirty others were injured on the day that became known as Bloody Saturday ; the event polarized the population . One of the leaders of the strike , J. S. Woodsworth , went on to found Canada 's first major socialist party , the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation , which later became the New Democratic Party . 
 The Manitoba Legislative Building , constructed mainly of Tyndall stone , opened in 1920 ; its dome supports a bronze statue finished in gold leaf , titled " Eternal Youth and the Spirit of Enterprise " ( commonly known as the " Golden Boy " ) . The stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression resulted in widespread unemployment , worsened by drought and low agricultural prices . The Depression ended after the start of World War II in 1939 . In the Battle of Hong Kong , The Winnipeg Grenadiers were among the first Canadians to engage in combat against Japan . Battalion members who survived combat were taken prisoner and endured brutal treatment in prisoner of war camps . In 1942 , the Victory Loan Campaign staged a mock Nazi invasion of Winnipeg to promote awareness of the stakes of the war in Europe . When the war ended , pent @-@ up demand generated a boom in housing development , although building activity was checked by the 1950 Red River flood . The federal government estimated damage at over $ 26 million , although the province indicated that it was at least double that . 
 Prior to 1972 , Winnipeg was the largest of thirteen cities and towns in a metropolitan area around the Red and Assiniboine Rivers . A consolidated metropolitan " unicity " government was established on 27 July 1971 , taking effect in 1972 . The City of Winnipeg Act incorporated the current city . Winnipeg experienced a severe economic downturn in advance of the early 1980s recession , during which the city incurred closures of prominent businesses , including the Winnipeg Tribune , as well as the Swift 's and Canada Packers meat packing plants . In 1981 , Winnipeg was one of the first cities in Canada to sign a tripartite agreement with the provincial and federal governments to redevelop its downtown area , and the three levels of government contributed over $ 271 million to its development . In 1989 , the reclamation and redevelopment of the CNR rail yards turned The Forks into Winnipeg 's most popular tourist attraction . The city was threatened by the 1997 Red River flood as well as further floods in 2009 and 2011 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Winnipeg lies at the bottom of the Red River Valley , a flood plain with an extremely flat topography . It is on the eastern edge of the Canadian Prairies in Western Canada and is known as the " Gateway to the West " . Winnipeg is bordered by tallgrass prairie to the west and south and the aspen parkland to the northeast , although most of the native prairie grasses have been removed for agriculture and urbanization . It is relatively close to many large Canadian Shield lakes and parks , as well as Lake Winnipeg ( the Earth 's 11th largest freshwater lake ) . Winnipeg contains North America 's largest extant mature urban elm forest . The city has a total area of 464 @.@ 08 km2 ( 179 @.@ 18 sq mi ) . 
 Winnipeg has four major rivers : the Red , Assiniboine , La Salle and Seine . The city was subject to severe flooding in the past . The Red River reached its greatest flood height in 1826 . Another large flood occurred in 1950 , which caused millions of dollars in damage and mass evacuations . This flood prompted Duff Roblin 's provincial government to build the Red River <unk> to protect the city ; the project began in 1962 and was completed in 1968 . In the 1997 flood , flood control dikes were reinforced and raised using sandbags ; Winnipeg suffered very limited damage compared to the flood 's impact on cities without such structures , such as Grand Forks , North Dakota . The generally flat terrain and the poor drainage of the Red River Valley 's clay @-@ based soil also results in many mosquitoes during wetter years . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Winnipeg 's location in the Canadian Prairies gives it a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfb ) Summers have a July mean average of 19 @.@ 7 ° C ( 67 @.@ 5 ° F ) . Winters are the coldest and driest time of year , with the January mean average around − 16 @.@ 4 ° C ( 2 @.@ 5 ° F ) and total winter precipitation averaging 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) . Temperatures occasionally drop below − 40 @.@ 0 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) The actual air temperature drops below − 30 ° C ( − 22 ° F ) on average 12 @.@ 6 days annually and above 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) 13 @.@ 3 days of the year . On average there are 317 @.@ 8 days per year with measurable sunshine , with July seeing the most on average . With <unk> hours of sunshine per year , Winnipeg is the second sunniest city in Canada . Total annual precipitation ( both rain and snow ) is just over 20 inches ( 51 cm ) . Thunderstorms are very common during summer , and sometimes severe enough to produce tornadoes . Wind chill is an issue in the local climate . The wind chill has gone down as low as − 57 ° C ( − 71 ° F ) and on average there are 12 days of the year that can reach a wind chill below − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) . 
 The highest temperature ever recorded in Winnipeg was 42 @.@ 2 ° C ( 108 ° F ) on 11 July 1936 . The apparent heat can be even more extreme due to bursts of humidity and on 25 July 2007 a 47 @.@ 3 ° C ( 117 @.@ 1 ° F ) reading of the humidex was measured . The coldest temperature ever recorded was − 47 @.@ 8 ° C ( − 54 ° F ) on 24 December 1879 . 
 The frost @-@ free season is comparatively long for a location with such severe winters . The last spring frost is on average around May 23 , whilst the first fall frost is on September 22 . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 There are officially 236 neighbourhoods in Winnipeg . Downtown Winnipeg , the city 's financial heart and economic core , is centred on the intersection of Portage Avenue and Main Street . It covers an area of about 1 square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) and is the fastest growing high @-@ income neighbourhood in the city . More than 72 @,@ 000 people work downtown , and over 40 @,@ 000 students attend classes at its universities and colleges . The past few decades have seen the downtown undergo major revitalization efforts ; since 1999 , over C $ 1 @.@ 2 billion has been invested . 
 Downtown Winnipeg 's Exchange District is named after the area 's original grain exchange , which operated from 1880 to 1913 . The 30 @-@ block district received National Historic Site of Canada status in 1997 ; it includes North America 's most extensive collection of early 20th @-@ century terracotta and cut stone architecture , 62 of downtown Winnipeg 's 86 heritage structures , Stephen Juba Park , and Old Market Square . Other major downtown areas are The Forks , Central Park , Broadway @-@ Assiniboine and Chinatown . Many of Downtown Winnipeg 's major buildings are linked with the Winnipeg Walkway . 
 Various residential neighbourhoods surround the downtown in all directions ; expansion is greatest to the south and west , although several areas remain underdeveloped . The largest park in the city , Assiniboine Park , houses the Assiniboine Park Zoo and the Leo Mol Sculpture Garden . Other large city parks include Kildonan Park and St. Vital Park . The major commercial areas in the city are Polo Park , Kildonan Crossing , South St. Vital , Garden City ( West Kildonan ) , Pembina Strip , Kenaston Smart Centre , Osborne Village , and the Corydon strip . The main cultural and nightlife areas are the Exchange District , The Forks , Osborne Village and Corydon Village ( both in Fort Rouge ) , Sargent and Ellice Avenues ( West End ) and Old St. Boniface . Osborne Village is Winnipeg 's most densely populated neighbourhood , as well as one of the most densely populated neighbourhoods in Western Canada . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the Canada 2011 Census there were 663 @,@ 617 people living in Winnipeg proper , with approximately 730 @,@ 018 living in the Winnipeg Census Metropolitan Area ( CMA ) . Thus , Winnipeg is Manitoba 's largest city and Canada 's seventh largest city . Furthermore , the city represents 54 @.@ 9 % of the population of the province of Manitoba , the highest population concentration in one city of any province in Canada . Apart from the city of Winnipeg , the Winnipeg CMA includes the rural municipalities of Springfield , St. Clements , Taché , East St. Paul , Macdonald , <unk> , West St. Paul , Headingley , the <unk> 4 reserve , and Rosser and St. François Xavier . Statistics Canada 's estimate of the Winnipeg CMA population as of 1 July 2015 is 793 @,@ 428 . 
 As of the 2006 census , 48 @.@ 3 percent of residents were male and 51 @.@ 7 percent were female . 24 @.@ 3 percent were 19 years old or younger , 27 @.@ 4 percent were between 20 and 30 years old , and 34 @.@ 0 percent were between 40 and 64 years old . The average age of a <unk> in May 2006 was 38 @.@ 7 , compared to an average of 39 @.@ 5 for Canada as a whole . Between the censuses of 2006 and 2011 , Winnipeg 's population increased by 4 @.@ 8 percent , compared to 5 @.@ 2 percent for Manitoba as a whole . The population density of the city of Winnipeg averaged 1 @,@ 430 people per km2 , compared with 2 @.@ 2 for Manitoba . 
 Winnipeg has a significant and increasing Aboriginal population , with both the highest percentage of Aboriginal peoples ( 11 @.@ 7 % ) for any major Canadian city , and the highest total number of Aboriginals ( 76 @,@ 055 ) for any single non @-@ reserve municipality . The Aboriginal population grew by 22 % between 2001 and 2006 , compared to an increase of 3 % for the city as a whole ; this population tends to be younger and less wealthy than non @-@ Aboriginal residents . Winnipeg also has the highest Métis population in both percentage ( 6 @.@ 3 % ) and numbers ( 41 @,@ 005 ) ; the growth rate for this population between 2001 and 2006 was 30 % . The city has the greatest percentage of Filipino residents ( 8 @.@ 7 % ) of any major Canadian city , although Toronto has more Filipinos by total population . In 2006 , Winnipeg ranked seventh of the Canadian cities for percentage of residents of a visible minority . The population is 67 @.@ 5 % white as of 2011 ( down from 73 @.@ 5 % in 2006 ) , while non @-@ aboriginal visible minorities represent 21 @.@ 4 % as of 2011 ( up from 16 @.@ 3 % in 2006 ) . The city receives over 10 @,@ 000 net international immigrants per year . 
 More than a hundred languages are spoken in Winnipeg , of which the most common is English : 99 percent of <unk> are fluent English speakers , 88 percent speak only English , and 0 @.@ 1 percent speak only French ( Canada 's other official language ) . 10 percent speak both English and French , while 1 @.@ 3 percent speak neither . Other languages spoken as a mother tongue in Winnipeg include Tagalog ( 5 @.@ 0 % ) , German ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) , and Punjabi and Ukrainian ( both 1 @.@ 4 % ) . Several Aboriginal languages are also spoken , such as Ojibwe ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) and Cree ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) . 
 The 2011 National Household Survey reported the religious make @-@ up of Winnipeg as : 63 @.@ 7 % Christian , including 29 @.@ 7 % Catholic , 8 @.@ 1 % United Church , and 4 @.@ 6 % Anglican ; 1 @.@ 7 % Muslim ; 1 @.@ 6 % Jewish ; 1 @.@ 5 % Sikh ; 1 @.@ 0 % Hindu ; 1 @.@ 0 % Buddhist ; 0 @.@ 3 % traditional ( aboriginal ) spirituality ; 0 @.@ 4 % other ; and 28 @.@ 9 % no religious affiliation . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Winnipeg is an economic base and regional centre . It has one of the country 's most diversified economies , with major employment in the trade ( 15 @.@ 2 % ) , manufacturing ( 9 @.@ 8 % ) , educational ( 7 @.@ 7 % ) , and health care and social assistance ( 15 @.@ 2 % ) sectors . There were approximately 21 @,@ 000 employers in the city as of 2012 . 
 In 2013 , The CIBC Metropolitan Economic Activity Index rated Winnipeg 's economy as fourth in a national survey of 25 city economies , behind Toronto , Calgary , and Regina . According to the Conference Board of Canada , Winnipeg is projected to experience a real GDP growth of 2 percent in 2014 . Unlike most of Canada , the city experienced a decrease in unemployment in 2013 , ending the year at a rate of 5 @.@ 8 percent . As of 2010 , median household income in the city was $ 72 @,@ 050 . 
 As of January 2014 , approximately 416 @,@ 700 people are employed in Winnipeg and the surrounding area . Some of Winnipeg 's largest employers are government and government @-@ funded institutions , including : the Province of Manitoba , the City of Winnipeg , the University of Manitoba , the Health Sciences Centre , and Manitoba Hydro . Approximately 54 @,@ 000 people ( 14 % of the work force ) are employed in the public sector as of 2008 . Large private sector employers include Shaw Communications , Manitoba Telecom Services , Ipsos @-@ Reid , Palliser Furniture , Great @-@ West Life Assurance , Motor Coach Industries , New Flyer Industries , Boeing Canada Technology , Magellan Aerospace , Nygård International , Canad Inns and Investors Group . 
 The Royal Canadian Mint , established in 1976 , is where all circulating coinage in Canada is produced . The plant , located in southeastern Winnipeg , also produces coins for many other countries . 
 In 2012 , Winnipeg was ranked by KPMG as the least expensive location to do business in western Canada . Like many prairie cities , Winnipeg has a relatively low cost of living . According to the Canadian Real Estate Association , the average house price in Winnipeg was $ 260 @,@ 000 as of 2013 . As of May 2014 , the Consumer Price Index was 125 @.@ 8 relative to 2002 prices , reflecting consumer costs at the Canadian average . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Winnipeg was named the Cultural Capital of Canada in 2010 by Canadian Heritage . As of 2012 , there are 26 National Historic Sites of Canada in Winnipeg . One of these , The Forks , attracts four million visitors a year . It is home to the City television studio , Manitoba Theatre for Young People , the Winnipeg International Children 's Festival , and the Manitoba Children 's Museum . It also features a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 800 m2 ) skate plaza , a 8 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 790 m2 ) bowl complex , the Esplanade Riel bridge , a river walkway , Shaw Park , and the Canadian Museum for Human Rights . The Winnipeg Public Library is a public library network with 20 branches throughout the city , including the main Millennium Library . 
 Winnipeg the Bear , which would later become the inspiration for part of the name of Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh , was purchased in Ontario by Lieutenant Harry <unk> of the Fort Garry Horse . He named the bear after the regiment 's home town of Winnipeg . A. A. Milne later wrote a series of books featuring the fictional Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh . The series ' illustrator , Ernest H. Shepard , created the only known oil painting of Winnipeg 's adopted fictional bear , displayed in Assiniboine Park . 
 The city has developed many distinct dishes and cooking styles , notably in the areas of confectionery and hot @-@ smoked fish . Both the First Nations and more recent Eastern Canadian , European , and Asian immigrants have helped shape Winnipeg 's dining scene , giving birth to dishes such as the desserts <unk> torte and wafer pie . 
 Winnipeg 's three largest performing arts venues , the Centennial Concert Hall , Manitoba Theatre Centre ( MTC ) and the Pantages Playhouse Theatre , are located downtown . MTC is Canada 's oldest English @-@ language regional theatre , with over 250 performances yearly . The Pantages Playhouse Theatre opened as a vaudeville house in 1913 . Other city theatres include the Burton Cummings Theatre ( a National Historic Site of Canada built in 1906 ) and Prairie Theatre Exchange . Le Cercle Molière , based in St Boniface , is the oldest theatre company in Canada ; it was founded in 1925 . Rainbow Stage is a musical theatre production company based in Kildonan Park that produces professional , live Broadway musical shows and is Canada 's longest @-@ surviving outdoor theatre . The Manitoba Theatre for Young People at The Forks is one of only two Theatres for Young Audiences in Canada with a permanent residence , and is the only Theatre for Young Audiences that offers a full season of plays for teenagers . The Winnipeg Jewish Theatre is the only professional theatre in Canada dedicated to Jewish themes . Shakespeare in the Ruins ( SIR ) presents adaptations of Shakespeare plays . 
 Winnipeg has hosted a number of Hollywood productions : Shall We Dance ? ( 2004 ) , Capote ( 2005 ) , The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford ( 2007 ) , and Goon ( 2011 ) among others had parts filmed in the city . The Winnipeg Film Group has produced numerous award @-@ winning films . There are several TV and film production companies in Winnipeg : the most prominent are Farpoint Films , Frantic Films , Buffalo Gal Pictures , and Les Productions Rivard . Guy Maddin 's My Winnipeg , an independent film released in 2008 , is a comedic rumination on the city 's history . 
 The Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra is the largest and oldest professional musical ensemble in Winnipeg . The Manitoba Chamber Orchestra runs a series of chamber orchestral concerts each year . Manitoba Opera is Manitoba 's only full @-@ time professional opera company . Among the most notable musical acts associated with Winnipeg are Bachman – Turner Overdrive , the Crash Test Dummies , The Guess Who , Neil Young , The <unk> ' <unk> , and The Weakerthans . 
 The Royal Winnipeg Ballet ( RWB ) is Canada 's oldest ballet company and the longest continuously operating ballet company in North America . It was the first organization to be granted a royal title by Queen Elizabeth II , and has included notable dancers such as Evelyn Hart and Mikhail Baryshnikov . The RWB also runs a full @-@ time classical dance school . 
 The Manitoba Museum is the largest museum in the city , and depicts the history of the city and province . The full @-@ size replica of the ship Nonsuch is the museum 's showcase piece . The Manitoba Children 's Museum is a nonprofit children 's museum located at The Forks that features twelve permanent galleries . The Winnipeg Art Gallery is Western Canada 's oldest public art gallery , founded in 1912 . It is the sixth @-@ largest in the country and includes the world 's largest public collection of contemporary Inuit art . The Canadian Museum for Human Rights is the second Canadian national museum for human rights . The federal government has contributed $ 100 million towards the estimated $ 311 @-@ million project . Construction of the museum began on 1 April 2008 , and the museum opened to the public 27 September 2014 . 
 The Western Canada Aviation Museum , located in a hangar at Winnipeg 's James Richardson International Airport , features military jets , commercial aircraft , Canada 's first helicopter , the " flying saucer " Avrocar , flight simulators , and a Black Brant rocket built in Manitoba by Bristol Aerospace . The Winnipeg Railway Museum is located at Via Rail Station and contains various locomotives , notably the Countess of Dufferin , the first steam locomotive in Western Canada . 
 Festival du Voyageur , Western Canada 's largest winter festival , celebrates the early French explorers of the Red River Valley . Folklorama is the largest and longest @-@ running cultural celebration festival in the world . The Jazz Winnipeg Festival and the Winnipeg Folk Festival both celebrate Winnipeg 's music community . The Winnipeg Music Festival offers a competition venue to amateur musicians . The Winnipeg Fringe Theatre Festival is the second @-@ largest alternative theatre festival in North America . The Winnipeg International Writers Festival ( also called <unk> AIR ) brings writers to Winnipeg for workshops and readings . The LGBT community in the city is served by Pride Winnipeg , an annual gay pride festival and parade , and Reel Pride , a film festival of LGBT @-@ themed films . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Winnipeg has been home to several professional hockey teams . The Winnipeg Jets of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) have called the city home since 2011 . The original Winnipeg Jets , the city 's former NHL team , left for Phoenix , Arizona after the 1995 – 96 season due to mounting financial troubles , despite a campaign effort to " Save the Jets " . The Jets play at MTS Centre , which is currently ranked the world 's 19th @-@ busiest arena among non @-@ sporting touring events , 13th @-@ busiest among facilities in North America , and 3rd @-@ busiest in Canada as of 2009 . Past hockey teams based in Winnipeg include the Winnipeg Maroons , Winnipeg Warriors , three time Stanley Cup Champion Winnipeg Victorias and the Winnipeg Falcons , who were the first ever Gold Medal Olympians , representing Canada in 1920 in Antwerp , Belgium . Another team presently located in Winnipeg is the Manitoba Moose , who are the American Hockey League primary affiliate of the Winnipeg Jets and owned by the same group . In amateur hockey , the Winnipeg Blues of the Manitoba Junior Hockey League play out of the MTS Iceplex . On the international stage , Winnipeg has hosted national and world hockey championships on a number of occasions , most notably the 1999 World Junior Hockey Championship and 2007 Women 's World Hockey Championship . 
 The Winnipeg Blue Bombers play in the Canadian Football League . The Blue Bombers are ten @-@ time Grey Cup champions , their last championship in 1990 . From 1953 to 2012 , the Blue Bombers called Canad Inns Stadium home ; they have since moved to Investors Group Field . Due to construction delays and cost overruns , the stadium was not ready in time for the 2012 CFL season , instead opening in 2013 . The $ 200 @-@ million facility is also the home to the CIS ' University of Manitoba Bisons and the Winnipeg Rifles of the Canadian Junior Football League . 
 The University of Manitoba Bisons and the University of Winnipeg <unk> represent the city in <unk> sport . In soccer , it is represented by the Winnipeg Alliance FC in the Canadian Major Indoor Soccer League and the WSA Winnipeg in the USL Premier Development League . 
 Winnipeg has been home to a number of professional baseball teams , most recently the Winnipeg Goldeyes since 1994 . The Goldeyes play at Shaw Park , which was completed in 1999 . The team had led the Northern League for ten straight years in average attendance through 2010 , with more than 300 @,@ 000 annual fan visits , until the league collapsed and merged into the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball . 
 Winnipeg was the first Canadian city to ever host the Pan American Games , and the second city to host the event twice , in 1967 and again in 1999 . The Pan Am Pool , built for the 1967 Pan Am Games , hosts aquatic events , including diving , speed swimming , synchronized swimming and water polo . Winnipeg co @-@ hosted the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup . The city has been selected to host the 2017 Canada Summer Games . 
 = = Local media = = 
 Winnipeg has three daily newspapers : the Winnipeg Free Press , the Winnipeg Sun , and the Metro Winnipeg . There are five weekly newspapers delivered free to most Winnipeg households by region . There are also several ethnic weekly newspapers . 
 Television broadcasting in Winnipeg started in 1954 . The federal government refused to license any private broadcaster until the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation had created a national network . In May 1954 , <unk> went on the air with four hours of broadcasting per day . There are now five English @-@ language stations and one French @-@ language station based in Winnipeg . Additionally , some American network affiliates are available over @-@ the @-@ air . Winnipeg is home to 33 AM and FM radio stations , two of which are French @-@ language stations . CBC Radio One and CBC Radio 2 broadcast local and national programming in the city . NCI is devoted to Aboriginal programming . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 Since 1992 , the city of Winnipeg has been represented by 15 city councillors and a mayor , both elected every four years . The present mayor , Brian Bowman , was elected to office in 2014 . The city is a single @-@ tier municipality , governed by a mayor @-@ council system . The structure of the municipal government is set by the provincial legislature in the City of Winnipeg Charter Act , which replaced the old City of Winnipeg Act in 2003 . The mayor is elected by direct popular vote to serve as the chief executive of the city . At Council meetings , the mayor has one of 16 votes . The City Council is a unicameral legislative body , representing geographical wards throughout the city . 
 In provincial politics , Winnipeg is represented by 31 of the 57 provincial Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) . As of 2016 , Winnipeg districts are represented by 17 members of the Progressive Conservative Party , 12 by the New Democratic Party ( NDP ) , and 2 by the Liberal Party . 
 In federal politics , as of 2015 Winnipeg is represented by eight Members of Parliament : seven Liberals and one New Democrat . There are six Senators representing Manitoba in Ottawa : three Liberals , two Conservatives , and one Independent . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 From 2007 to 2011 , Winnipeg was the " murder capital " of Canada , with the highest per @-@ capita rate of homicides ; it fell to second place in 2012 , behind Thunder Bay . Winnipeg has had the highest violent crime index since 2009 . The robbery rate in 2012 was between 250 @.@ 1 and 272 @.@ 9 . Despite high overall violent crime rates , crime in Winnipeg is mostly concentrated in the inner city , which makes up only 19 % of the population but was the site of 86 @.@ 4 % of the city 's shootings , 66 @.@ 5 % of the robberies , 63 @.@ 3 % of the homicides and 59 @.@ 5 % of the sexual assaults in 2012 . 
 From the early 1990s to the mid @-@ 2000s , Winnipeg had a significant auto @-@ theft problem , with the rate peaking at 2 @,@ 165 @.@ 0 per 100 @,@ 000 residents in 2006 compared to 487 auto @-@ thefts per 100 @,@ 000 residents for Canada as a whole . To combat auto theft , Manitoba Public Insurance established financial incentives for motor vehicle owners to install ignition <unk> in their vehicles , and now requires owners of high @-@ risk vehicles to install <unk> . The auto @-@ theft rate has been on a constant drop since 2006 . Other types of property crime have also decreased , but rates are still fairly high . 
 Winnipeg is protected by the Winnipeg Police Service , which in 2012 had 1 @,@ 442 police officers . In November 2013 , the national police union reviewed the Winnipeg Police Force and found high average response times for several categories of calls . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are seven school divisions in Winnipeg : Winnipeg School Division , St. James @-@ Assiniboia School Division , Pembina Trails School Division , Seven Oaks School Division , Division Scolaire Franco @-@ <unk> , River East Transcona School Division , and Louis Riel School Division . Winnipeg also has a number of religious and secular private schools . 
 The University of Manitoba is the largest university in Manitoba . It was founded in 1877 , making it Western Canada 's first university . In a typical year , the university has an enrolment of 24 @,@ 500 undergraduate students and 4 @,@ 000 graduate students . Université de Saint @-@ Boniface is the city 's only French Canadian university . The University of Winnipeg received its charter in 1967 . Until 2007 , it was an undergraduate institution that offered some joint graduate studies programs ; it now offers independent graduate programs . The Canadian Mennonite University is a private Mennonite undergraduate university established in 1999 . 
 Winnipeg also has two independent colleges : Red River College and Booth University College . Red River College offers diploma , certificate , and apprenticeship programs and , starting in 2009 , began offering some degree programs . Booth University College is a private Christian Salvation Army university college established in 1982 . It offers mostly arts and seminary training . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Winnipeg has had public transit since 1882 , starting with horse @-@ drawn streetcars . They were replaced by electric trolley cars . The trolley cars ran from 1892 to 1955 , supplemented by motor buses after 1918 , and electric trolleybuses from 1938 to 1970 . Winnipeg Transit now runs diesel buses on its routes . 
 Winnipeg is a railway hub and is served by Via Rail , Canadian National Railway , Canadian Pacific Railway , Burlington Northern Santa Fe Manitoba , and the Central Manitoba Railway . It is the only major city between Vancouver and Thunder Bay with direct US connections by rail . 
 Winnipeg is the largest and best connected city within Manitoba , and has highways leading in all directions from the city . To the south , Winnipeg is connected to the United States via Provincial Trunk Highway 75 ( PTH 75 ) ( a continuation of I @-@ 29 and US 75 , known as Pembina Highway or Route 42 within Winnipeg ) . The highway runs 107 km ( 66 mi ) to Emerson , Manitoba , and is the busiest Canada – United States border crossing on the Prairies . The four @-@ lane Perimeter Highway , built in 1969 , serves as a Ring Road , with at @-@ grade intersections and a few interchanges . It allows travellers on the Trans @-@ Canada Highway to bypass the city . A recent study cited dangerous intersections and low efficiency as its primary shortfalls . The Trans @-@ Canada Highway runs east to west through the city ( city route ) , or circles around the city on the Perimeter Highway ( beltway ) . Some of the city 's major arterial roads include Route 80 ( Waverley St. ) , Route 155 ( McGillivray Blvd ) , Route 165 ( Bishop Grandin Blvd . ) , Route 17 ( Chief <unk> Trail ) , and Route 90 ( Brookside Blvd . , Oak Point Hwy . , King Edward St. , Century St. , Kenaston Blvd . ) . 
 The Winnipeg James Armstrong Richardson International Airport completed a $ 585 @-@ million redevelopment in October 2011 . The development includes a new terminal , a four @-@ level parking facility , and other infrastructure improvements . Winnipeg Bus Terminal , located at Winnipeg International Airport , offers domestic and international service by Greyhound Canada , Grey Goose Bus Lines , Winnipeg Shuttle Service and Brandon Air Shuttle . Approximately 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) of land to the north and west of the airport has been designated as an inland port , CentrePort Canada , and is Canada 's first Foreign Trade Zone . It is a private sector initiative to develop the infrastructure for Manitoba 's trucking , air , rail and sea industries . In 2009 , construction began on a $ 212 @-@ million four @-@ lane freeway that would eventually connect CentrePort with the Perimeter Highway . Named CentrePort Canada Way , it was opened in November 2013 . 
 Winnipeg is served by several taxi companies , the three largest being <unk> , Duffy 's Taxi and Spring Taxi . Fifty percent of Winnipeg residents use a taxi at least once during the year . Cycling is popular in Winnipeg , and there are many bicycle trails and lanes around the city . Winnipeg holds an annual Bike @-@ to @-@ Work Day and <unk> , and bicycle commuters may be seen year @-@ round , even in the winter . Active living infrastructure in Winnipeg encourages bicycling through the inclusion of bike lanes and <unk> . 
 = = = Medical centres and hospitals = = = 
 Winnipeg 's major hospitals include Health Sciences Centre , Concordia Hospital , Deer Lodge Centre , Grace Hospital , Misericordia Health Centre , Riverview Health Centre , Saint Boniface General Hospital , Seven Oaks General Hospital , Victoria General Hospital , and The Children 's Hospital of Winnipeg . 
 The National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg is one of only a handful of <unk> level 4 microbiology laboratories in the world . There are also research facilities operated through hospitals and private biotechnology companies . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Water and sewage services are provided by the city . The city draws its water via an aqueduct from Shoal Lake , treating and fluoridating it at the Deacon Reservoir just outside the city prior to pumping it into the Winnipeg system . The city 's system comprises over 2 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) of underground water mains , which are subject to breakage during extreme weather conditions . 
 Electricity and natural gas are provided by Manitoba Hydro , a provincial crown corporation headquartered in the city ; it uses primarily hydroelectric power . The primary telecommunications carrier is MTS , although a number of other corporations offer telephone , cellular , television and internet services in the city . 
 Winnipeg contracts out several services to private companies , including garbage and recycling collection and street plowing and snow removal . This practice represents a significant budget expenditure and is more expansive than in comparable communities . The services have faced numerous complaints from residents in 2013 – 14 about missed service . 
 = = Military = = 
 Canadian Forces Base Winnipeg , co @-@ located at the airport , is home to many flight operations support divisions and several training schools . It is also the headquarters of 1 Canadian Air Division and the Canadian North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) Region , as well as the home base of 17 Wing of the Canadian Forces . The Wing comprises three squadrons and six schools ; it also provides support to the Central Flying School . Excluding the three levels of government , 17 Wing is the fourth largest employer in the city . The Wing supports 113 units , stretching from Thunder Bay to the Saskatchewan – Alberta border , and from the 49th parallel to the high Arctic . 17 Wing also acts as a deployed operating base for CF @-@ 18 Hornet fighter @-@ bombers assigned to the Canadian NORAD Region . 
 There are two squadrons based in the city . The 402 " City of Winnipeg " Squadron flies the Canadian @-@ designed and produced de Havilland CT @-@ 142 Dash 8 navigation trainer . The 435 " <unk> " Transport and Rescue Squadron flies the Lockheed CC @-@ 130 Hercules in airlift search and rescue roles . In addition , 435 Squadron is the only Royal Canadian Air Force squadron equipped and trained to conduct tactical air @-@ to @-@ air refueling of fighter aircraft . 
 For many years , Winnipeg was the home of the Second Battalion of Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry . Initially , the battalion was based at the Fort Osborne Barracks , the location of which now houses the <unk> Jewish Community Centre . They eventually moved to the Kapyong Barracks located between River Heights and Tuxedo . Since 2004 , the battalion has operated out of CFB Shilo near Brandon . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = Battle of Dong <unk> = 
 The Battle of Đồng Xoài ( Vietnamese : Trận Đồng Xoài ) was a major battle fought during the National Liberation Front Summer Offensive of 1965 as part of the Vietnam War . The battle took place in Phước Long Province , South Vietnam , between June 9 and 13 , 1965 . 
 In 1964 , General Nguyễn Khánh gained control of the South Vietnamese government after General Dương Văn Minh was overthrown in a military coup . Although General Khánh was able to gain control of the military junta , he failed to garner support from the civilian population when he implemented various laws which limited the freedoms of the South Vietnamese people . He then had a falling @-@ out with the Catholic faction within his own government , when he became increasingly reliant on the Buddhist movement to hold on to power . Consequently , on February 20 , 1965 , General Khánh was ousted from power and was forced to leave South Vietnam forever . The political instability in Saigon gave North Vietnamese leaders in Hanoi an opportunity to step up their military campaign in the south . They believed the South Vietnamese government was able to survive because it still had a strong military to combat the growing influence of the Viet Cong . With the summer campaign of 1965 , North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces aimed to inflict significant losses on the South Vietnamese military . In Phước Long Province , the Communist summer offensive culminated in the Đồng Xoài campaign . 
 The fight for Đồng Xoài began on the evening of June 9 , 1965 , when the Viet Cong 272nd Regiment attacked and captured the Civilian Irregular Defense Group and U.S. Special Forces camp there . In response to the sudden Viet Cong assault , the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) Joint General Staff ordered the ARVN 1st Battalion , 7th Infantry Regiment , to retake Đồng Xoài district . They arrived on the battlefield on June 10 , but were quickly overwhelmed by the Viet Cong 271st Regiment near Thuận Lợi . Later that day , Đồng Xoài was recaptured by the ARVN 52nd Ranger Battalion , who had survived an ambush while marching towards the district . On June 11 , further South Vietnamese reinforcements arrived in the form of the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion . The South Vietnamese paratroopers , while searching for survivors of the 1st Battalion in the Thuận Lợi rubber plantation , were defeated in a deadly ambush by the Viet Cong . On June 13 U.S. Army General William Westmoreland decided to insert elements of the U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade into a major battle for the first time , because he feared the Viet Cong could secure a major base area in Phước Long Province . By that time , however , the Viet Cong had already withdrawn from the battlefield , so the U.S. paratroopers were ordered to return to base without a fight . 
 = = Background = = 
 In January 1964 , General Khánh ousted General Dương Văn Minh as the leader of South Vietnam 's military junta in a bloodless coup . Although Khánh had made considerable efforts to consolidate his power , opposition to his rule began to grow as he tightened censorship laws , banned protests and allowed police arbitrary search and imprisonment powers . Khánh drafted a new constitution , which would have expanded his power within the military junta . In response to General Khánh 's political manoeuvres the South Vietnamese people , predominately Buddhists , held large demonstrations in the cities calling for an end to the draconian laws which had limited the people ’ s political freedom . Fearing that his power could be weakened by those demonstrations , General Khánh immediately repealed his constitution and new police powers . He promised to reinstate civilian rule and remove members of the Catholic @-@ based Cần lao from power . 
 Internally , the concessions made by General Khánh had the effect of unsettling Catholic officers such as Nguyễn Văn Thiệu and Trần Thiện Khiêm , because they were concerned by what they perceived to be the handing of power to Buddhist leaders . Subsequently , General Khiêm fell out with General Khánh over policy issues along religious lines , even though an alliance between both men had enabled Khánh to remove General Minh from power . As military support for his regime diminished , Khánh had to rely upon civilian Buddhist activists to maintain power . For the Americans , Khánh 's increased reliance on the Buddhists was a cause for concern , because the Buddhists favoured a political resolution to the conflict with the Communists . Thus , by the end of 1964 the Americans looked for someone to overthrow Khánh , in order to continue the military effort against the Communists . On February 20 , 1965 , Khánh was finally removed from power , and he was forced to leave South Vietnam . 
 From the Communist perspective , even though South Vietnam was plagued by political instability , it still had a strong army to resist the Viet Cong . So shortly after the Binh Gia campaign , North Vietnamese leaders reached a resolution to launch a summer offensive , to destroy the regular units of the South Vietnamese military . During the early stages of the Communist summer campaign , Viet Cong forces in Quảng Ngãi Province successfully destroyed a South Vietnamese task force , led by the ARVN 51st Infantry Regiment , in the village of Ba Gia . Following their victory at Ba Gia , the National Liberation Front ( known in America as Viet Cong ) turned its attention to the Mekong Delta region . To prepare for their next offensive , Major @-@ General Le Trong Tan was given the task of directing Viet Cong military operations in the provinces of Phước Long , Bình Phước . For the first time , the newly created Viet Cong 273rd and 274th Regiments was ordered to join the 271st and 272nd Regiments on the battlefield ; their objective was to destroy the regular units of the South Vietnamese military , and eliminate the strategic hamlets to enlarge what North Vietnam viewed as ' liberated zones ' . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Since May 1965 , the Viet Cong offensive in Phước Long Province had been in full @-@ swing . Beginning on May 10 , the Viet Cong 271st Regiment , supported by the <unk> Battalion and local sapper units , attacked the district town of Phước Long , capital of the province . Simultaneously , the Viet Cong 272nd Regiment overran South Vietnamese government positions in the sub @-@ sector of Phước Bình . During their brief occupation of Phước Long district , the Viet Cong destroyed several major strategic hamlets in the surrounding areas , such as Ba Ra , Thuan Kiem , Thuan Loi , Phu Rieng , Da Kia , Bu <unk> , Duc Bon and Song Be . 
 In response to the Viet Cong occupation of Phước Long district , the ARVN 36th Ranger Battalion was ordered by the ARVN Joint General Staff to recapture government positions there . On May 11 , two companies from the battalion sustained heavy casualties in battles with Viet Cong units positioned along Inter @-@ Provincial Road 13 and National Highway 14 . On May 12 , the Viet Cong 271st Regiment and other support units withdrew from Phuoc Long district . 
 In the Phước Bình sub @-@ sector , the Viet Cong 272nd Regiment were able to overrun South Vietnamese government positions within 25 minutes , and they claimed to have killed 115 South Vietnamese soldiers in the process At 9 am on May 11 , the ARVN 34th Ranger Battalion was airlifted into a small town located about 14 kilometres away from Phước Bình in the south @-@ east . As the ARVN 34th Ranger Battalion marched upward towards Phước Bình , the Viet Cong 272nd and 273rd Regiment was ordered to destroy the South Vietnamese Rangers . However , by the time the 272nd Regiment arrived at the South Vietnamese staging area , the Rangers had already pulled out and successfully recaptured Phước Bình . Meanwhile , on May 15 , the Viet Cong 274th Regiment defeated two South Vietnamese Regional Force companies along Route 20 , and destroyed 20 vehicles in the process . 
 After those operations in Phước Long district and Phước Bình sub @-@ sector , the Viet Cong 9th Division was ordered to attack Đồng Xoài . In 1965 , Đồng Xoài was a district town situated at a road junction which connected Inter @-@ Inter @-@ Provisional Road 13 , National Highway 1 and Highway 14 . The district was defended by 200 local Vietnamese soldiers drawn from the 327th and 328th Militia Companies , and the 111th Regional Force Company . They were supported by one armoured squadron ( 6 armoured vehicles ) and two 105mm howitzers . There were also 200 Cambodian soldiers of a Civilian Irregular Defense Group , 11 United States Army Special Forces personnel , and nine U.S. Navy Seabees . Prior to the battle , the U.S Special Forces had assumed control of Đồng Xoài 's defences ; they stepped up guard and patrol activities , and ordered the construction of new defensive fortifications around the district headquarters , the Special Forces Camp , and the armoured and artillery positions on the eastern side of the district . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the evening of June 9 , 1965 , the Viet Cong made final preparations for their assault on Đồng Xoài . While the Viet Cong assembled their formations , U.S.-led forces inside the Special Forces Camp were suddenly placed on alert , forcing the Viet Cong to commence their attack 70 minutes earlier than scheduled . At 11 : 30 pm Viet Cong heavy mortar rounds began to fall on South Vietnamese and American positions around Đồng Xoài , soon followed by an infantry assault led by the 272nd Regiment . During the initial assault , the Viet Cong sustained heavy casualties as they tried to navigate through the surrounding minefields and barb wire fences , which they had failed to pick up during previous reconnaissance missions . At about 1 : 30 am , two helicopter gunships from the U.S. Army 's 118th Aviation Company were dispatched to support the Special Forces Camp , they fired on the Viet Cong around the compound , and returned to base only after their weapons load was emptied . At around 2 : 30 am , the Americans and a few of the Cambodian soldiers retreated to the district headquarters , where other local troops were holding out . Meanwhile , at Biên Hòa Air Base , all flight crews of the 118th Aviation Company were on the flightline preparing for combat assault at first light . By that time , however , the Viet Cong had captured the Special Forces compound , and they began massing for an attack on the district headquarters . 
 While fighting raged inside the district , all flyable aircraft from the 118th Aviation Company flew out from Biên Hòa to Phước Vinh , a small town about 30 kilometres from Đồng Xoài . From Phước Vinh the first contingent of the ARVN 1st Battalion , 7th Infantry Regiment , was airlifted into the battlefield . At around 8 am , the UH @-@ 1 formations of the 118th Aviation Company descend on the landing zone near the Thuận Lợi rubber plantation , about 4 kilometres north of Đồng Xoài ; they immediately began to receive fire from bunkers and foxholes surrounding the area . The South Vietnamese command believed the landing zone near Thuận Lợi would be ideal to land their troops , because it was distant enough that the Viet Cong would not find and engage them immediately . However , the Viet Cong had anticipated the South Vietnamese would land troops in the area , and had prepared for an ambush . As a result , after U.S. helicopters had departed from the landing zone , soldiers of the Viet Cong 271st Regiment immediately turned their attention on the South Vietnamese . Within 15 minutes the main body of the ARVN 1st Battalion was completely destroyed . 
 At around 11 : 55 am the last remaining soldiers of the ARVN 1st Battalion were discharged near the original landing zone in Thuận Lợi , and they too were put out of action within three minutes of touching down on the field . During the afternoon , the Viet Cong had managed to destroy parts of the district headquarters building using their 57mm recoilless rifle . Second Lieutenant Williams then ordered 14 Americans inside the building , along with an equal number of Vietnamese women and children , to retreat to the artillery position located east of the town where they continued their resistance . Late in the afternoon on June 10 , the U.S. 118th Aviation Company was joined by other elements of the 145th Combat Aviation Battalion in their final sorties for the day ; airlifting the ARVN 52nd Ranger Battalion from Phước Vinh into Đồng Xoài , with the objective of recapturing the road junction and the Special Forces Camp . Following their last mission , the 118th Aviation Company immediately returned to Biên Hòa . During the first day of heavy fighting , every helicopter in the unit had sustained damage , including the loss of one helicopter and its entire crew . 
 At 3 : 20 pm the ARVN 52nd Ranger Battalion were discharged on a landing zone about 3 kilometres south of Đồng Xoài . As the South Vietnamese Rangers marched towards the town centre , their lead company was decimated in an ambush mounted by elements of the Viet Cong 271st Regiment . Undeterred by the strength of the Viet Cong , they continued their march towards the district . On the night of June 10 , the battalion began attacking Viet Cong positions around the Special Forces Camp , and they gradually recaptured the compound and much of the town . The Viet Cong eventually launched a counter @-@ attack in an attempt to win back the loss ground , but they failed to dislodge the soldiers of the ARVN 52nd Ranger Battalion . The next morning , on June 11 , the 118th Aviation Company was back at full strength in Phước Vinh . Like the previous day , they flew air @-@ support and airlifted further reinforcements from the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion . After the South Vietnamese paratroopers were dropped off on a soccer field , the 118th Aviation Company started large @-@ scale evacuation of South Vietnamese casualties . In contrast to the previous day , the 118th Aviation Company encountered only isolated rear guard actions . 
 Just before the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion landed on the battlefield , the Viet Cong had intercepted a radio conversation between the aforementioned unit and the 52nd Ranger Battalion in the district centre ; several months earlier the 7th Airborne Battalion was involved in the battle at Bình Giã , so they vowed to avenge the loss of their comrades . Thus , from the soccer field , the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion marched up to Thuận Lợi , against only light opposition . The South Vietnamese paratroopers arrived at the area where the first group of the ARVN 1st Battalion , 7th Infantry Regiment , was dropped off and they collected seven survivors and 55 bodies . In the afternoon , as elements of the 7th Airborne Battalion moved through the Thuận Lợi rubber plantation to search for remnants of the second group of the ARVN 1st Battalion , the Viet Cong 271st Regiment started attacking the South Vietnamese paratroopers in a manner which had characterised earlier ambushes . Taking advantage of the poor weather conditions that had limited U.S. air strikes , as well as their numerical superiority , the Viet Cong broke the South Vietnamese formation into small groups and destroyed many of them . On the next day , the strength of the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion was reduced from 470 to just 159 soldiers . 
 After the defeat of the ARVN 7th Airborne Battalion , U.S. General William Westmoreland concluded that the Viet Cong still had the strength to continue the attacks on Đồng Xoài . In contrast , South Vietnamese forces within the vicinity of Đồng Xoài were severely depleted , and did not have sufficient strength to defeat the Viet Cong . Furthermore , there was only one remaining battalion in South Vietnam ’ s strategic reserve , and it may not be enough to drive the Communist out from the area if it was committed . 
 Westmoreland was unwilling to leave the Viet Cong with a position from which they could dominate Phước Long Province . So , on June 13 , he made the decision to insert U.S. combat forces . Subsequently , 738 men of the 1st Battalion ( Airborne ) , 503rd Infantry Regiment , 173rd Airborne Brigade , were flown out to the staging area in Phước Vinh . Elements of the 3rd Battalion ( Airborne ) , 319th Artillery also followed later in the day . Upon arrival at Phước Vinh , the U.S. Army task force waited for five days , but it soon became apparent that the Viet Cong had withdrawn from the area and had no intention of holding territory . On June 18 , the 1 / 503rd Infantry was ordered to return to base . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In this battle both sides of the conflict had paid a heavy price to achieve their objectives . After the battle , search parties found several hundred VC bodies within small arms range of the Special Forces compound and district headquarters , and another 126 VC bodies inside these compounds . Numerous other Viet Cong casualties had been evacuated or incurred in the fighting beyond the towns borders . In their efforts to recapture the district town of Đồng Xoài , the South Vietnamese military lost 416 soldiers killed in action , 174 wounded and 233 missing . In addition , over one hundred South Vietnamese civilians were believed to have been massacred by the Viet Cong during their brief occupation of the area . Total casualties sustained by U.S. military personnel included 20 soldiers killed or wounded , and 13 missing . According to Vietnam 's official account of the Đồng Xoài campaign , the Communists claimed to have put 4 @,@ 459 enemy soldiers ( including 73 Americans ) out of action . Furthermore , 1 @,@ 652 weapons of various kinds were captured , 390 weapons and 60 vehicles were destroyed , 34 aircraft and 3 helicopters were shot down . 
 Even though the Viet Cong had won a clear victory over the regular units of the South Vietnamese army , they did not get away with light casualties . After the battle , a combined total of 126 Viet Cong bodies were recovered within the Special Forces compound and the district headquarters , and several hundred more were strewn all over the battlefield . Indeed , individual Viet Cong soldiers usually spare no efforts to evacuate their dead or wounded comrades ; but as military operations were conducted during the rainy season , the Viet Cong struggled to evacuate all their casualties from the battlefield as conditions on the main roads deteriorated . Despite the minor setbacks , the Đồng Xoài campaign marked the rapid maturity of the Viet Cong 9th Division as a fighting force . For their efforts during the battle , the Viet Cong 272nd Regiment received the title of ' Đồng Xoài Regiment ' to mark their achievements . 
 Six days after large @-@ scale fighting in Đồng Xoài had concluded there was another change of government in Saigon . South Vietnamese Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ was appointed prime minister and executive chairman of the government by the military junta , and General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu became a figurehead president . Unlike previous leaders , Air @-@ Marshal Kỳ and General Thiệu were more interested in fighting the Communists , and they intended to stop the Buddhist factions from interfering with their decision @-@ making processes . However , due to Air Marshal Kỳ 's lack of experience in civil government , the Americans were not entirely pleased with the formation of a new government with him as the leader . In contrast , General Thiệu 's appointment to the office of president was considered to be a positive development by the American Embassy and military command , because he possessed the political skills required by Saigon ’ s political establishment . Nonetheless , Kỳ 's ascension to the position of prime minister had effectively ended the cycle of military coups which had plagued Saigon since the downfall of Ngô Đình Diệm . 
 In a significant contrast to the political scene in South Vietnam , the North Vietnamese government in Hanoi were far more occupied with their military effort . The North Vietnamese Transportation Group 559 , then under the leadership of Major @-@ General Phan Trong Tue , was ordered to open a new transportation and communication lines through southern Laos and South Vietnam . The purpose was to facilitate the movement of troops and material through the Pathet Lao @-@ occupied section of the Ho Chi Minh trail . They were supported by 1 @,@ 500 workers from the Ministry of Transportation and 7 @,@ 600 volunteers . By the end of 1965 , the strength of Group 559 had grown to 24 @,@ 400 personnel organised in six battalions of motor vehicles , one battalion of boats , 18 battalions of combat engineers , four battalions of anti @-@ aircraft artillery and guard units . In addition to the expansion of their logistical abilities , the North Vietnamese also decided to establish five infantry divisions and one artillery in South Vietnam . Thus , the stage was set for a major military struggle with American and other allied forces . 
 = 2012 – 13 York City F.C. season = 
 The 2012 – 13 season was the ninety @-@ first season of competitive association football and seventy @-@ sixth season in the Football League played by York City Football Club , a professional football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . Their promotion via the Conference Premier play @-@ offs in 2011 – 12 meant they played in League Two , after an eight @-@ year absence from the Football League . The season ran from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 . 
 Manager Gary Mills signed eight players before the close of the summer transfer window . Having stood fourteenth in the league table on New Year 's Day , York were on an eleven @-@ match run without a win when Mills was sacked during March 2013 . He was replaced by former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington , who led York to safety from relegation on the final day of the season . Having won four of their last five games , the team finished the season seventeenth in the table . They lost in their opening round matches in both the 2012 – 13 FA Cup and the Football League Cup , and were eliminated in the second round of the Football League Trophy . 
 Thirty @-@ six players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first @-@ team competition , and there were twelve different goalscorers . Goalkeeper Michael Ingham played in all 50 first @-@ team matches over the season . Ashley Chambers finished as leading scorer with ten goals , all scored in the league . The winner of the Clubman of the Year award , voted for by the club 's supporters , was Danny Parslow , who became the first player to win the award for a third time . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 The 2011 – 12 season was Gary Mills ' first full season as York City manager , having taken over the role in October 2010 . York finished the season with two major trophies after victories in the 2012 FA Trophy Final and the 2012 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final , both of which were staged at Wembley Stadium . The FA Trophy victory represented York 's first piece of silverware in nineteen years and was achieved with a 2 – 0 victory over York 's Conference Premier rivals Newport County . With goals from Ashley Chambers and Matty Blair , York beat Luton Town 2 – 1 in the play @-@ off final to return to the Football League after an eight @-@ year absence with promotion to League Two . 
 Following the previous season 's conclusion Moses Ashikodi , Matthew Blinkhorn , Eugen Bopp and Scott Brown were released , while James Meredith , Adriano Moké and Danny Pilkington departed for Bradford City , Cambridge United and Kidderminster Harriers respectively . Jon Challinor , Chambers , Chris Doig , Jamal Fyfield , Michael Ingham , Scott Kerr and Danny Parslow signed new contracts with York . New players signed ahead of the start of the season were defender Danny Blanchett from Burton Albion , midfielders Lee Bullock from Bradford City , John McReady from Darlington 1883 and Jonathan Smith from Swindon Town , winger Michael Coulson from Grimsby Town and striker Oli Johnson from Oxford United . Midfielder Tom Platt , the previous season 's youth team captain and Youth Team Player of the Year , entered the first team squad after agreeing a professional contract . 
 The team adopted new home and away kits , with the home kit featuring red shirts with white sleeves , light blue shorts and white socks . The away kit comprised light blue shirts with white sleeves , white shorts and light blue socks . This was accompanied by a change in shirt sponsor , with Benenden Health 's name becoming present on the team kits . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = August = = = 
 York started the season away at League One club Doncaster Rovers in the first round of the League Cup . Debutant Coulson gave York the lead with a long @-@ range strike in the sixty @-@ fifth minute before Chris Brown equalised for Doncaster , scoring a penalty kick nine minutes later . The match finished 1 – 1 after extra time and York went on to lose the penalty shoot @-@ out 4 – 2 . York 's Football League return ended in defeat , with the side being beaten 3 – 1 at home to Wycombe Wanderers . Wycombe took a three @-@ goal lead before Jason Walker scored York 's consolation in the fifty @-@ fourth minute . York recorded their first point of the season after drawing 2 – 2 away at Morecambe , with Chris Smith and Chambers scoring the team 's goals in the second half . This was followed by their first league victory , with Parslow , Chambers and Coulson scoring in the first half away at Barnet in a 3 – 1 win . Two days before the transfer deadline York signed three new players ; defender Clarke Carlisle and striker Scott Dobie signed on free transfers and Charlie Taylor came on loan from Leeds United . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Coulson scored after 15 seconds to give York the lead at home to league leaders Oxford United , and with further goals from Chambers and Patrick McLaughlin the side went on to win 3 – 1 . York won 1 – 0 in their first round game of the Football League Trophy away at Rotherham United , with Blair scoring an eightieth @-@ minute winner . Walker 's equaliser in the fifth minute of stoppage time secured a 2 – 2 draw at home to Chesterfield . There had been three goals scored in a five @-@ minute period in the first half ; Chesterfield opened the scoring through Sam Hird and Coulson equalised for York before Craig <unk> restored the visitors ' lead . York drew their next game 1 – 1 at Exeter City , having taken the lead through Coulson in the fifty @-@ second minute before the home side equalised when John O 'Flynn scored in the eighty @-@ third minute . The team 's first away defeat of the season came with a 3 – 1 defeat away at Burton Albion ; after McLaughlin gave York a ninth @-@ minute lead , Burton went on to win with goals from Lee Bell , Calvin Zola and Matt Paterson . A third draw in four games came after York drew 0 – 0 at home to Cheltenham Town . Platt and Liam Henderson were sent out to Harrogate Town and Gainsborough Trinity on three @-@ month and one @-@ month loans respectively , while Dobie was released and Taylor had his loan extended for a second month . York 's run of four games without victory came to an end after a 2 – 0 win at Aldershot Town , with Blair and Walker scoring in the second half . 
 = = = October = = = 
 The previous season 's Conference Premier champions Fleetwood Town defeated York 2 – 0 at Bootham Crescent , with goals in each half scored by Junior Brown and Steven Gillespie . Peterborough United midfielder Daniel Kearns was signed on a one @-@ month loan and made his debut as a substitute in York 's 0 – 0 home draw with Rotherham . York were knocked out of the Football League Trophy in the second round after being beaten 4 – 0 at home by League One team Coventry City . Chambers scored the opening goal in York 's first derby game with Bradford City in sixteen years , but with the home side scoring through <unk> Hines the match finished a 1 – 1 draw . Chambers and Blair scored as York beat Dagenham & Redbridge 3 – 2 at home , which was the side 's first win in four league games . York recorded a second successive victory away at Accrington Stanley , with Walker scoring an eighty @-@ third @-@ minute winner in a 1 – 0 win . Bullock was loaned out to Gateshead of the Conference Premier for a month , with his appearances in the team being limited . A 0 – 0 draw away to Southend United saw York 's run of victories come to an end . 
 = = = November = = = 
 Coulson was ruled out for the season with a cruciate ligament injury , while Kearns ' loan was extended for a further two months . York conceded an eightieth @-@ minute equaliser at home to AFC Wimbledon in the first round of the FA Cup , with Charlie <unk> the scorer , after substitute Jamie Reed had earlier given York the lead . Jonathan Smith was loaned to Conference Premier side Luton until January 2013 , with him having not started a game since September . Blair gave York the lead at home to Northampton Town , and despite playing most of the game with ten men , the away side equalised through Adebayo Akinfenwa . Winger Alex Rodman , who had previously played under Mills at Tamworth , was signed on a two @-@ month loan from Aldershot . He made his debut in York 's home league game against AFC Wimbledon , which finished as a 3 – 0 defeat , with the visitors scoring their goals in the second half . 
 York were knocked out of the FA Cup after a 4 – 3 extra time defeat at AFC Wimbledon in a first round replay . Jamie Reed scored in the eighty @-@ ninth @-@ minute to hand York a 2 – 2 draw at Port Vale , after Rodman had scored his first goal for the club earlier in the second half . Carlisle was loaned to divisional rivals Northampton ahead of an arranged permanent transfer in January 2013 , while Henderson joined Gateshead on loan and Bullock had his loan extended . York fell to a second successive home defeat after being beaten 2 – 0 by Torquay United , the away side scoring in each half through Danny Stevens and Joe Oastler . Despite his loan earlier being extended until January 2013 , Kearns was recalled by Peterborough , having made twelve appearances for York . 
 = = = December = = = 
 York recorded their first win in eight games after defeating Rochdale 3 – 2 away , with Michael Potts scoring twice and Walker scoring once in the first half . Youth team defender Tom Allan signed a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year professional contract with the club , with Mills saying , " Tom has come on unbelievably in the last 12 months and thoroughly deserves his first professional contract " . York fell to a 2 – 0 defeat at Plymouth Argyle , with Fyfield scoring an own goal in the forty @-@ fifth @-@ minute and Nick Chadwick scoring in the ninetieth @-@ minute . Jonathan Smith and Bullock were recalled from their loans ahead of York 's home game against Bristol Rovers . York scored four first half goals to beat Bristol Rovers 4 – 1 , with Garry Kenneth scoring an own goal , Chambers scoring twice and Walker scoring once . A second successive away defeat came at Chesterfield on Boxing Day when York were beaten 3 – 0 , with the home side scoring their goals during the second half . This run ended after a 0 – 0 draw away at Fleetwood , in which York missed a number of chances to score in the first half . 
 = = = January = = = 
 Jonathan Smith made a permanent move to Luton for a fee of £ 50 @,@ 000 shortly after the transfer window opened . York won 3 – 0 in their New Year 's Day home fixture against Burton , with Walker , McLaughlin and Blair scoring . Carlisle completed a permanent transfer to Northampton after the conclusion of his loan , while Henderson signed for Gateshead permanently after an agreement was reached over the remainder of his York contract . York were beaten 2 – 1 at home to Exeter , with a Rodman own goal giving the visitors the lead in the fourteenth @-@ minute . Potts equalised for York five minutes later , before Exeter scored the winning goal on fifty @-@ three @-@ minutes through Jimmy Keohane . Rodman 's loan from Aldershot was extended until the end of the season . Walker scored in the eighty @-@ fourth @-@ minute to secure York a 1 – 1 draw away at Cheltenham , who had taken the lead in the sixty @-@ seventh @-@ minute through Shaun Harrad . Striker Ben Everson , who last played for <unk> in the Icelandic <unk> , was signed on a contract for the rest of the season . Platt was loaned out for the second time in a season , joining Conference North side FC Halifax Town for one month . Everson made his debut as a seventy @-@ first @-@ minute substitute in a 0 – 0 draw at home to Aldershot . 
 Blackburn Rovers defender Jack O 'Connell was signed on a one @-@ month loan , while Salford City defender Jameel <unk> was signed on a contract for the rest of the season . Blanchett was released after his contract was cancelled by mutual consent . York were leading Gillingham 1 – 0 away before the home side equalised five minutes from time through Cody McDonald , with York having taken the lead in the seventeenth @-@ minute through a McLaughlin goal straight from a corner kick . Striker David McDaid was signed from League of Ireland Premier Division side Derry City on a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract for a small compensation fee , while defender Curtis Obeng was signed on a one @-@ month loan from Premier League side Swansea City after Lanre Oyebanjo was ruled out for around six weeks with a fractured skull . 
 = = = February = = = 
 York were beaten 4 – 1 at home to Morecambe , with Walker scoring York 's only goal with a first half penalty , before enduring their largest defeat of the season after losing 4 – 0 at Wycombe . Jamie Reed was loaned to Cambridge United for the rest of the season , with his opportunities in the team having been limited . Burton midfielder John McGrath and Aldershot striker Michael Rankine were signed on loan , with the former joining for one month and the latter for the rest of the season . Both started in York 's 0 – 0 draw at home to Gillingham . York opened the scoring against Barnet at home through a David Stephens own goal , although goals from Andy <unk> and Jake Hyde saw the away side win 2 – 1 . Everson was loaned out to Gateshead for a month , having struggled for opportunities in the team , and Platt returned to Harrogate on loan for the remainder of the season . York drew 0 – 0 at Oxford , with the best chance of the game falling to Blair when he headed straight at goalkeeper Luke McCormick . O 'Connell 's loan was extended until the end of the season . Daniel <unk> scored a stoppage time equaliser for Rotherham when York were leading 1 – 0 , after the away team had taken the lead through Blair earlier in the second half . Johnson was released after making seven appearances for the club , having been hindered during the season by stomach and groin problems . 
 = = = March = = = 
 Mills was sacked after nearly two and a half years in charge on 2 March 2013 after York were beaten 2 – 0 at home to Bradford , with the team sitting four points above the relegation zone after an 11 @-@ match run without a win . Former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington was appointed as his successor two days later , with Fred Barber joining from Bury as his assistant . Mills ' remaining coaching staff of Darron Gee , Des Lyttle and Paul Musselwhite left the club . Following his appointment , Worthington indicated the players out on loan would return to the club , saying , " It 's only right that contracted players should be in and around the club over the next ten games as York City are paying their salaries and they should be part of anything that is going on in the next two months " . Worthington 's first signing was Sheffield Wednesday goalkeeper Arron Jameson , who joined on an emergency loan for the remainder of the season , while McGrath had his loan extended until the end of the season . 
 Worthington 's first game in charge was a 3 – 2 defeat away to AFC Wimbledon , in which Chris Smith scored twice , before Harry Pell scored the home side 's winner in the seventy @-@ ninth @-@ minute . York picked up their first point under Worthington after a 0 – 0 home draw with Rochdale , with both teams having few opportunities to score . Ipswich Town midfielder Josh Carson was signed on a one @-@ month loan , while Bullock was loaned to Stockport County of the Conference Premier for the rest of the season . Carson made his debut in York 's 2 – 0 home defeat to Port Vale , who scored in each half through Jennison Myrie @-@ Williams and Lee Hughes . Former York striker Richard Cresswell , who became the club 's record sale in 1999 , was signed from Sheffield United on a one @-@ month loan . He scored a penalty in the team 's 2 – 1 defeat away at Torquay , a result that saw York drop into the second relegation spot . Sunderland midfielder Adam Reed was signed on a one @-@ month loan , while <unk> was released . Adam Reed made his debut as York drew 0 – 0 away at Bristol Rovers , in which the home team 's goalkeeper Steve Mildenhall made a number of saves . 
 = = = April = = = 
 York recorded their first win in seventeen games after beating Plymouth 2 – 0 at home , with Chambers and Cresswell scoring in the first half . McGrath , Rankine and Rodman were sent back to their parent clubs , having become surplus to requirements under Worthington . The team were denied a second successive win after Peter Murphy scored a stoppage time equaliser for Accrington , with the match finishing a 1 – 1 home draw , after Adam Reed had given York the lead in first half stoppage time . Carson and Kerr were ruled out for the remainder of the season through injury , with the former returning to parent club Ipswich after the expiration of his loan . York recorded a second victory in three games after winning 2 – 0 away at Northampton , who had been on a run of ten consecutive home wins , with Chambers scoring in the first half and John Johnson scoring an own goal in the second half . This result saw York rise out of the relegation zone by moving up to twentieth @-@ place in the table , having occupied twenty @-@ third @-@ place following the previous four results . Cresswell was recalled from his loan by new Sheffield United caretaker manager Chris Morgan , after making an important contribution for York in their battle against relegation . 
 York picked up a third win in five matches by defeating Southend 2 – 1 at home with first half goals from Adam Reed and Blair . They remained in 20th position in the league following positive results for most of the teams surrounding them , meaning their relegation fight would not be concluded until after the last game of the season . Before the Southend match Parslow was named Clubman of the Year , voted for by the York supporters , becoming the first player to win the award on three occasions . York avoided relegation on the final day of the season after beating Dagenham 1 – 0 away , with Chris Smith scoring the only goal . This meant York finished their first season back in the Football League in seventeenth place in League Two , four points clear of the relegation zone . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 York spent most of the season in mid @-@ table , rising as high as seventh place in September 2012 and dropping as low as twenty @-@ third in March 2013 . The team recorded the second lowest number of wins in the League Two season with twelve ; bottom @-@ placed Aldershot were the only side to win fewer matches with eleven victories . Ingham was the only ever @-@ present player for York , appearing in all fifty @-@ one matches . Chambers was top scorer with ten goals in the league , being the only player to reach double figures , and was followed by Walker with nine goals . 
 Ahead of the new season , York released Bullock , Challinor , Doig , Everson , Kerr , McDaid , McLaughlin , Potts , Jamie Reed and Walker , while Blair left to sign for Fleetwood . David McGurk , Oyebanjo , Parslow , Platt and Chris Smith signed new contracts with the club . The club signed goalkeeper Chris Kettings from Blackpool , defender Ben Davies from Preston North End , midfielders Craig Clay from Chesterfield and Lewis Montrose from Gillingham , winger Sander Puri from St Mirren and strikers Ryan Bowman from Hereford United , Cresswell from Sheffield United , Wes Fletcher from Burnley and Ryan Jarvis from Torquay . Defender Mike Atkinson and striker Chris Dickinson entered the first team squad from the youth team after agreeing professional contracts . 
 = = Match details = = 
 League positions are sourced by Statto , while the remaining information is referenced individually . 
 = = = Football League Two = = = 
 = = = League table ( part ) = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = League Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Trophy = = = 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player 's contract with that club had expired before he joined York . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player joined that club after his York contract expired . 
 = = = Loans in = = = 
 = = = Loans out = = = 
 = = Appearances and goals = = 
 Source : 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with names struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with York . 
 Players listed with no appearances have been in the matchday squad but only as unused substitutes . 
 Key to positions : GK – Goalkeeper ; DF – Defender ; MF – Midfielder ; FW – Forward 
 = Humpback whale = 
 The humpback whale ( Megaptera novaeangliae ) is a species of baleen whale . One of the larger rorqual species , adults range in length from 12 – 16 m ( 39 – 52 ft ) and weigh about 36 @,@ 000 kg ( 79 @,@ 000 lb ) . The humpback has a distinctive body shape , with long pectoral fins and a knobbly head . It is known for breaching and other distinctive surface behaviors , making it popular with whale watchers . Males produce a complex song lasting 10 to 20 minutes , which they repeat for hours at a time . Its purpose is not clear , though it may have a role in mating . 
 Found in oceans and seas around the world , humpback whales typically migrate up to 25 @,@ 000 km ( 16 @,@ 000 mi ) each year . Humpbacks feed only in summer , in polar waters , and migrate to tropical or subtropical waters to breed and give birth in the winter when they fast and live off their fat reserves . Their diet consists mostly of krill and small fish . Humpbacks have a diverse repertoire of feeding methods , including the bubble net technique . 
 Like other large whales , the humpback was a target for the whaling industry . Once hunted to the brink of extinction , its population fell by an estimated 90 % before a 1966 moratorium . While stocks have partially recovered , entanglement in fishing gear , collisions with ships and noise pollution continue to impact the population of 80 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Humpback whales are rorquals ( Balaenopteridae , a family that includes the blue , fin , Bryde 's , sei and minke whales ) . The rorquals are believed to have diverged from the other families of the suborder Mysticeti as long ago as the middle Miocene . However , it is not known when the members of these families diverged from each other . 
 Though clearly related to the giant whales of the genus Balaenoptera , the humpback is the sole member of its genus . More recently , though , DNA sequencing analysis has indicated the humpback is more closely related to certain rorquals , particularly the fin whale ( B. physalus ) and possibly to the gray whale ( Eschrichtius robustus ) , than it is to other rorquals such as the minke whales . 
 The humpback was first identified as <unk> de la Nouvelle Angleterre by Mathurin Jacques Brisson in his Regnum <unk> of 1756 . In 1781 , Georg Heinrich Borowski described the species , converting Brisson 's name to its Latin equivalent , Balaena novaeangliae . In 1804 , Lacépède shifted the humpback from the family Balaenidae , renaming it B. <unk> . In 1846 , John Edward Gray created the genus Megaptera , classifying the humpback as Megaptera <unk> , but in 1932 , Remington Kellogg reverted the species names to use Borowski 's novaeangliae . The common name is derived from the curving of their backs when diving . The generic name Megaptera from the Greek mega- / <unk> " giant " and ptera / <unk> " wing " , refers to their large front flippers . The specific name means " New Englander " and was probably given by Brisson due to regular sightings of humpbacks off the coast of New England . 
 Genetic research in mid @-@ 2014 by the British Antarctic Survey confirmed that the separate populations in the North Atlantic , North Pacific and Southern Oceans are more distinct than previously thought . Some biologists believe that these should be regarded as separate subspecies and that they are evolving independently . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Humpbacks can easily be identified by their stocky body , obvious hump , black dorsal coloring and elongated pectoral fins . The head and lower jaw are covered with knobs called tubercles , which are hair follicles and are characteristic of the species . The fluked tail , which typically rises above the surface when diving , has wavy trailing edges . 
 Humpbacks have 270 to 400 darkly colored baleen plates on each side of their mouths . The plates measure from 18 in ( 46 cm ) in the front to about 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) in the back , behind the hinge . 
 Ventral grooves run from the lower jaw to the umbilicus , about halfway along the underside of the body . These grooves are less numerous ( usually 14 – 22 ) than in other rorquals , but are fairly wide . 
 The female has a hemispherical lobe about 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter in her genital region . This visually distinguishes males and females . The male 's penis usually remains hidden in the genital slit . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Fully grown males average 13 – 14 m ( 43 – 46 ft ) . Females are slightly larger at 15 – 16 m ( 49 – 52 ft ) ; one large recorded specimen was 19 m ( 62 ft ) long and had pectoral fins measuring 6 m ( 20 ft ) each . The largest humpback on record , according to whaling records , was a female killed in the Caribbean ; she was 27 m ( 89 ft ) long with a weight of 90 metric tons ( 99 short tons ) , although the reliability of this information is unconfirmed due to illogicality of the record . Body mass typically is in the range of 25 – 30 metric tons ( 28 – 33 short tons ) , with large specimens weighing over 40 metric tons ( 44 short tons ) . 
 Newborn calves are roughly the length of their mother 's head . At birth , calves measure 6 m ( 20 ft ) at 2 short tons ( 1 @.@ 8 t ) . They nurse for about six months , then mix nursing and independent feeding for possibly six months more . Humpback milk is 50 % fat and pink in color . 
 Females reach sexual maturity at age five , achieving full adult size a little later . Males reach sexual maturity around seven years of age . 
 = = = Fins = = = 
 The long black and white tail fin can be up to a third of body length . Several hypotheses attempt to explain the humpback 's pectoral fins , which are proportionally the longest fins of any cetacean . The higher maneuverability afforded by long fins and the usefulness of the increased surface area for temperature control when migrating between warm and cold climates possibly supported this adaptation . 
 = = = Identifying individuals = = = 
 The varying patterns on the tail flukes distinguish individual animals . A study using data from 1973 to 1998 on whales in the North Atlantic gave researchers detailed information on gestation times , growth rates and calving periods , as well as allowing more accurate population predictions by simulating the mark @-@ release @-@ recapture technique . A photographic catalogue of all known North Atlantic whales was developed over this period and is maintained by College of the Atlantic . Similar photographic identification projects operate around the world . 
 = = Life history / behavior = = 
 The lifespan of rorquals ranges from 45 to 100 years . 
 = = = Interactions = = = 
 The humpback social structure is loose @-@ knit . Typically , individuals live alone or in small , transient groups that disband after a few hours . Groups may stay together longer in summer to forage and feed cooperatively . Longer @-@ term relationships between pairs or small groups , lasting months or even years , have rarely been observed . Some females possibly retain bonds created via cooperative feeding for a lifetime . The humpback 's range overlaps with other whale and dolphin species — for instance , the minke whale . 
 = = = Courtship and reproduction = = = 
 Courtship rituals take place during the winter months , following migration toward the equator from summer feeding grounds closer to the poles . Competition is usually fierce . Unrelated males , dubbed escorts , frequently trail females , as well as cow @-@ calf pairs . Males gather into " competition groups " around a female and fight for the right to mate with her . Group size ebbs and flows as unsuccessful males retreat and others arrive . Behaviors include breaching , <unk> , lob @-@ tailing , tail @-@ slapping , pectoral fin @-@ slapping , peduncle throws , charging and parrying . 
 Whale song is thought to have an important role in mate selection ; however , they may also be used between males to establish dominance . 
 Females typically breed every two or three years . The gestation period is 11 @.@ 5 months . The peak months for birth are January , February ( northern hemisphere ) , July and August ( southern hemisphere ) . Females wait for one- to two – years before breeding again . Recent research on mitochondrial DNA reveals that groups living in proximity to each other may represent distinct breeding pools . 
 = = = Interspecies interactions = = = 
 Humpbacks are a friendly species that interact with other cetacean species such as bottlenose dolphins . Right whales interact with humpbacks . These behaviors have been recorded in all oceans . A record of a humpback and a southern right whale demonstrating what was interpreted to be mating behaviors was documented off the Mozambique coast . Humpback whales appear in mixed groups with other species , such as the blue , fin , minke , gray and sperm whales . Interaction with gray , fin , and right whales have been observed . Teams of researchers observed a male humpback whale singing an unknown type of song and approaching a fin whale at Rarotonga in 2014 . One individual was observed playing with a bottlenose dolphin in Hawaiian waters . 
 = = = Song = = = 
 Both male and female humpback whales vocalize , but only males produce the long , loud , complex " song " for which the species is famous . Each song consists of several sounds in a low register , varying in amplitude and frequency and typically lasting from 10 to 20 minutes . Individuals may sing continuously for more than 24 hours . Cetaceans have no vocal cords . They vocalize by forcing air through their massive nasal cavities ( blowholes ) . 
 Whales within a large area sing a single song . All North Atlantic humpbacks sing the same song , while those of the North Pacific sing a different song . Each population 's song changes slowly over a period of years without repeating . 
 Scientists are unsure of the purpose of whale songs . Only males sing , suggesting one purpose is to attract females . However , many of the whales observed to approach a singer are other males , often resulting in conflict . Singing may , therefore , be a challenge to other males . Some scientists have hypothesized the song may serve an <unk> function . During the feeding season , humpbacks make unrelated vocalizations for herding fish into their bubble nets . 
 Humpback whales make other sounds to communicate , such as grunts , groans , " <unk> " , snorts and barks . 
 = = = Breathing = = = 
 Whales are air @-@ breathing mammals who must surface to get the air they need . The stubby dorsal fin is visible soon after the blow ( exhalation ) when the whale surfaces , but disappears by the time the flukes emerge . Humpbacks have a 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , heart @-@ shaped to bushy blow through the blowholes . 
 They do not generally sleep at the surface , but must continue to breathe . Possibly only half of their brain sleeps at one time , allowing the other half to manage the surface / blow / dive process without awakening the other half . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 Migratory patterns and social interactions were explored in the 1960s and by further studies in 1971 . <unk> et al. provided the " first quantitative assessment of the migratory structure of humpback whales in the entire North Pacific basin . " 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Range and habitat = = = 
 Humpbacks inhabit all major oceans , in a wide band running from the Antarctic ice edge to 77 ° N latitude . The four global populations are North Pacific , Atlantic , Southern Ocean and Indian Ocean populations . These populations are distinct . Although the species has cosmopolitan distribution and is usually not considered to cross the equator line , seasonal observations at Cape Verde suggest possible interactions among populations from both hemisphere . 
 Whales were once uncommon in the eastern Mediterranean or the Baltic Sea , but have increased their presence in both waters as global populations have recovered . Recent increases within the Mediterranean basin , including re @-@ sightings , indicate that more whales may migrate into the inland sea in the future . They have also returned to Skagerrak and Kattegat , as well as Scandinavian fjords such as the <unk> , where they had not been observed for decades . 
 In the North Atlantic , feeding areas range from Scandinavia to New England . Breeding occurs in the Caribbean and Cape Verde . In the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans , <unk> may breed off Brazil , as well the coasts of central , southern and southeastern Africa ( including Madagascar ) . Whale visits into Gulf of Mexico have been infrequent , but occurred in the gulf historically . In the South Atlantic , about 10 % of world population of the species possibly migrate to Gulf of Guinea . Comparison of songs between those at Cape Lopez and Abrolhos Archipelago indicate that trans @-@ Atlantic <unk> between western and southeastern populations occur . 
 A large population spreads across the Hawaiian Islands every winter , ranging from the island of Hawaii in the south to Kure Atoll in the north . These animals feed in areas ranging from the coast of California to the Bering Sea . Humpbacks were first observed in Hawaiian waters in the mid @-@ 19th century and might have gained a dominance over North Pacific right whales as the right whales were hunted to near @-@ extinction . 
 A 2007 study identified seven individuals then wintering off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica as having traveled from the Antarctic — around 8 @,@ 300 km ( 5 @,@ 200 mi ) . Identified by their unique tail patterns , these animals made the longest documented mammalian migration . In Australia , two main migratory populations were identified , off the west and east coasts . These two populations are distinct , with only a few females in each generation crossing between the two groups . 
 In Panama and Costa Rica , humpback whales come from both the Southern Hemisphere ( July – October with over 2 @,@ 000 whales ) and the Northern Hemisphere ( December – March numbering about 300 . ) South Pacific populations migrating off mainland New Zealand , Kermadec Islands , and Tasmania are increasing , but less rapidly than in Australian waters because of illegal whaling by the Soviet Union in the 1970s . 
 Some recolonizing habitats are confirmed , especially in the North and South Atlantic ( e.g. English and Irish coasts , English Channel to coasts in the north such as the North Sea and Wadden Sea , South Pacific ( e.g. New Zealand coasts and Niue ) , pelagic islands of Chile such as Isla Salas y Gómez and the Easter Island where possibilities of undocumented wintering grounds have been considered , southern <unk> of Chile and Peru ( e.g. Gulf of Penas , Strait of Magellan , Beagle Channel ) and in Asia . Areas in the Philippines such as in Babuyan Islands , Cagayan and Calayan and <unk> Bay , Ryukyu Islands the Volcano Islands in Japan and the Northern Mariana Islands recently , again became stable / growing wintering grounds while Marshall Islands , Vietnamese , Taiwanese and Chinese coasts show slow or no obvious recovery . 
 Whales again migrate off Japanese archipelagos and into the Sea of Japan . Connections between these stocks and whales seen in Sea of Okhotsk , on Kamchatka coasts and around Commander Islands have been studied . Historical wintering distributions could have been much wider , as whales were seen areas along Batanes , Sulu and Celebes Seas including off Palawan , Malaysia and Mindanao with higher densities at around today 's Cape <unk> and Kenting National Park . Unconfirmed sightings have been reported near Borneo in Modern . The first confirmation in modern Taiwan was of a pair off Hualien in 1994 , followed by successful escape from entanglement off Taitung in 1999 , and continuous sightings around Orchid Island in 2000 . Few / none regularly migrate into Kenting National Park . In addition , despite sightings reported almost annually at the islands of Green and Orchid Islands , relatively short stays in these waters indicate recoveries as winter foraging has not occurred . Around Hong Kong , two documented sightings were recorded in 2009 and in 2016 . One of the first documented sighting within the Yellow Sea was of a group of 3 or 4 individuals , including a cow calf pair in <unk> County in October , 2015 . 
 Since November 2015 , whales gather around Hachijō @-@ jima , far north from the known breeding areas in the Bonin Islands . All breeding activities except for giving births had been confirmed as of January , 2016 . That makes Hachijo @-@ jima the northernmost breeding ground in the world , north of breeding grounds such as Amami Ōshima , Midway Island , and Bermuda . 
 = = = = Arabian Sea population = = = = 
 A non @-@ migratory population in the Arabian Sea remains there year @-@ round . More typical annual migrations cover up to 25 @,@ 000 km ( 16 @,@ 000 mi ) , making it one of the most @-@ traveled mammalian species . Genetic studies and visual surveys indicate that the Arabian group is the most isolated of all humpback groups and is the most endangered , numbering possibly fewer than 100 animals . 
 Whales were historically common in continental and marginal waters such as <unk> Islands , along Indian coasts , Persian Gulf and Gulf of Aden and recent migrations into the gulf including by cow @-@ calf pairs . It is unknown whether whales seen in the Red Sea originate in this population , however sightings increased since in 2006 even in the northern part of the sea such as in Gulf of Aqaba . Individuals may reach the Maldives , Sri Lanka , or further east . 
 Origins of whales occurring at Maldives are not clear as those from Arabian and south Pacific populations are possible . 
 = = Feeding and predation = = 
 Humpbacks feed primarily in summer and live off fat reserves during winter . They feed only rarely and opportunistically in their wintering waters . The humpback is an energetic hunter , taking krill and small schooling fish such as herring , salmon , capelin and American sand lance , as well as Atlantic mackerel , pollock and haddock in the North Atlantic . Krill and copepods are prey species in Australian and Antarctic waters . Humpbacks hunt by direct attack or by stunning prey by hitting the water with pectoral fins or flukes . 
 = = = Bubble net = = = 
 The humpback has the most diverse hunting repertoire of all baleen whales . Its most inventive technique is known as bubble net feeding ; a group of whales swims in a shrinking circle blowing bubbles below a school of prey . The shrinking ring of bubbles encircles the school and confines it in an ever @-@ smaller cylinder . This ring can begin near 30 m ( 98 ft ) in diameter and involve the cooperation of a dozen animals . Using a <unk> attached to a whale 's back , researchers found that some whales blow the bubbles , some dive deeper to drive fish toward the surface and others herd prey into the net by vocalizing . The whales then suddenly swim upward through the " net " , mouths agape , swallowing thousands of fish in one gulp . <unk> grooves in the whale 's mouth allow the creature to easily drain the water initially taken in , filtering out the prey . 
 So @-@ called <unk> feeding was observed in the North Atlantic . This technique involves the whale slapping the surface of the ocean with its tail between one and four times before creating the bubble net . Using network @-@ based diffusion analysis , the study authors argued that these whales learned the behavior from other whales in the group over a period of 27 years in response to a change in the primary form of prey . 
 = = = Killer whale predation = = = 
 Visible scars indicate that killer whales can prey upon juvenile humpbacks , though until recently hunting had never been witnessed and attacks were assumed to be superficial in nature . However , a 2014 study off Western Australia observed that when available in large numbers , young humpbacks can be attacked and sometimes killed by orcas . Moreover , mothers and ( possibly related ) adults escort neonates to deter such predation . The suggestion is that when humpbacks suffered near @-@ extinction during the whaling era , orcas turned to other prey , but are now resuming their former practice . 
 = = Relation to humans = = 
 = = = Whaling = = = 
 Humpback whales were hunted as early as the 18th century . By the 19th century , many nations ( the United States in particular ) , were hunting the animal heavily in the Atlantic Ocean and to a lesser extent in the Indian and Pacific Oceans . The late @-@ 19th @-@ century introduction of the explosive harpoon allowed whalers to accelerate their take . This , along with hunting in the Antarctic Ocean beginning in 1904 , sharply reduced whale populations . During the 20th century , over 200 @,@ 000 humpbacks were taken , reducing the global population by over 90 % . North Atlantic populations dropped to as low as 700 individuals . 
 = = = = Ban = = = = 
 In 1946 , the International Whaling Commission ( IWC ) was founded to oversee the industry . They imposed hunting regulations and created hunting seasons . To prevent extinction , IWC banned commercial humpback whaling in 1966 . By then , the global population had been reduced to around 5 @,@ 000 . The ban remained in force as of 2016 . 
 Prior to commercial whaling , populations could have reached 125 @,@ 000 . North Pacific kills alone are estimated at 28 @,@ 000 . The Soviet Union deliberately under @-@ recorded its catches ; the Soviets reported catching 2 @,@ 820 between 1947 and 1972 , but the true number was over 48 @,@ 000 . 
 As of 2004 , hunting was restricted to a few animals each year off the Caribbean island of Bequia in the nation of St. Vincent and the Grenadines . The take is not believed to threaten the local population . Japan had planned to kill 50 humpbacks in the 2007 / 08 season under its JARPA II research program . The announcement sparked global protests . After a visit to Tokyo by the IWC chair asking the Japanese for their co @-@ operation in sorting out the differences between pro- and antiwhaling nations on the commission , the Japanese whaling fleet agreed to take no humpback whales during the two years it would take to reach a formal agreement . 
 In 2010 , the IWC authorized Greenland 's native population to hunt a few humpback whales for the following three years . 
 In Japan , humpback , minkes , sperm and many other smaller Odontoceti , including critically endangered species such as North Pacific right , western gray and northern fin , have been targets of illegal captures . The hunts use harpoons for dolphin hunts or intentionally drive whales into nets , reporting them as cases of entanglement . Humpback meat can be found in markets . In one case , humpbacks of unknown quantities were illegally hunted in the Exclusive Economic Zones of anti @-@ whaling nations such as off Mexico and South Africa . 
 = = = Whale @-@ watching = = = 
 Whale watching is the leisure activity of observing humpbacks in the wild . Participants watch <unk> shore or on touring boats . Humpbacks are generally curious about nearby objects . Some individuals , referred to as " friendlies " , approach whale @-@ watching boats closely , often staying under or near the boat for many minutes . 
 Because humpbacks are typically easily approachable , curious , identifiable as individuals and display many behaviors , they have become the mainstay of whale tourism around the world . Hawaii has used the concept of " ecotourism " to benefit from the species without killing them . This business brings in revenue of $ 20 million per year for the state 's economy . 
 = = = Famous individuals = = = 
 = = = = The Tay whale = = = = 
 In December 1883 , a male humpback swam up the Firth of Tay in Scotland , past what was then the whaling port of Dundee . The whale was exhibited to the public by a local entrepreneur , John Woods , both locally and then as a touring exhibition that travelled to Edinburgh and London . The whale was dissected by Professor John Struthers , who wrote seven papers on its anatomy and a 1889 monograph on the humpback . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 An albino humpback whale that travels up and down the east coast of Australia became famous in local media because of its rare , all @-@ white appearance . <unk> is the only known all @-@ white specimen and is a true albino . First sighted in 1991 , the whale was named for an indigenous Australian word for " white fella " . To prevent sightseers approaching dangerously close , the Queensland government created a 500 @-@ m ( 1600 @-@ ft ) exclusion zone around him . 
 = = = = Humphrey = = = = 
 In 1985 , Humphrey swam into San Francisco Bay and then up the Sacramento River towards Rio Vista . Five years later , Humphrey returned and became stuck on a mudflat in San Francisco Bay immediately north of Sierra Point below the view of onlookers from the upper floors of the Dakin Building . 
 He was twice rescued by the Marine Mammal Center and other concerned groups in California . He was pulled off the mudflat with a large cargo net and the help of the US Coast Guard . Both times , he was successfully guided back to the Pacific Ocean using a " sound net " in which people in a flotilla of boats made unpleasant noises behind the whale by banging on steel pipes , a Japanese fishing technique known as <unk> . At the same time , the attractive sounds of humpback whales preparing to feed were broadcast from a boat headed towards the open ocean . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Analyses of whale songs in the 1960s led to worldwide media interest and convinced the public that whales were highly intelligent , aiding the antiwhaling advocates . 
 = = Status = = 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 While whaling no longer threatens the species , individuals are vulnerable to collisions with ships , entanglement in fishing gear and noise pollution . Like other cetaceans , humpbacks can be injured by excessive noise . In the 19th century , two humpback whales were found dead near sites of repeated oceanic sub @-@ bottom blasting , with traumatic injuries and fractures in the ears . 
 <unk> , a paralytic shellfish poisoning from contaminated mackerel , was implicated in humpback whale deaths . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The worldwide population is at least 80 @,@ 000 , with 18 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 in the North Pacific , about 12 @,@ 000 in the North Atlantic and over 50 @,@ 000 in the Southern Hemisphere , down from a <unk> population of 125 @,@ 000 . } 
 = = = = Least concern = = = = 
 In August 2008 , the IUCN changed humpback 's status from Vulnerable to Least Concern , although two subpopulations remain endangered . The United States is considering listing separate humpback populations , so smaller groups , such as North Pacific humpbacks , which are estimated to number 18 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 animals , might be delisted . This is made difficult by humpback 's migrations , which can extend 5 @,@ 157 miles ( 8 @,@ 299 km ) from Antarctica to Costa Rica . In Costa Rica , the Ballena Marine National Park is designed for humpback protection . 
 Areas where population data are limited and the species may be at higher risk include the Arabian Sea , the western North Pacific Ocean , the west coast of Africa and parts of Oceania . 
 The species was listed as vulnerable in 1996 and endangered as recently as 1988 . Most monitored stocks have rebounded since the end of commercial whaling . In the North Atlantic stocks are believed to be approaching <unk> levels . However , the species is considered endangered in some countries , including the United States . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 A 2008 US Department of Commerce analysis ( SPLASH ) noted that the many challenges to determining the recovery status included the lack of accurate population estimates , the unexpected complexity of population structures and their migration . The report was based on data collected from 2004 to 2006 . At the time , the North Pacific population was some 18 @,@ 302 . The estimate is consistent with a moderate rate of recovery for a depleted population , although it was considered to be a " dramatic increase in abundance " from other post @-@ 1960s estimates . By comparison , <unk> et al. estimated 9 @,@ 819 , covering 1991 @-@ 1993 . This represents a 4 % annual increase in population from 1993 to 2006 . The sanctuary provided by US national parks , such as Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve and Cape Hatteras National Seashore , became major factors in population recovery . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 Off the west coast of Canada , the Gwaii <unk> National Marine Conservation Area Reserve covers 3 @,@ 400 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 300 sq mi ) . It is " a primary feeding habitat " of the North Pacific population . Their critical habitat overlaps with tanker shipping routes between Canada and its eastern trade partners . In 2005 the North Pacific population was listed as threatened under Canada ’ s Species at Risk Act ( SARA ) . In April 19 , 2014 the Department of the Environment recommended an amendment to SARA to downgrade their status off the Pacific coast from " threatened " to " species of special concern " . According to Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada ( COSEWIC ) , the North Pacific humpback population increased at about 4 % annually from 1992 to 2008 . Although socioeconomic costs and benefits were considered in their decision to upgrade their status , according to the University of British Columbia ’ s Marine Mammal Research Consortium 's research director , the decision was based on biology , not politics . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 The United Kingdom , among other countries , designated the humpback as a priority species under the national Biodiversity Action Plan . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = Getty Villa = 
 The Getty Villa is one of two locations of the J. Paul Getty Museum . Located at the southerly end of the Malibu coast in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles , California , USA , the Getty Villa is an educational center and museum dedicated to the study of the arts and cultures of ancient Greece , Rome , and Etruria . The collection has 44 @,@ 000 Greek , Roman , and Etruscan antiquities dating from 6 @,@ 500 BC to 400 AD , including the Lansdowne Heracles and the Victorious Youth . The UCLA / Getty Master ’ s Program in Archaeological and Ethnographic Conservation is housed on this campus . The collection is documented and presented through the online GettyGuide as well as through audio tours . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1954 , oil tycoon J. Paul Getty opened a gallery adjacent to his home in Pacific Palisades . Quickly running out of room , he built a second museum , the Getty Villa , on the property down the hill from the original gallery . The villa design was inspired by the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum and incorporated additional details from several other ancient sites . It was designed by architects Robert E. Langdon , Jr. and Ernest C. Wilson , Jr .. It opened in 1974 , but was never visited by Getty , who died in 1976 . Following his death , the museum inherited $ 661 million and began planning a much larger campus , the Getty Center , in nearby Brentwood . The museum overcame neighborhood opposition to its new campus plan by agreeing to limit the total size of the development on the Getty Center site . To meet the museum 's total space needs , the museum decided to split between the two locations with the Getty Villa housing the Greek , Roman , and Etruscan antiquities . In 1993 , the Getty Trust selected <unk> Machado and Jorge Silvetti to design the renovation of the Getty Villa and its campus . In 1997 , portions of the museum 's collection of Greek , Roman and Etruscan antiquities were moved to the Getty Center for display , and the Getty Villa was closed for renovation . The collection was restored during the renovation . 
 Starting in 2004 , the museum and the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) hold summer institutes in Turkey , studying the conservation of Middle Eastern Art . 
 Reopened on January 28 , 2006 , the Getty Villa shows Greek , Roman , and Etruscan antiquities within Roman @-@ inspired architecture and surrounded by Roman @-@ style gardens . The art is arranged by themes , e.g. , Gods and Goddesses , Dionysos and the Theater , and Stories of the Trojan War . The new architectural plan surrounding the Villa – which was conceived by Boston architects Machado and Silvetti Associates ( who were also responsible for the plans for the renovated museum ) – is designed to simulate an archaeological dig . Architectural Record has praised their work on the Getty Villa as " a near miracle – a museum that elicits no smirks from the art world .... a masterful job ... crafting a sophisticated ensemble of buildings , plazas , and landscaping that finally provides a real home for a relic of another time and place . " 
 There has been controversy surrounding the Greek and Italian governments ' claim that objects in the collection were looted and should be repatriated . In 2006 , the Getty returned or promised to return four looted objects to Greece : a stele ( grave marker ) , a marble relief , a gold funerary wreath , and a marble statue . In 2007 , the Getty signed an agreement to return 40 looted items to Italy . 
 = = Facility and programs = = 
 Admission to the Getty Villa is free , but timed tickets must be obtained in advance via phone or the museum 's website . As of June 2010 , there is a $ 15 @.@ 00 charge for parking during the day , but parking is free for evening performances . The museum is open Wednesday to Monday , 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. It is closed Tuesday and on New Year 's Day ( January 1 ) , July 4 , Thanksgiving and Christmas ( December 25 ) . 
 The Getty Villa hosts live performances in both its indoor auditorium and its outdoor theatre . Indoor play @-@ readings included The Trojan Women , Aristophanes ' The Frogs , and Euripides ' Helen . Indoor musical performances , which typically relate to art exhibits , included : Musica Angelica , De <unk> , and Songs from the Fifth Age : Sones de México in Concert . The auditorium also held a public reading of Homer 's Iliad . Outdoor performances included Aristophanes ' Peace , Aeschylus 's Agamemnon , and Sophocles ' Elektra . The Getty Villa also hosts visiting exhibitions beyond its own collections . For example , in March 2011 " In Search of Biblical Lands " was a photographic exhibition which included scenes of the Middle East dating back to the 1840s . 
 The Getty Villa offers special educational programs for children . A special Family Forum gallery offers activities including decorating Greek vases and projecting shadows onto a screen that represents a Greek urn . The room also has polystyrene props from Greek and Roman culture for children to handle and use to cast shadows . The Getty Villa also offers children 's guides to the other exhibits . 
 The Getty Conservation Institute offers a Master ’ s Program in Archaeological and Ethnographic Conservation in association with the <unk> Institute of Archaeology at UCLA . Classes and research are conducted in the museum wing of the ranch house . The program was the first of its kind in the United States . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Villa self @-@ identifies with Malibu as it is located just east of the city limits of Malibu in the city of Los Angeles in the community of Pacific Palisades . The 64 acres ( 26 ha ) museum complex sits on a hill overlooking the Pacific Ocean , which is about 100 feet ( 30 m ) from the entrance to the property . An outdoor 2 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 230 m2 ) entry pavilion is also built into the hill near the 248 @-@ car , four story , South Parking garage at the southern end of the Outer Peristyle . The Outer Peristyle is a formal garden with roses and English ivy that includes a number of Roman sculptures . To the west of the Outer Peristyle is an herb garden . Beneath the Outer Peristyle is the Central Parking Garage . To the west of the Museum is a 450 @-@ seat outdoor Greek theater where evening performances are staged , named in honor of Barbara and Lawrence <unk> . The theater faces the west side of the Villa and uses its entrance as a stage . To the northwest of the theatre is a three @-@ story , 15 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 440 m2 ) building built into the hill that contains the museum store on the lower level , a cafe on the second level , and a private dining room on the top level . North of the Villa is a 10 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 930 m2 ) indoor 250 seat auditorium . On the hill above the museum are Getty 's original private ranch house and the museum wing that Getty added to his home in 1954 . They are now used for curatorial offices , meeting rooms and as a library . Although not open to the public , the campus includes J. Paul Getty 's grave on the hill behind his ranch house . A 200 @-@ car North Parking Garage is behind the ranch complex . The 105 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 9 @,@ 800 m2 ) museum building is arranged in a square opening into the Inner Peristyle courtyard . The 2006 museum renovation added 58 windows facing the Inner Peristyle and a retractable skylight over the atrium . It also replaced the terrazzo floors in the galleries and added seismic protection with new steel reinforcing beams and new isolators in the bases of statues and display cases . The museum has 48 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 4 @,@ 500 m2 ) of gallery space . 
 Architectural critic Calum Storrie describes the overall effect : 
 What the Getty Villa achieves , first by seclusion , then by control of access , and ultimately through the architecture , is a sense of detachment from its immediate environment . 
 = = Collection = = 
 The collection has 44 @,@ 000 Greek , Roman , and Etruscan antiquities dating from 6 @,@ 500 BC to 400 AD . Among the outstanding items is Victorious Youth , one of few life @-@ size Greek bronze statues to have survived to modern times . The Lansdowne Heracles is a Hadrianic Roman sculpture in the manner of <unk> . The Villa also has jewelry and coin collections and an extensive 20 @,@ 000 volume library of books covering art from these periods . The Villa also displays the Getty kouros , which the museum lists as " Greek , about 530 B.C. , or modern forgery " because scientific analysis is inconclusive as to whether the marble statue can be dated to Greek times . If genuine , the Getty kouros is one of only twelve remaining intact lifesize <unk> . The Marbury Hall Zeus is a 81 in ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall marble statue that was recovered from ruins at Tivoli near Rome . 
 = = = GettyGuide = = = 
 Detailed information about the J. Paul Getty Museum ’ s collection at the Getty Villa is provided on " GettyGuide " . This is available both at the Museum , at various points known as " GettyGuide stations " , and externally on its website . 
 = = Photographs = = 
 = Thirteen ( Megadeth album ) = 
 Thirteen ( stylized as <unk> ) is the thirteenth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . It was released worldwide on November 1 , 2011 , by Roadrunner Records , although the album was released on October 26 , 2011 for Japan . Thirteen is the first Megadeth studio album since The World Needs a Hero ( 2001 ) to feature bassist and founding member David Ellefson , who returned to the band in 2010 . Thirteen debuted at number 11 on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 42 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album broke into the top 20 in several other markets as well . It has sold about 120 @,@ 000 copies in the United States as of December 2012 . The album has received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The album followed the successful Endgame , released two years previously , and was recorded in late spring 2011 . In addition to new material was written for the album , the band decided to rework and release several older songs , some of which had previously seen release as demos or bonus tracks . Additionally , several of the songs on the album were intended to appear on video game soundtracks , notably " Sudden Death " , which appeared as a playable song in the 2010 video game Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock . 
 The lead single from Thirteen was the Al Capone @-@ inspired " Public Enemy No. 1 " . This was followed by " Whose Life ( Is It Anyways ? ) " about a month later . " Sudden Death " was released as a single prior to the announcement of Thirteen to promote Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , but was later included on the album . All three songs received Grammy Award nominations , in the " Best Metal Performance " or " Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance " categories . 
 = = Writing , recording and album artwork = = 
 In July 2010 , while being asked about the success of Megadeth 's release Endgame ( 2009 ) , drummer Shawn Drover revealed that the band had begun discussing a follow @-@ up album and said that there were a " couple of ideas " the band was starting to work on . In a later interview , frontman and guitarist Dave Mustaine stated that the album would contain a mix of songs he had written earlier in his career and new compositions written for the album . 
 Mustaine confirmed that Megadeth would record at the band 's own Vic 's Garage studio in California . Johnny K was chosen to produce the record because Andy Sneap , the producer of Megadeth 's previous two albums , was unavailable due to schedule conflicts . Mustaine subsequently revealed that the album would be titled Thirteen and would feature previously released tracks such as " Sudden Death " and " Never Dead " . 
 In an interview before a show in Auckland , New Zealand , Mustaine noted that the then @-@ upcoming record was the last one on the band 's contract with Roadrunner Records and mentioned that Roadrunner was trying to give the band a " huge new deal " . However , Mustaine expressed frustration with the label , saying " The treatment 's been terrible over the years , and I just don 't want it . " He stated that he would prefer to retire than " continue to play like that " . Nevertheless , Mustaine exclaimed the band 's new record would be " great " and the songs were " really good " . 
 In a December 2010 interview , bassist David Ellefson ( who was welcomed back into the band earlier that year ) commented " There 's some ideas that we 're now starting to individually compose " , but clarified the band would not be hitting the studio until 2011 . Ellefson also speculated that the album would be influenced by the band 's ( then ) recent live performances of the entire Rust in Peace album ( 1990 ) . 
 Mustaine initially suggested that the album was turning out to be " more like Endgame " . however he later declared the album was instead " Different , a hundred percent different , unlike anything we 've ever done before because the guitar sounds are different , it sounds really super @-@ modern . " He went on to compare the sound to " really old classic Sabbath and with a little bit of a modern edge of Queens of the Stone Age kind of thing . " 
 Ellefson stated the album was ready to be mixed as of July 2011 . When asked if it could be compared to any previous Megadeth album , he said the album " kind of fits in around the Countdown to Extinction album " but noted it would depend on how the album was to be mixed . Ellefson also announced the band has been considering album titles , but no release date was yet planned . 
 Chris Broderick compared some parts of the album specifically to Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? ( 1986 ) , Rust in Peace , or Countdown to Extinction ( 1992 ) , but also stated " I 've been likening it to a very diverse CD . It 's not one of those ones that you 'll put it on and every song sounds like the last one . It 's got everything from anthems to more radio friendly stuff to hard @-@ hitting thrash and some cool , dark @-@ sounding stuff . " In a later interview , Broderick again touted the sonic diversity of the album , noting that it is " like a cut in time from each CD of the past Megadeth discography " . 
 It was announced that a new song , " Never Dead " , would be included in a promotional trailer for Konami 's upcoming video game <unk> , marking the third time in five years that the band contributed a new song towards promoting a video game ( " Gears of War " in 2006 to promote Gears of War and " Sudden Death " in 2010 for inclusion in Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock being the other two ) . " Sudden Death " though originally recorded for the Guitar Hero franchise , was also later confirmed to be included on Thirteen . 
 The album artwork was designed by John <unk> , who contributed to the covers on Megadeth 's two previous albums , Endgame and United Abominations ( 2007 ) . The title was revealed as 13 , with Mustaine commenting " I started playing guitar at 13 and this is our 13th record and I was born on the 13th . As soon as I said I was going to call it ' 13 ' , I started noticing 13 everywhere . They never used to have 13th floors in hotels but now they have them again . " One day later , the band revealed that the title would be rendered as " <unk> " instead of 13 . Drover stated in a subsequent interview that " Thirteen " had originally been the working title for the album . The cover artwork and tracklist for the album were revealed on September 7 , 2011 . 
 According to Dave Mustaine , the band have encountered numerous mishaps and odd occurrences . In an interview with Terrorizer magazine , Mustaine , taking note of the connection to the unlucky number 13 , explained " This is our 13th studio record , and we 've already had a bunch of weird things happen . Car problems , stuff disappearing , a guy who worked for me that was the most white @-@ laced guy you could imagine falling out on drugs and disappearing ... but this one 's got me excited ! " In addition , Mustaine announced on Twitter that producer Johnny K was " suddenly struck ill " , and the band had ceased recording for the time being . However , the band resumed recording a few days later , with K having apparently recovered . In an interview , Drover had said nothing weird occurred until after he finished recording drum tracks for the album . 
 However , Mustaine later contradicted his previous statements " It 's been very good luck . We did this record in … in record time " . Furthermore , instead of the superstitions surrounding the number 13 , Mustaine said he was actually more concerned with the album 's release date of November 1 being a bad omen ; referring to the release of Youthanasia ( which was released on the same date in 1994 ) , when the band was " banned " from MTV , for playing the then @-@ new track " À Tout le Monde " on a televised promotional show , because MTV believed the song to be about suicide . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Mustaine revealed the album 's North American release date as November 1 , 2011 . Mustaine previously said the label was " looking at November 1st . I don 't know if it 's supposed to be the 1st or the 31st for the release date , cuz [ sic ] they 're trying to get us to do a live performance some place , for this release . " This live performance Mustaine mentioned would ultimately turn out to be an appearance on the October 31 , 2011 edition of Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . The band , performing in Halloween costumes , played " Public Enemy No. 1 " and " Symphony of Destruction " , the former of which was televised . The album was released in Japan on October 26 , 2011 . 
 To help draw publicity for the then @-@ upcoming release , Mustaine had scheduled an appearance on the October 14 – 16 edition of the Full Metal Jackie radio show and premiered a new track from Thirteen , " Whose Life ( Is This Anyways ? ) " , on the broadcast . For a 24 @-@ hour period from October 17 to October 18 , 2011 , " Whose Life ( Is It Anyway ? ) " was released as a free download through the band 's Facebook page . Samples of all the album 's songs were available for streaming on Amazon.com from October 17 . Mustaine also made an appearance on the November 7 edition of Rockline . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Mustaine had said that thirteen songs had been written in the sessions for the album , though only twelve were originally contracted for the album ( one of which being a bonus track intended only for the Japanese market ) . However , it was later revealed that the album was to feature a total of 13 tracks . Several of the songs on the album were previously recorded by the band in one form or another , although most of the songs are completely new material . 
 = = = Reworked older material = = = 
 " Sudden Death " , " New World Order " , " Black Swan " and " Millennium of the Blind " were released previously in different or incomplete versions , and were included as bonus tracks on previous albums or used for other projects . " Sudden Death " was originally written for the 2010 music video game Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock . The song was released as a digital single via iTunes in September 2010 . 
 " New World Order " was originally written during the Clash of the Titans Tour in 1991 , however , early versions of the song were not released until years later . The original finished version was released on the Duke Nukem soundtrack in 1999 , and a demo had been included as a bonus track on the 2004 remix / remaster of Youthanasia . Ellefson stated the song was re @-@ recorded at the insistence of Shawn Drover , and ( compared to previous versions of the song ) Mustaine had " updated some parts and made them more violent . " Drover , for his part , stated re @-@ recording " New World Order " was initially Mustaine 's idea , though he strongly supported re @-@ recording the song . 
 " Black Swan " was originally intended as a special edition bonus track for United Abominations . According to Ellefson , finishing and including " Black Swan " on Thirteen was Johnny K 's idea . Ellefson also noted that , having been written several years beforehand , it has nothing to do with the 2010 film of the same name ; the lyrics were inspired by the C.S. Lewis novel The Great Divorce . In part of the effort to promote the album , the song was released for streaming via Hot Topic 's official YouTube page on October 24 , 2011 . 
 According to Ellefson , " Millennium of the Blind " was originally written in 1991 and a demo was recorded , and a version of the song would later be included as a bonus track on the 2004 remix / remaster of Youthanasia . In the liner notes for the 2004 re @-@ release of Youthanasia , Mustaine claimed that " Millennium of the Blind " reminded him too much of another song he was working on at the time , " Absolution " ( which would later form part of " Trust " from Cryptic Writings ) . Mustaine states in the Youthanasia re @-@ release liner notes that he came up with the lyrics after watching Highlander . Ellefson explained Johnny K and Mustaine were able to finish the song for Thirteen . 
 = = = New compositions = = = 
 On July 4 , 2011 Megadeth debuted a new song entitled " Public Enemy No. 1 " at a show in Hamburg , Germany . According to Mustaine , " Public Enemy No. 1 " was written about 1920s gangster Al Capone . Ellefson revealed in an interview that " Public Enemy No. 1 " was to be released as a single A Western @-@ themed music video , which featured the band and live animals , was made to support the single . The video was released on November 4 , 2011 . 
 " Whose Life ( Is It Anyways ? ) " saw its radio debut during an appearance by Dave Mustaine on the October 14 – 16 , 2011 edition of the Full Metal Jackie radio show . On October 17 , the song was released as a limited @-@ time free download via Megadeth 's Facebook page . In March 2012 , a lyric video for the song was released . 
 " Never Dead " , was written for inclusion on <unk> , a third @-@ person action / fantasy game . To help promote the album , Roadrunner Records posted the song on their YouTube channel for streaming on September 21 , 2011 . 
 Being interviewed about the album in September 2011 , Ellefson commented on several of the album 's other songs . He also described the title track as " theatrical " and compared it to " In My Darkest Hour " from So Far , So Good ... So What ! ( 1988 ) . Ellefson said " 13 " is a song that " summed up the arc of Megadeth as a band " . While referring to another song , " Deadly Nightshade " , Ellefson stated the song 's main riff " was written during the sessions for Youthanasia , or maybe Cryptic Writings [ from 1997 ] . It ’ s been around for a while . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reaction from critics towards Thirteen has been mostly positive , with the average rating for the album being around a 7 / 10 . Reviewing the album for Allmusic , James Christopher Monger stated : " Darker , heavier , and more immediate than 2009 's Endgame " , and noted that although Mustaine 's vocals are higher in the mix on this album , " his fleet fingers are still possessed with the power to conjure the dead . " Sputnikmusic 's Mike Stagno wrote that except for the lyrical content , Thirteen doesn 't have major flaws . 
 According to Kevin Stewart @-@ Panko of Rock Sound , the album 's musical style " <unk> between classy thrashers and hokey anthemic rock " . He praised the " scorching guitar work and Mustaine ’ s snarling voice " . Carla Gillis from Now described the record as " thrashy , angry and melody @-@ packed , like Megadeth ’ s best Peace Sells @-@ era songs " . She said that the album was not " perfect " , but noted that Mustaine 's vocals and guitar playing " never get old " . Dom Lawson , writing in The Guardian , stated that Megadeth 's " music has lost none of its intensity , passion or rage " over the years . He finished his review by saying that Thirteen is " an all @-@ killer , no @-@ filler feast of state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art metal " . Similarly , Chris Colgan of PopMatters named Thirteen " the latest in a series of well @-@ composed and well @-@ executed albums " by Megadeth . Colgan went on to say that " Mustaine and his cohorts are still making great music and keeping classic thrash relevant in the metal community " . Heather McDaid from This Is Fake DIY described the record as " good old fashioned , classic heavy metal in its rough and ready glory " . 
 However , not all critical reaction to the album was positive . Neil Arnold from Metal Forces was disappointed by the album 's musical direction , because he felt that Mustaine " has reverted back to a more simple , less furious sound " . In a brief review for Spin , Jon Young commented on several of the album 's tracks , saying " Public Enemy No. 1 " and " Guns , Drugs & Money " were " deceptively melodic hard rock not far from Alice Cooper 's early classics " but also said they lack the same sense of humor . However , Young stated that " We the People " should be on " the apocalypse 's official soundtrack " . BBC Music 's Ian Winwood said the album " is something of an unremarkable affair . Not a bad album , but not one for the ages . " However , Winwood also called " Sudden Death " " quite brilliant " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Thirteen debuted at number 11 on the Billboard 200 , selling 42 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week . This was a slight fall from the first @-@ week sales ( about 45 @,@ 000 copies ) and chart position ( number 9 ) of its predecessor , Endgame . Another 10 @,@ 780 copies were sold in the second week , and the album 's position on the Billboard 200 fell to number 53 . The album charted similarly in Australia , New Zealand ( number 13 ) and on the Japanese chart ( number 11 ) . Elsewhere , the album failed to enter into the top 20 . As of December 2012 , Thirteen had sold 120 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = = Grammy nominations = = = 
 Three of the album 's songs received Grammy nominations . " Sudden Death " was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 2011 Grammys , but lost to Iron Maiden 's " El Dorado " . " Public Enemy No. 1 " received a nomination in the " Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance " category the next year , but lost to the Foo Fighters ' " Wasting Light | White Limo " . " Whose Life ( Is This Anyways ? ) " received a nomination in the same category at the 2013 Grammys , but lost to Halestorm 's " Love Bites ( So Do I ) " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Bartolomé de las Casas = 
 Bartolomé de las Casas ( c . 1484 – 18 July 1566 ) was a 16th @-@ century Spanish historian , social reformer and Dominican friar . He became the first resident Bishop of Chiapas , and the first officially appointed " Protector of the Indians " . His extensive writings , the most famous being A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies and Historia de Las Indias , chronicle the first decades of colonization of the West Indies and focus particularly on the atrocities committed by the colonizers against the indigenous peoples . 
 Arriving as one of the first European settlers in the Americas , he initially participated in , but eventually felt compelled to oppose , the atrocities committed against the Native Americans by the Spanish colonists . In 1515 , he reformed his views , gave up his Indian slaves and encomienda , and advocated , before King Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor , on behalf of rights for the natives . In his early writings , he advocated the use of African slaves instead of Natives in the West @-@ Indian colonies ; consequently , criticisms have been leveled at him as being partly responsible for the beginning of the Transatlantic slave trade . Later in life , he retracted those early views as he came to see all forms of slavery as equally wrong . In 1522 , he attempted to launch a new kind of peaceful colonialism on the coast of Venezuela , but this venture failed , causing Las Casas to enter the Dominican Order and become a friar , leaving the public scene for a decade . He then traveled to Central America undertaking peaceful evangelization among the Maya of Guatemala and participated in debates among the Mexican churchmen about how best to bring the natives to the Christian faith . Traveling back to Spain to recruit more missionaries , he continued lobbying for the abolition of the encomienda , gaining an important victory by the passing of the New Laws in 1542 . He was appointed Bishop of Chiapas , but served only for a short time before he was forced to return to Spain because of resistance to the New Laws by the encomenderos , and conflicts with Spanish settlers because of his pro @-@ Indian policies and activist religious stances . The remainder of his life was spent at the Spanish court where he held great influence over Indies @-@ related issues . In 1550 , he participated in the Valladolid debate in which Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda argued that the Indians were less than human and required Spanish masters in order to become civilized . Las Casas maintained that they were fully human and that forcefully subjugating them was unjustifiable . 
 Bartolomé de las Casas spent 50 years of his life actively fighting slavery and the violent colonial abuse of indigenous peoples , especially by trying to convince the Spanish court to adopt a more humane policy of colonization . And although he failed to save the indigenous peoples of the Western Indies , his efforts resulted in several improvements in the legal status of the natives , and in an increased colonial focus on the ethics of colonialism . Las Casas is often seen as one of the first advocates for universal human rights . 
 = = Life and times = = 
 = = = Background and arrival in the New World = = = 
 Bartolomé de las Casas was born in Seville in 1484 , on 11 November . For centuries , Las Casas 's birthdate was believed to be 1474 ; however , in the 1970s , scholars conducting archival work demonstrated this to be an error , after uncovering in the <unk> General de Indias records of a contemporary lawsuit that demonstrated he was born a decade later than had been supposed . Subsequent biographers and authors have generally accepted and reflected this revision . His father , Pedro de las Casas , a merchant , descended from one of the families that had migrated from France to found the town of Seville ; his family also spelled the name <unk> . According to one biographer , his family were of converso heritage , although others refer to them as ancient Christians who migrated from France . Following the testimony of Las Casas 's biographer Antonio de <unk> , tradition has it that Las Casas studied a licentiate at Salamanca , but this is never mentioned in Las Casas 's own writings . As a young man , in 1507 , he journeyed to Rome where he observed the Festival of Flutes . 
 With his father , Las Casas immigrated to the island of Hispaniola in 1502 on the expedition of Nicolás de <unk> . Las Casas became a <unk> and slave owner , receiving a piece of land in the province of Cibao . He participated in slave raids and military expeditions against the native Taíno population of Hispaniola . In 1510 , he was ordained a priest , the first one to be ordained in the Americas . 
 In September 1510 , a group of Dominican friars arrived in Santo Domingo led by Pedro de Córdoba ; appalled by the injustices they saw committed by the slaveowners against the Indians , they decided to deny slave owners the right to confession . Las Casas was among those denied confession for this reason . In December 1511 , a Dominican preacher Fray Antonio de Montesinos preached a fiery sermon that implicated the colonists in the genocide of the native peoples . He is said to have preached , " Tell me by what right of justice do you hold these Indians in such a cruel and horrible servitude ? On what authority have you waged such detestable wars against these people who dealt quietly and peacefully on their own lands ? Wars in which you have destroyed such an infinite number of them by homicides and slaughters never heard of before . Why do you keep them so oppressed and exhausted , without giving them enough to eat or curing them of the sicknesses they incur from the excessive labor you give them , and they die , or rather you kill them , in order to extract and acquire gold every day . " Las Casas himself argued against the Dominicans in favour of the justice of the encomienda . The colonists , led by Diego Columbus , dispatched a complaint against the Dominicans to the King , and the Dominicans were recalled from Hispaniola . 
 = = = Conquest of Cuba and change of heart = = = 
 In 1513 , as a chaplain , Las Casas participated in Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar 's and Pánfilo de Narváez ' conquest of Cuba . He participated in campaigns in Bayamo and Camagüey and in the massacre of <unk> . He witnessed many atrocities committed by Spaniards against the native <unk> and <unk> peoples . He later wrote : " I saw here cruelty on a scale no living being has ever seen or expects to see . " Las Casas and his friend Pablo de la Rentería were awarded a joint encomienda which was rich in gold and slaves , located on the <unk> River close to Cienfuegos . During the next years , he divided his time between being a colonist and his duties as an ordained priest . 
 In 1514 , Las Casas was studying a passage in the book Ecclesiasticus ( Sirach ) 34 : 18 – 22 for a Pentecost sermon and pondering its meaning . Las Casas was finally convinced that all the actions of the Spanish in the New World had been illegal and that they constituted a great injustice . He made up his mind to give up his slaves and encomienda , and started to preach that other colonists should do the same . When his preaching met with resistance , he realized that he would have to go to Spain to fight there against the enslavement and abuse of the native people . Aided by Pedro de Córdoba and accompanied by Antonio de Montesinos , he left for Spain in September 1515 , arriving in Seville in November . 
 = = = Las Casas and King Ferdinand = = = 
 Las Casas arrived in Spain with the plan of convincing the King to end the encomienda system . This was easier thought than done , as most of the people who were in positions of power were themselves either encomenderos or otherwise profiting from the influx of wealth from the Indies . In the winter of 1515 , King Ferdinand lay ill in Plasencia , but Las Casas was able to get a letter of introduction to the Majesty from the Archbishop of Seville , Diego de <unk> . On Christmas Eve of 1515 , Las Casas met the Monarch and discussed the situation in the Indies with him ; the King agreed to hear him out in more detail at a later date . While waiting Las Casas produced a report that he presented to the Bishop of Burgos Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca and secretary Lope <unk> , who were functionaries in complete charge of the Royal policies regarding the Indies ; both were encomenderos . They were not impressed by his account , and Las Casas had to find a different avenue of change . He put his faith in his coming audience with the King , but it never came , for King Ferdinand died on January 25 , 1516 . The regency of Castile passed on to Ximenez Cisneros and Adrian of Utrecht who were guardians for the under @-@ age Prince Charles . Las Casas was resolved to see Prince Charles who resided in Flanders , but on his way there he passed Madrid and delivered to the regents a written account of the situation in the Indies and his proposed remedies . This was his " Memorial de Remedios para Las Indias " of 1516 . In this early work , Las Casas advocated importing Black slaves from Africa to relieve the suffering Indians , a stance he later retracted , becoming an advocate for the Africans in the colonies as well . This shows that Las Casas 's first concern was not to end slavery as an institution , but to end the physical abuse and suffering of the Indians . In keeping with the legal and moral doctrine of the time Las Casas believed that slavery could be justified if it was the result of Just War , and at the time he assumed that the enslavement of Africans was justified . Worried by the visions that Las Casas had drawn up of the situation in the Indies , Cardenal Cisneros decided to send a group of Hieronymite friars to take over the government of the islands . 
 = = = Protector of the Indians = = = 
 Three Hieronymite friars , Luis de Figueroa , Bernardino de <unk> and Alonso de Santo Domingo , were selected as commissioners to take over the authority of the Indies . Las Casas had a considerable part in selecting them and writing the instructions under which their new government would be instated , largely based on Las Casas 's memorial . Las Casas himself was granted the official title of Protector of the Indians , and given a yearly salary of one hundred pesos . In this new office Las Casas was expected to serve as an advisor to the new governors with regards to Indian issues , to speak the case of the Indians in court and send reports back to Spain . Las Casas and the commissioners traveled to Santo Domingo on separate ships , and Las Casas arrived two weeks later than the <unk> . During this time the <unk> had time to form a more pragmatic view of the situation than the one advocated by Las Casas ; their position was precarious as every encomendero on the Islands was fiercely against any attempts to curtail their use of native labour . Consequently , the commissioners were unable to take any radical steps towards improving the situation of the natives . They did revoke some encomiendas from Spaniards , especially those who were living in Spain and not on the islands themselves ; they even repossessed the encomienda of Fonseca , the Bishop of Burgos . They also carried out an inquiry into the Indian question at which all the encomenderos asserted that the Indians were quite incapable of living freely without their supervision . Las Casas was disappointed and infuriated . When he accused the <unk> of being complicit in kidnapping Indians , the relationship between Las Casas and the commissioners broke down . Las Casas had become a hated figure by Spaniards all over the Islands , and he had to seek refuge in the Dominican monastery . The Dominicans had been the first to indict the encomenderos , and they continued to chastise them and refuse the absolution of confession to slave owners , and even stated that priests who took their confession were committing a mortal sin . In May 1517 , Las Casas was forced to travel back to Spain to denounce to the regent the failure of the Hieronymite reforms . Only after Las Casas had left did the <unk> begin to congregate Indians into towns similar to what Las Casas had wanted . 
 = = = Las Casas and King Charles V : The peasant colonization scheme = = = 
 When he arrived in Spain , his former protector , regent and Cardinal Ximenez Cisneros , was ill and had become tired of Las Casas 's tenacity . Las Casas resolved to meet instead with the young King Carlos I. Ximenez died on November 8 , and the young King arrived in Valladolid on November 25 , 1517 . Las Casas managed to secure the support of the King 's Flemish courtiers , including the powerful Chancellor Jean de la Sauvage . Las Casas 's influence turned the favor of the court against Secretary <unk> and Bishop Fonseca . Sauvage spoke highly of Las Casas to the King , who appointed Las Casas and Sauvage to write a new plan for reforming the governmental system of the Indies . 
 Las Casas suggested a plan where the encomienda would be abolished and Indians would be congregated into self @-@ governing townships to become tribute @-@ paying vassals of the King . He still suggested that the loss of Indian labor for the colonists could be replaced by allowing importation of African slaves . Another important part of the plan was to introduce a new kind of sustainable colonization , and Las Casas advocated supporting the migration of Spanish peasants to the Indies where they would introduce small @-@ scale farming and agriculture , a kind of colonization that didn 't rely on resource depletion and Indian labor . Las Casas worked to recruit a large number of peasants who would want to travel to the Islands , where they would be given lands to farm , cash advances , and the tools and resources they needed to establish themselves there . The recruitment drive was difficult , and during the process the power relation shifted at court when Chancellor Sauvage , Las Casas 's main supporter , unexpectedly died . In the end a much smaller number of peasant families were sent than originally planned , and they were supplied with insufficient provisions and no support secured for their arrival . Those who survived the journey were ill @-@ received , and had to work hard even to survive in the hostile colonies . Las Casas was devastated by the tragic result of his peasant migration scheme , which he felt had been thwarted by his enemies . He decided instead to undertake a personal venture which would not rely on the support of others , and fought to win a land grant on the American mainland which was in its earliest stage of colonization . 
 = = = The Cumaná venture = = = 
 Following a suggestion by his friend and mentor Pedro de Córdoba , Las Casas petitioned a land grant to be allowed to establish a settlement in northern Venezuela at Cumaná . Founded in 1515 , there was already a small Franciscan monastery in Cumaná and a Dominican one at <unk> , but the monks there were being harassed by Spaniards operating slave raids from the nearby Island of Cubagua . In order to make the proposal palatable to the King , Las Casas had to incorporate the prospect of profits for the royal treasury . He suggested fortifying the northern coast of Venezuela , establishing ten royal forts to protect the Indians and starting up a system of trade in gold and pearls . All the Indian slaves of the New World should be brought to live in these towns and become tribute paying subjects to the King . In order to secure the grant Las Casas had to go through a long fight in court against Bishop Fonseca and his supporters Gonzalo de Oviedo and Bishop Quevedo of Tierra Firme . Las Casas 's supporters were Diego Columbus and the new chancellor Gattinara . Las Casas 's enemies slandered him to the King , accusing him of planning to escape with the money to Genoa or Rome . In 1520 Las Casas 's concession was finally granted , but it was a much smaller grant than he had initially proposed ; he was also denied the possibilities of extracting gold and pearls , which made it difficult for him to find investors for the venture . Las Casas committed himself to producing 15 @,@ 000 ducats of annual revenue , increasing to 60 @,@ 000 after ten years , and to erecting three Christian towns of at least 40 settlers each . Some privileges were also granted to the initial 50 shareholders in Las Casas 's scheme . The King also promised not to give any encomienda grants in Las Casas 's area . That said , finding fifty men willing to invest 200 ducats each and three years of unpaid work proved impossible for Las Casas . In the end , he ended up leaving in November 1520 with just a small group of peasants , paying for the venture with money borrowed from his brother in @-@ law . 
 Arriving in Puerto Rico , in January 1521 , he received the terrible news that the Dominican convent at <unk> had been sacked by Indians , and that the Spaniards of the islands had launched a punitive expedition , led by Gonzalo de Ocampo , into the very heart of the territory that Las Casas wanted to colonize peacefully . The Indians had been provoked to attack the settlement of the monks because of the repeated slave raids by Spaniards operating from Cubagua . As Ocampo 's ships began returning with slaves from the land Las Casas had been granted , he went to Hispaniola to complain to the Audiencia . After several months of negotiations Las Casas set sail alone ; the peasants he had brought had deserted , and he arrived in his colony already ravaged by Spaniards . 
 Las Casas worked there in adverse conditions for the following months , being constantly harassed by the Spanish pearl fishers of Cubagua island who traded slaves for alcohol with the natives . Early in 1522 Las Casas left the settlement to complain to the authorities . While he was gone the native Caribs attacked the settlement of Cumaná , burned it to the ground and killed four of Las Casas 's men . He returned to Hispaniola in January 1522 , and heard the news of the massacre . The rumours even included him among the dead . To make matters worse , his detractors used the event as evidence of the need to pacify the Indians using military means . The tragic outcome of Las Casas 's great mainland adventure made him turn his life in a new direction . 
 = = = A Dominican friar = = = 
 Devastated , Las Casas reacted by entering the Dominican monastery of Santa Cruz in Santo Domingo as a novice in 1522 and finally taking holy vows as a Dominican friar in 1523 . There he continued his theological studies , being particularly attracted to Thomist philosophy , and there is little information about his activities in the following ten years . He oversaw the construction of a monastery in Puerto Plata on the north coast of Hispaniola , subsequently serving as prior of the convent . In 1527 he began working on his History of the Indies in order to report many of the experiences he had witnessed at first hand in the conquest and colonization of New Spain . In 1531 he wrote a letter to Garcia Manrique , Count of Osorno , protesting again the mistreatment of the Indians and advocating a return to his original reform plan of 1516 . In 1531 a complaint was sent by the encomenderos of Hispaniola that Las Casas was again accusing them of mortal sins from the pulpit . In 1533 he contributed to the establishment of a peace treaty between the Spanish and the rebel Taíno band of chief Enriquillo . In 1534 Las Casas made an attempt to travel to Peru to observe the first stages of conquest of that region by Francisco Pizarro . His party made it as far as Panama , but had to turn back to Nicaragua due to adverse weather . Lingering for a while in the Dominican convent of Granada , he got into conflict with Rodrigo de Contreras , Governor of Nicaragua , when Las Casas vehemently opposed slaving expeditions by the Governor . In 1536 Las Casas followed a number of friars to Guatemala , where they began to prepare to undertake a mission among the Maya Indians . They stayed in the convent founded some years earlier by Fray Domingo Betanzos and studied the K 'iche ' language with Bishop Francisco Marroquín , before traveling into the interior region called <unk> , " The Land of War " , in 1537 . 
 Also in 1536 , before venturing into <unk> , Las Casas went to Oaxaca , Mexico , to participate in a series of discussions and debates among the bishops of the Dominican and Franciscan orders . The two orders had very different approaches to the conversion of the Indians . The Franciscans used a method of mass conversion , sometimes baptizing many thousands of Indians in a day . This method was championed by prominent Franciscans such as Toribio de Benavente , known as " Motolinia " , and Las Casas made many enemies among the Franciscans for arguing that conversions made without adequate understanding were invalid . Las Casas wrote a treatise called " De <unk> <unk> modo " ( On the Only Way of Conversion ) based on the missionary principles he had used in Guatemala . Motolinia would later be a fierce critic of Las Casas , accusing him of being all talk and no action when it came to converting the Indians . As a direct result of the debates between the Dominicans and Franciscans and spurred on by Las Casas 's treatise , Pope Paul III promulgated the Bull " <unk> Dei , " which stated that the Indians were rational beings and should be brought peacefully to the faith as such . 
 Las Casas returned to Guatemala in 1537 wanting to employ his new method of conversion based on two principles : 1 ) to preach the Gospel to all men and treat them as equals , and 2 ) to assert that conversion must be voluntary and based on knowledge and understanding of the Faith . It was important for Las Casas that this method be tested without meddling from secular colonists , so he chose a territory in the heart of Guatemala where there were no previous colonies and where the natives were considered fierce and war @-@ like . Because of the fact that the land had not been possible to conquer by military means , the governor of Guatemala , Alonso de Maldonado , agreed to sign a contract promising that if the venture was successful he would not establish any new encomiendas in the area . Las Casas 's group of friars established a Dominican presence in Rabinal , Sacapulas and Cobán . Through the efforts of Las Casas 's missionaries the so @-@ called " Land of War " came to be called " Verapaz " , " True Peace " . Las Casas 's strategy was to teach Christian songs to merchant Indian Christians who then ventured into the area . In this way he was successful in converting several native chiefs , among them those of Atitlán and Chichicastenango , and in building several churches in the territory named Alta Verapaz . These congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal . In 1538 Las Casas was recalled from his mission by Bishop Marroquín who wanted him to go to Mexico and then on to Spain in order to seek more Dominicans to assist in the mission . Las Casas left Guatemala for Mexico , where he stayed for more than a year before setting out for Spain in 1540 . 
 = = = The New Laws = = = 
 In Spain , Las Casas started securing official support for the Guatemalan mission , and he managed to get a royal decree forbidding secular intrusion into the <unk> for the following five years . He also informed the Theologians of Salamanca , led by Francisco de Vitoria , of the mass baptism practiced by the Franciscans , resulting in a dictum condemning the practice as sacrilegious . 
 But apart from the clerical business , Las Casas had also traveled to Spain for his own purpose : to continue the struggle against the colonists ' mistreatment of the Indians . The encomienda had , in fact , legally been abolished in 1523 , but it had been reinstituted in 1526 , and in 1530 a general ordinance against slavery was reversed by the Crown . For this reason it was a pressing matter for Bartolomé de las Casas to plead once again for the Indians with Charles V who was by now Holy Roman Emperor and no longer a boy . He wrote a letter asking for permission to stay in Spain a little longer in order to argue for the Emperor that conversion and colonization were best achieved by peaceful means . 
 When the hearings started in 1542 , Las Casas presented a narrative of atrocities against the natives of the Indies that would later be published in 1552 as " Brevísima <unk> de la <unk> de las Indias " . Before a council consisting of Cardinal García de Loaysa , the Count of Osorno , Bishop <unk> and several members of the Council of the Indies , Las Casas argued that the only solution to the problem was to remove all Indians from the care of secular Spaniards , by abolishing the encomienda system and putting them instead directly under the Crown as royal tribute @-@ paying subjects . On November 20 , 1542 , the Emperor signed the New Laws abolishing the encomiendas and removing certain officials from the Council of the Indies . The New Laws made it illegal to use Indians as carriers , except where no other transport was available , it prohibited all taking of Indians as slaves , and it instated a gradual abolition of the encomienda system , with each encomienda reverting to the Crown at the death of its holders . It also exempted the few surviving Indians of Hispaniola , Cuba , Puerto Rico and Jamaica from tribute and all requirements of personal service . However , the reforms were so unpopular back in the New World that riots broke out and threats were made against Las Casas 's life . The Viceroy of New Spain , himself an encomendero , decided not to implement the laws in his domain , and instead sent a party to Spain to argue against the laws on behalf of the encomenderos . Las Casas himself was also not satisfied with the laws , as they were not drastic enough and the encomienda system was going to function for many years still under the gradual abolition plan . He drafted a suggestion for an amendment arguing that the laws against slavery were formulated in such a way that it presupposed that violent conquest would still be carried out , and he encouraged once again beginning a phase of peaceful colonization by peasants instead of soldiers . 
 = = = Bishop of Chiapas = = = 
 Before Las Casas returned to Spain , he was also appointed as Bishop of Chiapas , a newly established diocese of which he took possession in 1545 upon his return to the New World . He was consecrated in the Dominican Church of San Pablo on March 30 , 1544 . As Archbishop Loaysa strongly disliked Las Casas , the ceremony was officiated by Loaysa 's nephew , Diego de Loaysa , Bishop of Modruš , with Pedro Torres , Titular Bishop of <unk> , and Cristóbal de Pedraza , Bishop of Comayagua , as co @-@ consecrators . As a bishop Las Casas was involved in frequent conflicts with the encomenderos and secular laity of his diocese : among the landowners there was the conquistador Bernal Díaz del Castillo . In a pastoral letter issued on March 20 , 1545 , Las Casas refused absolution to slave owners and encomenderos even on their death bed , unless all their slaves had been set free and their property returned to them . Las Casas furthermore threatened that anyone who mistreated Indians within his jurisdiction would be excommunicated . He also came into conflict with the Bishop of Guatemala Francisco Marroquín , to whose jurisdiction the diocese had previously belonged . To Las Casas 's dismay Bishop Marroquín openly defied the New Laws . While bishop , Las Casas was the principal consecrator of Antonio de Valdivieso , Bishop of Nicaragua ( 1544 ) . 
 The New Laws were finally repealed on October 20 , 1545 , and riots broke out against Las Casas , with shots being fired against him by angry colonists . After a year he had made himself so unpopular among the Spaniards of the area that he had to leave . Having been summoned to a meeting among the bishops of New Spain to be held in Mexico City on January 12 , 1546 , he left his diocese , never to return . At the meeting , probably after lengthy reflection , and realizing that the New Laws were lost in Mexico , Las Casas presented a moderated view on the problems of confession and restitution of property , Archbishop Juan de Zumárraga of Mexico and Bishop Julián Garcés of Puebla agreed completely with his new moderate stance , Bishop Vasco de Quiroga of Michoacán had minor reservations , and Bishops Francisco Marroquín of Guatemala and Juan Lopez de Zárate of Oaxaca did not object . This resulted in a new resolution to be presented to viceroy Mendoza . His last act as Bishop of Chiapas was writing a <unk> , a manual for the administration of the sacrament of confession in his diocese , still refusing absolution to unrepentant encomenderos . Las Casas appointed a vicar for his diocese and set out for Europe in December 1546 , arriving in Lisbon in April 1547 and in Spain on November 1547 . 
 = = = The Valladolid debate = = = 
 Las Casas returned to Spain , leaving behind many conflicts and unresolved issues . Arriving in Spain he was met by a barrage of accusations , many of them based on his <unk> and its 12 rules , which many of his opponents found to be in essence a denial of the legitimacy of Spanish rule of its colonies , and hence a form of treason . The Crown had for example received a fifth of the large number of slaves taken in the recent <unk> War , and so could not be held clean of guilt under Las Casas 's strict rules . In 1548 the Crown decreed that all copies of Las Casas 's <unk> be burnt , and his Franciscan adversary , Motolinia , happily obliged , sending back a report to Spain . Las Casas defended himself by writing two treatises on the " Just Title " – arguing that the only legality with which the Spaniards could claim titles over realms in the New World was through peaceful proselytizing . All warfare was illegal and unjust and only through the papal mandate of peacefully bringing Christianity to heathen peoples could " Just Titles " be acquired . 
 As a part of Las Casas 's defense by offense , he had to argue against Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda . Sepúlveda was a doctor of theology and law who , in his book Democrates Alter , sive de <unk> <unk> apud Indios ( Democrates Alter , or on the just causes of War against the Indians ) had argued that the native people were naturally inferior and should be pacified forcefully , and were destined to perpetual servitude to Christian Europeans . The book was deemed unsound for publication by the theologians of Salamanca and Alcalá for containing unsound doctrine , but the pro @-@ encomendero faction seized on Sepúlveda as their intellectual champion . 
 In order to settle the issues , a formal debate was organized , the famous Valladolid debate , which took place in 1550 – 51 with Sepúlveda and Las Casas each presenting their arguments in front of a council of jurists and theologians . First Sepúlveda read the conclusions of his Democrates Alter , and then the council listened to Las Casas reading his counterarguments in the form of an " <unk> " . Sepúlveda argued that the subjugation of the Indians was warranted because of their sins as pagans ; that their low level of civilization required civilized masters to maintain social order ; that they required Christianity and that this in turn required them to be pacified ; and that only the Spanish could defend the weak Indians against the abuses of the stronger ones . Las Casas countered that the scriptures did not in fact support war against all heathens , only against certain Canaanite tribes ; that the Indians were not at all uncivilized nor lacked social order ; that peaceful mission was the only true way of converting the natives ; and finally that some weak Indians suffering at the hands of stronger ones was preferable to all Indians suffering at the hands of Spaniards . 
 Then the judge , Fray Domingo de Soto , summarised the arguments . Sepúlveda addressed Las Casas 's arguments with twelve refutations , which were again countered by Las Casas . The judges then deliberated on the arguments presented for several months before coming to a verdict . The verdict was inconclusive , and both debaters claimed that they had won . 
 In 1552 , Las Casas published A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies . This book , written a decade earlier and sent to the attention of then @-@ prince Philip II of Spain , contained accounts of the abuses committed by some Spaniards against Native Americans during the early stages of colonization . In 1555 his old Franciscan adversary Toribio de Benavente Motolinia wrote a letter in which he described Las Casas as an ignorant , arrogant troublemaker . Benavente described indignantly how Las Casas had once denied baptism to an aging Indian who had walked many leagues to receive it , only on the grounds that he did not believe that the man had received sufficient doctrinal instruction . This letter , which <unk> the old conflict over the requirements for the sacrament of baptism between the two orders , was intended to bring Las Casas in disfavour . However , it did not succeed . 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 Having resigned the Bishopric of Chiapas , Las Casas spent the rest of his life working closely with the imperial court in matters relating to the Indies . In 1551 he rented a cell at the College of San Gregorio , where he lived with his assistant and friend Fray Rodrigo de <unk> . He continued working as a kind of procurator for the natives of the Indies , many of whom directed petitions to him to speak to the Emperor on their behalf . Sometimes indigenous nobility even related their cases to him in Spain , for example , the Nahua noble Francisco <unk> from <unk> . His influence at court was so great that some even considered that he had the final word in choosing the members of the Council of the Indies . 
 One matter in which he invested much effort was the political situation of the Viceroyalty of Peru . In Peru , power struggles between conquistadors and the viceroy became an open civil war in which the conquistadors led by Gonzalo Pizarro rebelled against the New Laws and defeated and executed the viceroy Blasco Núñez Vela in 1546 . The Emperor sent Pedro de la Gasca , a friend of Las Casas , to reinstate the rule of law , and he in turn defeated Pizarro . In order to <unk> the political situation the encomenderos started pushing not only for the repeal of the New Laws , but for turning the encomiendas into perpetual patrimony of the encomenderos – the worst possible outcome from Las Casas 's point of view . The encomenderos offered to buy the rights to the encomiendas from the crown , and Charles V was inclined to accept since his wars had left him in deep economic troubles . Las Casas worked hard to convince the king that it would be a bad economic decision , that it would return the viceroyalty to the brink of open rebellion , and could result in the crown losing the colony entirely . The Emperor , probably because of the doubts caused by Las Casas 's arguments , never took a final decision on the issue of the encomiendas . 
 In 1561 , he finished his Historia General de las Indias and signed it over to the College of San Gregorio , stipulating that it could not be published until after forty years . In fact it was not published for 314 years , finally being done so in 1875 . He also had to repeatedly defend himself against accusations of treason : someone , possibly Sepúlveda , denounced him to the Spanish Inquisition , but nothing came from the case . Las Casas also appeared as a witness in the case of the Inquisition against his friend Archbishop Bartolomé Carranza de Miranda , who had been falsely accused of heresy . In 1565 he wrote his last will , signing over his immense library to the college . Bartolomé de Las Casas died on July 18 , 1566 , in Madrid . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Memorial de Remedios para las Indias = = = 
 The text , written 1516 , starts by describing its purpose : to present " The remedies that seem necessary in order that the evil and harm that exists in the Indies cease , and that God and our Lord the Prince may draw greater benefits than hitherto , and that the republic may be better preserved and consoled . " 
 Las Casas 's first proposed remedy was a complete moratorium on the use of Indian labor in the Indies until such time as better regulations of it were set in place . This was meant simply to halt the decimation of the Indian population and to give the surviving Indians time to reconstitute themselves . Las Casas feared that at the rate the exploitation was proceeding it would be too late to hinder their annihilation unless action were taken rapidly . The second was a change in the labor policy so that instead of a colonist owning the labor of specific Indians , he would have a right to man @-@ hours , to be carried out by no specific persons . This required the establishment of self @-@ governing Indian communities on the land of colonists – who would themselves organize to provide the labor for their patron . The colonist would only have rights to a certain portion of the total labor , so that a part of the Indians were always resting and taking care of the sick . He proposed 12 other remedies , all having the specific aim of improving the situation for the Indians and limiting the powers that colonists were able to exercise over them . 
 The second part of the Memorial described suggestions for the social and political organization of Indian communities relative to colonial ones . Las Casas advocated the <unk> of the city of Asunción and the subsequent gathering of Indians into communities of about 1 @,@ 000 Indians to be situated as satellites of Spanish towns or mining areas . Here , Las Casas argued , Indians could be better governed , better taught and indoctrinated in the Christian faith , and would be easier to protect from abuse than if they were in scattered settlements . Each town would have a royal hospital built with four wings in the shape of a cross , where up to 200 sick Indians could be cared for at a time . He described in detail social arrangements , distribution of work , how provisions would be divided and even how table manners were to be introduced . Regarding expenses , he argued that " this should not seem expensive or difficult , because after all , everything comes from them [ the Indians ] and they work for it and it is theirs . " He even drew up a budget of each pueblo 's expenses to cover wages for administrators , clerics , Bachelors of Latin , doctors , surgeons , pharmacists , advocates , ranchers , miners , muleteers , <unk> , pig herders , fishermen , etc . He showed that this arrangement could easily be maintained and gold still be extracted at a profit . 
 = = = A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies = = = 
 A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies ( Spanish : Brevísima <unk> de la <unk> de las Indias ) is an account written in 1542 ( published in Seville in 1552 ) about the mistreatment of the indigenous peoples of the Americas in colonial times and sent to then @-@ Prince Philip II of Spain . 
 One of the stated purposes for writing the account was Las Casas 's fear of Spain coming under divine punishment and his concern for the souls of the native peoples . The account was one of the first attempts by a Spanish writer of the colonial era to depict the unfair treatment that the indigenous people endured during the early stages of the Spanish conquest of the Greater Antilles , particularly the island of Hispaniola . Las Casas 's point of view can be described as being heavily against some of the Spanish methods of colonization , which , as he described them , inflicted great losses on the indigenous occupants of the islands . His account was largely responsible for the adoption of the New Laws of 1542 , which abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history and led to the Valladolid debate . 
 The book became an important element in the creation and propagation of the so @-@ called Black Legend – the tradition of describing the Spanish empire as exceptionally morally corrupt and violent . It was republished several times by groups that were critical of the Spanish realm for political or religious reasons . The first edition in translation was published in Dutch in 1578 , during the religious persecution of Dutch Protestants by the Spanish crown , followed by editions in French ( 1578 ) , English ( 1583 ) , and German ( 1599 ) – all countries where religious wars were raging . The first edition published in Spain after Las Casas 's death appeared in Barcelona during the Catalan Revolt of 1646 . The book was banned by the Aragonese inquisition in 1659 . 
 The images described by Las Casas were later depicted by Theodore de Bry in copper plate engravings that helped expand the Black Legend against Spain . 
 Las Casas , Bartolomé de ( 1999 ) . Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies . Nigel Griffin . London : Penguin . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Apologetic History of the Indies = = = 
 The Apologetic Summary History of the People of These Indies ( Spanish <unk> historia <unk> de las gentes <unk> Indias ) was first written as the 68th chapter of the General History of the Indies , but Las Casas changed it into a volume of its own , recognizing that the material was not historical . The material contained in the Apologetic History is primarily ethnographic accounts of the indigenous cultures of the Indies – the Taíno , the <unk> , and the <unk> , but it also contains descriptions of many of the other indigenous cultures that Las Casas learned about through his travels and readings . The history is apologetic because it is written as a defense of the cultural level of the Indians , arguing throughout that indigenous peoples of the Americas were just as civilized as the Roman , Greek and Egyptian civilizations — and more civilized than some European civilizations . It was in essence a comparative ethnography comparing practices and customs of European and American cultures and evaluating them according to whether they were good or bad , seen from a Christian viewpoint . 
 He wrote : " I have declared and demonstrated openly and concluded , from chapter 22 to the end of this whole book , that all people of these our Indies are human , so far as is possible by the natural and human way and without the light of faith – had their republics , places , towns , and cities most abundant and well provided for , and did not lack anything to live politically and socially , and attain and enjoy civil happiness .... And they equaled many nations of this world that are renowned and considered civilized , and they surpassed many others , and to none were they inferior . Among those they equaled were the Greeks and the Romans , and they surpassed them by many good and better customs . They surpassed also the English and the French and some of the people of our own Spain ; and they were incomparably superior to countless others , in having good customs and lacking many evil ones . " This work in which Las Casas combined his own ethnographic observations with those of other writers , and compared customs and cultures between different peoples , has been characterized as an early beginning of the discipline of anthropology . 
 = = = History of the Indies = = = 
 The History of the Indies is a three @-@ volume work begun in 1527 while Las Casas was in the Convent of Puerto de Plata . It found its final form in 1561 , when he was working in the Colegio de San Gregorio . Originally planned as a six @-@ volume work , each volume describes a decade of the history of the Indies from the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1492 to 1520 , and most of it is an eye @-@ witness account . It was in the History of the Indies that Las Casas finally regretted his advocacy for African slavery , and included a sincere apology , writing , " I soon repented and judged myself guilty of ignorance . I came to realize that black slavery was as unjust as Indian slavery ... and I was not sure that my ignorance and good faith would secure me in the eyes of God . " ( Vol II , p . 257 ) 
 = = Las Casas in posterity = = 
 Las Casas 's legacy has been highly controversial . In the years following his death his ideas became taboo in the Spanish realm , and he was seen as a nearly heretical extremist ; the accounts written by his enemies Lopez de <unk> and Oviedo were widely read and published . As the British empire rose to power and hostilities between the British and Spanish began , the British used Las Casas 's accounts of Spanish cruelty as a political tool making it part of the foundation of what Spanish nationalists have called the Black Legend , the tendency of historians to slander Spain for its imperial past , while looking mildly at the same undertakings by others such as the British . 
 Anti @-@ Las Casas history @-@ writing reached its climax with Spanish right @-@ wing , nationalist historians in the late 19th and early 20th centuries constructing a pro @-@ Spanish White Legend , arguing that the Spanish empire was benevolent and just , and denying any adverse consequences of Spanish colonialism . Spanish pro @-@ imperial historians such as Menéndez y Pelayo , Menéndez <unk> , and J. Pérez de <unk> depicted Las Casas as a madman , describing him as a " <unk> " and a <unk> given to exaggeration , and as a traitor towards his own nation . Menéndez Pelayo also accused Las Casas of having been instrumental in suppressing the publication of Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda 's " Democrates Alter " ( also called Democrates Secundus ) out of spite , but other historians find this unlikely since it was rejected by the theologians of both Alcalá and Salamanca who were unlikely to be influenced by Las Casas . 
 = = = Critiques = = = 
 Las Casas has also often been accused of exaggerating the atrocities he described in the Indies , some scholars holding that the initial population figures given by him were too high , making the population decline look worse than it actually was , and that epidemics of European disease were the prime cause of the population decline , not violence and exploitation . Demographic studies such as those of colonial Mexico by Sherburne F. Cook in the mid @-@ 20th century suggested that the decline in the first years of the conquest was indeed drastic – ranging between 80 and 90 % , due of course to many different causes , but all ultimately traceable to the arrival of the Europeans . The overwhelming main cause was disease introduced by the Europeans . It has also been noted that exaggeration of numbers was the norm in writing in 16th @-@ century accounts , and both contemporary detractors and supporters of Las Casas were guilty of similar exaggerations . 
 It has also been suggested that the atrocities that Las Casas described were exaggerated or even invented , but this is not generally considered likely as Las Casas was far from the only person to be deeply worried about abuse and mistreatment of the Indians . The Dominican friars Antonio de Montesinos and Pedro de Córdoba had reported extensive violence already in the first decade of the conquest of the Indies , and throughout the conquest of the Americas there were reports of abuse of the natives by friars and priests and ordinary citizens , and many massacres of indigenous people were reported in full by those who perpetrated them . Even some of Las Casas 's enemies , such as Toribio de Benavente Motolinia , reported many gruesome atrocities committed against the Indians by the colonizers . All in all , modern historians tend to disregard the numerical figures given by Las Casas , but maintain that the general picture he presented of an intensely violent and abusive conquest did represent reality . 
 One persistent point of criticism has been Las Casas 's repeated suggestions of replacing Indian with African slave labor . Even though he regretted this position towards the end of his life and included an apology in his History of the Indies , some later criticism held him responsible for the institution of the Atlantic slave trade . One detractor , the abolitionist David Walker , called Las Casas a " wretch ... stimulated by sordid avarice only , " holding him responsible for the enslavement of thousands of Africans . Other historians , such as John Fiske writing in 1900 , denied that Las Casas 's suggestions affected the development of the slave trade . Benjamin Keen likewise did not consider Las Casas to have had any substantial impact on the slave trade , which was well in place before he began writing . This view is contradicted by Sylvia Wynter , who argued that Las Casas 's 1516 Memorial was the direct cause of Charles V granting permission in 1518 to transport the first 4 @,@ 000 African slaves to Jamaica . 
 Revisionist histories of the late 20th century have argued in favor of a more nuanced image of Las Casas , suggesting that he was neither a saint nor a fanatic , but a person with exceptional willpower and a sense of justice , which sometimes led him into arrogance , stubbornness and hypocrisy . Some historians such as ( Castro 2007 ) argue that he was more of a politician than a humanitarian , and that his liberation policies were always combined with schemes to make colonial extraction of resources from the natives more efficient . He also argues that Las Casas failed to realize that by seeking to replace indigenous spirituality with Christianity , he was undertaking a religious colonialism that was more intrusive than the physical one . This critique has been rejected by other historians as facile and anachronistic . 
 = = = Cultural legacy = = = 
 In 1848 , Ciudad de San Cristóbal , the capital of the Mexican state of Chiapas , was renamed San Cristóbal de Las Casas , in honor of its first bishop . His work is a particular inspiration behind the work of the Las Casas Institute at Blackfriars Hall , Oxford . He is also often cited as a predecessor of the liberation theology movement . He is commemorated by the Church of England in the Calendar of Saints on July 20 and at the Evangelical Lutheran Church on July 17 . In the Catholic Church , the Dominicans introduced his cause for canonization in 1976 . In 2000 the Church began the process for his beatification . 
 Bartolomé de Las Casas has also come to be seen as an early advocate for a concept of universal human rights . He was among the first to develop a view of unity among humankind , stating that " All people of the world are humans , " and that they had a natural right to liberty – a combination of Thomist rights philosophy with Augustinian political theology . In this capacity , an ecumenical human rights institute located in San Cristóbal de las Casas , the Centro Fray Bartolomé de las Casas de Derechos Humanos , was established by Bishop Samuel Ruiz in 1989 . 
 He is also featured in the Guatemalan quetzal one cent ( <unk> ) coins . 
 The small town of <unk> , Tennessee , in the United States has also been named after him . 
 He is a central character in the H.R. Hays historical novel The Takers of the City , published in 1946 . 
 = Stan Marsh = 
 Stanley " Stan " Marsh is a main character in the animated television series South Park . He is voiced by and loosely based on series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . Stan is one of the show 's four central characters , along with his friends Kyle Broflovski , Kenny McCormick and Eric Cartman . He debuted on television when South Park first aired on August 13 , 1997 , after having first appeared in The Spirit of Christmas shorts created by Parker and long @-@ time collaborator Matt Stone in 1992 ( Jesus vs. Frosty ) and 1995 ( Jesus vs. Santa ) . 
 Stan is a third , then fourth @-@ grade student who commonly has extraordinary experiences not typical of conventional small @-@ town life in his fictional hometown of South Park , Colorado . Stan is generally depicted as friendly , knowledgeable , helpful , and relaxed . He often shares with his best friend Kyle a leadership role as the protagonist of the show . Stan is unreserved in expressing his distinct lack of esteem for adults and their influences , as adult South Park residents rarely make use of their critical faculties . 
 Like the other South Park characters , Stan is animated by computer in a way to emulate the show 's original method of cutout animation . He also appears in the full @-@ length feature film South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut ( 1999 ) , as well as South Park @-@ related media and merchandise . While Parker and Stone portray Stan as having common childlike tendencies , his dialogue is often intended to reflect stances and views on more adult @-@ oriented issues and has been frequently cited in numerous publications by experts in the fields of politics , religion , popular culture , and philosophy . 
 = = Role = = 
 Stan lives in South Park at 2001 Bonanza Street with his parents Randy and Sharon Marsh . Randy is a geologist , and Sharon is a secretary at a rhinoplasty clinic . Stan 's family includes his 12 @-@ year @-@ old sister Shelley , who bullies and beats him , and his centenarian grandfather , Marvin , who calls Stan " Billy " and who previously begged Stan to help him commit suicide . Stan attends South Park Elementary as part of Mr. Garrison 's fourth grade class . During the show 's first 58 episodes ( 1997 through the season 4 episode " 4th Grade " in 2000 ) , Stan and the other main child characters were in the third grade . His birthday is listed as October 19 ( the same day as co @-@ creator Trey Parker ) , 2001 on his Facebook page during the season 14 episode " You Have 0 Friends " . Stan is frequently embarrassed and / or annoyed by his father 's antics and frequent acts of public drunkenness . Stan 's relationship as nephew to his uncle Jimbo received moderate attention in the show 's first two seasons . 
 Amongst the show 's main characters , Kyle is defined as being the only Jewish kid , Cartman is recognized by his obesity , greed , and bigotry , and Kenny is notable for being poor and frequently dying ; as opposed to having a prominent distinguishing trait , Stan is portrayed ( in words of the show 's official website ) as " a normal , average , American , mixed @-@ up kid " . 
 Stan is modeled after Parker , while Kyle is modeled after Stone . Stan and Kyle are best friends , and their relationship , which is intended to reflect the real @-@ life friendship between Parker and Stone , is a common topic throughout the series . The two do have their disagreements , but always reconcile without any long @-@ term damage to their friendship . As is the case with his other friends and classmates , Stan is frequently at odds with Cartman , resenting Cartman 's behavior and openly mocking his weight . Stan also shares a close friendship with Kenny , while Kenny professes that Stan is one of " the best friends a guy could have " . Stan can understand Kenny 's muffled voice perfectly , and typically exclaims the catchphrase " Oh my God ! They killed Kenny ! " , following one of Kenny 's trademark deaths , allowing Kyle to follow up with " You bastards ! " Stan is the only character in the group to have had a steady girlfriend , Wendy Testaburger , and their relationship was a recurring topic in the show 's earlier seasons . Despite reconciling and declaring to be a couple again in the season 11 ( 2007 ) episode " The List " after Wendy had dumped him in the season seven ( 2003 ) episode " Raisins " , their relationship has received relatively less focus in recent seasons . As a running gag , a nervous Stan often vomits whenever Wendy approaches to kiss or speak to him . In many episodes , Stan contemplates ethics in beliefs , moral dilemmas , and contentious issues , and will often reflect on the lessons he has attained with a speech that often begins with " You know , I learned something today ... " . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 An unnamed precursor to Stan first appeared in the first The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Frosty , created by Parker and Stone in 1992 while they were students at the University of Colorado . The character was composed of construction paper cutouts and animated through the use of stop motion . When asked three years later by friend Brian Graden to create another short as a video Christmas card that he could send to friends , Parker and Stone created another similarly @-@ animated The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Santa , in which Stan also appeared . Stan next appeared on August 13 , 1997 , when South Park debuted on Comedy Central with the episode " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . 
 In the tradition of the show 's animation style , Stan is composed of simple geometrical shapes and primary colors . He is not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand @-@ drawn characters ; his character is mostly shown from only one angle , and his movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion . Ever since the show 's second episode , " Weight Gain 4000 " ( season one , 1997 ) , Stan , like all other characters on the show , has been animated with computer software , though he is portrayed to give the impression that the show still utilizes its original technique . 
 Stan is usually depicted in winter attire which consists of a brown jacket , blue denim jeans , red gloves / mittens , and a red @-@ brimmed blue knit cap adorned with a decorative red pom @-@ pom . In the rare instances Stan is seen without his cap , he is shown to have shaggy black hair . He was given his full name in the season one episode " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " , sharing his surname of " Marsh " with Parker 's paternal step @-@ grandfather . While originally voicing Stan without any computer manipulation , Parker now speaks within his normal vocal range while adding a childlike inflection . The recorded audio is then edited with Pro Tools , and the pitch is altered to make the voice sound more like that of a fourth grader . 
 Stan 's birthday is October 19 , which is Trey Parker 's birthday , except Stan 's year of birth is 1987 . 
 = = = Personality and traits = = = 
 Stan is foul @-@ mouthed ( a trait present in his friends as well ) as a means for Parker and Stone to display how they claim young boys really talk when they are alone . In responding to certain situations , particularly during earlier seasons , Stan often exclaims " Dude , this is pretty fucked up right here " . While Stan is cynical and profane , Parker still notes that there is an " underlying sweetness " to the character , and Time magazine described Stan and his friends as " sometimes cruel but with a core of innocence " . He is amused by bodily functions and toilet humor , and his favorite television personalities are Terrance and Phillip , a Canadian duo whose comedy routines on their show @-@ within @-@ the @-@ show revolve substantially around fart jokes . 
 Stan is an avid animal lover . He is highly against his uncle Jimbo 's hunting , and was also known to commit to vegetarianism after feeling compassion for baby calves in a farm , even going as far to hide them in his room to protect them from being slaughtered . Later , he was forced to quit vegetarianism because of a severe illness he developed , however , he still fights for animal rights , becoming a member of PETA in " Douche and Turd " as well as saving whales and dolphins in " Whale Whores " . 
 The only adult on the show that Stan consistently trusted was Chef , the cafeteria worker at his school , as Stan generally holds the rest of the show 's adult population in low regard due to their tendency to both behave irrationally when subjected to the scams , cults , and sensationalized media stories of which he is often skeptical , and engage in hypocritical behavior . He doubts the legitimacy of holistic medicine , declares cults to be dangerous , and regards those claiming to be psychic mediums as frauds , specifically by declaring John Edward to be " the biggest douche in the universe " . 
 After turning ten years old , Stan was diagnosed with cynicism , which in the series is treated as a serious medical disorder where the sufferer sees nothing but feces instead of people and animals and hear <unk> noises during music and voices . Stan 's friendships with the other main characters ended , his parents divorced and he moved out of his home . This episode formed a cliffhanger and set off widespread speculation that the series was coming to an end , but the premiere of the second half of the season resolved the arc as Stan was erroneously diagnosed with Asperger 's Syndrome and discovers Jameson Irish Whiskey cures cynicism . After struggling to repair his life , he finally explains he doesn 't want things to go back to normal , when his parents get back together and his life is repaired , although the end of the episode implies Stan may be permanently bound to whiskey to continue an everyday life . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 In 2014 , Stan was ranked by IGN at third place on their list of " The Top 25 South Park Characters " , commenting that he " often acts as the voice of reason in the midst of the show 's insane events , and in many ways he 's more mature than his father Randy . " The website concluded that " his history as one of the more stable and thoughtful characters in the series made him the perfect choice for the voice of Trey and Matt 's own creative / professional frustrations . " 
 Stan frequently offers his perspective on religion , and he was at the center of one of the most controversial episodes of the series , " Trapped in the Closet " ( season nine , 2005 ) , where he was recognized as the reincarnation of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard before denouncing the church as nothing more than " a big fat global scam " . 
 In the show 's nineteen seasons , Stan has addressed other topics such as homosexuality , hate crime legislation , civil liberties , parenting , illegal immigration , voting , alcoholism , and race relations . His commentary on these issues have been interpreted as statements Parker and Stone are attempting to make to the viewing public , and these opinions have been subject to much critical analysis in the media and literary world . The book South Park and Philosophy : You Know , I Learned Something Today includes an essay in which East Carolina University philosophy professor Henry Jacoby compares Stan 's actions and reasoning within the show to the philosophical teachings of William Kingdon Clifford , and another essay by Southern Illinois University philosophy professor John S. Gray which references Stan 's decision to not vote for either candidate for a school mascot in the season eight ( 2004 ) episode " Douche and Turd " when describing political philosophy and the claimed pitfalls of a two @-@ party system . Essays in the books South Park and Philosophy : Bigger , Longer , and More Penetrating , Blame Canada ! South Park and Contemporary Culture , and Taking South Park Seriously have also analyzed Stan 's perspectives within the framework of popular philosophical , theological , and political concepts . 
 = Russian battleship Sinop = 
 The Russian battleship Sinop ( Russian : <unk> ) was a battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy , being the third ship of the Ekaterina II class . She was named after the Russian victory at the Battle of Sinop in 1853 . The ship participated in the pursuit of the mutinous battleship Potemkin in June 1905 and towed her back to Sevastopol from Constanța , Romania , where Potemkin had sought asylum . Several proposals were made for Sinop 's reconstruction with modern guns and better quality armor during the 1900s , but both were cancelled . She was converted to a gunnery training ship in 1910 before she became a guardship at Sevastopol and had her 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns removed in exchange for four single 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns in turrets . Sinop was refitted in 1916 with torpedo bulges to act as " mine @-@ bumpers " for a proposed operation in the heavily mined Bosphorus . Both the Bolsheviks and the Whites captured her during the Russian Civil War after her engines were destroyed by the British in 1919 . She was scrapped by the Soviets beginning in 1922 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Sinop was 331 feet 8 @.@ 5 inches ( 101 @.@ 1 m ) long at the waterline and 339 feet 3 inches ( 103 @.@ 4 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 68 feet 11 inches ( 21 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 3 in ( 8 @.@ 6 m ) more than 28 inches ( 711 mm ) than designed . Her displacement was 11 @,@ 310 long tons ( 11 @,@ 490 t ) at load , over 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 1 @,@ 200 t ) more than her designed displacement of 10 @,@ 181 long tons ( 10 @,@ 344 t ) . 
 Sinop was the first large warship to use vertical triple expansion steam engines , having two 3 @-@ cylinder engines imported from Napier & Son of the United Kingdom . Fourteen cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engines . The engines had a total designed output of 9 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 711 kW ) , but they only produced 8 @,@ 888 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 628 kW ) on trials and gave a top speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . At full load she carried 900 long tons ( 910 t ) of coal that provided her a range of 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) and 1 @,@ 367 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 532 km ; 1 @,@ 573 mi ) at 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 She differed from her sisters mainly in the design of her gun mounts . Sinop had six 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 30 @-@ caliber guns mounted in twin barbette mounts , two forward , side by side , and one aft . Each of the forward mounts could traverse 30 ° across the bow and 35 ° abaft the beam , or a total of 155 ° . The rear mount could traverse 202 ° . Their rate of fire was one round every four minutes , thirty @-@ five seconds , including training time . Sixty rounds per gun were carried . The main guns were mounted very low , ( only 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) ) above the main deck , and caused extensive damage to the deck when fired over the bow or stern . The seven 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts in hull embrasures , except for one gun mounted in the stern in the hull . Six of the eight 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) five @-@ barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns were mounted in small sponsons that projected from the hull with the aftermost pair mounted in hull embrasures to defend the ship against torpedo boats . Four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) five @-@ barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns were mounted in the fighting top . She carried seven above @-@ water 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , one tube forward on each side , able to bear on forward targets , two other tubes were mounted on each broadside fore and aft of the central citadel ; the seventh tube was in the stern . 
 = = History = = 
 Sinop was named after the Russian victory in the Battle of Sinop in 1853 . She was built by the Russian Steam Navigation Company ( RoPIT ) at Sevastopol . She was laid down in late June 1883 , launched on 1 June 1887 , and completed in 1889 . Sinop began her trials in the middle of 1889 and she had a boiler accident the following year that killed eight and severely burned 10 more . Her machinery was upgraded between 1899 and May 1904 with 20 new Belleville water @-@ tube boilers , but the ship suffered a boiler explosion in 1903 that left seven sailors badly burned . Plans for a radical reconstruction were made to be done while she was docked for replacement boilers . It involved cutting her down by one deck and replacing her armament with two twin @-@ gun turrets equipped with 12 @-@ inch 40 @-@ caliber guns and ten 6 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns between the turrets in an armored citadel that used Krupp armor . However , this proved to be too expensive and was cancelled . 
 Sinop participated in the pursuit of the mutinous battleship Potemkin in June 1905 and towed her back to Sevastopol from Constanța , Romania . In 1907 the Naval General Staff made a proposal for a radical reconstruction that was similar to the proposals to reconstruct her and her sister Chesma made before the Russo @-@ Japanese War . This involved cutting her down by one deck and replacing her armament with two twin @-@ gun turrets equipped with 12 @-@ inch 40 @-@ caliber guns and her compound armor replaced by Krupp armor . This new proposal differed from the older one in that eight 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns replaced the ten 6 @-@ inch guns originally planned . This was also rejected as she still would have lacked the speed to stay with the main fleet and her armor was too obsolete to withstand modern high @-@ explosive shell fire . 
 She was converted to a gunnery training ship in 1910 and had four 6 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns installed on her upper deck . Sinop 's 12 @-@ inch guns were removed in 1912 and she received four single 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns in turrets that were also mounted on the upper deck . The ship 's original 6 @-@ inch 35 @-@ caliber guns were replaced with 45 @-@ caliber guns and two more were added in the Admiral 's salon . Four more 47 @-@ mm guns were also added as were four machine guns . Her torpedo tubes were removed and Sinop also received a central fire control station . She spent World War I as a guardship at Sevastopol . 
 Sinop was refitted in Nikolaev with torpedo bulges to serve as ' mine @-@ bumpers ' in 1916 to allow her to lead other ships into the mined waters of the Bosphorus , but the operation was later cancelled . She was captured by the Germans in April 1918 in Sevastopol and was handed over to the Allies in November 1918 . The British sabotaged her engines on 25 April 1919 as they abandoned the Whites to prevent any use by the advancing Bolsheviks . Sinop therefore remained at Sevastopol for the duration of the Russian Civil War , being captured by both sides as they occupied the city in turn , but was then abandoned by Wrangel 's fleet when it evacuated the Crimea in 1920 . Although Russian archives say that Sinop was gradually scrapped from 1922 , an underwater expedition under the leadership of Robert Ballard found a wreck that has been tentatively identified as Sinop upside down off not far from Sevastopol . 
 = Francis White ( Virginia ) = 
 Francis White ( 1761 – October 6 , 1826 ) was a distinguished early American lawyer and politician in what was then the U.S. state of Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . 
 White served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates , representing Hampshire County , and later served as a member of the Virginia State Senate , representing Berkeley , Hampshire , Hardy , and Morgan counties . He represented Virginia 's 2nd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives during the 13th United States Congress . White also served as the sheriff of Hampshire County . 
 White was the grandson of Virginia pioneer settler and physician Dr. Robert White ( 1688 – 1752 ) ; thus , he was a member of the prominent White political family of Virginia and West Virginia . He was the nephew of United States House Representative Alexander White ( 1738 – 1804 ) , and the brother of Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francis White was born in 1761 at Hayfield , near Winchester in Frederick County , Colony of Virginia . White was the son of John White and his wife , Ann Patton White . Through his grandfather , Dr. Robert White ( 1688 – 1752 ) , Francis White was of Scottish descent . His uncle was Alexander White ( 1738 – 1804 ) , an inaugural member of the United States House of Representatives . 
 White attended the common schools in Winchester . Following his education , White engaged in agricultural pursuits along the Cacapon and North rivers in Hampshire County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . By 1813 , White was operating a gristmill and a sawmill on his Hampshire County property . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Virginia House of Delegates = = = 
 White was elected to represent the multi @-@ member electoral district of Hampshire County in the Virginia House of Delegates for three terms : 1794 , 1809 to 1813 , and 1818 to 1823 . In his 1794 term , White served alongside Isaac Parsons ; from 1809 to 1813 , he served alongside Alexander King , from 1818 to 1823 , White served alongside William Armstrong , Jr . , Ephraim Dunn , and Edward McCarty . 
 During the 1809 election for Hampshire County 's two seats in the Virginia House of Delegates , White ran against fellow Federalist Alexander King , and Democratic @-@ Republicans William Donaldson and Jonathan Pugh . King received the most votes at 312 , and White came in second with 288 votes , thus qualifying him for a seat . White ran for reelection in 1811 against Alexander King , William Armstrong , and Jonathan Pugh . White and King received the two highest vote totals , with White receiving 313 votes . White was reelected to his seat in 1812 , with 336 votes . 
 Following his election along with Ephraim Dunn in 1821 , White returned to the Virginia House of Delegates , representing Hampshire County . In the 1822 election , White ran for election against Ephraim Dunn and George Park , with Dunn and White winning Hampshire County 's two seats in the Virginia House of Delegates . White received the most votes , with 276 . 
 In 1795 , while serving in the Virginia House of Delegates , White was either elected or appointed to serve as a justice of the peace in Hampshire County , along with Alexander King , William Vause , John Jack , Virgil <unk> , and John Snyder . 
 = = = United States House of Representatives = = = 
 White was elected unopposed as a Federalist representing Virginia 's 2nd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives during the 13th United States Congress ( March 4 , 1813 – March 3 , 1815 ) . White 's election in 1813 occurred during an ascendancy of the Federalist Party throughout Virginia . 
 White served on the United States House Committee on the District of Columbia . According to GovTrack , from May 1813 to March 1815 , White missed 56 of 352 roll call votes ( 15 @.@ 9 % ) . White resided at the Law 's Ten Buildings boarding house of Mrs. Lane on New Jersey Avenue in Washington , D.C. during the May 24 – August 2 , 1813 session and the December 6 , 1813 – April 18 , 1814 session . 
 White ran for reelection in 1815 , but he lost to fellow Federalist Magnus Tate with 420 votes ( 36 @.@ 65 percent of the vote ) , while Tate had 726 . 
 = = = Virginia State Senate = = = 
 Following his term in the United States House of Representative , White continued to operate his farms on the Cacapon and North rivers . In 1823 , White was elected as a member of the Virginia State Senate , defeating opponent candidate Ignatius O <unk> . White held the seat until 1824 . White 's seat in the Virginia State Senate represented District 6 , which consisted of Berkeley , Hampshire , Hardy , and Morgan counties . 
 While serving in the Virginia State Senate , White was appointed sheriff of Hampshire County on December 9 , 1823 , by Virginia Governor James Pleasants . On Thursday , January 1 , 1824 , White informed the Virginia State Senate of his appointment to the position of Hampshire County sheriff , and he asked for an opinion as to whether he could retain his senate seat while serving as sheriff . White 's inquiry was referred to the senate 's Committee of Privileges and Elections for " consideration and a report of their opinion thereupon to the House . " The following day , on Friday , January 2 , 1824 , the Committee of Privileges and Elections delivered their opinion : White should vacate his senate seat upon his acceptance of the position of Hampshire County sheriff , and the sheriffs of the senate district 's four counties were directed to hold a special election to " supply the vacancy occasioned . " On Tuesday , February 3 , 1824 , the Virginia State Senate certified the election of Elisha Boyd to fill White 's senate seat . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 White continued to serve as Hampshire County 's sheriff until his death . White died on October 6 , 1826 , at his residence on the Cacapon River in Hampshire County . He was interred at the White Family Graveyard at Hayfield in Frederick County , Virginia . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 White married his first cousin , Margaret White , in Frederick County on December 5 , 1787 . Margaret White was the daughter of White 's uncle , Robert White II . White and his wife had at large family , with at least six children : 
 Robert Norvell White , married Matilda McBride , daughter of John McBride 
 Thomas B. White 
 John A. White 
 Francis White , Jr . ( 1799 – September 8 , 1868 ) 
 Unnamed daughter , married to a Mr. Keyes 
 Mary M. White McDonald ( 1811 – February 7 , 1839 ) , married Evan McDonald , son of Benjamin and Margaret Hiett McDonald 
 = = Land ownership = = 
 White amassed extensive landholdings in Hampshire County . In 1797 , White purchased 233 acres ( 0 @.@ 94 km2 ) along the North River in Hampshire County from Henry and Rachael Pierce of Cecil County , Maryland . White purchased an additional 20 acres ( 0 @.@ 081 km2 ) along the North River in 1800 . At the time of his election to the United States House of Representatives , White was a resident of Romney . 
 = 2008 – 09 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team = 
 The 2008 – 09 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team represented the University of Michigan in competitive college basketball during the 2008 – 09 NCAA Division I season . The 2008 – 09 season marked the team 's ninety @-@ second consecutive season as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's ( NCAA ) Big Ten Conference . The team finished the season with a 21 – 14 overall record and a 9 – 9 conference record . The 9 – 9 conference record tied for seventh place in the 2008 – 09 Big Ten conference standings . Michigan was seeded seventh in the single @-@ elimination 2009 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament where it advanced one round . They were seeded tenth in the South Regional bracket of the single @-@ elimination 2009 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , where it also advanced one round before losing to the Blake Griffin @-@ led Oklahoma Sooners . C.J. Lee and David Merritt served as team co @-@ captains , and Manny Harris and DeShawn Sims shared team MVP honors . 
 The 2008 – 09 season marked a turnaround for the team for several reasons . The team rebounded from a 10 – 22 overall record and a 5 – 13 conference record during the previous 2007 – 08 season . The season was highlighted by the team 's first two wins in eleven years against teams ranked among the top five in the AP Poll , and by the team 's first trip to the NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament since the 1998 Tournament . Although the team had appeared in the 1998 NCAA tournament , the last appearance in the NCAA tournament that had been recognized in official NCAA records as not having been tainted by the University of Michigan basketball scandal was their 1995 Tournament appearance . The team was in its first year off scholarship probation , which following the scandal had restricted the number of available scholarships . However , the team continued to be prohibited from affiliating with implicated athletes ( Chris Webber , Robert Traylor , Maurice Taylor , and Louis Bullock ) until 2012 , which meant , among other things , that the players could not help the University recruit . The team began the season unranked , but in December 2008 it earned its first place in the top 25 since February 2006 . As the season progressed , the team adopted the slogan " <unk> los <unk> " , which is Spanish for " burn the ships " , as a reminder that there was no turning back . 
 For the forty @-@ second consecutive season , the team played its home games in Ann Arbor , Michigan at the Crisler Arena , which has a capacity of 13 @,@ 751 . John Beilein was in his second season as head coach with the team during the 2008 – 2009 season . At the conclusion of the season , guard Manny Harris was named to the All @-@ Big Ten first team , and forward DeShawn Sims was selected by the Big Ten media to the second team and chosen by the Big Ten coaches for the third team . 
 = = Preview = = 
 Their 2008 – 09 pre @-@ conference schedule included Atlantic Coast Conference members Maryland Terrapins and Duke Blue Devils , who went on to win the 2009 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament . The team also played against geographical rival Eastern Michigan and the preseason # 2 ranked Connecticut Huskies . 
 Unlike conference rivals Michigan State , Purdue , and Wisconsin , Michigan was not ranked in the top 25 by either the Associated Press or the ESPN / USA Today preseason polls . In fact , the team did not even receive any votes , like rival Ohio State , in either poll . Pre season reports described the team as a contender for fifth place in the conference . Although the team was building from a 10 – 22 record , it won five of its last ten games the prior year . A poll of 22 members of the media published in the Detroit Free Press ranked Michigan eighth in the conference . The Sports Illustrated 2008 College Basketball Preview issue did not select the team as one of the five predicted Big Ten teams ( the four mentioned above and the Minnesota Golden Gophers ) to qualify for the NCAA tournament . 
 = = Roster = = 
 On May 5 , 2008 , sophomore <unk> Udoh , the Big Ten 's top <unk> , decided to transfer for his final two years of athletic eligibility . Beilein attempted to replace Udoh with Robin <unk> , a member of Germany 's national youth team . However , <unk> failed to meet the NCAA 's initial @-@ eligibility guidelines and did not play . Beilein was able to partially solve the problem of complimenting Manny Harris by luring point guard Laval Lucas @-@ Perry to transfer from Arizona . Perry became eligible to play at the conclusion of the fall semester . The team anticipated relying on 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) freshman center Ben Cronin to make up for the loss of Udoh and Ron Coleman , who averaged over 21 minutes each of his four seasons . Including Cronin , the team had three incoming recruits . 
 Michigan granted two of its scholarships to fifth @-@ year redshirt graduate students C.J. Lee and David Merritt in September . Lee and Merritt had both been 2007 – 08 Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference selections . The varsity roster included fourteen players , thirteen of whom saw live game action . In December , the Wolverines made the decision to redshirt Ben Cronin after only 10 minutes of play . He had hip surgery on January 14 . 
 – denotes class status adjusted for used redshirt eligibility . 
 = = = Incoming signees = = = 
 The incoming class had no four- or five @-@ star recruits . However , it included three players that Rivals.com listed as three @-@ star recruits . Only Ben Cronin was also listed as three @-@ star by <unk> 
 = = = Mid @-@ season transfer = = = 
 = = = 2009 – 10 team recruits = = = 
 Incoming recruit Darius Morris and two Division I recruit teammates led Windward High School to the California Division V state title . Darius Morris received MVP of Olympic League , CIF Division 5A Southern Section Player of Year , and CIF Division 5A State Player of Year . Also Darius was awarded a John Wooden High School Player of the Year Award , received by Jrue Holiday the year before and the likes of Jason Kapono and Tayshaun Prince in the past . 
 Matt Vogrich won the Illinois Gatorade Player of the Year award , following in the footsteps of Derrick Rose and Jon Scheyer . Unlike Scheyer and Rose , he did not win Illinois Mr. Basketball . Kelvin Grady announced his intent to transfer at the end of the season . 
 = = Rankings = = 
