 = = Playing style = = 
 Over the course of the season , they developed a reputation for shooting a lot of three @-@ point shots and for not turning over the basketball . The team ranked among the national leaders in three @-@ point shots made per game . The ballhandling ability was a function of the Michigan lineup which often employed four guards and one center / forward , which meant that at any time the team had several adept <unk> on the court . By the end of the season , the starting lineup usually included four players 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) or shorter and Sims who is 6 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) . As a team that relied on the three @-@ point shot , it was streaky and was susceptible to hot and cold stretches . The team relied on a deep bench and had 10 players who averaged 10 minutes per game . Even the eleventh player averaged 9 @.@ 6 minutes . The offense used patient ball movement with backdoor cutters and slashers , which necessitated that defenses chase shooters and peel off picks . The offense resulted in a shot mix that employed three @-@ pointers for about 48 % of its shots . 
 On defense , the team was known for employing Beilein 's trademark trapping 1 – 3 – 1 halfcourt zone defense , which required opponents to be skilled at perimeter passing . The zone defense was generally employed after made baskets and dead @-@ ball situations . After offensive misses or turnovers , the Wolverines relied on man @-@ to @-@ man defense . Depending on the matchups the team also used a 2 – 3 zone defense because the team did not have the type of athletes necessary to play on the wings of his 1 – 3 – 1 . It employed the 1 – 3 – 1 less later in the season , and about ten percent of opponent possessions altogether . In total , the team used some sort of zone defense about 40 percent of the time . The team was also among the top 35 ( of over 300 ) in the nation in terms of three @-@ point shot defense . 
 = = Accomplishments = = 
 On December 13 , 2008 , the team tied Dartmouth ’ s current national record for most different players to make a three @-@ point field goal in game set in 1993 when 9 players made three @-@ point shots against Eastern Michigan . The team also set the current Big Ten Conference single @-@ game three @-@ point field goals attempted record of 42 on December 22 , 2008 against Florida Gulf Coast and the conference games record of 40 on January 7 , 2009 <unk> Indiana . Over the course of the season the team set the current Big Ten Conference single @-@ season three @-@ point field goals attempted record if 912 as well as the single @-@ season conference games record of 471 . The team led the Big Ten Conference with 151 three @-@ point field goals made in conference games . 
 The team set several school records . Its single @-@ season total of 305 three @-@ point field goals made surpassed the 1998 school record total of 260 . This record was surpassed by the 2013 – 14 team . The team 's single @-@ game total of 16 three @-@ point field goals made against Eastern Michigan on December 13 , 2008 surpassed the school record 15 made on February 22 , 1998 . The team also established the school ’ s single @-@ season free throw percentage record of 75 @.@ 7 % ( 412 – 544 ) surpassed the 75 @.@ 4 % set in 2002 . 
 = = Season = = 
 = = = Preconference = = = 
 Although the Big Ten Network had a two and a half hour special that featured Midnight Madness events from several Big Ten campuses on October 17 , 2008 , the Michigan Wolverines were not a featured part of the show . Michigan began the season with Ben Cronin suffering from a torn acetabular labrum ( hip joint ) and considering redshirting . The team started its season as the host of a 2K Sports College Hoops Coaches Vs . Cancer Classic tournament regional in which they defeated the Michigan Tech Huskies and Northeastern Huskies at Crisler Arena . Manny Harris won the second Big Ten Player of the week award of his career for his performances during these games . 
 The first two victories qualified Michigan to appear in the tournament final four at the Madison Square Garden where the unranked Wolverines team upset the # 4 ranked UCLA Bruins men 's basketball team for its first win over a top @-@ five team in eleven years on November 20 , 2008 . The 55 – 52 win also ended a twelve @-@ game losing streak against ranked opponents . During the game , Michigan forced 17 UCLA turnovers with its 1 – 3 – 1 zone defense . Nonetheless , Michigan fell behind by as many as 10 points at one point in the game . In the first half , the Wolverines shot 31 @.@ 3 % from the field , and in the second half , they shot 61 @.@ 9 % , including 4 of 8 on three @-@ point shots . Michigan trailed by two with 4 minutes and 16 seconds left before Stu Douglass made a three @-@ point basket and Sims scored a few possessions later after a steal . In the final seconds UCLA 's Nikola Dragovic hit a 3 @-@ point shot with five seconds left to reduce Michigan 's four @-@ point lead to one . Then UCLA sent Harris to the line where he made two free throws . In the final seconds Michigan defended an attack by Darren Collison who had his final shot blocked by Harris . At that point in the season , Michigan used DeShawn Sims as a sixth man . He played 28 minutes off the bench and led the team in scoring with 18 while being tied for the lead with 5 rebounds . Despite losing to # 10 ranked ( # 5 in the Coaches ' Poll ) Duke the following night , the Wolverines began receiving votes in the 2008 @-@ 09 NCAA Division I men 's basketball rankings for the week of November 24 . 
 The team earned a pair of non @-@ conference victories against Norfolk State and Savannah State . In the Savannah St. game , Sims made a jump shot from the corner as time expired to win the game in overtime . Michigan had trailed by 20 at halftime , but scored the first 15 points of the second half . Next , the team was matched up against the Maryland in the ACC – Big Ten Challenge , where they lost on December 3 . The Maryland game marked Sims ' entry into the starting lineup . 
 On December 6 , 2008 Michigan posted its second consecutive win over a top 5 opponent in a rematch against Duke with an 81 – 73 victory . The game included 11 lead changes and 16 ties . The close contest allowed the fans to play a part as they forced Duke to use a time out to quiet the noisy crowd late in the second half . The game , which had an attendance of 13 @,@ 751 , marked Michigan 's 168th sellout and eighth consecutive as host to Duke . Sims , in his new starting role , led the way with 28 points ( a career @-@ high ) and 12 rebounds . Novak contributed 14 off the bench including 4 for 7 on three @-@ point shots . Gerald Henderson fouled out in only 19 minutes of play . Michigan trailed 53 – 50 with 8 minutes and 38 seconds remaining before Novak hit three @-@ point shots on consecutive possessions to give Michigan the lead for good . Michigan built a 68 – 59 lead with 3 minutes and 7 seconds left . Then , Duke made four straight three @-@ point shots while Michigan made 13 of its last 14 free throws to defend its lead . The fourth three @-@ pointer cut the lead to 75 – 71 with 51 @.@ 3 seconds remaining . The game was the first time Michigan had defeated multiple top five teams in the same season since 1986 – 87 when it upended fifth @-@ ranked Syracuse , 91 – 88 ( January 18 , 1987 ) , second @-@ ranked Iowa , 100 – 92 ( January 31 , 1987 ) , and third @-@ ranked Purdue , 104 – 68 ( March 7 , 1987 ) . At that point in the season , Michigan 's two wins against top five teams were as many as the rest of the nation combined . 
 Then , after beating Eastern Michigan the following week , they welcomed Laval Lucas @-@ Perry to the lineup as he contributed 14 points in 16 minutes of play in a victory over the Oakland Golden Grizzlies . Two days later on December 22 , Michigan entered the Associated Press top 25 poll for the first time since February 6 , 2006 . Later that night in a victory over Florida @-@ Gulf Coast , DeShawn Sims became the first Wolverine to score 20 points and add 20 rebounds since Phil Hubbard had 22 points and 26 rebounds in a victory over University of Detroit in the 1977 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . This performance earned him his second career Big Ten Player of the Week award . On December 29 , the team entered the top 25 of the ESPN / USA Today Coaches Poll . 
 = = = Big Ten Season = = = 
 After a win over North Carolina Central , which gave the Wolverines ten wins to match its previous season 's total , the team lost its Big Ten Conference opener against the Wisconsin Badgers on New Years Eve . The win made Michigan the first ranked team that Wisconsin defeated during the season after three previous losses . During the game Zack Novak scored his season high 20 points , but Harris was held to 9 points and Wisconsin shot 58 @.@ 7 % from the field . On January 4 , the team earned its first conference victory against the Illinois Fighting Illini when five player chipped in with double digit scoring efforts and the defense induced a low shooting percentage in the second half . The loss during the week caused Michigan to fall from the top 25 of both polls . Michigan rallied from a 20 @-@ point deficit against the Indiana Hoosiers to force overtime in which it prevailed on January 7 . It was the team 's first victory in Bloomington , Indiana since 1995 . On January 11 , defeated the Iowa Hawkeyes marking eight wins in nine games starting with the Duke upset . Michigan opened a 32 – 16 lead and was never challenged afterwards . Following the Indiana and Iowa victories , Michigan moved back into the top 25 in both polls ( AP # 25 , ESPN / USAT # 24 ) . 
 Beilein stayed at 499 career wins at four @-@ year academic institutions , as Michigan suffered its first consecutive losses of the season when its second conference loss , which came against Illinois on January 14 , was followed by a loss to the Ohio State Buckeyes on January 17 . The Illinois contest was a rematch from ten days earlier . After a 31 – 30 Michigan halftime lead resulting from 11 lead changes , Illinois shut down Michigan early in the second half to build a 57 – 45 lead with 5 minutes remaining . In the game , Michigan did not attempt a free throw until the last 1 minute and 45 seconds of the second half . Against Ohio State , Michigan struggled against a 1 – 2 – 2 zone early in the game and fell behind by 11 before closing to a 29 – 25 halftime deficit . Michigan took a 44 – 40 lead with eight minutes remaining , and the score was tied at 47 before Ohio State ran off 10 points in a row . The game was a twentieth year celebration of the last Wolverine national championship with all but two members of the 1989 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament championship team in attendance as the team wore throwback uniforms . The consecutive losses caused the team to lose almost all of their support in the national rankings . On January 20 , in a contest against Penn State that pitted the conferences two leading scorers ( Harris and Talor Battle ) , Michigan shot 9 for 30 from the field in the first half including 2 for 16 on three @-@ point shot attempts . They fell behind by as many as 23 points in the second half . The loss extended the losing streak to three games . Although Michigan rebounded with Beilein 's 500th win in a January 24 victory over Northwestern in which they scored on their first five possessions and never looked back , they lost all support among the voters in the polls . 
 Michigan ended January with a pair of losses to Ohio State and Purdue . The Ohio State game was notable for Novak 's flagrant foul and ejection for elbowing P.J. Hill in the face . Harris accumulated a triple double of sorts with 22 points , 12 rebounds and 10 turnovers . Against Purdue , Harris was held to single digit scoring for the third time in four games . During the game he was ejected for elbowing Purdue captain Chris Kramer in the nose , which spurred Purdue to a 40 – 20 run . Novak was ineligible due to an ejection in the prior game and Harris was ejected toward the beginning of the second half . On February 5 , Harris was selected as a John R. Wooden Award 2008 – 09 Midseason Top 30 Candidate . After starting February play by snapping the two @-@ game losing streak against Penn State on February 5 , Michigan lost consecutive games to top ten opponents : Connecticut Huskies ( # 1 ) and Michigan State Spartans ( # 9 ) . Harris posted a 28 points as Michigan rallied from a two @-@ point halftime deficit to win by 20 against Penn State . Although Michigan confused Connecticut with a 2 – 3 zone defense instead of its normal 1 – 3 – 1 zone , which forced 10 first @-@ half turnovers , Connecticut was victorious . The 11th double double of the season by Hasheem Thabeet helped Connecticut overcome only its second halftime deficit . Michigan stayed in the game in part due to six three @-@ pointers by Stu Douglass . The loss against Michigan State marked 7 losses in 9 games for Michigan and gave Michigan State a 7 – 0 road record . On February 15 , Michigan raised its record to 3 – 0 in overtime games in a victory over the Northwestern Wildcats on the road . Michigan took a 56 – 51 lead with 1 minute and 44 seconds left , but let it slip away . Michigan never trailed in the overtime . Then four days later , they posted their first consecutive win since a three @-@ game streak from January 4 — 11 with a victory over the Minnesota Golden Gophers . In the game , Novak posted a career @-@ best 6 three @-@ pointers . 
 Michigan suffered an 80 – 70 overtime loss at the hands of ten @-@ place Big Ten foe , Iowa , on February 22 . Michigan had led 56 – 52 with 1 minute and 13 seconds remaining in regulation before allowing four straight free throws by Matt Gatens . The game was notable because Harris did not play during the overtime . At the time of the benching , Harris was in a battle with fellow sophomores Talor Battle and Evan Turner for the Big Ten Scoring leadership . Beilein commented on the benching : " That 's what we had to do to make our team better now and in the future . " . In the subsequent game against # 16 @-@ ranked Purdue , Michigan won 87 – 78 , raising its record to 3 – 4 against ranked opponents on the season . Harris was one of Michigan 's leaders with 27 points and 8 rebounds , while Sims had a career @-@ high 29 points . On March 1 , Michigan lost to Wisconsin 60 – 55 . After taking a 34 – 32 halftime lead , Michigan opened the second half shooting 1 for 12 . Michigan closed the contest to a 52 – 50 game with 3 minutes and 55 seconds remaining . They stayed close as Wisconsin missed four of eight late free throws . Prior to the final game of the season , the Wolverines adopted the slogan " <unk> los <unk> , " which means " burn the ships " and which had been used by 16th @-@ century Spanish conquistador Hernando Cortez as a command to his troops to remind them that there was no turning back in their battle with the Aztec . The team traded in their traditional warmup jersey 's for shirts with their adopted slogan . On March 7 , they recovered from a 51 – 39 deficit to win their conference finale against Minnesota . Laval Lucas @-@ Perry scored a career @-@ high 19 points , including three straight three @-@ pointers after Minnesota opened up the 12 @-@ point lead . Of the three teams that were ranked at the end of February and that Michigan had played twice ( Duke , Illinois and Purdue ) , Michigan split the two games against each opponent , winning against each at home . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 Michigan concluded its regular season with a 19 – 12 ( 9 – 9 Big Ten ) record . This earned the team a tie for seventh place in the conference standings with Minnesota . Since Michigan swept the season series with a February 19 74 – 62 win at home and a March 7 67 – 64 win at Minnesota , Michigan was seeded seventh in the 2009 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament held at the Conseco Fieldhouse in Indianapolis , Indiana while Minnesota was seeded eighth . During Championship Week , the Wolverines defeated the number ten seeded Iowa Hawkeyes on March 12 by a 73 – 45 margin . Sims helped Michigan open a 22 – 9 lead by scoring 16 of his 27 points in the first 10 minutes . Then the team lost to the number two seeded Illinois Fighting Illini on March 13 . Sims scored 15 and Harris was held to 9 . 
 Michigan continued to wear warmup shirts with the team slogan at the 2009 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . In the tournament , where Michigan earned the number 10 seed , the team defeated the Clemson Tigers 62 – 59 on March 19 in Kansas City . At one point , Michigan held a 16 @-@ point lead . After Harris gave Michigan a 58 – 43 lead with 5 : 51 remaining , Clemson had a 14 – 0 run to cut the deficit to 58 – 57 with 49 seconds left . Harris completed a three @-@ point play on a driving layup with 37 @.@ 4 second left . During the game , Clemson 's top shooter Terrence Oglesby was ejected for a flagrant foul . The Wolverines lost in the second round game played on March 21 , 2009 to the 2 @-@ seeded Oklahoma in a 73 – 63 . During the game four of Michigan 's five starters who were trying to defend against Blake Griffin spent much of the game in foul trouble with Harris and Lee fouling out and Novak and Sims finishing with four fouls . Although Michigan tried a variety of defenders and various approaches such as doubling him , sagging in the lane , bumping him , Griffin still posted 33 points and 17 rebounds . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 No Wolverines were drafted into the 2009 NBA Draft after the season . Before , during and after the season , individual players earned the following awards and honors : 
 Manny Harris 
 Preseason first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten 
 11 / 17 / 09 Big Ten Player of the Week 
 John R. Wooden Award 2008 – 09 Midseason Top 30 Candidate 
 National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District team 
 U.S. Basketball Writers Association 2008 – 09 Men 's District V All @-@ District Team 
 Postseason first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten 
 Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference 
 DeShawn Sims 
 12 / 22 / 08 Big Ten Player of the Week 
 Postseason All @-@ Big Ten second @-@ team ( media ) , third @-@ team ( coaches ) 
 C. J. Lee 
 Big Ten Sportsmanship Award ( Michigan ) 
 Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference 
 David Merritt 
 Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference 
 Laval Lucas @-@ Perry 
 Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference 
 = = = Statistical leadership = = = 
 Harris led the Big Ten in free throw percentage according to some sources who recognize a 2 @.@ 5 free throws made per game minimum , but was considered second according to the conference website that uses a 2 FTM / game minimum . The NCAA recognizes a 2 @.@ 5 attempts per game minimum . Thus , according to the Big Ten Gatens is the Conference Free Throw Champion and according to the NCAA Harris is the champion . Harris and Sims were both ranked among the leaders in the Conference in several statistics and divided the team leadership in most statistics . Harris led the Wolverines in points , minutes , assists , free throws made , free throw percentage and steals , while Sims led the team in field goal percentage , rebounds and blocked shots . Although Harris led the team in scoring for the season , Sims led the team in scoring in all its victories against ranked teams during the regular season and during the last five games before the NCAA tournament , while the team was on the bubble . However , Harris and Turner became the 4th and 5th players in conference history to finish in the top ten in the conference in average points , rebounds , and assists for a season since assists became a statistic in 1983 – 84 , following Steve Smith , Jim Jackson , and Brian Evans . After , Harris was named team MVP , he requested that Sims be recognized as co @-@ MVP . Sims was recognized as co @-@ MVP . 
 The team posted the following statistics : 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Bold text indicates game high ; ( nth time player led stat ) 
 = Pinewood Derby ( South Park ) = 
 " Pinewood Derby " is the sixth episode of the thirteenth season of the American animated television series South Park . The 187th overall episode of the series , it originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on April 15 , 2009 and in the United Kingdom on April 17 , 2009 . In the episode , Randy helps Stan cheat in a pinewood derby race , which inadvertently leads to the discovery of alien life . When an alien gangster visits South Park and the residents come into possession of his stolen " space cash " , they decide to keep it for themselves and hide it from alien police officers who are looking for it . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States for strong to extreme language . " Pinewood Derby " was seen by 2 @.@ 78 million households in its original broadcast , according to Nielsen ratings , making it the second most @-@ watched episode on Comedy Central the week it aired . The episode received mixed reviews upon its initial broadcast . 
 " Pinewood Derby " has been noted for spoofing a number of world leaders , such as Gordon Brown , Silvio Berlusconi , Vladimir Putin , Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , Raila Odinga , Taro Aso , Han Seung @-@ soo , Nicolas Sarkozy , Matti Vanhanen , Angela Merkel , Wen Jiabao and John Howard . The episode was originally scheduled to air on MTV Latin America in February 2010 but was pulled at the last minute , allegedly due to its perceived negative portrayal of Mexican President Felipe Calderón . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Randy Marsh , determined to make sure his son Stan win the annual statewide pinewood derby , slips an object into the back of the car to give it an advantage . Stan learns from a news report that the object is a superconducting magnet , stolen from the Large Hadron Collider by Randy disguised as Princess Leia . During the finals , Randy coaxes Stan to lie to the judges and say he used only the parts in the approved pinewood derby kit . Stan wins first place when his car reaches warp speed , shooting off the track and into space , where it is later found by an alien species . Soon after , a spaceship lands in South Park , but its pilot is a bank robber named " <unk> McGee @-@ zax " who demands that Stan and Randy build him a new warp drive while holding the entire planet at gunpoint . Everyone believes Stan and his father can create the drive using only the approved pinewood derby kit . 
 Stan tries to persuade Randy to tell the truth about the stolen magnet , but Randy refuses in order to avoid embarrassment . As the pair works on the warp drive , an Intergalactic Police ship approaches Earth ; McGee @-@ zax cloaks his ship and drags Stan out of sight as a hostage , leaving the townspeople to divert the officers ' questions . The officers say that McGee @-@ zax stole a large sum of space cash , but no one admits to seeing him , and the officers leave . Randy then provides a diversion for McGee @-@ zax while Stan , at Randy 's insistence , stabs him to death with a shank . McGee @-@ zax 's ship is found to contain the stolen space cash , but instead of returning it , Randy persuades everyone to divide it among themselves . Randy , in contact with all world leaders , buys other countries ' silence by giving them a share . Four days later , the officers return to South Park . They now know that McGee @-@ zax landed here and Randy tells them of his death , but everyone denies finding any space cash . 
 Randy tries to keep other countries from spending the space cash since that might alert the Intergalactic Police ; however , this fails when Mexico spends its money on 32 hospitals and 7 water parks , and China spends it on 48 soccer stadiums . Learning that Finland is about to divulge to the cops , Randy persuades the rest of the world to wipe Finland out in a nuclear missile attack . The Intergalactic Police pay a third visit to ask about the strike , but the South Park residents fake disbelief . By this time , Stan has had enough of the deception , so he tells the truth about cheating in the pinewood derby and returns his trophy ; however , no one else on the planet comes clean about the space cash . McGee @-@ zax emerges from the officers ' ship , having only faked his death . He reveals that he is really <unk> <unk> , ambassador to new world testing , and that the entire chain of events was a test to see if Earth was worthy of joining the intergalactic community . As punishment for failing , the Earth and the moon are isolated from the rest of the Universe ( although it appears to have disappeared later on ) . The episode ends with Randy saying " Well , that sucks " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pinewood Derby " was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . The episode first aired on April 15 , 2009 , in the United States , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . The theme of the episode was a warning about the dangers of greed , lying and cheating . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The NSA agents who contact the Marsh family are Agents Clark and Mars , an obvious reference to the Clark Bar and Mars Bar candy bars . 
 Among the world leaders who communicate with Randy in the episode are French president Nicolas Sarkozy , Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel , Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , Prime Minister of Italy Silvio Berlusconi , Chinese president Hu Jintao , Japanese prime minister Taro Aso , Mexican president Felipe Calderón , and Finnish prime minister Matti Vanhanen . The episode received some degree of criticism overseas for depicting the wrong leaders for its countries . The episode featured John Howard as Prime Minister of Australia , even though he had been replaced by Kevin Rudd almost eighteen months earlier ; according to the Macquarie National News , the episode " has copped some flack on video sharing websites " over the error . The episode also features Vladimir Putin as President of Russia , even though he stepped down in May 2008 . The episode also featured Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Gordon Brown . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Pinewood Derby " was watched by 2 @.@ 78 million overall households , according to the Nielsen ratings , making it the second most @-@ watched Comedy Central production of the week , behind the Ron White stand @-@ up special " Behavioral Problems " , which was seen by 3 @.@ 36 million households . 
 The episode received mixed reviews . Josh Modell of The A.V. Club said the episode was " boring " and " unfunny " , and was particularly disappointing following the episode " Fishsticks " the previous week . Modell said , " South Park episodes don 't get much <unk> or uninspired than this one . It was like half an idea stretched out forever and ever , and with very little payoff . " Carlos Delgado of If Magazine said the episode plot was too silly and lacked laughs : " All in all , I was left feeling a little cheated . " Pinewood Derby " wasn ’ t funny , it was just weird . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly said the episode was told with " the warp @-@ speed storytelling style that is making this season one of South Park 's best " . Travis Fickett of IGN said he was happy to see an episode centered on Randy Marsh , who he said is an excellent character ; Fickett said of " Pinewood Derby " , " This isn 't a great episode but its fast @-@ paced lunacy in the South Park tradition and most of the genre tropes it riffs on are dead on . " 
 = = Mexican flag controversy = = 
 " Pinewood Derby " drew considerable media attention in Mexico when it originally aired due to its depiction of Mexican president Felipe Calderón . The episode was scheduled to air in Spanish on MTV Latin America on February 8 , 2010 , and was advertised extensively for one week prior to the broadcast date . However , a few hours before the scheduled time , the network decided not to air the episode and replaced it with the episode " The Ring " , allegedly due to its depiction of Calderón irritating the international community and frivolously spending the space cash on water parks . This depiction was said to differ from the image Mexico 's Ministry of the Interior sought to present of Calderón , whom they dubbed the " Employment president " . MTV said the South Park creators did not get a special permit needed to broadcast an image of Mexico 's flag , and MTV executives said they did not want to risk angering fans by altering the image . The explanation was met with skepticism by Mexican South Park fans , some of whom accused MTV of unfair censorship . MTV later announced it would broadcast the episode on April 4 after the network was granted permission from the Minister of the Interior to air it . When asked to comment on the episode getting pulled , Stone said , " That 's so far away from us . We read that on the news , too , along with everyone else . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Pinewood Derby " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's thirteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on March 16 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , a collection of deleted scenes , and a special mini @-@ feature Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , which discussed the process behind animating the show with Inside Xbox host Major Nelson . 
 = The Telltale Head = 
 " The Telltale Head " is the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 25 , 1990 . It was written by Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Sam Simon and Matt Groening , and directed by Rich Moore . In the episode , Bart cuts the head off the statue of Jebediah Springfield in the center of town to impress Jimbo , Kearney and Dolph , three older kids he admires . The town 's residents , including the three boys , are horrified and Bart regrets his actions . After telling his family , Homer and Bart head to the center of town , where they are met by an angry mob . After Bart tells the mob he has made a mistake , the townspeople forgive Bart and he places the head back on the statue . The episode 's title is a reference to the short story " The Tell @-@ Tale Heart " by Edgar Allan Poe . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in medias res : Homer and Bart are chased through the streets of Springfield by an angry mob while carrying the head of the statue of their town founder , Jebediah Springfield . Surrounded by the mob , Bart begins to relate the events of the previous day . 
 Bart suffers through a boring morning at church and is forbidden by Marge to see the violent new Space Mutants movie . After church , he runs into a local gang Jimbo , Dolph , and Kearney . The three invite Bart to sneak into the Space Mutants movie with them . 
 After being thrown out of the movie by the manager , the gang <unk> from the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , throw rocks at the Jebediah Springfield statue , and watch clouds . Bart remarks that one cloud resembles Jebediah Springfield , but without a head . His new friends remark that they wish someone would decapitate the statue , saying it would be funny to see the town so upset . When Bart disagrees , the bullies make fun of him which upsets Bart. Bart is conflicted and asks Homer whether it is okay to compromise your beliefs to be popular . Homer tells Bart that popularity is the most important thing in the world , as long as Bart is not talking about killing someone . That night , Bart sneaks out of the house and decapitates the statue . 
 The town is shaken by the crime , which causes Bart to feel guilty about his actions . Adding to his guilt is when Jimbo , Dolph , and Kearney are upset as well , telling Bart that if they met the person responsible , they would attack him critically , as they did not actually mean what they said about the statue before . Bart begins to fear of the consequences he would face if his actions are to be revealed , and his conscience manifests itself as the statue 's severed head , which begins speaking to him . Unable to go on , Bart finally confesses his crime to his family , explaining that he thought that being popular was the most important thing in the world that Homer told him . It was then Homer realized that he inspired Bart of his popularity advice that caused him to commit the crime in the first place , and feels extremely guilty of doing so . It was then Bart decided to return the head back where it belongs , and Homer follows along , holding himself responsible for the events . They are found by the angry mob , returning the story to the beginning . Bart tells the mob that his act has actually brought the town closer together , to which the mob agrees . The head is returned to the statue and everyone forgives Homer and Bart for their actions . Homer and Bart then leave peacefully , with the former reminding the latter that " not all lynch mobs are this nice . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea to have the episode in flashbacks was originally thought up in the color screening stage of production . This is the first episode directed by Rich Moore . This is the first time Jebediah Springfield is mentioned , as well as the first time the Simpsons go to church . The announcer of the football game Homer is listening to at church is based on Keith Jackson . 
 This is the first episode of the series in which Sideshow Bob , Reverend Timothy Lovejoy , Krusty the Clown , Jimbo Jones , Kearney <unk> , Dolph <unk> , Ms. Albright , and Apu Nahasapeemapetilon appear . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Bart awakening and finding the head of Jebediah Springfield in bed next to him is a reference to the scene in The Godfather where Jack Woltz finds the head of his prize racehorse next to him one morning . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Telltale Head " finished twenty @-@ sixth in ratings for the week of February 19 – 25 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 14 @.@ 0 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood said they enjoyed : " the Simpsons [ being ] grossly dysfunctional in church , Homer dispensing terrible advice , and a real moral dilemma for Bart. " In a DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 3 / 5 and added , " This is a strange episode , touching on many bizarre aspects of the show to come . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said , " Good little moments abounded , and this was a generally solid episode . I liked the objects the boys saw in the clouds , and quite a few other funny bits appeared . “ Telltale ” wasn ’ t a great episode , but it was generally entertaining and clever . " 
 = History of Hertfordshire = 
 Hertfordshire is an English county , founded in the Norse – Saxon wars of the 9th century , and developed through commerce serving London . It is a land @-@ locked county that was several times the seat of Parliament . From origins in brewing and papermaking , through aircraft manufacture , the county has developed a wider range of industry in which pharmaceuticals , financial services and film @-@ making are prominent . Today , with a population slightly over 1 million , Hertfordshire services , industry and commerce dominate the economy , with fewer than 2000 people working in agriculture , forestry and fishing . 
 Hertfordshire is one of the historic counties of England first recorded in the early 10th century . Its development has been tied with that of London , which lies on its southern border . London is the largest city in Western Europe ; it requires an enormous tonnage of supplies each day and Hertfordshire grew wealthy on the proceeds of trade because no less than three of the old Roman roads serving the capital run through it , as do the Grand Union Canal and other watercourses . In the 19th century , rail links sprang up in the county , linking London to the north . Hatfield in Hertfordshire has seen two rail crashes of international importance ( in 1870 and 2000 ) . 
 Though nowadays Hertfordshire tends to be politically conservative , historically it was the site of a number of uprisings against the Crown , particularly in the First Barons ' War , the Peasants ' Revolt , the Wars of the Roses and the English Civil War . The county has a rich intellectual history , and many writers of major importance , from Geoffrey Chaucer to Beatrix Potter , have connections there . Quite a number of Prime Ministers were born or grew up in Hertfordshire . 
 The county contains a curiously large number of abandoned settlements , which K. Rutherford Davis attributes to a mixture of poor harvests on soil hard to farm , and the Black Death which ravaged Hertfordshire starting in 1349 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The earliest evidence of human occupation in Hertfordshire come from a gravel pit in Rickmansworth . The finds ( of flint tools ) date back 350 @,@ 000 years , long before Britain became an island . 
 People have probably lived in the land now called Hertfordshire for about 12 @,@ 000 years , since the Mesolithic period in Ware ( making Ware one of the oldest continuously occupied sites in Europe ) . Settlement continued through the Neolithic period , with evidence of occupation sites , enclosures , long barrows and even an unusual dog cemetery in the region . Although occupied , the area had a relatively low population in the Neolithic and early Bronze Age , perhaps because of its heavy , relatively poorly drained soil . Nevertheless , just south of present @-@ day Ware and Hertford there is some evidence of an increase in the population , with typical round huts and farming activity having been found at a site called <unk> Farm . There is no evidence of settlement at Hertford itself from this period , although Ware and perhaps Hertford seem to have been occupied during Roman times . 
 In the Iron age , a Celtic tribe called the Catuvellauni occupied Hertfordshire . Their main settlement ( or oppidum ) was <unk> on the River Ver ( near present @-@ day St Albans ) . Other oppida in Hertfordshire include sites at Cow Roast near Tring , Wheathampstead , Welwyn , <unk> , and Baldock . Hertfordshire contains several Iron Age hill forts , including the largest example in Eastern England at <unk> Castle in <unk> . 
 There is a wealth of Iron Age burial sites in Hertfordshire , making it a place of international importance in Iron Age study . The large number of sites of all types indicates dense and complex settlement patterns immediately prior to the Roman invasion . 
 = = = The Roman Invasion of Britain = = = 
 In 55 BCE when the Romans first attempted to invade Britain , the Catuvellauni ( which is Brythonic for " Expert Warrior " ) were the largest British tribe . Caesar 's report to the Senate said that " <unk> " ( Cassivellaunus ) was leader of the Britons , and Cassivellaunus ' headquarters were near Wheathampstead in Hertfordshire . On Caesar 's second invasion attempt in 54 BCE , Cassivellaunus led the British defensive forces . The Romans besieged him at Wheathampstead , and partly because of the defection of the <unk> ( whose King Cassivellaunus had had murdered ) , the Catuvellauni were forced to surrender . However , after the siege of Wheathampstead , Caesar returned to Rome without leaving a garrison . 
 <unk> became king of the Catuvellauni in 9 or 10 CE and ruled for about thirty years , conquering such a large area of Britain that the Roman writer Suetonius called him <unk> Rex ( ( Latin ) " King of Britain " ) . He built Beech Bottom Dyke , a defensive earthwork , at St Albans , which may be related to another Iron Age defensive earthwork , the Devil 's Dyke , at Cassivellaunus ' headquarters in nearby Wheathampstead . The Romans defeated the Catuvellauni again in July 43 CE and this time , garrisoned Britain . When the Romans took over , their settlement , laid out in 49 CE , became known as Verulamium . Alban , a Roman army officer who became Britain 's first Christian martyr after his arrest at Chantry Island , died in the 3rd or 4th century and gave his name to the modern town of St Albans . Verulamium became one of Roman Britain 's major cities , the third @-@ largest and the only to be granted self @-@ governing status . Strong though Verulamium 's defences may have been , they were not enough to stop Boudica , who burned the city in 61 CE . Verulamium was rebuilt , with defences enclosing a site of some 81 hectares ( 200 acres ) and was occupied into the 5th century . 
 A number of Roman Roads run through Hertfordshire including Watling Street and Ermine Street . The ancient trackway , the Icknield Way also runs through Hertfordshire . These are three of the " four highways " of medieval England ( the other being the Fosse Way , which does not run through Hertfordshire ) which were still the main routes through the country more than a thousand years later . The first Roman Road to be built was the Military Way , constructed very early in the Roman conquest to speed the troops ' access north . Later , Ermine Street would be built directly on top of it . 
 = = = Hertfordshire in the Early Middle Ages = = = 
 After the Anglo @-@ Saxon invasion of Britain , the Hertfordshire area formed parts of the Kingdom of Mercia and the Kingdom of Essex . The main early Saxon tribes there seem to have been the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Place names tend to derive from Celtic rather than Saxon , and there is a " singular lack of Early Saxon place names . " The Synod of Hertford , which was the first national Synod of the English Church , took place on 26 September 672 @-@ 3 . It was at this Synod that the " question of Easter " was settled , and the church agreed how to calculate the date of Easter . The Synod also marked the end of the conflict between the Celtic Church and the Romanised church introduced by Saint Augustine . 
 King Offa of Mercia ( died 796 ) built a church at Hitchin in Hertfordshire , but it burned down in 910 CE and the monks moved to St Albans . Offa defeated Beornred of Mercia at <unk> , near Hitchin and gave his name to the village of Offley ( " Offa 's Lea " ) . Some sources ( including Matthew Paris , who was a monk at St Albans ) suggest he died at Offley , though he was buried fifteen miles away in Bedford . One of Offa 's last acts was to found St Albans Abbey . 
 = = = Origins of the county = = = 
 The word Hertfordshire ( Saxon " <unk> " or " <unk> " ) is attested from 866 . The first reference ( as " <unk> " ) in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle is for 1011 , but the county 's true origins lie in the 10th century , when Edward the Elder established two burhs in Hertford in 912 and 913 respectively . 
 Hertfordshire clearly did not exist in any practical sense in the late 9th century . At that time , in the war between Saxon and Norseman , Hertfordshire was on the front line . When , after the Saxon victory in the Battle of Ethandun in 878 , the Saxon King Alfred the Great and Norse King Guthrum the Old agreed to partition England between them , the dividing line between their territories split what was to become Hertfordshire almost through the middle , along the line of the River Lea and then along Watling Street . Their agreement survives in the Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum which establishes the Danelaw 's extent . It seems the land now comprising Hertfordshire was then partly in the Kingdom of Essex ( nominally under Norse control , though still populated by Saxons ) and partly in the Kingdom of Mercia ( which remained Saxon ) . 
 Alfred was also responsible for building weirs on the River Lea at Hertford ( Saxon " <unk> " , ford used by deer ) and Ware ( Saxon " <unk> " , weir ) , presumably to prevent Viking ships coming upriver . King Edgar the Peaceful is credited with making Hertford the capital of the surrounding shire , presumably between 973 and 975 CE . 
 = = Early Middle Ages = = 
 Alfred died in 899 , and his son Edward the Elder worked with Alfred 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Æthelred , and daughter , Æthelflæd , to re @-@ take parts of southern England from the Norse . During these campaigns he built the two burhs of Hertford as already noted . Their sites have not been found , and probably lie beneath the streets of Hertford itself . From Hertford , together with Stafford , Tamworth and Witham , Edward and Æthelflæd pushed the Danes back to Northumbria in a series of battles . Anglo @-@ Saxon Hertford is an example of town planning as demonstrated by its organised rectangular grid street pattern . 
 There is considerable evidence of a mint in Hertford at this period . Edward the Martyr ( from 975 to 978 ) , Æthelred the Unready ( from 978 to 1016 ) and Knut the Great ( from 1016 to 1035 ) all had coins struck there . The mint itself has not been found , but many coins exist . Over 90 % of these coins were found on the Continent or in Scandinavia , which may suggest they were used for payment of Danegeld . 
 The St Brice 's Day massacre of 1002 probably started at Welwyn in Hertfordshire . The massacre was to be a slaughter of the Norse in England , including women and children . One of those executed was <unk> , the sister of King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark . He invaded England next year in retaliation . Forkbeard 's assault on England lasted ten years , until 1013 , when Æthelred fled to the continent . Forkbeard was crowned King of England on Christmas Day , but only reigned for five weeks before dying . Æthelred returned briefly and unsuccessfully until 1016 , at which time he was succeeded by Forkbeard 's son Knut , who granted the Royal Manor of Hitchin to his second in command , Earl <unk> . 
 = = High Middle Ages = = 
 After the Norman Invasion , Edgar the Ætheling ( the successor to Harold Godwinson ) surrendered to William the Conqueror at Berkhamsted . William created the manor of Berkhamsted , and bestowed it on Robert , Count of Mortain , who was his half @-@ brother . From Robert 's son William de Mortain it passed to King Henry I , and is still owned by the Royal Family . Henry held court there in 1123 . 
 The Domesday Book , completed in 1086 , lists 168 settlements in Hertfordshire . Hertfordshire 's population grew quickly from then until the Black Death reached the county in 1349 . The Norman church at St Albans Abbey was finished in 1088 . 
 Hertfordshire had a conflicted relationship with the King during the High Middle Ages . Like most counties in the south @-@ east , most of Hertfordshire was in private ( i.e. non @-@ royal ) ownership during the High Middle Ages . Royal land comprised about 7 % of the county 's area . The first Earl of Hertford , Gilbert de Clare , was so titled in 1138 . He bore one of the first two sets of heraldic arms in England : three gold chevrons on a red shield . His grandson Richard de Clare once offered King John £ 100 in respect of legal proceedings concerning his inheritance , but then during the First Barons War he sided with the Barons against the King . Richard became one of the twenty @-@ five Barons sworn to enforce the Magna Carta , for which he was excommunicated in 1215 . 
 Thomas Becket , who became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1161 , held the honour of Berkhamsted Castle from 1155 until 1163 . King Henry III celebrated Christmas there in 1163 . 
 Around this time , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were built in Great <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Watford was founded in the 12th century , probably as a result of a market and church set up there by the Abbot of St Albans . In 1130 , the earliest Pipe Roll shows that King Henry I 's Queen Consort Adeliza owned property in the county . 
 The first draft of the Magna Carta was written at St Albans Abbey in 1213 . It contained significant provisions still in force to this day , including the principle of habeas corpus ( which was first invoked in court in 1305 ) . Two years later , King John was in St Albans when he learned of the Archbishop of Canterbury 's suspension . Though John agreed to the Magna Carta , he did not adhere to it , and Hertfordshire was the main battlefield in the civil war that followed . On 16 December 1216 , during the First Barons ' War , Hertford Castle surrendered after a siege from Dauphin Louis ( later Louis VIII of France ) , whom the English barons had invited to England to replace John as King . Berkhamsted Castle surrendered around the same time . 
 In winter 1217 , royalist forces plundered St Albans , took captives and extorted £ 100 from the Abbot , who feared the Abbey would be burned . 
 In 1261 King Henry III held parliament in the county . In 1295 , another parliament was held in St Albans , and in 1299 , King Edward I gave Hertford Castle to his wife Margaret of France on her wedding day . 
 = = = Industry and commerce = = = 
 Hertfordshire is largely on a clay sub @-@ soil , and much of its land , though rich , is " heavy " and not well @-@ suited to crop cultivation with a medieval plough . However , the county did grow good barley which later became important for the brewing trade . Hertfordshire developed more through commerce than through the agriculture which drove most of England 's economy during this period . 
 In the High Middle Ages , the county was relatively urbanised by medieval standards , but because towns follow roads and Hertfordshire had many small roads rather than a few large ones , there was no large conurbation . 
 Commerce grew in Hertfordshire from the start of the 12th century ; the number of markets and fairs rose steadily from about 1100 until the Black Death . During the 13th century , Hertfordshire 's commerce grew still further . The county traded in butter and cheese , and to a lesser extent meat , hides and leather . Much of this produce was bound for London . The county also developed its inns and other services for travellers to and from London . 
 The Knights Templar built Baldock , starting around 1140 . In 1185 , a survey of the Knights ' holdings showed Baldock had 122 tenants on 150 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 km2 ) of land and several skilled craftsmen . King John granted the Knights a fair and market at Baldock in 1199 , to be held annually . It began on St Matthew 's Day and lasted five days in all . At around the same time , the leatherworking trade was prominent in Hitchin . 
 = = = An English pope = = = 
 Nicholas Breakspear , the only Englishman ever to have been elected Pope , was born on a farm in <unk> or Abbots Langley in Hertfordshire , probably around 1100 . He was baptised in Abbots Langley . Nicholas was refused permission to become a monk at St Albans , but his career does not seem to have suffered for this , and he was unanimously elected Pope on 2 December 1154 , taking the papal name Adrian IV . He died in 1159 . He was the Pope who placed Rome under an interdict , and is famous for his alleged Donation of Ireland to the English throne . 
 = = Late Middle Ages = = 
 In 1302 , King Edward I granted Kings Langley to the Prince of Wales . King Edward II 's " favourite " , Piers Gaveston , loved the palace at Kings Langley and he was buried there after his death in 1312 . Edmund of Langley , the first Duke of York and founder of the House of York , was born in Kings Langley on 5 June 1341 and died there on 1 August 1402 . 
 Richard of Wallingford , the mathematician and astronomer , became Abbott of St Albans in 1326 . He is regarded as the father of modern trigonometry . 
 Hertford Castle was used as a gaol for a series of important captives during the Hundred Years ' War . This was actually a series of separate wars that lasted a total of 116 years , between 1337 and 1453 . The Plantagenet Kings of England fought the Valois Kings of France , almost entirely on French soil . Queen Isabella was imprisoned by her son , the King , in Hertford Castle in 1330 , as were King David II of Scotland and his queen in 1346 , after the Battle of Neville 's Cross . King John II of France was imprisoned there in 1359 in considerable luxury . 
 The Black Death midway through the 14th century massively reduced Hertfordshire 's population . The number of residents probably fell by 30 % – 50 % , and likely took until the 16th century to recover . This meant many of the settlements in Hertfordshire were abandoned , particularly in the north and east of the county where farm yields were poor . Near Tring , a cluster of deserted medieval villages can still be seen . However , the residents who survived grew richer . The reduced population meant workers could demand higher wages and better conditions , despite laws such as the Ordinance of Labourers of 1349 and the Statute of Labourers of 1351 . These changed economic conditions contributed to the Peasants ' Revolt in 1381 , in which Hertfordshire 's people were deeply involved . ( Perhaps confusingly , another man called Richard of Wallingford was one of revolt leader Wat Tyler 's principal allies . This is not the same man as the Abbott of St Albans . ) 
 After Wat Tyler had been caught and executed , King Richard II went to St Albans to quell the rebels . Richard 's body was buried at Kings Langley church in Hertfordshire in 1400 , but he was moved to Westminster Abbey in 1413 , next to his wife Anne . That same year , King Henry IV appointed his knight Hugh de Waterton to Berkhamsted Castle to supervise his children John and Philippa . 
 King Henry IV moved his government temporarily to St Albans early in his reign for fear of public opinion in London . He gave the castle and honour of Hertford to Edmund , Earl of Stafford , and his wife Anne . Edmund was killed at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403 . King Henry IV married Catherine of France on 2 June 1420 , and gave Hertford Castle to her . 
 In 1413 , King Henry V kept Easter at Kings Langley . He gave the <unk> of a <unk> to the poor . Henry Chichele , the Archbishop of Canterbury , visited Barnet in 1423 . No bells rang , and the archbishop took offence at his poor welcome . When he returned in 1426 , the church doors were sealed against him . 
 Three important battles of the Wars of the Roses took place in Hertfordshire . At the First Battle of St Albans on 22 May 1455 , which was the first major battle of the Wars of the Roses , Richard of York and Neville the Kingmaker defeated the Lancastrians , killed their leader , Edmund Beaufort and captured King Henry VI . The Lancastrians recaptured the King at the Second Battle of St Albans on 12 February 1461 . While he was a prisoner of the Yorkists , in 1459 , Henry VI kept Easter at St Albans Abbey . He gave his best gown to the prior , but the gift seems to have been regretted and the treasurer later bought it back for fifty marks . 
 The Battle of Barnet took place on 14 April 1471 . Neville the Kingmaker advanced on London . He camped on Hadley Green , and King Edward IV 's army met him there . After confusion in the early morning mist , in which the Yorkists seem to have ended up fighting each other , the Lancastrians won the battle . The Kingmaker was captured and executed , and Edward 's authority was never again seriously challenged . 
 England 's oldest surviving pub is in Hertfordshire and dates to this period . Ye Olde Fighting Cocks , which is in St Albans , was rebuilt in 1485 . Some of the foundation stones are even older , allegedly going back to the 8th century . 
 First English paper and printing industry 
 One of the first three printing presses in England was in St Albans . England 's first paper mill , which was the property of John Tate , stood in Hertford opposite today 's County Hospital from 1494 ; visited by Henry VII twice and producing a star and circle watermark on some versions of the Papal Bull recognising his right to reign over England . 
 = = Renaissance = = 
 The long Elizabethan peace , and turmoil in Europe , conspired to raise English commercial power during the Renaissance . European refugees also contributed to English wealth . London was the centre of this new power , and Hertfordshire 's commerce benefited accordingly . 
 In November 1524 , Catherine of Aragon held court at Hertford Castle . On 3 May 1547 , King Edward VI granted his sister Mary the manor and castle of Hertford , tolls from the bridge at Ware , and the manor of <unk> . 
 Under Mary , who as Queen earned the sobriquet " Bloody Mary " , three " heretics " ( that is , <unk> who refused to become catholic ) were burnt at the stake in Hertfordshire . William Hale , Thomas <unk> , and George Tankerville , were executed at Barnet , Ware , and St Albans respectively . In 1554 , Queen Mary granted the town of Hertford its first charter for a fee of thirteen shillings and fourpence , due annually at Michaelmas . 
 Queen Elizabeth I lived at Hatfield House near Hatfield as a girl . When plague ravaged London , she held parliaments at Hertford Castle in 1564 and 1581 . The law courts moved to St Albans for the same reason . During her reign , Hertfordshire was specifically commended for its soldiers ' efficiency . In the mobilisation of 1588 for the Anglo @-@ Spanish War , the county sent twenty @-@ five lances and sixty light horse to Brentwood , a thousand infantry to Tilbury , a thousand to Stratford @-@ at @-@ Bow , and five hundred to guard Her Majesty 's person . The Arms of Hertfordshire were granted next year . In 1602 founder of Hartford ( Connecticut ) , Samuel Stone was born in Fore Street , Hertford . 
 King James I was often in Hertfordshire and had several works carried out in the county . He built Theobalds Park , enclosing a large tract of southern Hertfordshire in a wall . Parts of the wall still exist . He also had a hand in creating the New River , which was the brainchild of Welsh entrepreneur , Hugh Myddelton : an artificial watercourse that predated the building of England 's canal network by over a century . 
 James I , who was a confirmed dog @-@ lover , also built a huge kennel ( about 46 feet ( 14 m ) long ) and dog @-@ yard ( over half an acre in size ) at Royston . He seems to have loved Royston and spent considerable time there , hunting and feasting and enjoying himself — so much so that his favourite dog , <unk> , returned one evening with a note tied to his collar . The note read : " Good Mr <unk> , we pray you to speak to the King ( for he hears you every day and so he doth not us ) that it will please His Majesty to go back to London , for else the country will be undone ; all our provision is spent already and we are not able to entertain him longer . " 
 During the civil war , the county was mainly parliamentarian . St Albans was an especially staunch parliamentary stronghold . In the course of this war , deserters and mutineers among the various encamped armies ravaged the Chilterns , plundered Ashridge , rifled Little <unk> Church and broke open its tombs . In 1645 , a dozen men of Oliver Cromwell 's New Model Army were hanged for outrages against the people of the county . 
 In 1647 , the parliamentary army , still unpaid after their victory in the First English Civil War , camped on <unk> Heath near Royston . They wrote to Parliament demanding their pay . This led to a clash between Cromwell 's army and the Levellers at <unk> Field , near Ware , on 15 November 1647 . Cromwell captured and imprisoned the Levellers ' " agitators " and a number were sentenced to death , though only one was actually executed . 
 After the Great Fire of London , many children were sent to Hertfordshire : 62 were sent to Ware , and 56 to Hertford . A few years later the mayor and people of Hertford petitioned King Charles II to confirm , amend and expand the town 's charters . Enquiries were made as to whether anyone would object , and three prominent men did , but the attorney general dismissed their objections on grounds of malice in 1680 . The town henceforth had its own coroner , who doubled as the town clerk , and both the court @-@ day and market @-@ day were changed so as not to coincide with nearby markets at Ware , Hoddesdon or Hatfield . 
 In 1683 , there was a plot to assassinate Charles II and his brother as he passed through Rye House in Hertfordshire . Unfortunately for the plotters , the Royal party was early , so the opportunity was missed ; when the plot was discovered , it became a pretext for a purge of the Whig leaders . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 In the last two centuries , Hertfordshire 's population has multiplied tenfold . Around the end of the 18th century , its population was around 95 @,@ 000 . In 1821 , it was just under 130 @,@ 000 . In 1881 it was just over 203 @,@ 000 , and by 1921 it was just over 333 @,@ 000 . By the 2001 census , it was 1 @,@ 033 @,@ 977 . During the 18th century brewing became an important industry in Hertfordshire . 
 Smallpox broke out in Hertford gaol in 1729 , and spread into the town . The next year , smallpox hit Hitchin , killing 158 people . The River Lea Navigation Act of 1739 led to the river being improved , becoming navigable as far as Ware . Locks were built in Ware , Broxbourne , and " <unk> " ( presumably <unk> Abbotts rather than Stansted <unk> , which is not on the Lea ) . By 1797 , the Grand Junction Canal ( now called the Grand Union Canal ) was being cut . Its highest point is the Tring Summit in Hertfordshire , which was formed in 1799 . Because a canal barge can hold so much more than a wagon , the waterways expansions increased the quantity of supplies that could reach London ( and the amount of refuse and manure that could be carted away ) . 
 Mobilisation for the Seven Years ' War affected Hertfordshire . In 1756 , £ 350 was paid to the inns and public houses of Ware for the troops staying with them . The next year , Pitt 's army reforms made Hertfordshire liable to provide 560 officers and men . 
 The county also contributed soldiers to the French Revolutionary Wars . On 7 May 1794 , lists opened for the Hertfordshire Yeomanry Cavalry Regiment , which comprised five troops of cavalry . The Loyal Hemel Hempstead Volunteers formed in 1797 . Two further troops of volunteers were raised in 1798 , at Borehamwood and Sawbridgeworth , and the same year , the Hitchin Volunteers were also raised , but their duty was only to defend land within three miles ( 5 km ) of Hitchin . 
 In 1795 , a Dr Walker wrote a report on agriculture and forestry in the county . He said " Herts is justly deemed the first and best corn county in the kingdom " , an assessment that may not be free from local bias . It nevertheless shows how more advanced farming techniques and soil improvement programmes had enabled farmers to work Hertfordshire 's " heavier " soils to better effect since the Saxon – Norse wars . 
 Thanks to a rapidly increasing population and improved record @-@ keeping practices , the volume of paper records for Hertfordshire in the 19th and 20th centuries is huge . Many of these documents are written or printed on paper made locally , at a time when paper @-@ making joined brewing as another dominant industry in the county . 
 In 1809 , John Dickinson purchased Apsley Mills in Hemel Hempstead for his newly patented paper @-@ making machine . In a dispute with the Society of Paper @-@ Makers in 1821 , he dismissed the men involved and trained replacements . By 1825 , Apsley and Nash Mills in Hemel Hempstead were using steam power to produce paper . Dickinson patented his silk <unk> in 1829 , which was used , among other things , for Exchequer Bonds , and had to be made under supervision from two excise men . He built Croxley Mills , near Rickmansworth , in 1830 and Abbots Hill , Nash Mills , in 1836 . 
 In 1840 , the Uniform Penny Post came in . Dickinson made paper for the stamps , and also for the Mulready envelopes . He built a private gas works at Apsley in 1851 . In March 1886 , John Dickinson & Co . Ltd. was incorporated with £ 500 @,@ 000 in capital and 10 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 m2 ) of glass houses . By 1900 , the company had 264 acres ( 1 @.@ 07 km2 ) of glass houses in the Cheshunt area . 
 Rothamsted Research , previously known as the Experimental Station and then the Institute of Arable Crops Research , is one of the oldest agricultural research institutions in the world , at its Harpenden site . It was founded by a fertiliser inventor in 1843 . 
 The 19th century was also a busy period for the military . Ten corps of Volunteer Infantry were formed in 1803 . In 1804 , the clock tower in St Albans signalled news of the Battle of Trafalgar by semaphore . The Duke of Wellington earned the freedom of the borough of St Albans after Napoleon 's defeat in 1814 . The Hertfordshire Regiment became the fourth battalion of the Bedfordshire Regiment in 1891 , and in March 1900 , the 42nd ( Hertfordshire ) Company of the Imperial Yeomanry landed at Cape Town . Cecil Rhodes , who founded De Beers and the state of Rhodesia ( now Zimbabwe ) , was born in South Street , Bishops Stortford , in 1853 . The house is still standing , and has been adapted into a museum . He spent much of his youth in South Africa , but returned to Bishops Stortford in 1873 . 
 The first branch railway line in England was the Aylesbury one , which opened in 1839 . It had a station in Hertfordshire , at Marston Gate . Another rail line grew out from London towards Cambridge , reaching Broxbourne in 1840 , Harlow in 1841 , and Bishops Stortford in 1842 . A branch to Hertford opened in 1843 . The first Hatfield train crash took place on Boxing Day , 1870 . The London Underground rail line reached Rickmansworth in 1887 . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 = = = Pre World War II = = = 
 The two flagship garden cities of Letchworth and Welwyn were central to the development of town planning in England . The first Garden City Company formed in 1903 , with £ 300 @,@ 000 of capital , and by 1914 , Letchworth had a population of around 10 @,@ 000 . Ebenezer Howard bought nearly 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) in 1919 , and the first house in Welwyn Garden City was occupied in 1920 . The town 's official date of founding was 29 April . 
 In the First World War , the Hertfordshire Yeomanry mobilised in September 1914 and were almost immediately deployed to Egypt . The 2nd London Division of the Territorial Force had their headquarters at St Albans , and the North Midland Territorial Division was billeted there as well . The 1 / 1st Hertfordshire Regiment landed at Le Havre in November , and saw action in the Ypres Salient that month . 
 The Hertfordshire Volunteer regiment formed on 15 May 1915 . On 13 October of that year , a Zeppelin raid hit North Road in Hertford , destroying houses there . In 1916 , the Hertfordshire Regiment was transferred to 39th Division and fought at St Julien . Two Victoria Crosses ( " VC " ) were awarded to Hertfordshire men in 1916 : one to Corporal Alfred Alexander Burt and one to Lieutenant William <unk> Robinson , who shot down a Zeppelin over <unk> . Second Lieutenant Wulfstan Tempest shot down another on 2 October of that year , and it came down in Potters Bar . The 1st Battalion of the Hertfordshire Regiment fought near Achiet @-@ le @-@ Grant in 1918 , and then at the Battle of Havrincourt . It also fought in the advance to <unk> . Hertfordshire 's last VC of the First World War was awarded in December 1918 , after the war had finished : a posthumous VC for Lieutenant Frank Young of Hitchin , who was killed on 18 September 1918 , aged 23 . 
 With the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , 1st and 2nd Battalions of the Hertfordshire Regiment were mobilised . Together with the 6th Battalion of the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment , they made up 162nd Infantry Brigade of the East Anglian Division . Second Battalion would later be at Ver @-@ sur @-@ Mer in Normandy in support of the D @-@ Day landings . 
 In May 1940 , a public meeting at County Hall , Hertford ( which was then newly built , having only opened in 1939 ) was held to consider forming the Hertfordshire Local Defence Volunteers . Nineteen companies formed at once . They became the Hertfordshire Home Guard in December of that year . 
 In 1942 the 191st ( Hertfordshire and Essex Yeomanry ) Field Regiment , Royal Artillery formed for an anticipated campaign in Northern Europe . Hertfordshire was central to aircraft manufacture in the Second World War . De Havilland designed their Mosquito in Hatfield and constructed them at Leavesden , together with Halifax bombers . 
 Many RAF pilots were trained at <unk> . From 1940 , No. 2 ( AC ) Squadron was stationed at RAF Sawbridgeworth , with the purpose of mounting tactical reconnaissance sorties over occupied Europe . Initially it operated the Westland Lysander , before re @-@ equipping with the more capable Curtiss Tomahawk and North American Mustang aircraft . About 4000 bombs , 107 V @-@ 1 flying bombs , and 47 V @-@ 2 rockets fell on Hertfordshire during the Second World War . American Flying Fortresses bombers of the 398th Bombardment Group ( Heavy ) mounting 195 combat missions against targets on the Continent from RAF <unk> . The United States Army Air Forces used RAF <unk> as a training station , while the US VIII Fighter Command Headquarters was based RAF Bushey Hall . 
 = = = Post @-@ War = = = 
 After the war , Stevenage was the first town to be redeveloped under the New Towns Act 1946 . Hatfield remained closely connected with the aircraft industry , and about 10 % of the aircraft workers in England worked in Hertfordshire in the 1960s . The de Havilland Comet was developed in the town . The London Government Act 1963 created an enlarged Greater London in 1965 which took Barnet from Hertfordshire , but in exchange , the county gained Potters Bar and South Mimms from Middlesex . The county 's boundaries were revised in the reforms accompanying the Local Government Act 1972 , at which time Royston became fully a part of Hertfordshire . Camfield House , Hatfield , belonged to Barbara Cartland during this period , and Beatrix Potter lived there as well . 
 During the Second World War , sculptor Henry Moore moved to the village of Perry Green in Hertfordshire when his former home was bombed . The Henry Moore Foundation still operates from the village . 
 The character of Hertfordshire changed in the later part of the 20th century . In 1992 , it was resolved to close the aircraft manufacturing site in Hatfield . At the start of the 20th century , 83 % of the workforce were involved in agriculture , but by the end , less than 1 % remained so . Only one brewery , <unk> , is still open and there are no remaining commercial maltings or mills . Nowadays , Hertfordshire has become a service and administrative centre containing the head offices of several important companies ( see here ) and a dormitory for London . A growing trend is research and development , notably for Glaxo and at the University of Hertfordshire which , from relatively humble beginnings as Hatfield Polytechnic , now has over 23 @,@ 000 students . 
 On 17 October 2000 , a major rail crash took place in Hatfield . Criticism of Railtrack after the accident was rife , and the company had to pay over £ 700 million in compensation . It ceased trading owing to insolvency in 2002 . 
 The fire of 11 December 2005 at Buncefield , Hemel Hempstead , was a major disaster . Hertfordshire 's Chief Fire Officer , Roy <unk> , said it was " possibly the largest in peacetime Europe . " About sixty million gallons of petrol burned , the largest of the explosions measured just under 2 @.@ 5 on the Richter scale , and the smoke darkened skies in neighbouring towns for two days before it could be extinguished . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Hertfordshire has a larger number of listed buildings and village greens pre @-@ dating 1700 than Greater London , see for example Grade II * listed buildings in Hertfordshire which tend to be in this category . All 10 District ( or Borough ) Councils have designated conservation areas . 
 = = Crime and criminals = = 
 King Stephen held court at St Albans in 1143 . He arrested Geoffrey de Mandeville , who held shrievalty of London , Middlesex and Hertfordshire from the pretender Empress Matilda . De Mandeville surrendered his castles , including the one he had recently built at South Mimms , and went on to become a noted outlaw and bandit . 
 A seventeenth @-@ century <unk> , called the " Wicked Lady " , preyed on travellers on <unk> Common along Watling Street to the far end of Wales . This may have been Lady Katherine Ferrers of Markyate Cell 1634 @-@ 1660 who was married to a detached husband Thomas Fanshaw ( e ) and whose body was carried across the county to be buried at Ware . By the time of a 1840 fire at the large house , a folklore rhyme had arisen : { { Near the cell there is a well 
 Near the well there is a tree 
 Near the tree the treasure be } } 
 In one of the last witch trials recorded , Jane Wenham , of <unk> , was convicted of witchcraft in 1712 . The accused was over the age of 70 at the time . Queen Anne pardoned Wenham , who " lived on in a cottage at <unk> " . In 1751 , John and Ruth Osborne of <unk> , Tring , were accused of witchcraft . A mob dragged them through the village pond until Ruth drowned . One Thomas Colley , a chimney sweep and apparently the ringleader , was hanged ; but the people disapproved of the hanging and did not come to watch . 
 There are records for Hitchin court from the 17th century . William <unk> wrote in 1744 : 
 ... these <unk> are the most litigious people on earth , and most of them pretty rich , so that whenever I have attempted a distress they removed the cause to a superior court , where you may believe it is not worth my while to try it for the value of perhaps a 10 shilling or 20 shilling <unk> . 
 In 1783 the vestry organised a watch to " put a stop to the daring robberies almost nightly committed in or near the town . " The next year Vincenzo <unk> 's first balloon flight over Britain landed in <unk> Green End where a stone commemorates the achievement . 
 Also in the late 18th Century , Hertford 's branch of Woolworth 's ( now closed ) was formerly an inn called the Maiden Head . From this inn , Walter <unk> , the " murderous pie man of Hertford " , operated . He pretended to be deaf , so that people would talk freely while he moved among them selling pies , overhearing their destinations and the location of their valuables ; and , with his sons who blackened their faces , would ambush them later that night . <unk> was shot dead in 1782 by one George North on the <unk> to <unk> road . 
 In 1823 , the murder of William Weare in Radlett became known as the first trial by newspaper . The murderer , who was the Mayor of Norwich 's son John <unk> , a notorious gambler , pleaded that the sensational newspaper coverage had prejudiced the court against him . It only took 20 minutes of deliberations for the jury to sentence him to death by hanging . The crowds that gathered for the trial were so large that the judge had trouble getting to the courthouse through the gridlocked streets , and about 15 @,@ 000 people attended the hanging itself . 
 The murder of Mercy Nicholls in Railway Street , Hertford , in 1899 , ultimately led to a major re @-@ organisation of Hertfordshire 's police force . In a long , gradual decline in agriculture , fishing and forestry , the 2011 census recorded 1 @,@ 878 Hertfordshire workers employed in this sector . 
 = = Authors of Hertfordshire = = 
 Jane Austen ( 1775 – 1817 ) wrote about Hertfordshire . Pride and Prejudice is set in a fictionalised Hertfordshire . Sir Francis Bacon ( 1561 – 1626 ) , writer and Lord Chancellor , lived at <unk> near St Albans and is buried at St Michael 's . J. M. Barrie ( 1860 – 1937 ) based his character Peter Pan on Peter Llewelyn Davies , his friend 's son , after visiting their family in Berkhamsted . Dame Juliana Berners ( <unk> ? ) was the author of the Boke of St Albans , a guide to hunting , hawking and heraldry , which was printed by Abbey Press in 1486 . John Bunyan ( 1628 – 1688 ) was linked to Hitchin , and although he was gaoled outside the county in Bedford , he was a member of the Baptist Church at <unk> ( at that time in Hertfordshire , though now in Bedfordshire ) . He preached extensively in Hertfordshire . George Chapman ( c . 1559 – 1634 ) , a poet and playwright remembered for his translations of the Iliad and the Odyssey , was born in Hitchin and lived there . Geoffrey Chaucer ( c . 1343 – 1400 ) was Clerk of the Works at Berkhamsted Castle in 1389 . 
 Sir Henry Chauncy ( 1632 – 1719 ) , known for his Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire ( pub . 1700 ) , was made first Recorder of Hertford in 1680 . Samuel Taylor Coleridge ( 1772 – 1834 ) was educated at Christ 's Hospital , Hitchin . William Cowper ( 1731 – 1800 ) , poet , was born and lived in Berkhamsted . He was later institutionalised in an asylum in St Albans . Charles Dickens ( 1812 – 1870 ) was often in Hertfordshire ( not least to visit his friend Edward Bulwer Lytton , who is mentioned below ) , and significant elements of his novels are set there . Sir Richard Fanshawe ( 1608 – 1666 ) was born at Ware Park and his memorial tablet is in Ware . E. M. Forster ( <unk> ? ) lived at Rook 's Nest House between Stevenage and Weston . William Godwin ( 1756 – 1836 ) , an anarchist philosopher , was a Chapel Minister in Ware ; his feminist wife Mary Wollstonecraft ( 1759 – 1797 ) , author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , gave him a daughter , Mary Shelley ( 1797 – 1851 ) , who wrote Frankenstein . Graham Greene ( 1904 – 1991 ) was educated at Berkhamsted Grammar School , where his father was headmaster . Julian Grenfell ( 1888 – 1915 ) , the First World War poet , lived in <unk> . Lady Caroline Lamb ( 1785 – 1827 ) lived at Brocket Hall and wrote <unk> there after her unhappy love affair with Lord Byron . She is buried in Hatfield . 
 Nathaniel Lee ( c . 1653 – 1692 ) , poet and playwright , was born in Hatfield where his father was rector . Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton ( 1803 – 1873 ) lived at the family seat of Knebworth House where he often entertained Charles Dickens and Benjamin Disraeli , among others . John Scott , the Quaker poet and writer , moved to Great Amwell in 1740 . He gave Amwell its name ( after Emma 's Well , which is nearby and now dry ; the well has part of John Scott 's poem " Emma " inscribed near it . ) Nobel prizewinning playwright George Bernard Shaw lived in Hertfordshire until his death in 1950 . Anthony Trollope ( 1815 – 1882 ) lived in Waltham Cross . Thomas Walsingham ( ? <unk> ) , author of the Historia Anglicana and chronicler of the Peasants ' Revolt , was a monk in St Albans Abbey in the early 15th century . 
 = = Film @-@ making in Hertfordshire = = 
 In film @-@ making Melbourne @-@ Cooper born and working in Hertfordshire ( but later what became the London Borough of Barnet ) was a British film maker who witnessed the birth of the movies as an assistant / cameraman of Birt Acres ( 1854 – 1918 ) . Acres , in 1895 , co @-@ developed the first British 35 mm moving picture camera under the guidance of British engineer R.W. Paul . Cooper , for the next 20 years , made contributions to the British moving picture industry . 
 Elstree Studios nearby has risen to prominence ; landmark films and television that have been produced there include the first and second Star Wars films ( chronologically , i.e. Episodes IV and V ) , Indiana Jones , and Superman , The World 's End and British television shows Dancing on Ice , Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , and Big Brother . Parts of the Harry Potter film series production took place at Leavesden Film Studios . Wild child was filmed in Balls park , Hertford . 
 = = Nobles and politicians of Hertfordshire = = 
 <unk> was a Christian Saxon noblewoman who lived in the county in the late 980s , and her will is an important document for the study of the country as well as the county . It shows that <unk> had three large estates in Hertfordshire . She left much of her land to the monks of St Albans , and her will shows the importance of Hitchin as a legal and administrative centre . Hitchin likely stayed in royal hands into the 10th century . 
 Edward Seymour was appointed Earl of Hertford in 1559 . He married Lady Catherine Grey , who was Lady Jane Grey 's sister , in 1560 . As Catherine was in line for the throne , she needed Queen Elizabeth 's permission to wed , and because this was not sought , the marriage was held in secret with Edward 's sister , Lady Jane Seymour , as the only witness . However , when Catherine became visibly pregnant , she had little option but to reveal her marriage and , at her request , Lord Robert Dudley told the Queen . An angry Elizabeth had the Earl and Countess of Hertford interned in the Tower of London and annulled their marriage . 
 Sarah Churchill , one of the most influential women in English history , was born as Sarah Jennings in St Albans in 1660 . She married the Duke of Marlborough , rose to high favour with the Crown , then fell out with the Queen and was dismissed , but returned to Court after the Queen 's death . She argued with many important people in the late 17th and early 18th centuries , grew very rich , toured the continent and built Blenheim Palace . Winston Churchill and Diana , Princess of Wales , were both descended from her . 
 A new title , the Earl of St Albans , was created in 1628 with a short and undistinguished history , effectively wiped out in the civil war shortly thereafter . Rather than revive the Earldom , Charles Beauclerk , illegitimate son of King Charles II and Nell Gwyn , was made Duke of St Albans in 1684 . This peerage is as of 2016 on its fourteenth duke . 
 Robert Arthur Gascoyne Talbot Cecil , the Marquess of Salisbury , was born at Hatfield House on 3 February 1830 . He also died there , 73 years later . In a distinguished political career , he would go on to become the Prime Minister three times and Foreign Secretary four times . William Lamb , ( Viscount ) Melbourne and again Prime Minister , lived in Hertfordshire and at one stage was its co @-@ Member of Parliament . He died at Brocket Hall . 
 After the Local Government Act 1888 , the first County Councillors in Hertfordshire were elected on 17 January 1889 . 
 Arthur Balfour , though born in Scotland , was educated in Hertfordshire before going to university at Cambridge . He served as MP for Hertford before being elected as Prime Minister in 1902 . He resigned as Prime Minister in 1905 , at which time he was the first Prime Minister to own a car . He later served as Foreign Secretary , when his Balfour Declaration was an important episode in the leadup to the creation of Israel . 
 = 1980 Eureka earthquake = 
 The 1980 Eureka earthquake ( also known as the Gorda Basin earthquake ) occurred on November 8 at 02 : 27 : 34 local time along the northern coastal area of California in the United States . With a moment magnitude of 7 @.@ 3 and a maximum Mercalli intensity of VII ( Very strong ) , this strike @-@ slip earthquake was the largest to occur in California in 28 years . Although damage was considered light , several loss estimates equaled or exceeded $ 2 million , and six injuries resulted when two vehicles came down with the partial collapse of a highway overpass on US 101 in Fields Landing . The north coast of California experiences frequent plate boundary earthquakes near the Mendocino Triple Junction and intraplate events also occur within the Gorda Plate . 
 Due to the regional seismic risk , the nuclear portion of the Humboldt Bay Nuclear Power Plant was shut down in the 1970s . No substantial damage occurred to the two fossil @-@ fuel units that were still operational at the facility . Several types of sensors were installed at the site to capture strong motion data in this seismically @-@ active area , but the majority of records from the event were considered unreliable due to faulty equipment or inadequate maintenance . Only one piece of equipment at the facility provided data by which an estimate of the peak ground acceleration could be made . 
 = = Tectonic setting = = 
 Near Cape Mendocino , the Mendocino Triple Junction is an area of active seismicity where three tectonic plates come together . The Mendocino Fracture Zone ( also known as the Mendocino Fault east of the Gorda Ridge ) is a transform fault that separates the Pacific and Gorda Plates . To the south , the relative motion between the Pacific Plate and North American Plate is accommodated by the San Andreas Fault , and to the north , the Gorda Plate is converging with the North American Plate at the Cascadia Subduction Zone . Earthquakes within the Gorda Plate are the result of north @-@ south compression at the Mendocino Fault . 
 = = Earthquake = = 
 The left @-@ lateral strike @-@ slip earthquake was the largest to occur in California since the 1952 Kern County earthquake . The mainshock ( which was described as a multiple @-@ rupture , with four subevents in the initial 80 seconds ) and its aftershocks occurred on a northeast @-@ trending fault that extended from near the Mendocino Fault to a point northwest of Eureka . Movement along the fault is due to a north @-@ south compressional regime and the resulting intraplate deformation of the Gorda Plate . Previous events in this area were the January 1922 7 @.@ 3 Ms and the January 1923 7 @.@ 2 Ms shocks . 
 The earthquake occurred offshore ( to the northwest of Eureka , about 37 mi ( 60 km ) west of Patrick 's Point ) and had a maximum Mercalli intensity of VII ( Very strong ) . Some people reported intense shaking that lasted for 15 to 30 seconds ; tremors were felt as far south as the San Francisco Bay Area and as far north as Salem , Oregon . In the epicentral area , items were knocked off shelves and furniture was displaced , but damage was considered light ( the smaller 5 @.@ 2 ML event that occurred in June 1975 caused more damage ) . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 While most of the damage from the Gorda Basin earthquake was considered light , there were some exceptions . Mercalli intensities in the immediate area were judged to be in the range of V ( Moderate ) to VII . In Eureka , intensity VI ( Strong ) effects included broken windows and dishes , fallen chimneys , and merchandise that fell from store shelves . Intensity VII effects affected the Fields Landing , King Salmon , Loleta , and Big Lagoon areas , and included surface cracks on the ground , soil liquefaction , small landslides and rockfalls , and numerous slumps along the Eel River . Similar effects occurred along the Old Coast Highway near Trinidad and Moonstone , where the roadway was reduced to one lane of travel in some areas . Several homes were knocked off their foundations and a highway overpass collapsed in Fields Landing . Seismic wave amplification , poor design , or inadequate construction style may have contributed to losses there . 
 = = = = Tompkins Hill Road overpass = = = = 
 The Tompkins Hill Road overpass is situated just south of Fields Landing and was built in the late 1960s . It suffered slight damage during the 1975 earthquake and was due for a retrofit in 1981 . The overpass was constructed with cement abutments on earthen ramps on either end and a series of concrete support columns in the middle . Eight 60 ft ( 20 m ) reinforced concrete spans accommodated northbound and southbound lanes of traffic , with no anchors connecting the spans with each other or to the abutments . At the time of the shock , two of the southbound spans came off their support ( a 6 in ( 15 cm ) ledge ) and six people were injured when a Volkswagen Beetle and a small pickup truck plummeted off the bridge . 
 = = = = Humboldt Bay Power Plant = = = = 
 The Humboldt Bay Power Plant is located about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the collapsed highway overpass and operated fossil @-@ fuel and nuclear units in the 1960s and 1970s . The nuclear unit was cancelled in 1976 because of seismic safety concerns , but the two fossil @-@ fuel units remained in operation . The Nuclear Regulatory Commission performed a post @-@ event survey of the facility 's systems in late 1980 , but inspectors found only minor effects to the plant 's structure , piping , tanks , and other mechanical equipment . It was found that the two units were automatically shut down at the time of the shock for various protective concerns and that there were minor cracks in masonry and concrete , sheared bolts , pipe leaks , and slight movement of water tanks . The deformation of a reinforced masonry wall that resulted in a variable @-@ width gap was the only structural issue . 
 = = = Strong motion = = = 
 Pacific Gas and Electric initially reported that peak ground accelerations in the range of <unk> – .4g were recorded on the floor of the refueling building on the plant 's strong motion instruments ( accelerometers ) . Low voltage from a faulty power supply left the instruments in a condition that was functional , but the records were not considered reliable . Three <unk> Technology film recorders were also in use as a backup system , but these instruments also did not produce any usable records , because lack of maintenance had allowed dirt and grit to get inside . Only records from one instrument ( an <unk> peak shock recorder ) was believed to be operating correctly and , with a close examination of the energy dispersed at various frequencies , an estimate of .15 – .25g was given for the event at that location . 
 = List of counties in Delaware = 
 The United States state of Delaware has only three counties : New Castle , Kent , and Sussex , the least in the United States . The origin of the county boundaries goes back to former court districts . The powers of the counties ' legislative bodies are limited to issues such as zoning and development . 
 = = Politics and government = = 
 Each county elects a legislative body ( known in New Castle and Sussex counties as the County Council , and in Kent County as the Levy Court ) . The counties are able to raise taxes and borrow money . They also have control over garbage disposal , water supply , sewerage , zoning , development , and building codes . 
 Most functions which are handled on a county @-@ by @-@ county basis in other states — such as court and law enforcement — have been centralized in Delaware , leading to a significant concentration of power in the Delaware state government . The counties were historically divided into hundreds , which were used as tax reporting and voting districts until the 1960s . However , the hundreds now serve no administrative role ; their only current official legal use is in real @-@ estate title descriptions . 
 = = History = = 
 Following the English conquest of 1664 , all of the land on the western side of the Delaware River and Delaware Bay was governed as part of the New York Colony and administered from the town of New Castle . During the brief recapture of the colony by the Dutch in 1673 , additional court districts were created around Upland and <unk> . The latter was also known as <unk> , and is now the town of Lewes . The court at New Castle was left with the central portion of the colony . The jurisdiction left to the court at became New Castle County , and the county seat remained at New Castle until 1881 when it was moved to Wilmington . In 1680 , <unk> District was divided into Deale County and St. Jones County . After this division , Lewes became the county seat of Deale , which was later renamed Sussex County . The former Upland District was named after the New Sweden settlement of Upland , and was renamed Chester County in 1682 . Chester County is now located within the present boundaries of Pennsylvania . 
 Lord Baltimore , the Proprietor of Maryland , claimed all present @-@ day Delaware , and organized its northern and eastern portions as Durham County , Maryland . However , this county existed only on paper . The southern and western portions of present @-@ day Sussex County were organized as portions of several adjacent Maryland counties and were not recognized as part of Delaware until the Mason @-@ Dixon Survey was run in 1767 . In 1791 , with the expansion of Sussex County to the south and west , the county seat was moved to Georgetown . The county seat of St. Jones ( renamed Kent County in 1681 ) is at Dover . 
 After 2000 , a fourth " Appoquinimink County " was proposed to be carved out of New Castle County . The motivation for this failed effort was to end the zoning restrictions of the Unified Development Code on the undeveloped farmland . The proposed boundaries extended beyond Appoquinimink Hundred to include all land south of the C & D Canal with Middletown as the proposed seat . 
 = = County information = = 
 The Federal Information Processing Standard ( <unk> ) code , which is used by the United States government to uniquely identify counties , is provided with each entry . The <unk> code for each county links to census data for that county . 
 = Clements Markham = 
 Sir Clements Robert Markham KCB FRS ( 20 July 1830 – 30 January 1916 ) was an English geographer , explorer , and writer . He was secretary of the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) between 1863 and 1888 , and later served as the Society 's president for a further 12 years . In the latter capacity he was mainly responsible for organising the National Antarctic Expedition of 1901 – 04 , and for launching the polar career of Robert Falcon Scott . 
 Markham began his career as a Royal Naval cadet and midshipman , during which time he went to the Arctic with HMS Assistance in one of the many searches for the lost expedition of Sir John Franklin . Later , Markham served as a geographer to the India Office , and was responsible for the collection of cinchona plants from their native Peruvian forests , and their transplantation in India . By this means the Indian government acquired a home source from which quinine could be extracted . Markham also served as geographer to Sir Robert Napier 's Abyssinian expeditionary force , and was present in 1868 at the fall of Magdala . 
 The main achievement of Markham 's RGS presidency was the revival at the end of the 19th century of British interest in Antarctic exploration , after a 50 @-@ year interval . He had strong and determined ideas about how the National Antarctic Expedition should be organised , and fought hard to ensure that it was run primarily as a naval enterprise , under Scott 's command . To do this he overcame hostility and opposition from much of the scientific community . In the years following the expedition he continued to champion Scott 's career , to the extent of disregarding or disparaging the achievements of other contemporary explorers . 
 All his life Markham was a constant traveller and a prolific writer , his works including histories , travel accounts and biographies . He authored many papers and reports for the RGS , and did much editing and translation work for the Hakluyt Society , of which he also became president . He received public and academic honours , and was recognised as a major influence on the discipline of geography , although it was acknowledged that much of his work was based on enthusiasm rather than scholarship . Among the geographical features bearing his name is Antarctica 's Mount Markham , named after him by Scott in 1902 . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Markham was born on 20 July 1830 at Stillingfleet , Yorkshire , the second son of the Reverend David Markham , then vicar of Stillingfleet . The family were descendents of the Rt Hon. and Most Rev. Dr William Markham , a former Archbishop of York and royal tutor ; this Court connection led to David Markham 's appointment , in 1827 , as an honorary canon of Windsor . Markham 's mother Catherine , née Milner , was the daughter of Sir William Milner , Bt . , of Nun Appleton Hall , Yorkshire . 
 In 1838 David Markham was appointed rector of Great <unk> , near Colchester , Essex . A year later Clement began his schooling , first at Cheam and later at Westminster School . Reportedly an apt pupil , he showed particular interest in geology and astronomy , and from an early age he wrote prolifically , an activity which filled much of his spare time . At Westminster , which he found " a wonderful and delightful place " , he developed a particular interest in boating , often acting as coxswain in races on the River Thames . 
 = = Royal Navy = = 
 = = = Naval cadet = = = 
 In May 1844 Markham was introduced by his aunt , the Countess of Mansfield , to Rear @-@ Admiral Sir George Seymour , a Lord of the Admiralty . The boy made a favourable impression on the admiral , and the meeting led to the offer of a cadetship in the Royal Navy . Accordingly , on 28 June 1844 Markham travelled to Portsmouth to join Seymour 's flagship HMS Collingwood . Collingwood was being fitted out for an extended voyage to the Pacific Ocean where Seymour was to assume command of the Pacific station . This tour of duty lasted for almost four years . The ship reached the Chilean port of Valparaíso , the headquarters of the Pacific station , on 15 December 1844 after a cruise that incorporated visits to Rio de Janeiro and the Falkland Islands , and a stormy passage in the Southern Ocean . Markham 's social connections assured him of a relatively comfortable time ; he was frequently invited to dine with the admiral , whose wife and daughters were on board . 
 After a few weeks ' respite in Valparaiso , Collingwood sailed again , this time for Callao , the main port on the Peruvian coast , giving Markham his first experience of a country that would figure prominently in his later career . During the next two years Collingwood cruised in the Pacific , visiting the Sandwich Islands ( Hawaii ) , Mexico , and Tahiti , where Markham attempted to assist the nationalist rebels against their French governor . On 25 June 1846 Markham passed the examination for midshipman , being placed third in a group of ten . The long periods spent in Chilean and Peruvian ports had also enabled him to learn Spanish . 
 Towards the end of the voyage Markham experienced growing doubts about a conventional naval career ; he now desired above all to be an explorer and a geographer . On arrival in Portsmouth in July 1848 he informed his father of his wish to leave the navy , but was persuaded to stay . After a brief period of service in the Mediterranean Markham experienced months of inactivity while based at Spithead and the Cove of Cork , which further diminished his interest in the service . However , early in 1850 he learned that a squadron of four ships was being assembled to undertake a new search for the lost Arctic expedition of Sir John Franklin . Markham used his family 's influence to secure a place in this venture , and in April 1850 was informed of his appointment to HMS Assistance , one of the squadron 's two principal vessels . 
 = = = First Arctic voyage 1850 – 51 = = = 
 Sir John Franklin had left England in May 1845 with two ships , HMS Erebus and HMS Terror , in search of the Northwest Passage . The expedition was last seen on 29 July by whalers in the northern waters of Baffin Bay , moored to an ice floe and waiting for the chance to sail westward . 
 The hunt for the missing ships began two years later . The relief squadron which Markham joined was commanded by Captain Horatio Austin in HMS Resolute . Markham 's ship Assistance was captained by Erasmus Ommanney . Markham , as the youngest member of the expedition and its only midshipman , had a limited role , but carefully noted every detail of expedition life in his journal . The ships sailed on 4 May 1850 . 
 After rounding the southernmost point of Greenland on 28 May , the squadron proceeded northwards until stopped by ice in Melville Bay on 25 June . They were held here until 18 August , when they were finally able to proceed west into Lancaster Sound , the known route taken by Franklin . Here the ships dispersed to search different areas for signs of the vanished expedition . On 23 August Ommanney sighted a cairn , and discovered packing materials nearby which bore the name of " Goldner " , Franklin 's canned meat supplier . Together with other odds and ends of abandoned equipment , these fragments were the first traces of Franklin that anyone had found . A few days later , on Beechey Island , the party came across three graves , which proved to be those of members of Franklin 's crew who had died between January and April 1846 . 
 Searches continued until the ships were laid up for the long Arctic winter . During this enforced rest there were lectures and classes for the crew , and various theatrical diversions in which Markham was able to display his " great histrionic talent " . He did much reading , mainly Arctic history and classical literature , and thought about a possible return visit to Peru , a country which had captivated him during the Collingwood voyage . When spring returned , a series of sledging expeditions was launched to search for further signs of the missing crews . Markham played a full part in these activities , which produced no further evidence of Franklin , but led to the mapping of hundreds of miles of previously uncharted coast . The expedition returned to England in early October 1851 . 
 Immediately on his return to England Markham informed his father of his determination to leave the navy . One of the reasons for his disaffection was the severity of the corporal punishment that was constantly administered for what in his view were trivial offences . He had been in trouble during his Collingwood service for attempting to prevent the flogging of a crewman . He had also become disenchanted by the idleness that had occupied long periods of his service . With some regret the elder Markham consented to his son 's request , and after taking and passing the gunnery part of the examination for the rank of lieutenant , Markham resigned from the service at the end of 1851 . 
 = = Peruvian journeys = = 
 = = = First journey 1852 – 53 = = = 
 In the summer of 1852 , freed from his naval obligations , Markham made plans for an extended visit to Peru . Supported by a gift from his father of £ 500 ( more than £ 40 @,@ 000 at 2008 values ) to cover expenses , Markham sailed from Liverpool on 20 August . 
 Markham travelled by a roundabout route , proceeding first to Halifax , Nova Scotia , then overland to Boston and New York , before taking a steamer to Panama . After crossing the isthmus he sailed for Callao , finally arriving there on 16 October . He set out for the Peruvian interior on 7 December 1852 , heading across the Andes towards his goal , the ancient Inca city of Cuzco . On the way , Markham paused for nearly a month in the town of Ayacucho , to study the local culture and increase his knowledge of the Quechua . He then travelled on towards Cuzco , and after crossing a swinging bridge ( the <unk> Bridge ) suspended 300 feet ( 91 m ) above the raging <unk> River , he and his party passed through fertile valleys which brought them finally to the city of Cuzco , on 20 March 1853 . 
 Markham remained in the city for several weeks , researching Inca history , describing in his journal the many buildings and ruins that he visited . During the course of an excursion to nearby towns and ruins he reached the area of San Miguel , La Mar , Ayacucho , where he first learned of the properties of the cinchona plant , a source of quinine , cultivated in that vicinity . He finally left Cuzco on 18 May , accompanied by a party of six who , like him , were returning to Lima . Their journey took them southwards , descending the mountains to the city of Arequipa , a former Spanish colonial settlement with a mixture of native and European architecture . The city is overlooked by the conical volcano Mount Misti , which Markham likened to Mount Fuji in Japan . On 23 June the party reached Lima , where Markham learned of the death of his father . He departed for England , where he arrived on 17 September . 
 = = = Cinchona mission , 1859 – 61 = = = 
 Six years after his first trip to Peru , Markham returned there , with a specific mission to collect cinchona plants and seeds . He had been working meantime as a civil servant in the India Office , and in 1859 he made proposals to his employers for a scheme for collecting cinchona trees from the Peruvian and Bolivian Andes , and transplanting them to selected sites in India . Cinchona bark , a source of quinine , was the first known treatment for malaria and other tropical diseases . These plans were approved and Markham was placed in charge of the operation . 
 Markham and his team , which included the botanist Richard Spruce and his future brother @-@ in @-@ law , the New Zealander Charles Bowen , left England for Peru in December 1859 , arriving in Lima late in January 1860 . There was danger in their enterprise ; Peru and Bolivia were on the verge of war , and Markham 's party soon experienced the hostility of Peruvian interests anxious to protect their control over the cinchona trade . This limited his sphere of operations , and prevented him from obtaining specimens of the best quality . Later Markham overcame bureaucratic obstruction to obtain the necessary export licences . 
 Markham returned briefly to England before sailing to India , to select suitable sites for cinchona plantations there and in Burma ( now Myanmar ) and Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) . Although many of the Indian plantations failed to flourish and were soon destroyed by insects , others survived , and were augmented by species obtained by Spruce which were more suited to Indian conditions . Twenty years after the first plantations the annual cinchona bark crop from India was estimated at 490 @,@ 000 pounds ( 220 @,@ 000 kg ) . For his work in introducing cinchona to India , Markham received a grant of £ 3 @,@ 000 ( over £ 200 @,@ 000 in 2008 terms ) from the British Government . 
 = = Civil servant , geographer , traveller = = 
 = = = India Office = = = 
 After the death of his father in 1853 Markham needed paid employment , and in December 1853 secured a junior clerkship in the Legacy Duty Office of the Inland Revenue at a salary of £ 90 per annum ( around £ 6 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) . He found the work tedious , but after six months was able to transfer to the forerunner of what became , in 1857 , the India Office . Here , the work was interesting and rewarding , with sufficient time to allow him to travel and pursue his geographical interests . 
 In April 1857 Markham married Minna Chichester , who accompanied him on the cinchona mission to Peru and India . Their only child , a daughter Mary Louise ( known as May ) , was born in 1859 . As part of his India Office duties Markham investigated and reported to the Indian government on the introduction of Peruvian cotton into the Madras Presidency , on the growth of <unk> in Brazil and the possibilities for cultivating this medicinal plant in India , and on the future of the pearl industry at Tirunelveli in Southern India . He was also involved in an ambitious plan for the transplanting of Brazilian rubber trees , claiming that he would " do for the india @-@ rubber or caoutchouc @-@ yielding trees what had already been done with such happy results for the cinchona trees . " This scheme was not , however , successful . 
 = = = Abyssinia , 1867 – 68 = = = 
 In 1867 was selected to accompany Sir Robert Napier 's military expeditionary force to Abyssinia , as the expedition 's geographer . This force was despatched by the British government as a response to actions taken by the Abyssinian King Theodore . In 1862 the king had written to the British government requesting protection against Egyptian invaders , and proposing the appointment of an ambassador . Unwilling to risk giving offence to Egypt , the British government did not reply . The king reacted to this slight by seizing and imprisoning the British consul and his staff , and ordered the arrest and whipping of a missionary who had allegedly insulted the king 's mother . A belated reply to the king 's letter resulted in the capture and incarceration of the deputation that brought it . After efforts at conciliation failed , the British decided to settle the matter by sending a military expedition . Because the geography of the country was so little known , it was decided that an experienced traveller with map @-@ making skills should accompany the force , hence Markham 's appointment . 
 Napier 's troops arrived at Annesley Bay in the Red Sea , early in 1868 . Markham was attached to the force 's headquarters staff , with responsibility for general survey work and in particular the selection of the route to Magdala , the king 's mountain stronghold . Markham also acted as the party 's naturalist , reporting on the species of wildlife encountered during the 400 @-@ mile ( 640 km ) march southward from the coast . He accompanied Napier to the walls of Magdala , which was stormed on 10 April 1868 . As the king 's forces charged down the mountain to meet Napier 's advancing troops Markham recorded : " The Snider rifles kept up a fire no Abyssinian troops could stand . They were mown down in lines ... the most heroic struggle could do nothing in the face of such vast inequality of arms . " After the discovery of the king 's body the victorious troops , according to Markham , " gave three cheers over it , as if it had been a dead fox . " Markham added that although the king 's misdeeds had been numerous and his cruelties horrible , he had finally died as a hero . 
 On the orders of General Napier , Magdala was burnt to the ground and its guns destroyed . The British troops then departed , and Markham was back in England in July 1868 . For his services to this campaign Markham was created a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in 1871 . 
 = = = Second Arctic voyage , 1875 – 76 = = = 
 Markham had , through his various activities , come to know many influential people , and during the early 1870s used these connections to make the case for a Royal Naval Arctic expedition . Prime minister Benjamin Disraeli consented , in the " spirit of maritime enterprise that has ever distinguished the English people " . When the expedition was ready to sail , Markham was invited to accompany it as far as Greenland , on HMS Alert , one of the expedition 's three ships . Markham accepted , and left with the convoy on 29 March 1875 . He was gone for three months , remaining with Alert as far as the island of Disco in Baffin Bay . He wrote of this journey : " I never had a happier cruise ... a nobler set of fellows never sailed together . " He returned to England on the support vessel HMS Valorous , although the homeward voyage was delayed after Valorous struck a reef and required substantial repairs . Markham 's extended absence from his India Office duties , together with his increasing involvement in a range of other interests , caused his superiors to request his resignation . Markham retired from his post in 1877 , his 22 years of service entitling him to a pension . 
 Meanwhile , the main expedition , under the command of Captain George Nares , had proceeded north with the two ships HMS Discovery and HMS Alert . On 1 September 1875 they reached 82 ° 24 ' , the highest northern latitude reached by any ship up to that date . In the following spring a sledging party led by Markham 's cousin , Commander Albert Hastings Markham , achieved a record Farthest North at 83 ° 20 ' . 
 = = Royal Geographical Society = = 
 = = = Honorary secretary = = = 
 In November 1854 Markham had been elected a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society . The Society soon became the centre of his geographical interests , and in 1863 he was appointed its honorary secretary , a position he was to hold for 25 years . 
 In addition to his work in promoting the Nares Arctic expedition , Markham followed the work of other Arctic explorers , organising a reception in 1880 for the Swedish explorer Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld after the latter 's successful navigation of the North @-@ East Passage , and monitoring the progress of the American expeditions of Adolphus Greely and George W. DeLong . Release from the India Office provided Markham with more time for travel . He made regular trips to Europe and in 1885 went to America , where he met with President Grover Cleveland in the White House . Throughout his secretaryship Markham was a prolific writer of travel books and biographies , and of many papers presented to the RGS and elsewhere . He was the author of the Encyclopædia Britannica ( ninth edition ) article entitled " Progress of Geographical Discovery " . He also wrote popular histories . Within the RGS Markham was responsible for the revision of the Society 's standard Hints to Travellers , and for relaunching the journal Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society in a much livelier format . 
 In parallel with his RGS duties Markham served as secretary of the Hakluyt Society until 1886 , subsequently becoming that society 's president . As part of his work for this body , Markham was responsible for many translations from Spanish into English of rare accounts of travel , in particular those relating to Peru . In time scholars would express doubts about the quality of some of these translations , finding them prepared in haste and lacking in rigour . Nevertheless , this work ran to 22 volumes in the society 's publications . In 1873 Markham had been elected a Fellow of the Royal Society , and in subsequent years received several overseas honours , including the Portuguese Order of Christ and the Order of the Rose of Brazil . He briefly considered , but did not pursue , the idea of a parliamentary career . 
 Markham maintained his interest in the navy , particularly in the training of its officers . He often visited the merchant officer training vessels , HMS Conway and HMS Worcester , and became a member of the latter 's governing body . In early 1887 he accepted an invitation from his cousin Albert Markham , who now commanded the Royal Navy 's training squadron , to join the squadron at its station in the West Indies . Markham spent three months aboard the flagship HMS Active , during which , on 1 March 1887 , he had his first encounter with Robert Falcon Scott , who was serving as a midshipman aboard HMS Rover . Scott was victorious in a race between cutters , an event that was noted and remembered by Markham . 
 = = = President = = = 
 In May 1888 Markham resigned from his position as RGS Secretary , finding himself at odds with the Society 's new policies which appeared to favour education over exploration . On his retirement he was awarded the Society 's Founder 's Medal for what were described at the presentation ceremony as his " incomparable services to the Society " . 
 The next few years were filled with travel and writing . There were further cruises with the training squadron , and extended visits to the Baltic and the Mediterranean . In 1893 , during the course of one of these journeys , Markham was elected in absentia President of the RGS . This unexpected elevation was the result of a dispute within the Society over the question of women members , about which Markham had kept silent . When in July 1893 the issue was put to a special general meeting , the proposal to admit women was narrowly defeated despite an overwhelming postal ballot in favour . In these circumstances the Society 's President , Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff , resigned his office . The 22 existing women members were allowed to remain , but no more were admitted until January 1913 when the RGS changed its policy . Although Markham was not the first choice as a replacement for Grant Duff — other notable figures were approached — he had kept out of the women members controversy and was broadly acceptable to the membership . Shortly after his accession to the presidency , in recognition of his services to geography Markham was raised in the Order of the Bath to the rank of Knight Commander ( KCB ) , and became Sir Clements Markham . 
 In a letter written many years later , Markham said that on the assumption of the presidency he had felt the need , after the dispute over women , to " restore the Society 's good name " by the adoption of some great enterprise . He chose Antarctic exploration as the basis for this mission ; there had been no significant Antarctic exploration by any country since Sir James Clark Ross 's expedition fifty years previously . A new impetus was provided through a lecture given to the RGS in 1893 by the oceanographer Professor John Murray , calling for " an expedition to resolve the outstanding questions still posed in the south . " In response to Murray the RGS and the Royal Society formed a joint committee , to campaign for a British Antarctic expedition . 
 = = = National Antarctic Expedition = = = 
 Murray 's call for the resumption of Antarctic exploration was taken up again two years later , when the RGS acted as host to the sixth International Geographical Congress in August 1895 . This Congress passed a unanimous resolution : 
 [ That ] the exploration of the Antarctic Regions is the greatest piece of geographical exploration still to be undertaken . That , in view of the additions to knowledge in almost every branch of science which would result from such a scientific exploration , the Congress recommends that the scientific societies throughout the world should urge , in whatever way seems to them most effective , that this work should be undertaken before the close of the century . 
 The joint committee organising the British response to this resolution contained a difference of view . Murray and the Royal Society argued for a largely civilian expedition , directed and staffed by scientists , while Markham and most of the RGS contingent saw a National Antarctic Expedition as a means of reviving naval glories , and wanted the expedition organised accordingly . Markham 's tenacity finally won the day when in 1900 he secured the appointment of his protégé Robert Falcon Scott , by then a torpedo lieutenant on HMS Majestic , as the expedition 's overall commander . In doing so he thwarted an attempt to place the leadership in the hands of Professor John Gregory of the British Museum . In the view of Markham 's critics , this represented the subordination of scientific work to naval adventure , although the Instructions to the Commander , drawn up by Markham , give equal priorities to geographical and scientific work . The " science versus adventure " arguments were renewed when , after the return of the expedition , there was criticism over the accuracy and professionalism of some of its scientific results . 
 Markham faced further problems in securing funding for the expedition . In 1898 , after three years ' effort , only a fraction of what was required had been promised . Meanwhile , the Anglo @-@ Norwegian explorer Carsten Borchgrevink had obtained a sum of £ 40 @,@ 000 ( over £ 3 million in 2008 ) from publisher George Newnes , to finance a private Antarctic venture . Markham was furious , believing that funds were being diverted from his own project , and denounced Borchgrevink as " evasive , a liar and a fraud " . He was equally hostile to William Speirs Bruce , the Scottish explorer who had written to Markham asking to join the National Antarctic Expedition . On receiving no confirmation of an appointment , Bruce obtained finance from the Scottish Coats family and organised his own Scottish National Antarctic Expedition . Markham accused Bruce of " mischievous rivalry " , and of attempting to " cripple the National Expedition ... in order to get up a scheme for yourself " . The Scottish expedition duly sailed , but Markham remained unforgiving towards it , and used his influence to ensure that its participants received no Polar Medals on their return . 
 A substantial private donation and a government grant finally allowed the National Antarctic Expedition to proceed . A new ship , the Discovery , was built , and a mainly naval crew of officers and crewmen appointed , along with a scientific staff which was later described as " underpowered " . Discovery sailed on 5 August 1901 , after an inspection by King Edward VII , at which Markham was present to introduce Scott and the officers . The ship was gone for just over three years during which time , from a base in the Ross Sea area , significant explorations of this sector of Antarctica were carried out , along with an extensive scientific programme . Although it was reported by the Times as " one of the most successful [ expeditions ] that ever ventured into the Polar regions , north or south , " it was largely ignored by the government of the day . Markham was criticised in official quarters for privately sanctioning a second season in the Antarctic , contrary to the original plan , and then being unable to raise funds for the expedition 's relief in 1904 . The cost for this had to be borne on the Treasury . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Shackleton and Scott = = = 
 A few months after the Discovery 's return , Markham announced his retirement from the RGS presidency . He was 75 years old ; according to his biographer he felt that his active geographical life was now over . His 12 years in the presidency was the longest period on record . He remained a member of the RGS Council , a vice @-@ president , and he kept an active interest in Antarctic exploration , particularly in the two British expeditions which set out in the five years following his retirement . These were led respectively by Ernest Shackleton and Scott . 
 Markham had agreed to Shackleton 's appointment as Third Officer on the Discovery following a recommendation from the expedition 's principal private donor . He had given sympathy and support after Shackleton 's early return from the expedition on grounds of ill health , and had backed the latter 's unsuccessful application for a Royal Navy commission . Later , after Shackleton had confided his intention to lead an expedition of his own , Markham supplied a generous testimonial , describing Shackleton as " well @-@ fitted to have charge of men in an enterprise involving hardship and peril " , and " admirably fitted for the leader [ ship ] of a Polar Expedition . " He expressed strong support for Shackleton 's 1907 – 09 Nimrod Expedition : " ... not only my most cordial wishes for your success will accompany you , but also a well @-@ founded hope . " When news of the expedition 's achievement of a new Farthest South latitude of 88 ° 23 ' reached him , Markham publicly signified his intention to propose Shackleton for the RGS Patron 's Medal . 
 However , Markham had second thoughts , and was soon writing to the current RGS president , Leonard Darwin , to express disbelief about Shackleton 's claimed latitudes , repeating these doubts to Scott . Historians have surmised that Scott was Markham 's protégé , and that the old man resented polar glory going to someone else . Whatever his reason , Markham adopted a bitterness towards Shackleton which he retained for the rest of his life . He is said to have crossed out all favourable references to Shackleton in his own notes on the Discovery expedition , and to have virtually ignored Shackleton 's achievements in a 1912 address to the British Association . He was equally dismissive in his history of Antarctic exploration , The Lands of Silence ( published posthumously in 1921 ) . 
 By contrast , Markham remained on close personal terms with Scott and was godfather to the explorer 's son , born 14 September 1909 and named Peter Markham Scott in the old man 's honour . In his tribute to Scott in the preface to Scott 's Last Expedition ( 1913 ) , Markham describes Scott as " among the most remarkable men of our time " , and talks of the " beauty " of his character . As Scott lay dying " there was no thought for himself , only the earnest thought to give comfort and consolation to others . " In one of the last letters written from his final camp , days from death , Scott wrote : " Tell Sir Clements I thought much of him , and never regretted his putting me in command of the ' Discovery ' . " 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After his retirement from the RGS presidency , Markham led an active life as a writer and traveller . He wrote biographies of the English kings Edward IV and Richard III , and of his old naval friend Admiral Sir Leopold McClintock ; he also kept up his editing and translating work . He continued to produce papers for the RGS , and remained president of the Hakluyt Society until 1910 . Markham continued to travel extensively in Europe , and in 1906 cruised with the Mediterranean squadron , where Scott was acting as Flag @-@ Captain to Rear @-@ Admiral George Egerton . When in 1909 Scott announced his plans for a new Antarctic venture , the Terra Nova Expedition , Markham assisted with fundraising and served on the expedition 's organising committee , arranging the deal which brought in Lieutenant " Teddy " Evans as second @-@ in @-@ command , in return for the abandonment of Evans 's own expedition plans . 
 Markham was awarded honorary degrees from the Universities of Cambridge and Leeds . In conferring this latter degree , the Chancellor referred to Markham as " a veteran in the service of mankind " , and recalled that he had been " for sixty years the inspiration of English geographical science . " However , Markham did not altogether avoid controversy . In 1912 , when Roald Amundsen , conqueror of the South Pole , was invited by RGS president Leonard Darwin to dine with the Society , Markham resigned his council seat in protest . 
 The news of the death of Scott and his returning polar party reached Markham in February 1913 , while he was staying in Estoril . He returned to England , and assisted with the preparation of Scott 's journals for publication . Scott 's death was a heavy blow , but Markham continued to lead a busy life of writing and travelling . In 1915 he was present at the service in St Peter 's Church , <unk> , near Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , where a window was dedicated to Scott and his companions ; later that year he assisted at the unveiling of the Royal Navy 's statue of Scott , in Waterloo Place , London . Markham read his last paper for the RGS on 10 June 1915 , its title being " The History of the Gradual Development of the Groundwork of Geographical Science " . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On 29 January 1916 , while reading in bed by candlelight , Markham set fire to the bedclothes and was overcome by smoke . He died the following day . His last diary entry , a few days earlier , had recorded a visit from Peter Markham Scott . 
 The family received tributes from King George V , who acknowledged the debt the country owed to Markham 's life work of study and research ; from the Royal Geographical Society and the other learned bodies with which Markham had been associated ; from the Naval Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief at Devonport ; and from Fridtjof Nansen , the Norwegian Arctic explorer . Other messages were received from France , Italy , Denmark , Sweden , the United States , and from Arequipa in Peru . 
 More critical assessments of Markham 's life and work were to follow . Hugh Robert Mill , Shackleton 's first biographer and for many years the RGS librarian , referred to the dictatorial manner in which Markham had run the Society . In time , questions would be raised about the accuracy of some of his Hakluyt translations , and about the evidence of haste in the preparation of other publications . On a personal level he had made enemies as well as friends ; Frank Debenham , the geologist who served with both Scott and Shackleton , called Markham " a dangerous old man " , while William Speirs Bruce wrote of Markham 's " malicious opposition to the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition " . Bruce 's colleague Robert Rudmose @-@ Brown went further , calling Markham " that old fool and humbug " . These protestations reflected Markham 's protective attitude towards Scott ; according to Bruce , " Scott was Markham 's protégé , and Markham thought it necessary , in order to uphold Scott , that I should be obliterated " . He added that " Scott and I were always good friends , in spite of Markham . " 
 It has been suggested that Markham 's prejudices about polar travel , particularly his belief in the " nobility " of <unk> , had been passed to Scott , to the detriment of all future British expeditions . Mill 's measured opinion , that Markham was " an enthusiast rather than a scholar " , has been asserted as a fair summary of his strengths and weaknesses , and as the basis for his influence on the discipline of geography in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . He is commemorated by Mount Markham , 82 ° 51 ′ S 161 ° 21 ′ E , in the Transantarctic range , discovered and named by Scott on his southern march during the Discovery expedition in 1902 . The Markham River in Papua New Guinea was named after him ; Carsten Borchgrevink discovered and named Markham Island in the Ross Sea during his 1900 expedition , a gesture that was not , however , acknowledged by Markham . The name lives on in Lima , Peru , through Markham College , a private co @-@ educational school . Minna Bluff , a promontory extending into the Ross Ice Shelf , was named by Scott for Lady Markham . 
 Markham 's estate was valued for probate purposes at £ 7 @,@ 740 ( 2008 equivalent £ 376 @,@ 000 ) . He was survived by his wife Minna , to whom Albert Hastings Markham 's 1917 biography of Sir Clements is dedicated . Markham 's only child , May , avoided public life and devoted herself to church work in the East End of London . According to the family 's entry in Burke 's Landed Gentry she died in 1926 . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Markham was a prolific writer and diarist ; his first published work , an account of his voyage with HMS Assistance in search of Franklin , had appeared in 1853 . After his retirement from the India office in 1877 writing became his chief source of income . In addition to papers and reports for the Royal Geographical Society and other learned bodies , Markham wrote histories , biographies and travel accounts , many as full @-@ length books . He also translated many works from Spanish to English , and compiled a grammar and dictionary for the Quichua language of Peru . 
 His books include the following : 
 Franklin 's Footsteps ( 1852 ) London , Chapman and Hall 
 Cuzco ... and Lima ( 1856 ) London , Chapman and Hall 
 Travels in Peru and India ( 1862 ) London , John Murray 
 Contribution Toward a Grammar and Dictionary of Quichua ( 1864 ) London , Trubner & Co , 
 A History of the Abyssinian Expedition ( 1869 ) London , Macmillan 
 A Life of the Great Lord Fairfax ( 1870 ) London , Macmillan 
 <unk> : an ancient <unk> drama ( 1871 ) London , Trubner & Co 
 The Countess of <unk> and the cinchona genus ( 1874 ) London , Trubner & Co 
 General Sketch of the History of Persia ( 1874 ) London , Longman Green 
 The Threshold of the Unknown Regions ( 1875 ) London , Samson Low 
 Narrative of the mission of George Bogle to Tibet ( 1877 ) London , Trubner & Co 
 A Memoir of the Indian Surveys ( 1878 ) London , W.H. Allen 
 Peruvian Bark ( 1880 ) London , John Murray 
 The Voyages of William Baffin , 1612 – 1622 ( 1881 ) London , Hakluyt Society 
 The War between Peru and Chile ( 1881 ) London , Samson Low 
 A narrative of the life of Admiral John Markham ( 1883 ) London , Low Marston Searle & Rivington 
 The Sea Fathers ( 1885 ) London , Cassell 
 Life of Robert Fairfax of Steeton , Vice @-@ admiral ( 1885 ) London , MacMillan & Co , 
 The Fighting Veres ( 1888 ) London , Samson Low 
 The Life of John Davis the Navigator ( 1889 ) London , George Philip and Son 
 The Life of Christopher Columbus ( 1892 ) London , George Philip and Son 
 The History of Peru ( 1892 ) Chicago , Charles H Sergel 
 Major James <unk> and the Rise of Modern English Geography ( 1895 ) London , Cassell & Co 
 The <unk> of Edwin the Great ( 1896 ) London , Adam & Charles Black 
 Richard III : his life and character ( 1906 ) London , Smith , Elder & Co 
 The Story of Minorca and Majorca ( 1909 ) London , Smith , Elder & Co 
 The Incas of Peru ( 1912 ) London , John Murray 
 The Lands of Silence ( completed by <unk> Guillemard , 1921 ) Cambridge , Cambridge University Press 
 = Richard Minifie = 
 Richard Pearman Minifie , DSC & Two Bars ( 2 February 1898 – 31 March 1969 ) was an Australian fighter pilot and flying ace of the First World War . Born in Victoria , he attended Melbourne Church of England Grammar School . Travelling to the United Kingdom , he enlisted in the Royal Naval Air Service in June 1916 . Accepted for flight training , he completed his instruction in December and joined No. 1 ( Naval ) Squadron RNAS on the Western Front in January 1917 , flying Sopwith Triplanes . He went on to score seventeen aerial victories on this type of machine throughout the year , becoming both the youngest Australian flying ace of the First World War and No. 1 ( Naval ) Squadron 's highest @-@ scoring ace on the Triplane . The unit re @-@ equipped with the Sopwith Camel late in 1917 , with Minifie going on to achieve a further four victories on the aircraft , raising his final tally to a score of twenty @-@ one aircraft shot down . 
 Minifie crash landed in German @-@ held territory in March 1918 , and spent the remainder of the war in prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps in Germany . He was released at the end of the war , and was demobilised as a captain in September 1919 . Returning to Australia , he joined the staff of his father 's flour milling business , James Minifie & Co . Pty Ltd . He served as a squadron leader in the Air Training Corps of the Royal Australian Air Force during the Second World War . Minifie returned to the flour milling industry after the war , becoming managing director of James Minifie & Co . Pty Ltd in 1949 . He died in 1969 at the age of seventy @-@ one . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Pearman <unk> was born in <unk> , Victoria , on 2 February 1898 to Englishman James Minifie , a flour miller , and his Australian wife Beatrice Kate ( née Earle ) . In his youth , Minifie attended Melbourne Church of England Grammar School , becoming a prefect in 1915 and being appointed a lieutenant in the school Cadet unit . Completing his secondary studies later that year , Minifie won a scholarship to Trinity College at the University of Melbourne . 
 = = First World War = = 
 By 1916 , Minifie was residing in Elsternwick , Victoria . That year , he decided to postpone his studies and travelled to the United Kingdom where he enlisted in the Royal Naval Air Service at Crystal Palace , London on 11 June . Accepted for flight training with the rank of probationary flight sub @-@ lieutenant , he spent the following six months at naval establishments in Eastbourne , Cranwell , East Fortune and Dover earning his wings . Granted the substantive rank of flight sub @-@ lieutenant in October , he was posted to No. 1 Wing RNAS on graduating as a pilot in October . In early 1917 , he was allotted to the Wing 's No. 1 ( Naval ) Squadron in France , flying Sopwith Triplanes , an aircraft in which he was to score heavily . 
 Throughout February and March 1917 , No. 1 Squadron was " continually in action " along the Somme sector of the Western Front . During April , the squadron maintained a high operational tempo with the launch of the Arras offensive . In an air battle on 29 April , Minifie was credited with his first two aerial victories , shooting down an Albatros D.III in a solo effort , before sharing in the destruction of a second with fellow Australian , Flight Sub @-@ Lieutenant Robert A. Little of No 8 ( Naval ) Squadron . Over the next two months , Minifie participated in the " highly effective " ground @-@ strafing missions on Bullecourt and during the Battle of Messines , while simultaneously adding to his tally of aircraft brought down ; he became an ace during this period . At 19 years of age , Minifie was the youngest Australian ace of the First World War . He was promoted to acting flight lieutenant in July , taking part in the Passchendaele offensive later that month . On 8 August , Minifie destroyed a German scout plane , forcing the machine down in flames and thus scoring his seventh victory . Ten days later , he executed a raid on two German aerodromes . Flying at a height of 400 feet ( 120 m ) , he fired approximated 450 rounds of ammunition into the hangars . Cited for his efforts in bringing down several German aircraft and his assaults on ground targets between April and September , Minifie was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . The notice for the decoration was promulgated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 2 November 1917 . 
 Between August and October 1917 , Minifie was credited with a further eleven German aircraft , bringing his total to seventeen . He had thus far achieved all of his victories on the Sopwith Triplane , making him No. 1 Squadron 's highest @-@ scoring ace on the aircraft , besting his Commanding Officer and friend , fellow Australian ace Lieutenant Commander Roderic Dallas , by a single victory on the machine . In late October , the squadron returned to the United Kingdom in order to re @-@ equip with the Sopwith Camel . On 30 November , the London Gazette carried the announcement that Minifie had been awarded a Bar to his Distinguished Service Cross as a consequence of his " conspicuous gallantry in air fighting throughout October " , that resulted in his personal destruction of " several enemy machines " . 
 On returning to the Western Front , Minifie went on to score an additional four aerial victories on the Sopwith Camel . In March 1918 , he was promoted to acting flight commander . Later that month , he acted as No. 1 Squadron 's Commanding Officer during the transition of command from Dallas to Lieutenant Commander Charles Dawson Booker . On 13 March , Minifie led a party of four aircraft out on a patrol . While airborne , the group intercepted a formation of five German scout planes . In the ensuring battle , Minifie personally destroyed two of the aircraft while a third was shot down by one of his men . These two scout planes were to be Minifie 's final victories of the war , raising his ultimate tally to twenty @-@ one aircraft shot down and making him the seventh highest @-@ scoring Australian ace of the conflict . His aerial achievements were composed of ten and one shared aircraft destroyed , eight and one shared out of control , and one captured . As a result of his gallantry while operating against hostile forces , particularly in the air battle of 13 March , Minifie was awarded a second Bar to his Distinguished Service Cross . The announcement and accompanying citation was published in the London Gazette on 17 April 1918 , reading : 
 <unk> FOR THE ROYAL <unk> AIR <unk> . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the following decorations and medals to Officers and Men of the Royal Naval Air Service : — 
 To receive a Second Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross . 
 Act . Flt . Cdr . Richard Pearman Minifie , <unk> , <unk> 
 For courage and daring in the face of the enemy , particularly on the 13th March , 1918 . On that date , when on patrol with four machines , he attacked an enemy patrol of five scouts , destroying two , whilst a third was destroyed by another officer . 
 Act . Flt . Cdr . Minifie has now destroyed numerous hostile machines . 
 On 17 March 1918 , Minifie took off in his Camel on a sortie . During the flight , he was forced to crash land in German @-@ held territory near <unk> Forest , Belgium . The exact circumstances of why he was forced to land are unknown , but it came as a result of either being shot down during a duel with Jasta 47 's Friedrich <unk> or Minifie 's machine suffering engine failure . He was subsequently captured by German forces at Roulers , and taken as a prisoner of war ; he spent the remainder of the war at prison camps in Karlsruhe and <unk> , Germany . Roderic Dallas later wrote to Minifie 's mother , informing her that Richard had been taken as a prisoner of war . In the letter he described Minifie as " a brilliant pilot and air fighter " , and stated that " his aerial victories were gained by clean , clever fighting and he was always so modest about his great achievements " . On 1 April , the Royal Naval Air Service and Royal Flying Corps were combined to form the Royal Air Force , with personnel from the former services transferring to the new branch ; Minifie was promoted to captain the same day . He was released from captivity following the Armistice with Germany in November 1918 , returning to the United Kingdom on 13 December 1918 . Minifie returned to Australia in May 1919 , and was placed on the Royal Air Force 's unemployed list on 1 November . 
 = = Post @-@ war career and later life = = 
 Back in Australia , Minifie took up his scholarship , studying mathematics and science at the University of Melbourne . However , he soon withdrew from the course , opting to join his father 's flour milling business , James Minifie & Co . Pty Ltd . In a ceremony at the Holy Trinity Church in Kew on 19 October 1921 , Minifie married Nellie Frances Roberts ; the couple would have four children . His father died the next year and , in collaboration with his brother James and his father 's business partner , James Gatehouse , he continued to manage and run James Minifie & Co . Pty Ltd . Over the subsequent three decades , the trio were successful in furthering their business ventures , significantly expanding the company . 
 On 17 June 1941 , Minifie enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force for service in the Second World War , and was accepted as an officer with the Prahran Wing of the Air Training Corps . Promoted to flying officer and granted the acting rank of squadron leader on 23 August , he was appointed in commander of No. 1 Squadron of No. 1 Cadet Wing . Returning to the flour milling business after the war , he was appointed president of the Victorian Flour Millers ' Association in 1948 . The following year , Minifie was made managing director of James Minifie & Co . Pty Ltd and its associated companies , in addition to being selected as president of the Federal Council of Flour <unk> of Australia and the flour millowners ' representative on the Australian Wheat Board . He relinquished these positions upon his retirement in 1966 . Richard Minifie died on 31 March 1969 and was cremated . He was survived by his wife , son and three daughters . 
 = Harriet Leveson @-@ Gower , Countess Granville = 
 Henrietta Elizabeth " Harriet " Leveson @-@ Gower , Countess Granville ( née Cavendish ; 29 August 1785 – 25 November 1862 ) was a British peeress and society hostess . She was born in Devonshire House as the second daughter of William Cavendish , 5th Duke of Devonshire by his wife , the political hostess Lady Georgiana Spencer . Despite her parents ' turbulent marriage , Harriet had a happy childhood . Her mother 's death in 1806 led to an unpleasant situation in which her father 's long @-@ time mistress Lady Elizabeth Foster took control of the Devonshire household ; as the unmarried eldest daughter , this should have been Harriet 's role . 
 To help her escape this awkward domestic situation , Harriet 's maternal aunt Henrietta arranged for her niece to marry her lover of seventeen years , Granville Leveson @-@ Gower , 1st Earl Granville . The couple 's marriage proved to be happy , and it produced five children . Granville served as his country 's ambassador to France intermittently from 1824 to 1841 , and he was awarded an earldom in 1833 . With her position , Harriet acted as hostess to Parisian society , writing detailed accounts that were later published . She died in 1862 of a stroke , having been widowed fifteen years . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Lady Henrietta Elizabeth Cavendish was born at Devonshire House on 29 August 1785 , the younger daughter of William Cavendish , 5th Duke of Devonshire and his wife Lady Georgiana Spencer . Known as " Harriet " or " <unk> " to her family , the baby was named after Georgiana 's sister Henrietta Ponsonby and her friend Lady Elizabeth Foster . Her parents ' marriage had been unhappy from the start ; the Duchess had difficulty bringing her pregnancies to term , suffering miscarriages during their first nine years together . Her mother distracted herself by becoming immersed in society , and was soon known as a political hostess and leader of fashion . 
 Despite the state of her parents ' marriage , Cavendish had a happy childhood . She was devoted to her mother , and was fond of , but rarely saw , her aloof father . Her governess Selina Trimmer was a daughter of the famous children 's writer Sarah Trimmer , and encouraged her charge to be morally principled . In May 1799 , Cavendish was confirmed in Westminster Abbey alongside her cousin , the future Lady Caroline Lamb . The historian Janet Gleeson describes Cavendish as slightly plump in appearance , in possession of a clever , funny , and perceptive personality . Her biographer , Virginia Surtees , writes that although Cavendish was " no beauty , she had wit , intelligence , and shrewdness ; her sharp eye missed little but in high croak and spirits viewed with tolerance the world of drums , <unk> , gossip , and matchmaking in which she moved " . 
 In 1802 , Cavendish 's cousin John Ponsonby , Viscount Duncannon ( her mother 's sister 's son ) , whom she had known her entire life , began to show romantic interest in her . Cavendish was unsure whether she cared for him enough , and they agreed to wait a year before deciding " whether they liked each other well enough to marry " . Their two families , especially his mother ( and her aunt ) Lady Bessborough approved of the match , but Cavendish was still undecided . During this period , John had romantic relationships with Lady Maria Fane and others ; Cavendish presented an ultimatum that he " must promise to cure himself completely of flirting , for she could not bear it " . John angrily refused that he was not ready to marry her after all , nor " bear rules to be prescribed to him by any woman living " . He became engaged to Fane shortly thereafter . Her family later encouraged a match with another cousin John Spencer , Viscount Althorp , though , during her stay at Althorp , she stated that " no reasonable woman " could think of him as anything " but as an eager huntsman " . 
 The Duchess of Devonshire died in March 1806 ; and Cavendish 's life at home became unhappy . Her father had been involved in a relationship with Lady Elizabeth Foster for years . Always greatly resentful of Foster 's presence in the household , Cavendish was angered when she took control of their home , for instance disliking it when her place at the head of the table was taken by Foster . As the unmarried adult daughter , this role should have been taken by Cavendish , not by Foster ( who was not yet married to her father ) . During this period , Cavendish frequently went to live with her elder sister , Georgiana , who was recently married to the future 6th Earl of Carlisle ; Cavendish 's son Frederick later wrote that the experience " strengthened the tie of sisterly affection , which bound them together during the whole of their joint lives " . From 1801 onwards , Cavendish wrote to her sister almost daily until the latter 's death in 1858 . Three years after her mother 's 1806 death , the Duke married Foster . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 With her mother dead , Cavendish 's aunt Henrietta Ponsonby felt obligated to help her niece escape a difficult home situation . For her part , Cavendish had been critical of her aunt in the past but now turned to her for affection , support , and as a reminder of her mother . Once the Duke of Devonshire made clear his desire to marry Foster , Henrietta began searching for a suitable marriage prospect for her niece , and suggested Lord Granville Leveson @-@ Gower , as he was known at that time . Lord Granville had been Henrietta 's own lover by now for seventeen years ; she had borne him two illegitimate children during their relationship and declared once that she " loved him to idolatry . " Nevertheless , Henrietta encouraged her niece to consider marriage with the thirty @-@ seven @-@ year @-@ old Granville . Though still infatuated with him , she knew that Granville would need to eventually marry and produce legitimate offspring , and that when he did so , she would likely lose him . Getting her niece to marry him was one way of keeping him within her circle . 
 Cavendish had been acquainted with Lord Granville her whole life and never particularly cared for him , having disapproved alike of his lofty hauteur and his illicit liaison with her aunt . Now however , she came to appreciate Granville 's finer qualities : historians describe him as handsome , intelligent , of good family , and a member of the British parliament . The historian K. D. Reynolds writes that Granville was " considered one of the most handsome men of his time ; his curly brown hair , blue eyes , and sensuous features brought him strings of female admirers . " While eager to leave Devonshire House , the morally upright girl insisted that his affair with her aunt be truly over . Granville was unsure if he wanted the unglamorous Cavendish as a marriage partner , however , and spent his time pursuing other candidates ; their refusals , often in response to his womanising reputation , led him to ultimately choose Cavendish . 
 On 24 December 1809 , Cavendish married Granville with her aunt 's blessing . Though ageing , Granville maintained his handsome appearance and Cavendish was said to have " [ in ] high degree the charm of voice and manner which belongs to the Cavendish family " . Their marriage was happy ; she loved him until her death , writing in September 1810 to her sister , " I really think I am happier every hour . There never was anything so adorable as he is in every way " . Their eldest child , Susan , was born in October 1810 in London . The couple would go on to have four further children , and his two illegitimate issue with Henrietta also flourished in the happy household . Granville was made a Viscount in 1815 ; an earldom awarded in 1833 led to Harriet becoming known as Countess Granville . 
 The couple lived in England for their first fifteen years of marriage , sometimes travelling to the continent for short periods , but mainly dividing their time between London and the countryside . Granville rented a residence in <unk> , Staffordshire before moving to a rental in <unk> , Suffolk , entertaining society figures at both places . During long stretches between 1824 and 1841 , Granville served as his country 's ambassador to France . The Countess helped entertain Parisian society by serving as hostess , writing detailed accounts that were later published in 1894 , 1940 , and 1990 . Granville resigned the post in 1841 only after becoming ill ; for the next two years , the family travelled across Europe before returning to England in November 1843 . They resided in houses in Brighton and London , and spent portions of their time visiting friends and family at their various country estates . 
 = = Widowhood = = 
 Lord Granville died in early 1846 , having never recovered from a stroke he suffered five years previously . He was buried at Stone , Staffordshire . His death desolated his wife . She lived henceforth in complete retirement , residing chiefly at Chiswick House , where she turned to piety for consolation . Her contacts in the outside world were chiefly her children and step @-@ children , her brother William , and the children of her sister Georgiana . She survived her husband by fifteen years , dying on 25 November 1862 of a stroke at her London home at 13 Hereford Street . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Earl and Countess Granville had five surviving children : 
 Lady Susan Georgiana Leveson @-@ Gower ( 25 October 1810 – 30 April 1866 ) ; married George Pitt @-@ Rivers , 4th Baron Rivers in 1833 and had issue 
 Lady Georgiana Charlotte Leveson @-@ Gower ( 23 September 1812 – 19 January 1885 ) ; married Alexander Fullerton 
 Granville Leveson @-@ Gower , 2nd Earl Granville ( 11 May 1815 – 31 March 1891 ) ; married ( 1 ) Mary Louise von Dalberg ( 2 ) <unk> Rosalind Campbell 
 Hon. Granville William Leveson @-@ Gower ( 28 September 1816 – 26 May 1833 ) 
 Hon. Frederick Leveson @-@ Gower ( 3 May 1819 – 30 May 1907 ) ; married Lady Margaret Compton , daughter of Spencer Compton , 2nd Marquess of Northampton 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Marvel 1602 = 
 Marvel 1602 is an eight @-@ issue comic book limited series published in 2003 by Marvel Comics . The limited series was written by Neil Gaiman , penciled by Andy Kubert , and digitally painted by Richard Isanove ; Scott McKowen illustrated the distinctive scratchboard covers . The eight @-@ part series takes place in a timeline where Marvel superheroes exist in the Elizabethan era ; faced with the destruction of their world by a mysterious force , the heroes must fight to save their universe . Many of the early Marvel superheroes — Nick Fury , the X @-@ Men , the Fantastic Four , and Spider @-@ Man — as well as villains such as Doctor Doom and Magneto appear in various roles . 
 Neil Gaiman had always been a fan of Marvel , and editor Joe Quesada approached Gaiman to work on a project which eventually evolved into 1602 . The success of the comic led to three sequels , entitled 1602 : New World , Marvel 1602 : Fantastick Four , and Spider @-@ Man : 1602 . There is also a short story , " Son of the Dragon " , starring the 1602 version of The Hulk in the second issue of Hulk : Broken Worlds . In 1602 : <unk> Angela of Marvel 's 2015 Secret Wars event , Angela appears as a hunter of witchbreed ( mutants ) . 
 The pocket reality seen at the end of the limited series in which the continuing Marvel 1602 universe takes place is classified as Earth @-@ 311 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Neil Gaiman stated in an afterword to the series that he had always viewed the Marvel universe as " magic " . The editors of 1602 , Nick Lowe and Joe Quesada , approached Gaiman after Quesada became Marvel 's Editor in Chief with the intent for Gaiman to work on a project for Marvel . Gaiman eventually agreed to write a Marvel comic in August 2001 , although he was not sure what it would contain . When the September 11 , 2001 attacks occurred , Gaiman decided that he did not want planes , skyscrapers , bombs or guns in his comic . " I didn 't want it to be a war story , and I didn 't want to write a story in which might made right – or in which might made anything . " On a trip to Venice soon after , Gaiman was struck by how the " past seemed very close at hand " ; he returned from the trip knowing the story he wanted to tell . The time was chosen because " it was a nice place to set the story . It gave me America and it gave me a lot of things that I wanted in terms of the way the world was changing . It also gave me the sense of wonder and magic . " 
 Gaiman described writing the series as odd , since he had not written comics in half a decade ; the story was trimmed down significantly as the size went from six 36 @-@ page chapters to eight 22 @-@ page segments . He also wanted to write a comic that was different from The Sandman , his most recognized work . The profits of the series went to help fund his Marvels and Miracles LLC company , which is fighting for the rights to Marvelman . 
 = = = Illustration = = = 
 Unlike usual penciled pages , Marvel 1602 used a technique called " enhanced pencils " , whereby the finished pencil drawings are sent straight to the colorist instead of to an inker first . This technique had been used before on Kubert 's Origin , and results in cleaner and more elaborate lines . 
 Editor Nick Lowe noticed theater posters done by Scott McKowen and decided that the " engraving ' look ' of the scratchboard would be interesting for the historical setting of this story . " <unk> is a technique where a sharp knife is used to scrape through a layer of black ink to a hard chalk surface underneath ; in effect , artists draw white lines on an all @-@ black surface . All McKowen 's illustrations were done by hand and then colored later in Photoshop . For inspiration , McKowen looked at seventeenth @-@ century engravings . He also added scrolls or flags to the covers for the Marvel 1602 titles , basing the designs on Renaissance paintings where scrolls are used to comment on the scenes depicted . 
 The hardbound edition features a scratchboard illustration depicting the main characters whispering discreetly to each other on the cover . According to McKowen , the image was inspired by a depiction of the masterminds behind the " Gunpowder Plot " , an attempt to blow up Parliament during the reign of King James . Since the characters of the story are all traitors in the eyes of King James , they were drawn in a similar fashion . 
 = = = Premise = = = 
 In the year 1602 in the Marvel Universe , for an unknown reason , superheroes have appeared about 400 years early , though they were born and bred in this era and some hold important positions in high places . When the characters come to realize that something is wrong with the universe , the heroes must solve the mystery behind their own existence , while dealing with intrigue at the courts of Elizabeth and James . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 All over Europe , strange weather is provoking panic . Many believe the unnatural occurrences are the beginning of the Apocalypse . Dr. Stephen Strange , the court magician of Queen Elizabeth I , senses that there are unnatural forces at work . He has also been asked to watch over the secret treasure of the Knights Templar which is being brought over from Jerusalem . Elizabeth tells her head of intelligence , Sir Nicholas Fury , to bring the weapon to England safely . Fury in turn contracts blind minstrel and agent Matthew Murdoch to rendezvous with the Templar guard somewhere in Europe and secure the weapon . Later that evening , Fury and his assistant Peter Parker are attacked by an assassin whom Fury disables and locks in the Tower of London . 
 Meanwhile , the ship Virginia Maid arrives in England from the New World , carrying the young Virginia Dare , the first child born in Roanoke colony , as well as her hulking , fair @-@ skinned , blond Native American bodyguard Rojhaz . They are taken to meet the Queen only for a vulture @-@ like assassin to snatch Virginia . Rojhaz quickly disables the attacker , but Virginia has transformed into a white <unk> . Rojhaz subdues Virginia , and Stephen Strange <unk> her to human form before Fury sees her transformed . She has strange shapeshifting powers , and Strange suspects she is the cause of the disastrous weather . Fury interrogates one of the assassins to learn who sent him . He is told that it is Otto von Doom , ruler of Latveria , but Fury is too late to stop one of Doom 's machines from killing Elizabeth with a poison gas released by dropping a pill into aqua regia . 
 With Elizabeth 's death , James VI of Scotland becomes ruler of both England and Scotland . James is distrustful of " witchbreed " ( people born with magical powers , mutants ) and collaborates with Spanish High Inquisitor Enrique to blame the witchbreed of England , headed by Carlos Javier , for Elizabeth 's death . Fury , a friend of Carlos and his students , is forced to take the witchbreed to the Tower . Strange , Javier , and Fury meet there and discuss how to save the world — an act which will almost surely lead to them being branded traitors by James . Strange has learned that the treasure of the Templars and its keeper Donal , and Murdoch , have been betrayed and are now in the hands of Doom . Strange also learns that Doom has been holding captive four heroes from the ship Fantastick , including Fury 's friend Sir Richard Reed . Knowing that James will never give him an army to march on Latveria , he conspires with the witchbreed , taking a ship levitated by Javier and his page John Grey across the continent . 
 Strange meanwhile finds himself on the moon where he meets the Watcher Uatu , who tells him that the strange events are due to an anomaly he calls the Forerunner . The Forerunner is from the future and its presence in the past has disrupted reality to the point of impending annihilation of not only Strange 's world but all other universes as well . Explaining his theory that the emergence of various superhumans on Stephen 's Earth is the result of the universe trying to save itself , the Watcher tells Strange that he will not be able to repeat what he has learned while he is alive . 
 Fury , Javier and his witchbreed launch a successful attack on Count Doom 's fortress . The Fantastick Four are freed , and Doom is horribly scarred by what he believes is the Templar 's treasure ; in fact , Donal 's walking stick is the true treasure , and using it Donal becomes the Norse god Thor . Having nowhere else to go , the ship of fugitives heads for the New World . In Spain , Enrique , the Inquisitor who has killed so many witchbreed , is exposed as a witchbreed himself and sentenced to be burned at the stake with his young acolytes , Petros and Sister Wanda . Enrique breaks their bonds and they escape on a ship of their own , also bound for America . 
 Sir Stephen Strange is executed by James , and his head put on a pike . With his magic , his spirit can still communicate in a telepathic way , allowing him to explain the warning that he received from Uatu now that he is dead and no longer bound by Uatu 's original compulsion . His wife Clea takes his head from the pike and sets off for America with Virginia and Rojhaz . Clea believes that Strange 's suspicions were wrong : Virginia is not the Forerunner , it is her blond @-@ haired , blue @-@ eyed " Native American " companion . 
 Rojhaz is in fact Steve Rogers , the future costumed superhero known as Captain America . After fighting against a future fascist government of the 21st century run by the President @-@ For @-@ Life , Rogers was captured . Wanting to dispose of Rogers so completely that not even his ashes would remain to inspire future rebellion , the President @-@ for @-@ Life had Rogers placed into a machine which should have killed him but instead sent him into the 1602 timeline . His presence not only brought about a rift that will destroy the universe , but it also caused the heroes of the twentieth century to appear centuries earlier to counter the Forerunner 's negative effects . 
 Fury and company arrive at the Roanoke colony , where they discover the rift that is tearing their universe apart . Javier , realizing that his enemy Enrique may be the key to manipulating the rift and thus saving the universe , traps him and his followers in their ship . However , it is the former Inquisitor who dictates terms . 
 James sends his adviser Banner and Peter Parker to America with orders to kill Fury . When they arrive in America , Fury single @-@ handedly kills all the members of their ship aside from Banner and Peter . In spite of this , Fury has almost lost the will to live : he failed to protect his Queen , he has been made a traitor to his country , and all his wealth and property has been seized and taken over by James and his favorites . 
 Donal meanwhile turns to alcohol , devastated at the fact that he has brought about a god who , according to Donal 's religion , should not even exist . However , Reed 's analysis leads him to believe that the final component needed to deal with the rift is lightning , and Donal is convinced to turn into the Viking god once more . 
 Back in England , having just been crowned King , James feels that everything is going his way , but then Murdoch breaks into his chamber and warns him in no uncertain terms of the consequences should anything happen to Fury , or Murdoch 's native Ireland . 
 Rojhaz , looking more like the Captain America of old ( or of the future , as the case may be ) , refuses to go back through the rift : he hopes to build a better America from the beginning . Fury tricks Rojhaz by playing on the trust that Captain America had for the Nick Fury of his own time , knocks him unconscious and carries the body back through the rift , thus going into the future himself . 
 The rift and the universe restore themselves , meaning the destruction of the alternate timeline ; however , Uatu the Watcher is granted a " pocket universe " by his colleagues in which the 1602 timeline remains intact , and where the powered fugitives decide to settle in the Roanoke colony , declaring it a free place for all . Meanwhile , while walking in the woods with Virginia , Peter is bitten by a spider and Banner , who shielded Peter from the energies released when Rojhaz and Fury entered the rift , has changed into a hulking gray monster . Intrigued by the continuing events , Uatu continues to watch the new universe ( later designated Earth @-@ 311 ) . 
 = = Characters = = 
 1602 features both historical figures and many of the original Marvel superheroes and villains . Some popular characters , such as Wolverine , were not added , because of Gaiman 's vision to address the heroes of the 1960s . " The territory doesn 't go much further than 1969 in terms of the characters that I picked to use , " Gaiman noted . " I couldn 't get everybody in because there are an awful lot of Marvel characters . " 
 Elizabeth I of England : The aging Queen of England . Already close to death , she is killed by a poisonous gas device constructed by Otto Von Doom . 
 James I of England : Originally King James VI of Scotland , James becomes the monarch over England as well with Elizabeth 's death . James maintains an intense hatred of witchbreed and seeks to destroy them along with any who practice sorcery or witchcraft . 
 Virginia Dare : The daughter of Ananias Dare , and the first English child born in the Americas . In this world , the Roanoke Colony did not disappear in the 1580s ; when Steve Rogers went into this world he saved the colony , which would have been killed by starvation . Dare touches the rift caused by Roger 's arrival . She has the ability to transform into white @-@ furred animals when frightened , which she later learns to control , and appears to be the equivalent to Alpha Flight 's <unk> who has a similar appearance and powers , though Neil Gaiman had denied this . 
 Uatu , the Watcher : A younger member of a race of intelligent beings who have sworn not to interfere in the affairs of lesser races , only to watch and observe . He breaks this oath , however , by explaining the situation to an astral projection of Doctor Stephen Strange . 
 Sir Nicholas Fury : The Queen 's intelligence officer ( referred to as the " intelligencer " ) and responsible for foiling many past plots against the monarch . Seemingly killed when he carries an unconscious Rojhaz into the dimensional rift . 
 Doctor Stephen Strange : The Queen 's Physician , who is also a magician and alchemist . He allows himself to be beheaded by King James , which subsequently frees him from the restriction placed upon him by Uatu , the Watcher ( namely , that he could not reveal what he knows while still living ) . 
 Peter Parker : Sir Nicholas ' apprentice ; left orphaned and tended to by his aunt and uncle until Fury arrived and took the boy to London . 
 Matthew Murdoch : A blind Irish minstrel who moonlights as a freelance agent . Matthew acquired heightened senses from a mysterious substance he encountered as a child . 
 Clea Strange : Stephen Strange 's wife and assistant , Clea actually comes from another dimension . After bringing her husband 's severed head to the Roanoke colony - thus fulfilling her last promise to him - she asks the heroes to bury the head with the rest of the body and then returns to her home dimension . 
 Rojhaz : Virginia 's blonde @-@ haired , blue @-@ eyed Native American bodyguard , who in fact is a displaced Captain America from a dystopian future . When the government of his time captured him and attempted to execute him using advanced technology , he was accidentally sent back in time - the event which triggered the alternate timeline to begin with - thus forming the paradox of the story . 
 Carlos Javier : A Spaniard living in England , where he runs a " College for the Sons of <unk> " , in fact a haven for " witchbreed " , or mutants . His students include Roberto <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Hal McCoy , Werner , and " John " Grey ( who is in fact a young woman with psychic powers rivaling that of his own ) . 
 The Four from the Fantastick : A band of explorers who gained powers when their ship encountered a strange energy vortex at sea . The four are Captain Benjamin Grimm , Sir Richard Reed , Susan Storm , and John Storm , Their bodies were reshaped into the four elements : Reed 's flesh became pliable like water ; Grimm 's body became solid rock ; Susan 's body became weightless and invisible like air ; and John 's body became living fire . They are eventually captured by Doom . 
 Grand Inquisitor Enrique : Born a Jew , a young Enrique was forcibly baptized and seduced by a Catholic priest , and thus inducted into the church . As an adult , he leads the Spanish Inquisition - a position of power through which he can further his own plans . Although ordered to execute the witchbreed , he hides those whom he can pass off as normal . Secretly a witchbreed himself , he uses his activities as a cover to form a " Brotherhood Of Those Who Will Inherit The Earth " . He is assisted by Sister Wanda and Petros , who are secretly his children . He is also aided by Toad , despite Toad 's betrayal at one point . 
 Banner : An advisor to King James , Banner is sent to Roanoke in order to kill Fury . When the rift is closed at the end of the story , Banner is caught within the backlash and is later seen lurking in the nearby woods as a massive gray @-@ skinned creature ( the Hulk ) . 
 Count Otto von Doom : Doom is the ruler of Latveria , known as Otto the Handsome due to his perfect physique and appearance . He captures the Fantastick Four in order to force Reed 's compliance in creating war machines , poisons , and various other inventions . Von Doom is later struck and badly burned by Thor 's lightning , although he survives . 
 Donal the Guardian of the Templar Treasure and alter ego to Thor , who is captured by Count Otto von Doom on his way to deliver the treasure of the Templars ( the hammer Mjolnir disguised as a simple walking stick ) to England . He is rescued by Sir Nicholas Fury and the witchbreed and is taken to the New World along with the Fantastick Four . 
 Natasha : She travels with Matthew while en route to meet Donal , who is bringing the Templar Treasure to England . Natasha is revealed to be working for Count Otto von Doom . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The first issue of 1602 was ranked first in August 2003 US comics with pre @-@ order sales of 150 @,@ 569 . 
 1602 received mixed praised upon its release with Comics Bulletin stating " Is 1602 good ? Yes , it 's damn good . Is it revolutionary or even ground breaking ? No . Sorry , but I can 't go so far as to call a glorified What If ? series anything more than what it is ; a well done re @-@ imagination of the Marvel Universe . " Entertainment Weekly declared that the combination of writing and moody artwork meant " the Marvel Universe hasn 't been this engrossing in ages . " <unk> noted that fans looking for elements of Gaiman 's The Sandman would be disappointed ; " It 's not a senses @-@ shattering Marvel epic , but then it 's not meant to be . It 's nothing more or less than a chance to enjoy reinterpretations of some familiar characters . " UGO Networks concurred , stating " there doesn 't need to be a ' point ' in re @-@ imagining familiar icons — it 's simply meant to be fun . [ ... ] The result of 1602 is agreeable entertainment . " The series won several awards , including the Quill Book Award for Graphic Novels . The first issue was also awarded the 2003 Diamond Distributors Gem Award as " Comic of the Year " . 
 Conversely , Time Magazine listed it as the worst comic of 2003 , although the list 's composer later stated " he didn 't actually mean it was the worst comic of the year . " UGO 's Darren Latta noted as a downside to the series that " the approach maybe a little too subdued at times . " Latta also felt that despite being familiar with the setting , Gaiman never utilized the period to its full potential . Others simply felt that Gaiman 's involvement led to inflated expectations ; one review noted that while reading " I [ ... ] felt at times like maybe it was all a little bit too cute , a little bit too in @-@ jokey . " 
 1602 's success led to three sequels . 
 The first , 1602 : New World , takes place shortly after the end of 1602 , with the heroes settling down in America . The series was written by Greg Pak and illustrated by Greg <unk> , and the first issue was published in August 2005 . During that time , Lord Iron and Captain Ross had arrived to hunt down David Banner while coming into conflict with the Spider and Virginia Dare . Meanwhile , Master Osborn tries to turn the natives against the settlers . 
 The second sequel , Marvel 1602 : Fantastick Four was written by Peter David and pencilled by Pascal <unk> . The story involves the Fantastic Four 's adventures in London , the return of Otto Von Doom , and the " Four Who Are Frightful " when they capture William Shakespeare to chronicle Otto von Doom 's travels to <unk> ( this reality 's <unk> ) . 
 The third sequel Spider @-@ Man : 1602 centers on the continuing adventures of the Spider and features reinterpretations of Doctor Octopus , the Lizard , and Mary Jane Watson . Also appearing are the Beast , Janet and Henry Pym , the Kingpin ( <unk> as a pirate named King 's Pin ) , Bullseye ( <unk> as an assassin and first mate of the King 's Pin ) , and Steve Rogers . 
 = = = Spider @-@ Verse = = = 
 The Marvel 1602 universe appears in a lead @-@ up to Spider @-@ Verse . Peter Parker is on stage at the Globe Theatre with Marion Jane <unk> 's family when Morlun appears . Peter attempts to defend himself , but Morlun proves too powerful . Morlun brings down the Globe Theater around everyone , and absorbs Peter 's life essence . Before disappearing into another dimension , Morlun declares that all spiders will die . 
 = = = Secret Wars ( 2015 ) = = = 
 Marvel 1602 will appear in Secret Wars where its domain on <unk> will be referred to as King James ' England . It will mostly be featured in the comic 1602 : Witch Hunter Angela ( which will feature a witch hunter version of Angela ) . 
 In the domain of King James ' England , King James ( a variation of Wolverine ) was its ruler until he was discovered to be a Witchbreed ( this domain 's version of Mutants ) who killed various <unk> girls . King James was seemingly killed by Sister Angela of the Holy Order who drowned him . He was succeeded is King Charles the First ( who is secretly a Witchbreed leader and a variation of Professor X ) . With the population of Witchbreed diminished , the Witch Hunters Sister Angela of the Holy Order and her partner Lady Serah <unk> went on to hunt <unk> , people who made deals with Demons , but , before doing so , they went to the Mermaid Tavern to drink with some friends of theirs . There they attacked Captain James Barnes of Clan Buchanan whom they believed was a Witchbreed , but it revealed itself to be a Faustian after being cut in half by Angela and reanimating its two halves as hideous monsters . Lady Serah killed the upper half . As Angela killed the bottom half , it summoned its " maker " the Enchantress . Angela tried to hit her , but she couldn 't do her harm . The Enchantress threatened that Serah would die when three of her <unk> had been killed by Angela before vanishing in the air , leaving a worried Angela behind . 
 After telling Serah about Enchantress ' menace , Angela and her fellow Witch Hunter departed from London and found a troupe of players called the " Gardiner 's Men " ( who are this domain 's version of the Guardians of the Galaxy ) being attacked by beasts in the woods . They aided the troupe members Madam Gomorrah , Peadar O <unk> , Arthur <unk> , Goodman Root , and <unk> to kill the beasts . As the creatures had traces of Enchantress ' magic on them indicating she was somewhere nearby , Angela and Serah traveled with the Gardiner 's Men to a pagan village in the outskirts of York where a marriage for the town beauty Anne Weying and the young printer 's apprentice Edwin <unk> was going to happen . As the festival proceeded , Angela realized young Edwin had enchanted his bride to marry him when she saw him giving her a potion to drink . Edwin noticed Angela had seen and panicked becoming a venomous monster and attacking her . Angela and her companions engaged him in battle and subdued him , afterwards Angela decapitated him . While leaving the town , Serah told Angela she wasn 't afraid of her fate as long as Angela was with her . 
 Angela and Serah then headed to Castle Caldecote in Cumberland as it was the whereabouts of the third Faustian . Her name was Anna Maria , the natural daughter of a bishop that was kept safe by Master Coulson in one of the castle 's room as instructed by her father . However , in the last new moon , she managed to escape the castle and returned somewhat different . Seeing the girl was not mad as Coulson said she was , Serah demanded the girl to be freed from her chains and told Angela to keep an eye on her . As the days passed , Serah , who had been studying about the Faerie , discovered that the Enchantress sends a sliver of herself into each of those with whom she struck a deal and that she was using stories , such as that of her victims and Christopher Marlowe 's play , to expand her power . Upon figuring it out , Serah started to devise a plan to counter that of Enchantress . Meanwhile , Angela struck a deal with Anna Maria : in exchange for a way to free her , she would tell Angela the truth about herself . The girl then told her she was born Witchbreed and that she eventually learned her touch was death . When the path to the Faerie was open , she took the opportunity to become something other than what she was , and willingly struck a deal with the Enchantress and became a Faustian . Later that night , Angela heard strange noises coming from Anna Maria 's room and went to check if everything was right . There she found the girl crying , frightened by the Enchantress ' voice inside her head . The girl asked Angela to tell her a story to calm her down , and so she did , but it was in vain as the Enchantress took control of the girl 's body and attacked Angela . The girl managed to regain consciousness though and in an attempt to be free again , used Angela 's weapon to kill herself . Serah showed up and was able to revive the girl , who was a Faustian no more . As she hadn 't died , Serah thought she was safe from the Enchantress ' wrath , but she was wrong as the Faerie rose from the blood of her lost Faustian and took Serah 's life , fulfilling her menace . With the sun setting , Angela burned her lover 's body to the ashes , recovering her skull and singing to it afterwards . Suddenly to Angela 's surprise , the skull became animated and started to talk with her . 
 = = = Web @-@ Warriors = = = 
 The Web Warriors ( Alternate versions of Spider @-@ Man ) visited the 1602 Universe to deal with the dimension 's version of Sinister Six . After apprehending the villains , they noticed the dimension 's Electro has escaped , unbeknownst to the heroes , followed them back to the Great Web . 
 = = Academic response = = 
 James Fleming has written about the use of the postmodern tradition in 1602 , and how this is employed ; as a means to respond to the post @-@ 9 / 11 world in which the comic was written ; and to propose a new model of postmodernism better suited to the post @-@ 9 / 11 world . On the one hand , 1602 is clearly postmodern , depending as it does on the mixing of tropes of both Elizabethan fiction and contemporary comics . But Fleming focuses particularly on Gaiman 's use of The Watcher as a witness that provides an epistemological grounding to the text - a grounding that , citing Brian McHale , Fleming argues is absent in traditional postmodern writing . 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Marvel 1602 reality appeared in The Super Hero Squad Show episode " 1602 . " 
 In the Ultimate Spider @-@ Man animated series , an armored , medieval version of Spider @-@ Man called Spyder @-@ Knight appears , voiced by Christopher Daniel Barnes . In the " Spider @-@ Verse " mini @-@ series , the Green Goblin uses the Siege Perilous to travel to alternate worlds and find the Spider @-@ Men residing there , planning to obtain blood samples from them . Spider @-@ Man follows him into a medieval version of New York City , simply called York . There he sees the villagers having to pay ransom to a shady , cloaked Alchemist , and he provide protection from a terrible threat . Spider @-@ Man is spotted and accused of being a witch by the townspeople , and when explaining to them about the Goblin , he accused of working with a demon . They tie him up and attempt to publicly burn him . However , to his rescue is a knight with special , advanced medieval armor , who is known as the " Spyder @-@ Knight " . Believing Spider @-@ Man to be a town fool , both Spiders avoid the angry villagers . While Spider @-@ Man is harassed and distracted by the villagers , Spyder @-@ Knight is confronted by the Goblin , who is after a blood sample . While Spyder @-@ Knight briefly battles him , and is protected by his armor , he is slammed against a wall by Goblin , who extracts his blood from his exposed neck . Goblin then escapes through another portal . While Spider @-@ Man states he must leave , the village comes under attack by a massive , metal , fire @-@ breathing <unk> . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man 1602 is an unlockable costume in Spider @-@ Man : Shattered Dimensions . 
 Spider @-@ Man 1602 is playable in Spider @-@ Man Unlimited . 
 = Made in Japan ( Deep Purple album ) = 
 Made in Japan is a double live album by English rock band Deep Purple , recorded during their first tour of Japan in August 1972 . It was originally released in December 1972 , with a US release in April 1973 , and became a commercial and critical success . 
 The band were well known for their strong stage act , and had privately recorded several shows , or broadcast them on radio , but were unenthusiastic about recording a live album until their Japanese record company decided it would be good for publicity . They insisted on supervising the live production , including using Martin Birch , who had previously collaborated with the band , as engineer , and were not particularly interested in the album 's release , even after recording . The tour was successful , with strong media interest and a positive response from fans . 
 The album was an immediate commercial success , particularly in the US , where it was accompanied by the top five hit " Smoke on the Water " , and became a steady seller throughout the 1970s . A three @-@ CD set of most of the tour 's performances was released in 1993 , while a remastered edition of the album with a CD of extra tracks was released in 1998 . In 2014 , a deluxe edition was announced with further bonus material . The album had a strong critical reception and continues to attract praise . A Rolling Stone readers ' poll in 2012 ranked Made in Japan the sixth best live album of all time . 
 = = Background and live bootlegs = = 
 Deep Purple " Mk II " formed in July 1969 when founding members , guitarist Ritchie Blackmore , organist Jon Lord and drummer Ian Paice recruited singer Ian Gillan and bassist Roger Glover to progress from their earlier pop and psychedelic rock sound towards hard rock . They began touring extensively , becoming a well received live band , and had recorded several shows either to broadcast on the radio or listen to privately . However , they had rejected the idea of releasing a live album commercially as they believed it would be impossible to reproduce the quality and experience of their stage act on an LP . 
 Consequently , there was a demand for bootleg recordings of the band . The most notorious of these was an LP entitled H Bomb , recorded at Aachen on 11 July 1970 , which led to a subsequent court case when Virgin Records ' Richard Branson was prosecuted for selling it . An article in Melody Maker that examined the bootleg phenomenon claimed that H Bomb was the best selling one at that time . This success , along with albums from other artists such as the Who 's Live at Leeds and the Rolling Stones ' Get Yer Ya @-@ Ya 's Out convinced the band that an official live album would be commercially successful . At the time , Glover told Sounds magazine that " there are so many bootlegs of us going around , if we put out our own live set , it should kill their market . " 
 = = Tour and recording = = 
 By 1972 , Deep Purple had achieved considerable commercial success in Japan , including several hit singles , so it made sense to tour there . Three dates were booked ; the Festival Hall , Osaka on 11 and 12 May , and the Budokan , Tokyo on 16 August , though these were later changed to the 15 and 16 August , and 17 August respectively due to an earlier US tour being rescheduled . The dates sold out almost immediately , and consequently the Japanese arm of the band 's label , Warner Bros. Records , wanted to record the tour for a live album to be released in the country . The band eventually agreed to the idea , but insisted if it was going to be released , they wanted it to be done properly . Gillan recalled , " we said we would have to OK the equipment , we wanted to use our own engineer and we would have the last say on whether the tapes were released " . The band enlisted producer Martin Birch , who had worked on previous studio albums , to record the shows onto an 8 @-@ track recorder so they could subsequently be mixed . 
 The band 's live setlist had been revamped at the start of the year , immediately after recording the album Machine Head , and that album made up a substantial proportion of new material . Although the setlist remained the same for most of the year , opening with " Highway Star " and closing with " Lazy " and " Space Truckin ' " , the band 's musical skill and structure meant there was sufficient improvisation within the songs to keep things fresh . The original intention was the stage act would be used for about a year before being dropped , but Gillan and Glover both resigned from the band in June 1973 . When this line @-@ up reformed in 1984 , the 1972 setlist made up a significant amount of material performed in concert . 
 The band arrived in Japan on 9 August , a week before the tour started , to a strong reception , and were greeted with gifts and flowers . Birch was not confident that the recording quality would be satisfactory , since the equipment supplied by Warner Bros. did not have any balance control and that the recorder 's size did not appear big enough on sight to capture a commercial quality recording . The band were uninterested in the end result , concentrating on simply being able to deliver a good show . Lord later noticed however that he felt this attitude meant the spontaneity of the performances and interplay between the band members was captured well . 
 The second gig in Osaka was considered to be the stronger of the two , and indeed this show made up the bulk of the released LP . Only one song , " Smoke on the Water " from 15 August show was used , and this may simply have been because it was the only gig that Blackmore played the song 's opening riff as per the studio album . 
 The band considered the gig at Tokyo on 17 August to be the best of the tour . Glover remembered " twelve or thirteen thousand Japanese kids were singing along to ' Child in Time ' " and considered it a career highlight , as did Gillan . At the venue , a row of bodyguards manned the front of the stage . When Blackmore smashed his guitar during the end of " Space Truckin ' " and threw it into the audience , several of them clambered past fans to try and retrieve it . Blackmore was annoyed , but the rest of the band found the incident amusing . The gig was not as well recorded as the Osaka shows , though " The Mule " and " Lazy " were considered of sufficient quality to make the final release . 
 There were no overdubs on the album . Lord claimed once in a magazine interview that a line from " Strange Kind of Woman " had to be redubbed from a different show after Gillan had tripped over his microphone cable , but no direct evidence of this was found when the multitrack tapes were examined . According to Lord , the total budget for the recording was only $ 3 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 35 @,@ 696 in 2015 ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 The band did not consider the album to be important and only Glover and Paice showed up to mix it . According to Birch , Gillan and Blackmore have never heard the finished album . The band did not want the album to be released outside Japan and wanted full rights to the tapes , but it was released worldwide anyway . 
 The album was released in the UK in December 1972 , with a special offer price of £ 3 @.@ 10 , the same as a typical single LP from that period . It reached number 16 in the charts . The cover was designed by Glover and featured a colour photo of the band on the front and rear covers , and black and white photos in the inside gatefold . The release in the US was delayed , until April 1973 , because Warner Bros. wanted to release Who Do We Think We Are first . They were motivated into releasing it due to a steady flow of UK imports being purchased , and it was an immediate commercial success , reaching number 6 in the charts . Warner Brothers also released " Smoke on the Water " as a single , coupling the live recording on Made in Japan with the studio version on Machine Head , and it reached number 4 in the Billboard charts . A recording of " Black Night " from the Tokyo gig , one of the encores that was not on the album , was released as the B @-@ side to the single " Woman from Tokyo " in Europe , and as a single in its own right in Japan . 
 The Japanese release was titled Live in Japan and featured a unique sleeve design , with an overhead stage shot of the band , a selection of photographs from a gig at the Rainbow Theatre in London , and an insert with lyrics and a hand @-@ written message from each band member . The first pressing came with a 35mm film negative with photos of the band which buyers could develop into their own prints . The sleeve notes claimed that the recording only contained the Tokyo gig , though in fact it was musically identical to the version released in the rest of the world . Phil Collen , later to play in Def Leppard , was in the audience for the Rainbow gig as captured on the sleeve . 
 In Uruguay , the album was released in 1974 as a single LP ( with just the first two sides ) on Odeon Records . It used a simplistic sleeve design unlike any other release , with a rising sun on the cover . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The band as a whole had mixed feelings about the album . Gillan was critical of his own performance , yet was still impressed with the quality of the live recording . Paice gave a very positive impression , suggesting that the shows were some of the best the group had performed , and the album captured the spirit of them well . Lord listed it as his favourite Deep Purple album , saying , " The band was at the height of its powers . That album was the epitome of what we stood for in those days . " 
 The response from critics was favourable . John Tiven , writing in Rolling Stone said " Made in Japan is Purple 's definitive metal monster , a spark @-@ filled execution ... Deep Purple can still cut the mustard in concert " . Subsequently , a readers ' poll in the magazine declared the album to be the sixth best live album of all time , adding the band have performed " countless shows since in countless permutations , but they 've never sounded quite this perfect . " 
 Recent reviews have been equally positive . Allmusic 's William Ruhlmann considered the album to be " a definitive treatment of the band 's catalog and its most impressive album " . Rock author Daniel <unk> claimed the album is " widely acknowledged as one of the greatest live albums of all time " . Goldmine magazine said the album " defined Deep Purple even as it redefined the concept of the live album . " Deep Purple author Dave Thompson wrote " the standing of Deep Purple 's first ( and finest ) live album had scarcely diminished in the quarter @-@ century since its release " . 
 = = Reissues = = 
 The original LP was a steady seller throughout the 1970s and remained in print . The first reissue on CD was in 1988 which contained the complete double @-@ LP on a single CD . 
 The 8 @-@ track tapes of the three shows were carefully put in storage by Warner Bros. Japan for future use . For the album 's 21st anniversary in 1993 , Deep Purple author and archivist Simon Robinson decided to enquire via the band 's management if the tapes could be located . He discovered the entire show had been recorded well , including all the encores . In July , Robinson and Darron Goodwin remixed the tapes at Abbey Road Studios for an expanded edition , that was then mastered by Peter Mew in September . To compromise between including as much of the shows as possible and setting a realistic price that most fans would accept , they decided to release a 3 @-@ CD box set , titled Live in Japan . This included all of the three main shows except for two tracks already available on the original album . In their place were two previously unreleased encores . 
 Robinson subsequently oversaw a new reissue of the original album in 1998 on CD , that was also remastered by Mew . This version contained an extra CD with three tracks that had been left off the 1993 set . The colour scheme of the cover was reversed to show gold text on a black background . The remastered Made in Japan has further edits to make a contiguous performance , making it shorter than the original release . At the same time , a limited edition of 4 @,@ 000 double LPs was released on purple vinyl , while in Spain , EMI added the studio versions of the tracks making up the original album to the second CD . 
 In 2014 , Universal Music announced that the album would be reissued in a number of formats in May . The deluxe option is a set of four CDs or 9 LPs containing a new remix of the three concerts in full , a DVD containing previously unseen video footage , a hardback book and other memorabilia . The original LP was reissued in 180g vinyl as per the original release with the original 1972 mix , with the audio available for digital download through popular providers . 
 = = Cover version = = 
 On 13 January 2006 , progressive metal band Dream Theater played the original album in its entirety at Kokusai Forum in Tokyo , and also on the 15th at NHK Hall in Osaka . Both performances were recorded , and the latter of the two shows has been released through the band 's YtseJam Records label . It was mixed for release by Glover . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Ritchie Blackmore , Ian Gillan , Roger Glover , Jon Lord and Ian Paice except where indicated . 
 = = = Original release on vinyl ( 2 LP ) = = = 
 = = = Live in Japan 3CD set = = = 
 Titles already released on Made in Japan are in bold . 
 Disc 1 
 Good Morning 
 Recorded in Osaka on 15 August 1972 
 " Smoke on the Water " from the 15th is not included here but is available on the original album 
 The encore " Speed King " from the 15th is not included here on CD1 but is available on CD3 
 Disc 2 
 Next week , we 're turning professional 
 Recorded in Osaka on 16 August 1972 
 The two encores " Black Night " and " Lucille " from the 16th are not included here but " Black Night " has been released on compilations and " Lucille " is available on the 1998 reissue of Made in Japan on CD 2 . 
 Disc 3 
 Can we have everything louder than everything else ? 
 Recorded in Tokyo on 17 August 1972 
 " The Mule " from the 17th is not included here but is available on the main album 
 The two encores " Black Night " and " Speed King " from the 17th are not included here but are available on the 1998 reissue disc 2 
 " Speed King " on CD3 is from the 15th 
 = = = 25th Anniversary remastered edition ( 2CD ) = = = 
 Disc One 
 Made in Japan 
 Disc Two 
 The Encores 
 = = = 2014 Box Set Edition = = = 
 Disc 1 
 " Good Morning " Osaka 15 August 1972 
 Disc 2 
 " Next Week We 're Turning Professional " Osaka 16 August 1972 
 Disc 3 
 " Can We Have Everything Louder Than Everything Else ? " Tokyo 17 August 1972 
 Disc 4 
 " Good Night " Encores 
 Disc 5 
 Made in Japan Documentary DVD 
 Disc 6 
 Japanese 7 " Promo 
 = = = 2014 2CD Edition = = = 
 Disc 1 
 2013 Kevin Shirley Remix 
 Disc 2 
 The Encores 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Taken from the sleeve notes : 
 Deep Purple 
 Ritchie Blackmore – lead guitar 
 Ian Gillan – vocals , harmonica ( uncredited ) , percussion ( uncredited ) 
 Roger Glover – bass 
 Jon Lord – organ , piano 
 Ian Paice – drums 
 Co @-@ ordination – Warner Pioneer 
 Recording Unit 
 Engineering – Martin Birch 
 Equipment – Ian Hansford , Rob Cooksey , Colin Hart , Ron Quinton 
 Marshall Engineer – K Flegg 
 Promoters – Universal Orient Promotions 
 Produced by Deep Purple 
 Mixed by Roger Glover , Ian Paice 
 Cover Design – Roger Glover 
 Photography – Fin Costello 
 Remastered by Peter Mew 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Parineeti Chopra = 
 Parineeti Chopra ( pronounced [ <unk> ̪ iː <unk> ] ; born 22 October 1988 ) is an Indian actress who appears in Hindi films . She has received several awards and nominations , including a Filmfare and National Film Award . In addition to her acting career , Chopra is a humanitarian and is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products . 
 Chopra initially aspired to pursue a career in investment banking , but after obtaining a triple honours degree in business , finance and economics from Manchester Business School she returned to India during the 2009 economic recession and joined Yash Raj Films as a public relations consultant . Later , she signed a deal with the company as an actress . She made her acting debut in the 2011 romantic comedy Ladies vs Ricky Bahl . Chopra 's breakthrough performance in the film earned her the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut and a nomination for Best Supporting Actress . 
 In 2012 , she garnered wide critical acclaim for her starring role in the romantic drama Ishaqzaade , a critical and commercial success , winning the National Film Award – Special Mention and several Best Actress nominations including the Filmfare Award for Best Actress . She subsequently received praise for her performances in the successful romantic comedies Shuddh Desi Romance ( 2013 ) and Hasee Toh Phasee ( 2014 ) . Her prime accomplishments have made her one of the most promising new actresses in India . 
 = = Early life and work = = 
 Parineeti Chopra was born on 22 October 1988 in Ambala , Haryana into a Punjabi family . Her father , Pawan Chopra , is a businessman and supplier to the Indian Army at Ambala Cantonment and her mother is Reena Chopra . She has two brothers : <unk> and Saraj ; actress Priyanka Chopra , Meera Chopra and <unk> are her cousins . Chopra received her early education at the Convent of Jesus and Mary in Ambala Cantonment . In an Interview published in The Hindu , she revealed that she was a very good student and had always wanted to become an investment banker . At the age of 17 , Chopra moved to London , where she received a triple honours degree in business , finance and economics from Manchester Business School in the United Kingdom . She used to take orientation classes for new students at the University . While studying , she worked part @-@ time for the Manchester United Football Club as the team leader of the catering department . 
 In 2009 , she returned to India in the wake of the economic recession and moved to Mumbai to stay with her cousin , Priyanka . During a visit to Yash Raj Films studio , Priyanka ( who was shooting for Pyaar Impossible ! ) introduced Parineeti to the head of the public relations team of the company . Chopra obtained an internship in the marketing department , joining the production company as a public @-@ relations consultant . She considered it a perfect job , because she could use what she had learned and work in films . Chopra had disliked actors and acting ; to her , the profession seemed like an excuse to wear too much makeup . This changed when she observed Priyanka 's preparations for her role in 7 Khoon Maaf , which highly influenced her and changed her perception towards acting and actors . Once she learnt more about filmmaking , her respect for the profession increased . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Debut and breakthrough ( 2011 – 12 ) = = = 
 While working on promotions for Band Baaja Baaraat , Chopra realised that she wanted to become an actress and decided to resign from her executive position with Yash Raj Films to attend acting school . Film director Maneesh Sharma suggested signing Chopra to Aditya Chopra , vice @-@ president of Yash Raj Films . Appalled by the idea of recruiting someone from his marketing team as an actress , the vice @-@ president refused . When Parineeti Chopra told Sharma she was leaving her job to attend acting school he advised her to meet the company 's casting director , who asked her to do a " dummy audition for fun " . Chopra remembered " fooling around with a camera " and delivering lines by the character Geet from the film Jab We Met , never expecting producer Aditya Chopra to see the tape . However , when the producer saw the tape he was impressed with her acting . With Sharma describing her " phenomenal " in the screen test , Chopra was signed to a three @-@ film deal ; Chopra 's colleagues later told her she was a " misfit in an office situation " . 
 In 2011 , Chopra made her screen debut in the romantic comedy Ladies vs Ricky Bahl , in a supporting role with Ranveer Singh and Anushka Sharma . The film describes how three girls who are tricked by a con artist take revenge on him by plotting the same trick for him . Chopra played the Delhi @-@ based " rich and spoiled brat " Dimple Chadda , who is betrayed by the film 's central character . The film received mixed reviews from critics , and was moderately successful at the box office ; however , Chopra 's performance was praised by film critics . Komal Nahta said , " Of the three other girls , Parineeti Chopra is undoubtedly the best . She has the best role , the best lines and hers is the best performance among the three . In fact , she provides a lot of light moments in the first half and , more importantly , in the second half too " . Priyanka Roy of The Telegraph described Chopra as " natural " and wrote " Among the ladies , debutante Parineeti almost steals the show from Anushka . As a spoilt and nouveau @-@ riche Delhi girl . " The film earned her several awards , including the Filmfare Award , the Screen Award , the Apsara Award and the IIFA Award for Best Debut . Chopra also received nominations in the supporting actress category at Filmfare ) and won the Apsara and IIFA Awards in the same category . 
 Chopra 's second release was Habib Faisal 's romantic drama Ishaqzaade in which she played a leading role opposite Arjun Kapoor . The film revolves around two political families , whose rivalry ( and mutual hatred ) go back generations . Chopra played the boisterous and feisty tomboy Zoya , a Muslim girl who marries a Hindu boy and gives birth to new rivalry in both families . The film received positive reviews from critics , and Chopra earned critical acclaim for her performance . Taran Adarsh observed , " Parineeti Chopra is simply fantastic in this high @-@ voltage drama . Playing the part of a spirited gun @-@ toting girl , she is not the regular timid , decorous , withdrawn Hindi film heroine . She portrays the violent behavior coupled with the audacious and brash attitude with aplomb " , and Rajeev Masand labelled her the " biggest strength of the film " . The film grossed over ₹ 46 crore ( US $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) at the domestic box office , and was termed a super hit by Box Office India . Chopra earned a National Film Award – Special Mention at the 60th National Film Awards , and received first nominations for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress , Screen and Apsara Awards . 
 = = = 2013 – present = = = 
 Chopra next appeared alongside <unk> Singh Rajput and <unk> Kapoor in the romantic comedy @-@ drama Shuddh Desi Romance ( 2013 ) , her second collaboration with Maneesh Sharma . The film , set in Jaipur , received positive feedback from the critics and Chopra 's portrayal of Gayatri , an outspoken and rebellious girl , was particularly praised . CNN @-@ IBN noted that the film belonged to Chopra , who " turns Gayatri into the most real woman one have encountered on screen " , and the critic Mayank Shekhar added " Parineeti ’ s act in the film ’ s first half is nothing short of National Award winning material . " Shuddh Desi Romance collected ₹ 46 crore ( US $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) at the domestic box @-@ office and emerged as a commercial success . Chopra garnered several Best Actress nominations , including her second Filmfare nomination for Best Actress . 
 Chopra 's first of three releases of 2014 was Dharma Productions ' romantic comedy Hasee Toh Phasee , her first role outside the Yash Raj Films banner . She featured in the role of a mad scientist alongside Sidharth Malhotra and Adah Sharma . Directed by <unk> Matthew and jointly produced by Anurag Kashyap and Karan Johar , the film was a moderate success and received generally positive reviews . Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV wrote that Chopra was " pitch @-@ perfect with her goofball act " and Hindustan Times published that she re @-@ defined the concept of a Bollywood heroine with the film . 
 Habib Faisal 's dowry @-@ based social comedy film Daawat @-@ e @-@ Ishq marked Chopra 's second collaboration with Faisal . She was cast as <unk> " <unk> " Qadir , a middle @-@ class salesgirl from Hyderabad alongside Aditya Roy Kapoor and Anupam Kher . The film received mixed reviews though Chopra was praised . Film critic Sarita A Tanwar from Daily News Analysis found Chopra to be " the best thing about the film " and added , " She shines in every scene . She does what she does every single time — rises head and shoulders above the film and her costars . " Chopra next played her first " glamorous role " in Shaad Ali 's crime film Kill Dil , co @-@ starring Govinda , Ranveer Singh and Ali Zafar . Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com found the film to be a " disaster " and wrote that " Chopra is terribly miscast and wears clothes that should have never left the wardrobe " . Both Daawat @-@ e @-@ Ishq and Kill Dil were unsuccessful at the box office . 
 = = = = Upcoming projects = = = = 
 As of July 2016 , Chopra is filming Yash Raj Film 's romantic drama Meri <unk> Bindu opposite Ayushmann Khurana directed by debutant Akshay Roy . She has been cast as the titular character , Bindu ( an aspiring singer ) , and will be making her singing debut in the film . She has also signed Homi Adajania 's <unk> opposite <unk> Singh Rajput . 
 = = In the media = = 
 In addition to acting in films , Chopra is active in charity work and supports a number of causes . She walked the ramp at the Wills Lifestyle India Fashion Week to support the Shabana Azmi Mijwan Welfare Society , an NGO dedicated to empowering girls . Chopra said , " I don 't want it to be just about ramp walk , but I seriously and genuinely feel for what Mijwan and what Manish and <unk> are doing . For such an initiative , I just could not say no . I had to be a part of it . " She also appeared on NDTV 's Greenathon , an initiative to support eco @-@ friendliness and investigate poor electricity supplies in rural villages , to lend her support . Apart from charity work , she serves as an ambassador for a number of brands . Chopra endorses brands such as <unk> , Nivea , Maaza and Spinz , <unk> , Pantene and Mahindra <unk> . She became the first Bollywood star to endorse products from both Coke ( Maaza ) and PepsiCo ( <unk> ) at the same time . 
 The actress ' roles and performances have been studied by critics . NDTV noted , " [ Chopra ] .... is as far removed from the standard Bollywood bombshell as it is possible for a lead actress to be . She 's more girl next door than glamour doll , with no obvious oomph in evidence , and freely confesses to a battle with the weighing scale " . Following her debut , she has been widely regarded as one of the most promising actresses in Hindi cinema . The Indian Express labelled her the " most brightest and talented " newcomer of this generation , noting " her infectious amount of energy " . While discussing her career in a 2013 article , CNN @-@ IBN noted , " [ she ] .... is one of the few actresses in the current lot who has a strong screen presence which demands absolute attention from the viewer . When she is on screen , one can 't notice other actors — Parineeti engages you in such a way " . In a 2013 interview with Hindustan Times , Chopra revealed that she intends to do films , where she has lot to perform and not the films , which has high production value . The actress appeared on Verve 's list of most powerful women in 2011 . In 2012 , she featured on Rediff.com 's annual list of Bollywood 's Best Actresses . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Chopra is a recipient of a National Film Award – Special Mention for Ishaqzaade ( 2012 ) and a Filmfare Best Female Debut for Ladies vs Ricky Bahl ( 2011 ) . Additionally , she has been nominated for three more Filmfare Awards : Best Supporting Actress for Ladies vs Ricky Bahl ( 2011 ) and Best Actress for Ishaqzaade ( 2012 ) and Shuddh Desi Romance ( 2013 ) . 
 = Marc Lépine = 
 Marc Lépine ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; October 26 , 1964 – December 6 , 1989 ) was a 25 @-@ year @-@ old Canadian man from Montreal , Quebec , who in 1989 murdered 14 women , and wounded 10 women and four men at the École Polytechnique , an engineering school affiliated with the Université de Montréal , in the École Polytechnique massacre , also known as the " Montreal Massacre " . 
 Lépine was born in Montreal , the son of a Canadian nurse and an Algerian businessman . His father was abusive and contemptuous of women . After his parents separated when he was seven , his mother returned to nursing to support her children . Lépine and his younger sister lived with other families , seeing their mother on weekends . Lépine was considered bright but withdrawn and having difficulties with peer and family relationships . He changed his name to Marc Lépine at the age of 14 giving as the reason his hatred of his father . Lépine 's application to the Canadian Forces was rejected , and in 1982 he began a science program at a college , switching to a more technical program after one year . In 1986 , he dropped out of the course in his final term , and was subsequently fired from his job at a hospital due to his poor attitude . He began a computer programming course in 1988 , and again abandoned it before completion . Lépine twice applied for admission to the École Polytechnique , but lacked two required compulsory courses . 
 After several months of planning , Lépine entered the École Polytechnique de Montréal , on the afternoon of December 6 , 1989 . He had long complained about women working in non @-@ traditional jobs , and after separating men and women in a classroom , he shot the women , claiming that he was fighting feminism . He then moved into other parts of the building , only targeting the women in classrooms he went to , before killing himself . His suicide note blamed feminists for ruining his life . 
 Lépine 's actions have been variously ascribed to psychiatric diagnoses such as personality disorder , psychosis , or attachment disorder , or societal factors such as poverty , isolation , powerlessness , and violence in the media . The massacre is regarded by criminologists as an example of a hate crime against women , and by feminists and government officials as misogynist attack and an example of the larger issue of violence against women . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Marc Lépine was born Gamil Rodrigue <unk> Gharbi on October 26 , 1964 in Montreal , Quebec , the son of Algerian immigrant Rachid <unk> Gharbi and Canadian nurse Monique Lépine . His father Rachid , who was a mutual funds salesman , was travelling in the Caribbean at the time of his son 's birth . During his absence , his mother Monique discovered evidence that her husband had been having an affair . Rachid was a non @-@ practising Muslim , and Monique a former Catholic nun who had rejected organized religion after she left the convent . Their son was baptized a Roman Catholic as an infant , but received no religious instruction during his childhood ; his mother described her son as " a confirmed atheist all his life . " Gamil 's sister , Nadia , was born in 1967 . 
 Instability and violence marked the family : they moved frequently , and much of Lépine 's early childhood was spent in Costa Rica and Puerto Rico , where his father was working for a Swiss mutual funds company . The family returned to Montreal permanently in 1968 , shortly before a stock market crash led to the loss of much of the family 's assets . Rachid was an authoritarian , possessive and jealous man , frequently violent towards his wife and his children . He had contempt for women and believed that they were only intended to serve men . He required his wife to act as his personal secretary , slapping her if she made any errors in typing , and forcing her to <unk> documents in spite of the cries of their toddler . He was also neglectful and abusive towards his children , particularly his son , and discouraged any tenderness , as he considered it spoiling . In 1970 , following an incident in which Rachid struck Gamil so hard that the marks on his face were visible a week later , his mother decided to leave . The legal separation was finalized in 1971 , and the divorce in 1976 . Following the separation , Gamil lived with his mother and younger sister Nadia ; soon after , their home and possessions were seized when Rachid defaulted on mortgage payments . Gamil was afraid of his father , and at first saw him on weekly supervised visits . The visits ended quickly , as Rachid ceased contact with his children soon after the separation . Gamil never again saw his father , and in the future refused to discuss him with others . 
 Rachid stopped making support payments after paying them twice , and to make ends meet , Monique returned to nursing . She subsequently started taking further courses to advance her career . During this time the children lived with other families during the week , seeing their mother only on weekends . Concerned about her children and parenting skills , she sought help for the family from a psychiatrist at St. Justine 's Hospital in 1976 ; the assessment concluded there was nothing wrong with the shy and withdrawn Gamil , but recommended therapy for his sister Nadia , who was challenging her authority . 
 = = = Adolescence = = = 
 After the divorce became final in 1976 , the children , then aged 12 and 9 , returned to live with their mother , who was director of nursing at a Montreal hospital . In 1977 , the family moved to a house purchased in the middle @-@ class Montreal suburb of Pierrefonds . Gamil Gharbi attended junior high and high school , where he was described as a quiet student who obtained average to above average marks . He developed a close friendship with another boy , but he did not fit in with other students . <unk> as an Arab because of his name , at the age of 14 he legally changed it to " Marc Lépine " , citing his hatred of his father as the reason for taking his mother 's surname . Lépine was uncommunicative and showed little emotion . He suffered from low self @-@ esteem , exacerbated by his chronic acne . Family relations remained difficult ; his younger sister Nadia publicly humiliated him about his acne and his lack of girlfriends . He fantasized about her death , and on one occasion made a mock grave for her . He was overjoyed when in 1981 she was placed in a group home because of her delinquent behaviour and drug abuse . Seeking a good male role model for Lépine , his mother arranged for a Big Brother . For two years , the experience proved positive as Lépine , often with his best friend , enjoyed the time with photography and moto @-@ cross motorcycles . However , in 1979 the meetings ceased abruptly when the Big Brother was detained on suspicion of molesting young boys . Both Lépine and his Big Brother denied that any molestation had occurred . Lépine owned an air rifle as a teenager , which he used to shoot pigeons near his home with his friend . They also enjoyed designing and building electronic gadgets . He developed an interest in World War II and an admiration of Adolf Hitler , and enjoyed action and horror movies . Lépine also took considerable responsibility at home , including cleaning and doing repairs while his mother worked . 
 Lépine applied to join the Canadian Forces as an officer cadet in September 1981 at the age of 17 , but was rejected during the interview process . He later told his friend it was because of difficulties accepting authority , and in his suicide letter , noted that he had been found to be " anti @-@ social " . An official statement from the military after the massacre stated that he had been " interviewed , assessed and determined to be unsuitable . " 
 = = = Adulthood = = = 
 In 1982 at the age of 18 , the family moved to Saint @-@ Laurent , closer to his mother 's work and to Lépine 's new <unk> . He lost contact with his school friend soon after the move . This period marks the beginning of the seven years which he described in his suicide note as having " brought [ him ] no joy " . 
 In August 1982 , Lépine began a two @-@ year pre @-@ university course in pure sciences at <unk> de Saint @-@ Laurent , failing two courses in the first semester but improving his grades considerably in the second semester . He worked part @-@ time at a local hospital where his mother was director of nursing , serving food and doing custodial work . He was seen as nervous , hyperactive , and immature by his colleagues . He developed an attraction to another employee , but he was too shy to act on his feelings . After a year at college , he switched from the university @-@ destined science program into electronics technology , a three @-@ year technical program geared more towards immediate employment . His teachers remembered him as being a model student , quiet , hardworking and generally doing well in his classes , particularly those related to <unk> . There was an unexplained drop in his marks in the fall 1985 term , and in February 1986 , during the last term of the program , he suddenly and without explanation stopped attending classes , as a result failing to complete his diploma . 
 He moved out of his mother 's home into his own apartment , and in 1986 he applied to study engineering at École Polytechnique de Montréal . He was admitted on the condition that he complete two compulsory courses , including one in solution chemistry . In 1987 , Lépine was fired from his job at the hospital for aggressive behaviour , as well as disrespect of superiors , and carelessness in his work . He was enraged at his dismissal , and at the time described a plan to commit a murderous rampage and then commit suicide . His friends noted that he was unpredictable , flying into rages when frustrated . 
 In the fall of 1987 , in order to complete his college diploma , Lépine took three courses , obtaining good marks in all of them , and in February 1988 , began a course in computer programming at a private college in downtown Montreal , funding his studies with government student loans . He moved into a downtown apartment with his old high school friend , and in the winter of 1989 took a CEGEP night @-@ course in solution chemistry , a prerequisite course for the École Polytechnique . Lépine wanted a girlfriend , but was generally ill at ease around women . He tended to boss women around and show off his knowledge in front of them . He spoke out to men about his dislike of feminists , career women and women in traditionally male occupations , such as the police force , stating that women should remain in the home , caring for their families . Lépine applied again to the École Polytechnique in 1989 ; however his application was rejected as he lacked required courses . In March 1989 he abandoned the course in computer programming , though he performed well in the CEGEP course , obtaining 100 % in his final exam . In April 1989 he met with a university admissions officer , and complained about how women were taking over the job market from men . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 The massacre appeared to have been planned for several months if not longer . In August 1989 , Lépine picked up an application for a firearms @-@ acquisition certificate , and in mid @-@ October , he received his permit . On November 21 , 1989 , Lépine purchased a Ruger Mini @-@ 14 semi @-@ automatic rifle at a local sporting goods store . Between October and December 1989 , Lépine was seen at least seven times at the École Polytechnique . Four days before the shooting , he brought his mother a present , though it was several weeks before her birthday ; he also brought a note and two bags of belongings , which she did not discover until long after the shooting . Lépine had previously always been very punctual paying his rent , but had not done so in December 1989 . 
 On December 6 , 1989 , Lépine walked into the École Polytechnique de Montréal . There , he entered a second @-@ floor classroom where he separated the men and women and then ordered the approximately 50 men to leave . Claiming that he was fighting feminism , he shot the nine women who remained , killing six and injuring the rest . After this , Lépine moved to other areas of the building , including the cafeteria , corridors and another classroom . A total of 14 women ( 12 engineering students , one nursing student , and one university employee ) were killed , and four men and ten women injured before Lépine turned the gun on himself . The event was later described as a " pseudo @-@ community " type of " pseudo @-@ commando " murder @-@ suicide , in which the perpetrator targets a specific group , usually in a public place and intending to die in " a blaze of glory . " 
 A three @-@ page letter was found in the pocket of his jacket . The letter was never officially made public , but was leaked in November 1990 to Francine Pelletier , and published in the newspaper La Presse . In his suicide letter , Lépine claimed political motives , blaming feminists for ruining his life . He considered himself rational and expressed admiration for Denis Lortie , who had mounted an attack on the Quebec National Assembly in 1984 for political reasons , killing three Quebec government employees . The letter also contained a list of nineteen Quebec women whom Lépine apparently wished to kill because of their feminism . Another letter , written to a friend , promised the explanation to the massacre lay by following clues left in Lépine 's apartment . The hunt led only to a suitcase of computer games and hardware . 
 Marc Lépine was buried in the Cimetière Notre @-@ Dame @-@ des @-@ Neiges in Montreal , a few blocks from where he committed the massacre . 
 = = = Rationale = = = 
 A police psychiatrist who interviewed Lépine 's family and entourage , and who had access to his letters , suggested that he may have had a serious personality disorder , as he chose the multiple homicide / suicide strategy ( killing oneself after killing others ) that is a characteristic of this disorder . The psychiatrist noted " extreme narcissistic vulnerability " as shown by fantasies of power and success combined with high levels of self @-@ criticism and difficulties dealing with rejection and failure . Feelings of powerlessness and incompetence were compensated for by a violent and grandiose imaginary life . Other psychiatrists suggested that Lépine was psychotic , having lost touch with reality as he tried to erase the memories of a brutal ( and absent ) father , while at the same time unconsciously identifying with a violent manhood that dominates women . Other theories were that Lépine 's experiences of abuse as a child had caused brain @-@ damage or led him to feel victimized as he faced losses and rejections in his later life . 
 His mother speculated that Lépine may have suffered from attachment disorder , due to the abuse and sense of abandonment he had experienced in his childhood . She also wondered whether Lépine viewed her as a feminist , and that the massacre might have been an unconscious attempt to get revenge for her neglect while she pursued her career , and for his sister 's taunts . Others take a less individualistic approach . Many feminists and governmental officials view it as an illustration of misogynist violence committed against women . Criminologists consider the massacre as an example of a hate or bias crime against women . A few <unk> seek to rehabilitate Lépine as hero of the anti @-@ feminist cause . Others wondered if Lépine 's actions were the result of societal changes that had led to increased poverty , powerlessness , individual isolation or increased violence in the media and in society . 
 = = Suicide statement = = 
 The following is a translation of the suicide letter written by Lépine on the day of the shooting . The original letter in French is also available . 
 Forgive the mistakes , I had 15 minutes to write this . See also Annex . 
 Would you note that if I commit suicide today 89 @-@ 12 @-@ 06 it is not for economic reasons ( for I have waited until I exhausted all my financial means , even refusing jobs ) but for political reasons . Because I have decided to send the feminists , who have always ruined my life , to their Maker . For seven years life has brought me no joy and being totally blasé , I have decided to put an end to those <unk> . 
 I tried in my youth to enter the Forces as an officer cadet , which would have allowed me possibly to get into the arsenal and precede Lortie in a raid . They refused me because asocial [ sic ] . I therefore had to wait until this day to execute my plans . In between , I continued my studies in a haphazard way for they never really interested me , knowing in advance my fate . Which did not prevent me from obtaining very good marks despite my theory of not handing in work and the lack of studying before exams . 
 Even if the Mad Killer epithet will be attributed to me by the media , I consider myself a rational erudite that only the arrival of the Grim Reaper has forced to take extreme acts . For why persevere to exist if it is only to please the government . Being rather backward @-@ looking by nature ( except for science ) , the feminists have always enraged me . They want to keep the advantages of women ( e.g. cheaper insurance , extended maternity leave preceded by a preventative leave , etc . ) while seizing for themselves those of men . 
 Thus it is an obvious truth that if the Olympic Games removed the Men @-@ Women distinction , there would be Women only in the graceful events . So the feminists are not fighting to remove that barrier . They are so opportunistic they [ do not ] neglect to profit from the knowledge accumulated by men through the ages . They always try to misrepresent them every time they can . Thus , the other day , I heard they were honoring the Canadian men and women who fought at the frontline during the world wars . How can you explain [ that since ] women were not authorized to go to the frontline ? ? ? Will we hear of Caesar 's female legions and female galley slaves who of course took up 50 % of the ranks of history , though they never existed . A real <unk> Belli . 
 Sorry for this too brief letter . 
 Marc Lépine 
 The letter is followed by the list of 19 names , with a note at the bottom : 
 " Nearly died today . The lack of time ( because I started too late ) has allowed these radical feminists to <unk> <unk> est . " 
 = = Memorial = = 
 Canadians mark the day of the killings with a National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women . 
 In 2008 , Lépine 's mother Monique published Aftermath , a memoir of her own journey through the grief and pain of the incident . She had stayed silent until 2006 , when she decided to speak out for the first time in the wake of that year 's Dawson College shooting . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Lépine 's life and death was dramatized by Adam Kelly in his controversial play The <unk> . 
 The shooting was dramatized by Denis Villeneuve in the 2009 film Polytechnique . Actor Maxim <unk> won a Genie Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Lépine . 
 = Denard Robinson = 
 Denard Xavier Robinson ( born September 22 , 1990 ) , is an American football running back for the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was drafted by the Jaguars in the fifth round of the 2013 NFL Draft . Robinson was the starting quarterback in all 26 games for the 2010 and 2011 Michigan Wolverines football teams and played at the same position as a senior for the 2012 team as well as running back and receiver in the second half of the season . 
 As a sophomore in 2010 , Robinson set the single @-@ season Division I FBS record for rushing yards by a quarterback and became the only player in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) history to both pass and rush for 1 @,@ 500 yards . Robinson also broke the Big Ten Conference season record with 4 @,@ 272 yards of total offense ( 2 @,@ 570 yards passing and 1 @,@ 702 yards rushing ) and led the conference in rushing . In his second start at quarterback against Notre Dame , he set the Michigan single @-@ game record with 502 yards of total offense . He was awarded the 2010 Chicago Tribune Silver Football as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten Conference and was selected by the Football Writers Association of America as a first @-@ team All @-@ American . He also set the Big Ten single @-@ game record for rushing yards by a quarterback and became the only player in NCAA Division I FBS history to both pass for 200 yards and rush for 200 yards in a regular season game twice . 
 As a junior in 2011 , Robinson led a resurgent Michigan team to an 11 – 2 record and a victory over Virginia Tech in the 2012 Sugar Bowl . He threw for a career @-@ high 338 passing yards in a come @-@ from @-@ behind victory over Notre Dame in the first night game played at Michigan Stadium . At the end of the 2011 season , Robinson had eight of the top 10 single @-@ game total offense totals in Michigan history , including 948 yards in two games against Notre Dame . His total offense output in 2010 ( 4 @,@ 272 yards ) and 2011 ( 3 @,@ 348 yards ) rank as the top two single @-@ season totals in Michigan history . As a senior in 2012 , he extended his record with a third game with both 200 yards rushing and 200 yards passing . 
 As a freshman and sophomore , he also competed as a sprinter for the Michigan men 's track and field team . He has run the 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 32 seconds , and he recorded the fastest competition time in 2010 among Michigan 's sprinters in the 60 @-@ meter dash . 
 = = Early life and nickname = = 
 Robinson was born in 1990 , the son of Thomas Robinson , Sr. , and Dorothea Robinson . Robinson began playing pee @-@ wee football by age 10 and played the game with his shoes untied , thus earning the nickname " Shoelace " as a child . Those who saw him play at Westside Park in Deerfield Beach recall : 
 " Kids would go for his shoes on tackles , and he 'd come up to the huddle in just socks . His coach couldn 't stand it at first and neither could his parents . They 'd tie wristbands around his shoes . When that didn 't work , they tried athletic tape . They even rolled his socks over his shoes . He was a marvel , and he wasn 't even finished with the sixth grade . " 
 Robinson continued to play football without tying his shoelaces and became known as " Shoelace . " One reporter who visited his family to watch a Michigan game noted , " To everyone in Deerfield Beach – everyone but his mother , that is – there is no Denard , just Shoelace . " Robinson 's high school coach , Art Taylor , explained his rationale for accepting the practice : 
 " After 25 years coaching , if the kid can throw it 90 yards in the air and is accurate and the kid can run as fast as he does ... as long as he feels comfortable , not lacing his shoes , fine with me . The kid 's been doing it all his life , why mess with it ? " 
 At the college level , his coaches at the University of Michigan also accepted Robinson 's practice . After learning that Robinson could run the 100 meters in 10 @.@ 4 seconds with his shoes untied , Michigan quarterbacks coach Rod Smith called it " the damnedest thing I 've ever seen " and added , " Anybody that runs that fast I 'm not going to tell him how to tie his shoes . " Robinson wears Adidas <unk> Superfly shoes with Velcro straps to secure them to his feet . 
 = = High school career = = 
 As a ninth grader , Robinson tried out for a spot as a defensive back for the varsity football team at Deerfield Beach High School in Deerfield Beach , Florida . The team 's defensive coordinator at the time was former Buffalo Bills defensive back Manny Martin , who was also Robinson 's algebra teacher . Martin later recalled that he had an experienced defensive backfield , but Robinson " was always in my ear : ' I can do it . ' " Robinson did not win a spot on the varsity team and instead played quarterback for the junior @-@ varsity team as a ninth grader . 
 Robinson became the starting quarterback for the Deerfield Beach varsity team as a sophomore and filled that position for three years from 2006 to 2008 . Deerfield Beach head coach Art Taylor recalled , " As soon as he stepped on that field his sophomore year playing varsity , we knew we had something special . " 
 In a 2007 state semifinal game played at the Orange Bowl , Robinson led his team to within two points of upsetting Miami Northwestern , the top @-@ ranked high school team in the country . While warming up , Robinson noticed that a Miami Northwestern lineman had taped a photograph of Robinson onto the front of his helmet . Robinson started laughing and told the player , " You think that scares us ? " Robinson had Deerfield ahead in the game , 12 – 7 , but Miami Northwestern completed a 99 @-@ yard touchdown drive with 18 seconds left to give them a 14 – 12 win . 
 In October 2008 against St. Thomas Aquinas High School , Robinson was responsible for six touchdowns in a single game , passing for 342 yards and five touchdowns and rushing for 54 yards and a touchdown . As a three @-@ year starter for Deerfield Beach , Robinson totaled nearly 6 @,@ 000 yards of total offense with 4 @,@ 784 passing yards ( 262 for 576 passing ) and 1 @,@ 132 rushing yards ( 5 @.@ 2 yards per carry ) . 
 Robinson also competed in track for Deerfield Beach . In March 2009 , he ran the 100 meters sprint in 10 @.@ 44 seconds , and finished third in the 100 @-@ meter dash at the 2008 Florida 4A Track & Field State Championships . He also ran the 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 32 seconds . He was also a member of the 2008 Florida High School Athletic Association state champion 4 x 100 metres relay team . 
 = = College recruitment = = 
 As a high school senior , ESPN ranked Robinson seventh in the country as a general athlete and 101st regardless of position . Rivals.com ranked him 14th as a general athlete and 188th overall . Scout.com categorized him as a cornerback and ranked him 16th in the nation . Robinson received scholarship offers from Florida , Georgia , Kansas State , Michigan , and other programs . Michigan initially recruited Robinson as a defensive back , and Robinson declined . Robinson recalled that it was one of his goals to play quarterback at the college level . After observing his passing abilities , Michigan recruited Robinson as a quarterback . On February 4 , 2009 , Robinson announced that he had signed a National Letter of Intent to attend Michigan . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = 2009 football season = = = 
 Robinson enrolled in the University of Michigan 's School of Kinesiology in the fall of 2009 . During Michigan 's 2009 summer training camp , Robinson was in competition for the starting quarterback position with fellow freshman Tate Forcier and junior Nick Sheridan . Forcier , who enrolled early and participated in spring practice , was named the starting quarterback , but Robinson saw significant playing time as a true freshman , appearing in all 12 games . 
 On September 5 , 2009 , in Michigan 's season opener against Western Michigan , Robinson scored a touchdown on his first collegiate ( fumbled ) snap . As the ESPN television broadcast focused on his untied shoelaces , Robinson took the snap in the shotgun formation , ran to the right , broke a tackle at the 40 @-@ yard line , then cut left and ran 43 yards for a touchdown . 
 Two weeks later against Eastern Michigan , he ran quarterback draw plays for touchdowns of 13 and 36 yards , though he also threw two interceptions . 
 In Michigan 's October 10 game against Iowa , Robinson replaced Forcier in the fourth quarter with the team trailing 30 – 21 . He led the team on a 59 @-@ yard scoring drive capped by his own 3 @-@ yard touchdown run with 3 : 16 left to cut the lead to 30 – 28 . However , on the following drive , Robinson 's threw an interception at Michigan 's 31 @-@ yard line with 44 seconds remaining in the game . 
 Robinson led the Wolverines on four scoring drives against Delaware State , throwing his first two collegiate touchdown passes and scoring a rushing touchdown as well . His only start of the season came on November 14 as a running back against Wisconsin . 
 During the 2009 season , Robinson completed 14 of 31 passes for 188 yards and two passing touchdowns . He also ran for 351 yards and five touchdowns in 69 attempts . 
 = = = 2010 track season = = = 
 Robinson also competed for the Michigan men 's track and field team during his freshman year . In January 2010 , Robinson told a reporter , " When I was getting recruited I always wanted to run track and play football . It helped me move faster on the football field . " Michigan track coach Fred LaPlante said Robinson had one of the 10 fastest 100 @-@ meter high @-@ school times in the United States in 2009 and described Robinson the sprinter as " one of the four or five best guys in the Big Ten . " LaPlante emphasized Robinson 's " quickness " : 
 " One thing in football that you don 't see in track is quickness . He 's incredibly quick and his lateral movement is unbelievable and his ability to go in one direction and get in another . The perception people have is that 's speed . That 's not speed , that 's quickness . " 
 Robinson won the 60 @-@ meter dash in his college track debut in " The Dual " against Ohio State on January 16 , 2010 . His time of 6 @.@ 81 stood up as the best by a Wolverine for the season . He finished fifth in the 60 @-@ meter dash at the <unk> Invitational on February 6 , 2010 . He finished ninth in the event at the 2010 Big Ten Indoor Championships in late February 2010 , failing to qualify for the finals by four @-@ thousandths of a second . 
 LaPlante recalled becoming panic @-@ stricken during a practice race when Robinson was " running so fast he was having trouble holding the turn . " Concerned about an injury to the football team 's quarterback , LaPlante yelled out , " Denard ! Please , don 't do that again ! I 'll be fired in 2 seconds ! " LaPlante recalled Robinson 's reaction : " He had that great big smile on his face . " 
 = = = = Personal bests = = = = 
 = = = 2010 football season = = = 
 = = = = Pre @-@ season competition = = = = 
 During spring practice in April 2010 , Robinson impressed coaches and observers , leading to speculation that Robinson would overtake Forcier as the starting quarterback . The competition continued through late August and early September 2010 . In early September 2010 , Angelique <unk> profiled Robinson in The Detroit News : " The prevailing belief is that Robinson has worked hard enough and improved enough to earn the job . He took significant steps in spring practice , and from all accounts , he showed his teammates an incredible devotion to offseason conditioning and film viewing , all in the interest of honing his game and improving Michigan 's chances . " 
 Even on the morning of Michigan 's season opener , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times reported that " the mystery surrounding who would be the Wolverines ' No. 1 quarterback was a major story line , with coach Rich Rodriguez keeping his decision secret until the very last minute . " 
 = = = = A total offense record against UConn = = = = 
 Robinson did start Michigan 's season opener against Connecticut . In the first half , he rushed for 131 yards and a touchdown on 15 carries for an average of 8 @.@ 7 yards per carry . He finished the game with 383 yards of total offense , including 186 passing yards ( 19 of 22 passing ) and 197 rushing yards on 29 carries ( 6 @.@ 9 yards per carry ) . Robinson 's rushing yardage against UConn was the most ever by a Michigan quarterback . He also broke Michigan 's single @-@ game record for total offense with 383 yards . For his efforts Robinson earned Big Ten Conference Offensive Player of the Week , AT & T ESPN All @-@ America Player of the Week , and Walter Camp Football Foundation National Offensive Player of the Week recognition . 
 Less than a week after his performance in the Connecticut game , the New York Daily News wrote that Robinson had acquired " cult hero " status : " He has started only one game at quarterback for Michigan , but Denard Robinson is already a cult hero to the Wolverine faithful . " 
 = = = = 502 yards of total offense against Notre Dame = = = = 
 In his second start at quarterback , Robinson led Michigan to a 28 – 24 win over Notre Dame against its traditional rival . He finished the game with 502 of Michigan 's 532 yards of total offense ( 258 rushing yards and 244 passing yards ) , breaking the Michigan record he set in his first start . The record stood until Devin Gardner totaled 584 yards of total offense on October 19 , 2013 against Indiana . In the first half , Robinson had an 87 @-@ yard touchdown run that at the time ( surpassed on September 19 , 2015 by C. J. <unk> ) ranked as the longest run from scrimmage in Notre Dame Stadium 's 80 @-@ year history , but remains as the longest run by a visitor in Notre Dame Stadium . He also scored the winning touchdown with 27 seconds remaining on a two @-@ yard run , capping a 12 @-@ play , 72 @-@ yard drive . Robinson broke Mike Kafka 's Big Ten Conference record for rushing yards by a quarterback and became the ninth quarterback in NCAA history ( and the first since Pat White in 2006 ) to rush and pass for more than 200 yards in a single game . His rushing total also ranks as the all @-@ time best in a road game by any Michigan player , regardless of position . 
 After the game , Brandon Graham , who played with Robinson at Michigan in 2009 and now plays with Michael Vick on the Philadelphia Eagles told reporters that Robinson is even quicker than Vick : " Both of them are pretty fast , I just think Vick 's older ; he 's not really that fast like how Shoelace is . I think Shoelace is more quick than Vick , but Vick , he gets away . He 's pretty fast still . I think Shoelace might have got him by a couple steps . " 
 Robinson 's performance drew praise from the national media . The Wall Street Journal called Robinson " the breakout star of the young 2010 season " and drew attention to his " absurd rushing totals . " Columnist Mitch Albom wrote : " Denard Robinson redefined the term ' offensive weapon ' on Saturday against Notre Dame . " ESPN college football analyst Kirk Herbstreit noted the " confident aura " around Robinson : 
 " The body language he exudes is , ' I 'm a winner . ' He 's small in stature , but his heart you can almost see it pounding through his jersey . And then he has , like all the great ones , he plays with a swagger like , ' You can 't stop me . ' " 
 Gregg <unk> , national columnist for CBSSports.com , proclaimed Robinson the front @-@ runner for the Heisman Trophy : " Denard Robinson has earned the right to pole position in the Heisman race . It 's not close . And if he stays healthy , I fully expect him to walk across a stage in New York City in December and take that trophy home . " 
 For his performance against Notre Dame , Robinson was selected for the second consecutive week as the Walter Camp Football Foundation National Offensive Player of the Week , the AT & T ESPN All @-@ America Player of the Week , the Big Ten Offensive Player of the Week , and the CBSSports.com Player of the Day . He is the first player to earn the Walter Camp honor two weeks in a row , and the fourth to do so twice in a season . He was also named the Capital One Cup Impact Performance of the Week . CBS Sports ' Verne Lundquist joked : " He might become the first guy to win both the Davey O 'Brien and the Doak Walker . " 
 Robinson totaled 455 rushing yards and 885 yards of total offense in the first two games of the 2010 season , which led Division I FBS . Through the first two weeks of the season , Robinson had by himself outgained 87 of the 120 FBS teams in total offense . 
 = = = = Indiana : 494 yards of total offense = = = = 
 Playing against Indiana in the fifth game of the season , Robinson totaled 494 yards of total offense , the second @-@ highest single @-@ game total in Michigan history . He completed 10 of 16 passes for 277 yards and three touchdowns , and he gained 217 rushing yards on 19 carries for an average of 11 @.@ 4 yards per carry . On Michigan 's second play from scrimmage , Robinson ran 72 yards for a touchdown . On the second play of the second half , Robinson threw a 70 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Junior Hemingway , the longest of his career , to give Michigan a 28 – 21 lead . On Michigan 's next drive , Robinson aggravated the knee injury sustained the prior week against Bowling Green and came out of the game for the remainder of the drive . He returned to the game and led Michigan on a game @-@ winning , 65 @-@ yard touchdown drive in the final minute of the game . With 21 seconds remaining , Robinson completed a 32 @-@ yard pass to the 4 @-@ yard line . On the next play , Robinson scored on a 4 @-@ yard touchdown run with 17 seconds remaining . 
 With his performance against Indiana , Robinson became the first player in Division I FBS history to have two regular season games with 200 yards rushing and 200 yards passing . Seven others have accomplished the feat ( including Pat White , Vince Young and Antwaan Randle El ) , but none have done so more than once in the regular season . Vince Young accomplished this feat once in the regular season and once in the Rose Bowl . 
 After the Indiana game , Dari <unk> wrote in ESPN 's " Heisman Watch " column that Robinson was " running away with the Heisman Trophy " and compared him to 1988 Heisman Trophy winner Barry Sanders : 
 " We haven 't seen this type of college football playmaker since ... Barry Sanders ? I 'm not saying Robinson reminds me of Sanders . ( How could a quarterback remind me of a running back ? ) But there is a shocking resemblance between the diminutive playmakers in their speed , elusiveness and quickness . So is the effect the two have on my sense of what is right and wrong . Being that dominant on a football field somehow feels wrong . It 's unfair . " 
 On October 4 , 2010 , Robinson was named the Big Ten Offensive Player of the Week ( for the third time in five weeks ) , and also received the Davey O 'Brien Quarterback of the Week award ( for the second time in four weeks ) . After five games , Robinson remained the nation 's leading rusher in both total yards ( 905 ) and yards per game ( 181 ) . He also ranked fourth in the country with a quarterback rating of 180 . 
 = = = = Three consecutive mid @-@ season losses = = = = 
 After leading Michigan to a 5 – 0 record and breaking the school 's total offense records , Robinson was the front @-@ runner for the Heisman Trophy . His Heisman prospects suffered after three consecutive losses to Michigan State , Iowa and Penn State . 
 In a 34 – 17 loss to Michigan State in the Paul Bunyan Trophy game , Robinson completed 17 of 29 passes for 215 passing yards but threw three interceptions . He was also limited to 86 rushing yards on 21 carries . Despite a " lackluster " performance against the Spartans , Sports Illustrated selected Robinson for its " September Heisman " following the Michigan State game . He was also selected by Mark Schlabach as the Offensive MVP in ESPN.com 's Mid @-@ Season Awards . 
 One week after the loss to Michigan State , the Wolverines lost to Iowa , 38 – 28 . Robinson was limited to 96 passing yards and 105 rushing yards and threw his fifth interception of the season . In the third quarter , Robinson suffered a shoulder injury and did not return to the game . 
 Michigan 's record dropped to 5 – 3 with a 41 – 31 loss to Penn State . Despite the loss , Robinson 's offensive output rebounded against the Nittany Lions . He rushed for 191 yards on 27 carries ( an average of 7 @.@ 1 yards per carry ) and passed for another 190 yards , including a 60 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Kevin Koger . With 191 rushing yards against Penn State , Robinson 's season rushing total reached 1 @,@ 287 yards , breaking Antwaan Randle El 's Big Ten record of 1 @,@ 270 rushing yards by a quarterback . 
 = = = = Offensive free @-@ for @-@ all against Illinois = = = = 
 In his ninth start , Robinson passed for a career @-@ high 302 yards and ran for 62 yards against Illinois . On the first play from scrimmage , Robinson threw a 75 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Roy Roundtree . In the second quarter , Robinson also threw a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Roundtree and another 75 @-@ yard pass to Roundtree to set up Michigan 's third touchdown . Robinson set a school single @-@ half record with 262 passing yards in the first half . Robinson came out of the game at the end of the third quarter after reporting concussion @-@ like symptoms , including dizziness and headaches . Michigan went on to win the game 67 – 65 . Robinson and substitute Tate Forcier combined to break Michigan 's all @-@ time , single @-@ game record with 419 passing yards , surpassing the prior record of 396 yards by Tom Brady and Drew Henson against Michigan State in 1999 . The following week , Robinson , was named as one of sixteen Maxwell Award semifinalists . 
 = = = = Consecutive losses to Wisconsin and Ohio State = = = = 
 Robinson 's shot at the Heisman Trophy was lost with a disappointing performance against Purdue and consecutive blowout losses to Wisconsin and Ohio State . 
 In the Purdue game , Robinson turned the ball over four times ( two interceptions and two lost fumbles ) in heavy rain and gusting wind . Robinson was also held to a season @-@ low 68 rushing yards against Purdue . 
 One week later , Michigan suffered a 48 – 28 loss to Wisconsin . Robinson passed for 239 yards and two touchdowns , rushed for 121 yards and two touchdowns , set the Division I FBS record for rushing yards by a quarterback and become the first NCAA player with 1 @,@ 500 rushing yards and 2 @,@ 000 passing yards in the same season . However , Robinson 's individual performance was overshadowed by the 20 @-@ point loss to the Badgers . 
 In the final game of the regular season , Michigan lost by a 30 @-@ point margin ( 37 – 7 ) against Ohio State in The Game . Robinson failed to register a passing or rushing touchdown for the first time since 2010 . Although he rushed for 105 yards on 18 carries , he was limited to 87 passing yards . After sustaining two dislocated fingers on his non @-@ throwing hand , Robinson was replaced in the second half by Tate Forcier . 
 = = = = 2011 Gator Bowl = = = = 
 Michigan finished its 2010 season with a 52 – 14 loss to Mississippi State in the 2011 Gator Bowl , the worst defeat ever suffered by Michigan in a bowl game . Robinson completed 27 of 41 passes for 254 yards , two touchdowns and one interception . He added 59 rushing yards on 11 carries for 313 yards of total offense , enough to break Drew Brees ' Big Ten single @-@ season total offense record of 4 @,@ 189 yards . 
 = = = = 2010 season statistics and awards = = = = 
 Robinson finished the 2010 season with 1 @,@ 702 rushing yards ( 130 @.@ 9 yards per game ) , which stood as an FBS single @-@ season record for a quarterback until it was surpassed two years later by Jordan Lynch . He also passed for 2 @,@ 570 yards and compiled 4 @,@ 272 yards of total offense ( 328 @.@ 6 yards per game ) . In the 10th game of the season against Purdue , Robinson passed John Navarre 's Michigan single @-@ season total offense record of 3 @,@ 240 yards set in 2003 . Against Wisconsin one week later , he broke the Division I FBS single @-@ season quarterback rushing record of 1 @,@ 494 yards previously held by Beau Morgan of Air Force . He also became the first person in NCAA ( all divisions ) history to record 1 @,@ 500 yards rushing and passing in the same season . 
 At the end of the regular season , Robinson received the Chicago Tribune Silver Football trophy as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten Conference . He was also named Big Ten Offensive Player of the Year by the Big Ten coaches and media and by the College Football News . Robinson was also selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ American by the Football Writers Association of America as a running back , a third @-@ team All @-@ American by the Associated Press as an all @-@ purpose player , and an honorable mention quarterback selection by Sports Illustrated and College Football News . He finished sixth in the 2010 Heisman Trophy voting , and was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten quarterback by both the Big Ten media and College Football News . 
 With 313 yards of total offense in the 2011 Gator Bowl , Robinson broke Drew Brees ' Big Ten single @-@ season total offense record of 4 @,@ 189 yards . He fell 116 yards short of Tim Biakabutuka 's Michigan school record of 1 @,@ 818 rushing yards . However , he led the conference in both total offense and rushing yards per game . 
 = = = 2011 football season = = = 
 = = = = Decision to stay after coaching change = = = = 
