 Al @-@ Khidr ( " The Green One " ) , was an important Qur 'anic figure who was said to have met and traveled with Moses . He was given that name because of his role as a diplomat and negotiator . Green was also considered to be the median color between light and obscurity . 
 Roman Catholic and more traditional Protestant clergy wear green vestments at liturgical celebrations during Ordinary Time . In the Eastern Catholic Church , green is the color of Pentecost . Green is one of the Christmas colors as well , possibly dating back to pre @-@ Christian times , when evergreens were worshiped for their ability to maintain their color through the winter season . Romans used green holly and evergreen as decorations for their winter solstice celebration called Saturnalia , which eventually evolved into a Christmas celebration . In Ireland and Scotland especially , green is used to represent Catholics , while orange is used to represent Protestantism . This is shown on the national flag of Ireland . 
 = = In gambling and sports = = 
 Gambling tables in a casino are traditionally green . The tradition is said to have started in gambling rooms in Venice in the 16th century . 
 Billiards tables are traditionally covered with green woolen cloth . The first indoor tables , dating to the 15th century , were colored green after the grass courts used for the similar lawn games of the period . 
 Green was the traditional color worn by hunters in the 19th century , particularly the shade called hunter green . In the 20th century most hunters began wearing the color olive drab , a shade of green , instead of hunter green . 
 Green is a common color for sports teams . Well @-@ known teams include A.S. Saint @-@ Étienne of France , known as Les <unk> ( The Greens ) . The Mexico national football team has a green uniform . 
 British racing green was the international motor racing color of Britain from the early 1900s until the 1960s , when it was replaced by the colors of the sponsoring automobile companies . 
 A green belt in karate , taekwondo and judo symbolizes a level of proficiency in the sport . 
 = = Idioms and expressions = = 
 Having a green thumb . To be passionate about or talented at gardening . The expression was popularized beginning in 1925 by a BBC gardening program . 
 Greenhorn . Someone who is inexperienced . 
 Green @-@ eyed monster . Refers to jealousy . ( See section above on jealousy and envy ) . 
 <unk> . A term used in finance and corporate takeovers . It refers to the practice of a company paying a high price to buy back shares of its own stock to prevent an unfriendly takeover by another company or businessman . It originated in the 1980s on Wall Street , and originates from the green of dollars . 
 Green room . A room at a theater where actors rest when not onstage , or a room at a television studio where guests wait before going on @-@ camera . It originated in the late 17th century from a room of that color at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane in London . 
 <unk> . Environmental activists sometimes use this term to describe the advertising of a company which promotes its positive environmental practices to cover up its environmental destruction . 
 Green around the gills . A description of a person who looks physically ill . 
 Going green . An expression commonly used to refer to preserving the natural environment , and participating in activities such as recycling materials . 
 = Manhunter ( film ) = 
 Manhunter is a 1986 American crime horror thriller film based on Thomas Harris ' novel Red Dragon . Written and directed by Michael Mann , it stars William Petersen as FBI profiler Will Graham . Also featured are Tom Noonan as serial killer Francis Dollarhyde , Dennis Farina as Graham 's FBI superior Jack Crawford , and Brian Cox as incarcerated killer Hannibal Lecktor . The film focuses on Graham coming out of retirement to lend his talents to an investigation on Dollarhyde , a killer known as " The Tooth Fairy . " In doing so , he must confront the demons of his past and meet with Lecktor , who nearly counted Graham amongst his victims . 
 Manhunter focuses on the forensic work carried out by the FBI to track down killers and shows the long @-@ term effects that cases like this have on profilers such as Graham , highlighting the similarities between him and his quarry . The film features heavily stylized use of color to convey this sense of duality , and the nature of the characters ' similarity has been explored in academic readings of the film . It was the first film adaptation of Harris ' Hannibal Lecter novels , as well as the first adaptation of Red Dragon , which later became the basis for a film of the same name in 2002 . 
 Opening to mixed reviews , Manhunter fared poorly at the box office at the time of its release , making only $ 8 @.@ 6 million in the United States . However , it has been reappraised in more recent reviews and now enjoys a more favorable reception , as both the acting and the stylized visuals have been appreciated better in later years . Its resurgent popularity , which may be due to later adaptations of Harris ' books and Petersen 's success in CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , has seen it labelled as a cult film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will Graham ( William Petersen ) is a former FBI criminal profiler who has retired because of a mental breakdown after being attacked by a cannibalistic serial killer , Dr. Hannibal Lecktor ( Brian Cox ) whom he captured . Graham is approached at his Florida home by his former FBI superior Jack Crawford ( Dennis Farina ) , who is seeking help with a new serial killer case . Promising his wife ( Kim Greist ) that he will do nothing more than examine evidence and not risk physical harm , Graham agrees to visit the most recent crime scene in Atlanta , where he tries to enter the mindset of the killer , now dubbed the " Tooth Fairy " by the police for the bite @-@ marks left on his victims . 
 Having found the killer 's fingerprints , Graham meets with Crawford . They are accosted by tabloid journalist Freddy Lounds ( Stephen Lang ) , with whom Graham has a bitter history ; Lounds ' paper had run photographs of Graham taken secretly while he was hospitalized . Graham pays a visit to Lecktor , a former psychiatrist , in his cell and asks for his insight into the killer 's motivations . After a tense conversation , Lecktor agrees to look at the case file . A little later , Lecktor contrives and manages to obtain Graham 's home address by deceit during his phone privileges . 
 Graham travels to the first crime scene in Birmingham , Alabama , where he is contacted by Crawford , who tells him of Lounds ' tabloid story on the case . Crawford also patches Graham through to Frederick Chilton ( Benjamin Hendrickson ) , Lecktor 's warden , who has found a note in Lecktor 's personal effects . Reading it , they realize it is from the Tooth Fairy , expressing admiration for Lecktor — and an interest in Graham . Crawford brings Graham to the FBI Academy at Quantico , where a missing section of the note is analyzed to determine what Lecktor has removed . It is found to be an instruction to communicate through the <unk> section of the National Tattler , Lounds ' newspaper . 
 The FBI intends to plant a fake advertisement to replace Lecktor 's , but they realize that without the proper book code the Tooth Fairy will know it is fake ; therefore , they let the advertisement run as it is , and Graham organizes an interview with Lounds , during which he gives a false and derogatory profile of the Tooth Fairy to incite him . After a sting operation fails to catch the killer , Lounds is kidnapped by the Tooth Fairy ( Tom Noonan ) . Waking in the killer 's home , he is shown a slideshow of William Blake 's The Great Red Dragon paintings , along with the Tooth Fairy 's past victims and slides of a family the killer identifies as his next targets . Lounds is forced to tape @-@ record a statement before being set on fire in a wheelchair and killed , his flaming body rolled into the parking garage of the National Tattler as a warning . 
 Graham is told by Crawford that they have cracked Lecktor 's coded message to the Tooth Fairy — it is Graham 's home address with an instruction to kill the family ( ending with " Save yourself . Kill them all , " revealing that Lecktor believes Graham would find the Tooth Fairy ) . Graham rushes home to find his family safe but terrified . After the FBI moves Graham 's family to a safe house , he tries to explain to his son Kevin why he had retired previously . 
 At his job in a St. Louis film lab , Francis Dollarhyde — The Tooth Fairy — approaches a blind co @-@ worker , Reba McClane ( Joan Allen ) , and ends up offering her a lift . They go to Dollarhyde 's home , where Reba is oblivious to the fact that Dollarhyde is watching home @-@ movie footage of his planned next victim . She kisses him and they make love . Dollarhyde is confused by this newfound relationship , though it helps suppress his bloodlust . Just as Graham comes to realize how much the Tooth Fairy 's desire for acceptance factors into the murders , Dollarhyde watches as Reba is escorted home by another co @-@ worker . Mistakenly believing them to be kissing , Dollarhyde murders the man and abducts Reba . When she calls him Francis , he tells her : " Francis is gone . Forever . " 
 Desperately trying to figure out a connection between the murdered families , Graham realizes that someone must have seen their home movies . He and Crawford deduce where the films were processed . They identify the lab in St. Louis and fly there immediately . Dollarhyde has been casing the victims ' homes through home movies , enabling him to prepare for the break @-@ ins in extreme detail . Graham determines which employees that match their profile information have seen these films and obtains Dollarhyde 's home address , to which he and Crawford travel with a police escort . At Dollarhyde 's home , Reba is terrified as he contemplates what to do with her . As he struggles to kill Reba with a piece of broken mirror glass , police teams assemble around the house . Seeing that Dollarhyde has someone inside with him , Graham lunges through a window . He is quickly subdued by Dollarhyde , who retrieves a shotgun and uses it to wound Crawford and kill two police officers . Wounded in the firefight , Dollarhyde returns to the kitchen to shoot Graham , but misses because of his injuries and is killed himself when Graham returns fire . Graham , Reba , and Crawford are tended to by paramedics before Graham returns home and retires permanently . 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Petersen as Will Graham . Richard Gere , Mel Gibson and Paul Newman were considered for the role , but Mann cast Petersen after seeing footage from To Live and Die in L.A. Petersen spent time with officers of the Chicago Police Department researching for his role . 
 Tom Noonan as Francis Dollarhyde . Noonan credits his ability to improvise during rehearsals for his casting . He took up bodybuilding to prepare physically for the part . He began preparation for his role by studying other serial killers , but quickly rejected this approach . While shooting the film , Noonan remained in character at all times , keeping away from cast members playing his pursuers . 
 Dennis Farina as Jack Crawford . Farina had already worked with Mann before , making his acting début in the 1981 film Thief before starring in Crime Story and in several episodes of Miami Vice . Farina had already read the novel Red Dragon , and was called to audition at the same time as Brian Cox . 
 Kim Greist as Molly Graham . Greist , who according to reviews was " wasted in a tiny role " , had previously worked with Mann on an episode of Miami Vice . 
 Brian Cox as Dr. Hannibal Lecktor . Actors John Lithgow , Mandy Patinkin , and Brian Dennehy , and director William Friedkin were also considered for the part of Lecktor , whose name was changed from the novel 's " Lecter " . Cox based his performance on Scottish serial killer Peter Manuel . Cox was asked to audition with his back turned to the casting agents , as they felt they needed to focus on the power of his voice when considering him for the part . 
 Joan Allen as Reba McClane . In preparation for her role , Allen spent time with the New York Institute for the Blind , learning to walk through New York blindfolded . She had previously worked with co @-@ star William Petersen on stage , in the 1980 Steppenwolf Theatre Company production of Balm in Gilead . 
 Stephen Lang as Freddy Lounds . Lang had previously starred in Band of the Hand , on which Mann was executive producer . He went on to appear in the Mann @-@ produced Crime Story with Farina and in Mann 's 2009 film Public Enemies . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 The film was originally going to be called Red Dragon , like the novel . Michael Mann , who called the new title " inferior " , said that producer Dino De Laurentiis made the change after Michael Cimino 's film Year of the Dragon , produced by De Laurentiis , bombed at the box office in 1985 . William Petersen has commented that another reason for the change was to avoid any suggestion that it might be a karate movie . " At the time , Bruce Lee was knocking out Dragon movies , and Dino , in his wisdom , decided people would think it was a kung @-@ fu movie " , he later recalled . Brian Cox , who played jailed killer Hannibal Lecktor , has also expressed disdain for the film 's title , calling it " bland " and " cheesy " . 
 William Petersen worked with the Chicago Police Department Violent Crimes Unit and the FBI Violent Crimes Unit in preparation for the role of Will Graham , talking to the officers and reading some of their crime files . He spoke to the investigators on the Richard Ramirez case about how they coped with the effects these disturbing cases had on them and how they learned to " compartmentalize " their working and personal lives . " Of course you don ’ t really turn it off " , he recalled . " At the end of the day , even if you ’ re just a regular policeman , it takes a toll " . During the three years he spent working on the script , Michael Mann also spent time with the FBI 's Behavioral Science Unit , where he claimed to have met people very like the character of Will Graham . This level of research led Brent E. Turvey to describe the film as " one of the most competent blends of cutting @-@ edge forensic science and criminal profiling at the time " . Mann also spent several years corresponding with imprisoned murderer Dennis Wayne Wallace . Wallace had been motivated by his obsession for a woman he barely knew , and believed that Iron Butterfly 's " In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida " was " their song " . This connection inspired Mann to include the song in the film . 
 Tom Noonan , who played killer Francis Dollarhyde , initially researched other serial killers to study for the role , but was repulsed by it . He then decided to play the character with the sense that he felt he was doing right by his victims , not harming them . " I wanted to feel this guy was doing the best he could " , Noonan explained , " that he was doing this out of love " . Noonan credits his casting to improvisation during his audition , recalling that he was reading lines alongside a young woman . During a reading of the scene featuring the torture of Freddy Lounds , Noonan noticed that the woman began to seem frightened , and deliberately tried to scare her more . He believed that this is what secured the role for him . 
 Joan Allen , who played Dollarhyde 's blind love interest Reba McClane , recalls meeting with representatives of the New York Institute for the Blind in preparation for her role . She spent time walking around New York wearing a mask over her eyes to get accustomed to walking as though she were blind . 
 John Lithgow , Mandy Patinkin , William Friedkin , and Brian Dennehy were all considered for the role of Hannibal Lecktor , but Brian Cox was cast after being recommended to Mann by Dennehy . Cox based his portrayal on Scottish serial killer Peter Manuel , who ( he said ) " didn 't have a sense of right and wrong " . Cox has also suggested that his selection was due to his nationality , claiming that characters who are " a little bit nasty " are best played by Europeans . Mann kept the role of Lecktor very short , believing that it was " such a charismatic character that [ he ] wanted the audience almost not to get enough of him " . For the role of Will Graham , De Laurentiis had expressed interest in Richard Gere , Mel Gibson and Paul Newman , but Mann , having seen footage of William Petersen 's role in To Live and Die in L.A. , championed Petersen for the part . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Petersen has claimed in an interview that one of the film 's scenes forced the crew to adopt a guerrilla filmmaking approach . The scene in which Petersen 's character Will Graham falls asleep while studying crime scene photographs during a flight required the use of an airplane during shooting . Michael Mann had been unable to gain permission to use a plane for the scene and booked tickets for the crew on a flight from Chicago to Florida . Once on board , the crew used their equipment , checked in as hand luggage , to shoot the scene quickly , while keeping the plane 's passengers and crew mollified with Manhunter crew jackets . 
 Cinematographer Dante Spinotti made strong use of color tints in the film , using a cool " romantic blue " tone to denote the scenes featuring Will Graham and his wife , and a more subversive green hue , with elements of purple or magenta , as a cue for the unsettling scenes in the film , mostly involving Dollarhyde . Petersen has stated that Mann wanted to create a visual aura to bring the audience into the film , so that the story would work on an interior and emotional level . Mann also made use of multiple frame rates in filming the climactic shootout : different cameras recording the scene at 24 , 36 , 72 and 90 frames per second , giving the final scene what Spinotti has called an " off tempo " , " staccato " feel . 
 During principal photography , Noonan asked that no one playing his victims and pursuers be allowed to see him , while those he did speak to should address him by his character 's name , Francis . The first time Noonan met Petersen was when Petersen jumped through a large window during the filming of the climactic fight scene . Noonan admits that , because of his request , the atmosphere on set became so tense that people actually became afraid of him . He had also begun body @-@ building to prepare for the role and felt that his size intimidated the crew when filming began , as the first scene to be shot was his character 's interrogation and murder of another . Noonan claims that this led him to take separate flights and stay in separate hotels from the rest of the cast , and while on the film 's sets , he would remain in his trailer alone in the dark to prepare himself , sometimes joined by a silent Mann . 
 Petersen recalled filming the climactic shoot @-@ out scene at the end of principal photography , when most of the crew had already left the production because of time constraints . With no special effects crew to provide the blood spatter for the gunshots , Petersen described how the remaining crew would blow ketchup across the set through hoses when such effects were needed . Joan Allen also related that Mann would simulate the impacts of bullets in Dollarhyde 's kitchen by throwing glass jars across the surfaces so they would shatter where he needed them to ; one of these broken jars left a shard of glass embedded in Petersen 's thigh during filming . The pool of blood forming around Noonan 's character at the end of this scene was intended to allude to the " Red Dragon " tattoos worn by the character in the novel . This shot left Noonan lying in the corn syrup stage blood for so long that he became stuck to the floor . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Spinotti has commented on how Mann 's use of mise en scène when framing shots evokes " the emotional situation in the film at that particular time " , noting the director 's focus on the particular shape or color of elements of the set . He has also drawn attention to the scene in which Graham visits Lecktor in his cell , pointing out the constant position of the cell bars within the frame , even as the shots cut back and forth between the two characters . " There is nothing in Manhunter ... which is just a nice shot " , says Spinotti . " [ It ] is all focused into conveying that particular atmosphere ; whether it 's happiness , or delusion , or disillusion " . This " manipulation of focus and editing " has become a visual hallmark of the film . 
 Despite having initially filmed the scenes involving Francis Dollarhyde with an elaborate tattoo across Noonan 's chest , Mann and Spinotti felt that the finished result seemed out of place and that it " trivialize [ d ] the struggle " the character faced . Mann cut the scenes in which the character appeared bare @-@ chested , and quickly re @-@ shot additional footage to replace what had been removed . Spinotti noted that in doing so , scenes which he felt had been captured with a " beautiful " aesthetic were lost , as the production did not have the time to recreate the original lighting conditions . 
 Petersen had difficulty ridding himself of the Will Graham character after principal photography wrapped . While rehearsing for a play in Chicago , he felt the old character " always coming out " instead of his new role . To try and rid himself of the character , Petersen went to a barbershop where he had them shave his beard , cut his hair and dye it blond so that he could look into the mirror and see a different person . At first he felt it was due to the rigorous shooting schedule for Manhunter , but later realized that the character " had creeped in " . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Manhunter 's soundtrack " dominates the film " , with music that is " explicitly diegetic the entire way " . Steve <unk> has commented that the music is not intended to correlate with the intensity of the action portrayed alongside it , but rather to signify when the viewer should react with a " degree of aesthetic distance " from the film , or be " suture [ d ] into the diegetic world " more closely . The soundtrack album was released in limited quantities in 1986 , on MCA Records ( # <unk> ) . It was not , however , released on compact disc at the time , but only on cassette tape and vinyl record . On 19 March 2007 , a two @-@ CD set titled Music from the Films of Michael Mann was released , featuring four tracks from Manhunter : The Prime Movers ' " Strong As I Am " , Iron Butterfly 's " In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida " , <unk> 's " This Big Hush " , and Red 7 's " Heartbeat " . In March 2010 , Intrada Records announced that they were releasing the Manhunter soundtrack on CD for the first time , with an extra track , " <unk> 's Stakeout " by The Reds . 
 The Reds were contacted about contributing to the film 's soundtrack after submitting their music for possible use on Miami Vice . They recorded their score over a period of two months , in studios in New York and Los Angeles . They recorded a total of 28 minutes of music for the film ; however , several cues were replaced later with music by <unk> and Michel <unk> . " Comfortably Numb " by Pink Floyd and " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " by The Electric Prunes have both been cited by The Reds ' vocalist Rick Shaffer as influences on the film 's soundtrack . Mann selected " Strong as I Am " by The Prime Movers for the film and later funded the filming of a music video for the song 's release as a single . 
 Music in the film 's screen credits which are not listed above included : 
 = = Themes = = 
 Visually , Manhunter is driven by strong color cues and the use of tints , including the hallmark blue of Mann 's work . Dante Spinotti has noted that these visual cues were meant to invoke different moods based on the tone of the scenes in which they were used : cool blue tones were used for the scenes shared between Will Graham and his wife Molly , and unsettling greens and <unk> were used for the scenes with the killer Francis Dollarhyde . Steven <unk> has observed that " blue is associated with Molly , sex , and the Graham family home " , while green denotes " searching and discovery " , pointing out the color of Graham 's shirt when the investigation begins and the green tone of the interior shots in the Atlanta police station . John Muir suggests that this helps identify the character of Graham with the " goodness " of the natural world , and Dollarhyde with the city , " where sickness thrives " . This strongly stylized approach drew criticism from reviewers at first , but has since been seen as a hallmark of the film and viewed more positively . 
 Academic studies of the film tend to draw attention to the relationship between the characters of Graham and Dollarhyde , noting , for example , that the film " chooses to emphasize the novel 's symbiotic relationships between Graham , Lecter and Dolarhyde [ sic ] by visual techniques and screen acting where subtlety plays a key role " . In his book <unk> of Darkness : The Family in the American Horror Film , Tony Williams praises the depth of the film 's characterizations , calling Dollarhyde a " victim of society " and his portrayal " undermining convenient barriers between monster and human " . Philip L. Simpson echoes this sentiment in his book Psycho Paths : Tracking the Serial Killer through Contemporary American Film , calling Manhunter a " profoundly ambiguous and destabilizing film " which creates " uncomfortable affinities between protagonist and antagonist " . Mark T. Conard 's The Philosophy of Film Noir follows this same idea , claiming that the film presents the notion that " what it takes to catch a serial killer is tantamount to being one " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Manhunter was released in the United States on 15 August 1986 . It opened in 779 theaters and grossed $ 2 @,@ 204 @,@ 400 in its opening weekend . The film eventually grossed a total of $ 8 @,@ 620 @,@ 929 in the US , making it the 76th highest @-@ grossing film that year . Because of internal problems at De Laurentiis Entertainment Group , the UK premiere was postponed for over a year . It was screened in November 1987 as part of the London Film Festival and saw wide release on 24 February 1989 . In France , Manhunter was screened on 9 April at the 1987 Cognac Festival du Film <unk> , where it was awarded the Critics Prize . It was also shown at the 2009 Camerimage Film Festival in Łódź , Poland . On 19 March 2011 , it was screened at Grauman 's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood to celebrate the 25th anniversary of its release . Michael Mann was present for discussion at the event . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Manhunter was released in a widescreen edition on laserdisc in 1986 . It was released on VHS several times , including by BMG on 10 October 1998 and by Universal Studios in 2001 . It has also been available on DVD in various versions . Anchor Bay released a two @-@ DVD limited edition in 2000 . A standard edition , an individual release of the first disc from the two @-@ disc set , was also released at the same time . In 2003 Anchor Bay released the " Restored Director 's Cut " , which is very close to the " Director 's Cut " on the 2000 disc but omits one scene . It does , however , feature a commentary track by Mann . 
 MGM ( current holders of the rights to The Silence of the Lambs and Hannibal ) released the theatrical cut of Manhunter on DVD in a pan @-@ and @-@ scan format in 2004 . In January 2007 , the same version was released by MGM in a widescreen format , for the first time on DVD , as part of The Hannibal Lecter Collection , along with The Silence of the Lambs and Hannibal . Manhunter was also released by itself in September 2007 . The studio re @-@ released The Hannibal Lecter Collection on Blu @-@ ray in September 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its release , Manhunter was met with widely mixed reviews . At first , it was seen as too stylish , owing largely to Mann 's 1980s trademark use of pastel colors , art @-@ deco architecture and glass brick . A common criticism in the initial reviews was that the film overemphasized the music and stylistic visuals . Petersen 's skill as a lead actor was also called into question . Particularly critical of the film 's stylistic approach was the New York Times , which called attention to Mann 's " taste for overkill " , branding his stylized approach as " hokey " and little more than " gimmicks " . Chicago Tribune writer Dave Kehr remarked that Mann " believes in style so much that he has very little belief left over for the characters or situations of his film , which suffers accordingly " , adding that the film 's focus on style serves to " drain any notion of credibility " from its plot . Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times was critical of the film 's visuals and soundtrack , comparing it unfavourably with Miami Vice and describing it as a " chic , well @-@ cast wasteland " that " delivers very little " . The film 's stylistic similarity to Miami Vice was also pointed out by Film Threat 's Dave <unk> , who felt it was the chief reason for the film 's poor box office results . Writing for the San Francisco Chronicle , Steve Winn derided the film , claiming its lack of a strong lead role caused it to " fall apart like the shattered mirrors that figure in the crimes " . Time was more favorable in its review , praising the " intelligent <unk> " and " bold , controlled color scheme " . Leonard Maltin gave the film three stars , calling it " gripping all the way through and surprisingly <unk> " , although adding that " the holes start to show through " if looked for " too carefully " . Manhunter was , however , nominated for the 1987 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture . 
 Modern appreciation of the film has seen its standing among critics improve . Salon.com called Mann 's original the best of the Lecter series , and Slate magazine described it as " mesmerizing " , positing that it directly inspired television series such as Millennium and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , though calling attention to its " Miami @-@ Vice @-@ like overreliance on synthesized sludge " . The Independent called it " the most <unk> film of the 1980s " , and noted its " chilly integrity " . British television channel and production company Film4 called it " the most refined screen adaptation of Harris ' books " , although they found the film 's contemporary soundtrack " dated " . Sky Movies echoed this sentiment , summing up their review by saying " although it still remains a classic , the film has dated slightly . " Retrospective reviews tend to be less critical of the stylized visuals : the BBC 's Ali Barclay called the film " a truly suspenseful , stylish thriller " , awarding it four out of five stars , and Nathan Ditum described it in Total Film as " complex , disturbing and super @-@ stylish " , adding that the 2002 remake could not compete with it . Empire editor Mark Dinning gave the film five stars out of five , praising the " subtlety " of the acting and the " neon angst " of the visuals . Television channel Bravo named Dollarhyde 's interrogation of Freddy Lounds as one of its 30 Even <unk> Movie Moments in 2007 , and Noonan 's portrayal of Dollarhyde was praised by Simon Abrams of UGO Networks as " a highlight of his career " . 
 Despite the low gross on its initial release , Manhunter has grown in popularity in recent years and has been mentioned in several books and lists of cult films . These <unk> often cite the success of Silence of the Lambs and its sequels as the reason for the increased interest in Manhunter , while still favoring the earlier film over its successors . Telling of this resurgence in appreciation are the film 's ratings on review aggregation sites such as Metacritic or Rotten Tomatoes . Compiled mostly from recent reviews for the film , Manhunter has a metascore of 78 on Metacritic , based on ten reviews , and a 94 % fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes , from 33 reviews . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Manhunter 's focus on the use of forensic science in a criminal investigation has been cited as a major influence on several films and television series that have come after it — most notably CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , also featuring William Petersen , which was " inspired , or at least influenced " by the forensics scenes in Manhunter . Petersen 's sympathetic portrayal of profiler Will Graham has also been noted as helping to influence a " shift in the image of the pop @-@ culture FBI agent " that would continue throughout the 1980s and 90s . The film has also been noted as a thematic precursor to the series Millennium , John Doe , Profiler , and The X @-@ Files , and to films such as Copycat , Switchback , The Bone Collector , Seven and Fallen . 
 The Silence of the Lambs , a film adaptation of Harris ' next Lecter novel , was released in 1991 . However , none of the cast of Manhunter reprise their roles in the later film , although characters such as Lecter and Chilton return with new actors . Actors Frankie Faison and Dan Butler appear in both films , but as different and unrelated characters . The Silence of the Lambs earned several awards and accolades , including the Academy Award for Best Picture . It is one of only three films to have won the Academy Awards for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Actor and Actress , and Best Screenplay . The Silence of the Lambs was followed in turn by a sequel and two prequels : Hannibal , Red Dragon and Hannibal Rising , plus an NBC television series , Hannibal . 
 Of these later films , Red Dragon ( 2002 ) , adapted from the same novel as Manhunter , was released to a generally positive critical reception and successful box office receipts , making $ 209 @,@ 196 @,@ 298 on a $ 78 million budget . Based on recent reviews , Red Dragon currently has a 68 % rating from 183 reviews at Rotten Tomatoes , and a 60 % rating based on 36 reviews on Metacritic . Manhunter 's cinematographer Dante Spinotti also served as the director of photography on this version . 
 = Jacques Offenbach = 
 Jacques Offenbach ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; German : [ <unk> ̩ <unk> ] ; 20 June 1819 – 5 October 1880 ) was a German @-@ born French composer , cellist and impresario of the romantic period . He is remembered for his nearly 100 operettas of the 1850s – 1870s and his uncompleted opera The Tales of Hoffmann . He was a powerful influence on later composers of the operetta genre , particularly Johann Strauss , Jr. and Arthur Sullivan . His best @-@ known works were continually revived during the 20th century , and many of his operettas continue to be staged in the 21st . The Tales of Hoffman remains part of the standard opera repertory . 
 Born in Cologne , the son of a synagogue cantor , Offenbach showed early musical talent . At the age of 14 , he was accepted as a student at the Paris Conservatoire but found academic study unfulfilling and left after a year . From 1835 to 1855 he earned his living as a cellist , achieving international fame , and as a conductor . His ambition , however , was to compose comic pieces for the musical theatre . Finding the management of Paris ' Opéra @-@ Comique company uninterested in staging his works , in 1855 he leased a small theatre in the Champs @-@ Élysées . There he presented a series of his own small @-@ scale pieces , many of which became popular . 
 In 1858 , Offenbach produced his first full @-@ length operetta , Orphée aux enfers ( " Orpheus in the Underworld " ) , which was exceptionally well received and has remained one of his most played works . During the 1860s , he produced at least 18 full @-@ length operettas , as well as more one @-@ act pieces . His works from this period included La belle Hélène ( 1864 ) , La vie parisienne ( 1866 ) , La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein ( 1867 ) and La Périchole ( 1868 ) . The risqué humour ( often about sexual intrigue ) and mostly gentle satiric barbs in these pieces , together with Offenbach 's facility for melody , made them internationally known , and translated versions were successful in Vienna , London and elsewhere in Europe . 
 Offenbach became associated with the Second French Empire of Napoleon III ; the emperor and his court were <unk> satirised in many of Offenbach 's operettas . Napoleon III personally granted him French citizenship and the Légion d 'Honneur . With the outbreak of the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 , Offenbach found himself out of favour in Paris because of his imperial connections and his German birth . He remained successful in Vienna and London , however . He re @-@ established himself in Paris during the 1870s , with revivals of some of his earlier favourites and a series of new works , and undertook a popular U.S. tour . In his last years he strove to finish The Tales of Hoffmann , but died before the premiere of the opera , which has entered the standard repertory in versions completed or edited by other musicians . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Offenbach was born Jacob or Jakob Offenbach to a Jewish family , in the German city of Cologne , which was then a part of Prussia . His birthplace in the <unk> <unk> was a short distance from the square that is now named after him , the <unk> . He was the second son and the seventh of ten children of Isaac Juda Offenbach né <unk> ( 1779 – 1850 ) and his wife Marianne , née <unk> ( c . 1783 – 1840 ) . Isaac , who came from a musical family , had abandoned his original trade as a bookbinder and earned an itinerant living as a cantor in synagogues and playing the violin in cafés . He was generally known as " der <unk> " , after his native town , Offenbach am Main , and in 1808 he officially adopted Offenbach as a surname . In 1816 he settled in Cologne , where he became established as a teacher , giving lessons in singing , violin , flute and guitar , and composing both religious and secular music . 
 When Jacob was six years old , his father taught him to play the violin ; within two years the boy was composing songs and dances , and at the age of nine he took up the cello . As he was by then the permanent cantor of the local synagogue , Isaac could afford to pay for his son to take lessons from the well @-@ known cellist Bernhard Breuer . Three years later , the biographer Gabriel <unk> records , the boy was giving performances of his own compositions , " the technical difficulties of which terrified his master " , Breuer . Together with his brother Julius ( violin ) and sister Isabella ( piano ) , Jacob played in a trio at local dance halls , inns and cafés , performing popular dance music and operatic arrangements . In 1833 , Isaac decided that the two most musically talented of his children , Julius ( then aged 18 ) and Jacob ( 14 ) needed to leave the provincial musical scene of Cologne to study in Paris . With generous support from local music lovers and the municipal orchestra , with whom they gave a farewell concert on 9 October , the two young musicians , accompanied by their father , made the four @-@ day journey to Paris in November 1833 . 
 Isaac had been given letters of introduction to the director of the Paris Conservatoire , Luigi Cherubini , but he needed all his eloquence to persuade Cherubini even to give Jacob an audition . The boy 's age and nationality were both obstacles to admission . Cherubini had several years earlier refused the 12 @-@ year @-@ old Franz Liszt admission on similar grounds , but he eventually agreed to hear the young Offenbach play . He listened to his playing and stopped him , saying , " Enough , young man , you are now a pupil of this Conservatoire . " Julius was also admitted . Both brothers adopted French forms of their names , Julius becoming Jules and Jacob becoming Jacques . 
 Isaac hoped to secure permanent employment in Paris but failed to do so and returned to Cologne . Before leaving , he found a number of pupils for Jules ; the modest earnings from those lessons , supplemented by fees earned by both brothers as members of synagogue choirs , supported them during their studies . At the conservatoire , Jules was a diligent student ; he graduated and became a successful violin teacher and conductor , and led his younger brother 's orchestra for several years . By contrast , Jacques was bored by academic study and left after a year . The conservatoire 's roll of students notes against his name " Struck off on the 2 December 1834 ( left of his own free will ) " . 
 = = = Cello virtuoso = = = 
 Having left the conservatoire , Offenbach was free from the stern academicism of Cherubini 's curriculum , but as the biographer James Harding writes , " he was free , also , to starve . " He secured a few temporary jobs in theatre orchestras before gaining a permanent appointment in 1835 as a cellist at the Opéra @-@ Comique . He was no more serious there than he had been at the conservatoire , and regularly had his pay docked for playing pranks during performances ; on one occasion , he and the principal cellist played alternate notes of the printed score , and on another they sabotaged some of their colleagues ' music stands to make them collapse in mid @-@ performance . Nevertheless , his earnings from his orchestral work enabled him to take lessons with the celebrated cellist Louis @-@ Pierre <unk> . He made a favourable impression on the composer and conductor Fromental Halévy , who gave him lessons in composition and orchestration and wrote to Isaac Offenbach in Cologne that the young man was going to be a great composer . Some of Offenbach 's early compositions were programmed by the fashionable conductor Louis Antoine Jullien . Offenbach and another young composer Friedrich von Flotow collaborated on a series of works for cello and piano . Although Offenbach 's ambition was to compose for the stage , he could not gain an entrée to Parisian theatre at this point in his career ; with Flotow 's help , he built a reputation composing for and playing in the fashionable salons of Paris . 
 Among the salons at which Offenbach most frequently appeared was that of the comtesse de Vaux . There he met Hérminie d <unk> ( 1827 – 1887 ) , the daughter of a Carlist general . They fell in love , but he was not yet in a financial position to propose marriage . To extend his fame and earning power beyond Paris , he undertook tours of France and Germany . Among those with whom he performed were Anton Rubinstein and , in a concert in Offenbach 's native Cologne , Liszt . In 1844 , probably through English family connections of Hérminie , he embarked on a tour of England . There , he was immediately engaged to appear with some of the most famous musicians of the day , including Mendelssohn , Joseph Joachim , Michael Costa and Julius Benedict . The Era wrote of his debut performance in London , " His execution and taste excited both wonder and pleasure , the genius he exhibited amounting to absolute inspiration . " The British press reported a triumphant royal command performance ; The Illustrated London News wrote , " Herr Jacques Offenbach , the astonishing <unk> , performed on Thursday evening at Windsor before the Emperor of Russia , the King of Saxony , Queen Victoria , and Prince Albert with great success . " The use of " Herr " rather than " Monsieur " , reflecting the fact that Offenbach remained a Prussian citizen , was common to all the British press coverage of Offenbach 's 1844 tour . The ambiguity of his nationality sometimes caused him difficulty in later life . 
 Offenbach returned to Paris with his reputation and his bank balance both much enhanced . The last remaining obstacle to his marriage to Hérminie was the difference in their professed religions ; he converted to Roman Catholicism , with the comtesse de Vaux acting as his sponsor . Isaac Offenbach 's views on his son 's conversion from Judaism are unknown . The wedding took place on 14 August 1844 ; the bride was 17 years old , and the bridegroom was 25 . The marriage was lifelong , and happy , despite some extramarital dalliances on Offenbach 's part . After Offenbach 's death , a friend said that Hérminie " gave him courage , shared his ordeals and comforted him always with tenderness and devotion " . 
 Returning to the familiar Paris salons , Offenbach quietly shifted the emphasis of his work from being a cellist who also composed to being a composer who played the cello . He had already published many compositions , and some of them had sold well , but now he began to write , perform and produce musical burlesques as part of his salon presentations . He amused the comtesse de Vaux 's 200 guests with a parody of Félicien David 's currently fashionable Le désert , and in April 1846 gave a concert at which seven operatic items of his own composition were premiered before an audience that included leading music critics . After some encouragement and some temporary setbacks , he seemed on the verge of breaking into theatrical composition when Paris was convulsed by the 1848 revolution , which swept Louis Philippe from the throne and led to serious bloodshed in the streets of the capital . Offenbach hastily took Hérminie and their recently born daughter to join his family in Cologne . He thought it politic to revert temporarily to the name Jacob . 
 Returning to Paris in February 1849 , Offenbach found the grand salons closed down . He went back to working as a cellist , and occasional conductor , at the Opéra @-@ Comique , but was not encouraged in his aspirations to compose . His talents had been noted by the director of the Comédie Française , Arsène Houssaye , who appointed him musical director of the theatre , with a brief to enlarge and improve the orchestra . Offenbach composed songs and incidental music for eleven classical and modern dramas for the Comédie Française in the early 1850s . Some of his songs became very popular , and he gained valuable experience in writing for the theatre . Houssaye later wrote that Offenbach had done wonders for his theatre . The management of the Opéra @-@ Comique , however , remained uninterested in commissioning him to compose for its stage . The composer Debussy later wrote that the musical establishment could not cope with Offenbach 's irony , which exposed the " false , overblown quality " of the operas they favoured – " the great art at which one was not allowed to smile " . 
 = = = Bouffes @-@ Parisiens , Champs @-@ Élysées = = = 
 Between 1853 and 1855 , Offenbach wrote three one @-@ act operettas and managed to have them staged in Paris . They were all well received , but the authorities of the Opéra @-@ Comique remained unmoved . Offenbach found more encouragement from the composer , singer and impresario <unk> <unk> , known professionally as Hervé . At his theatre , the Folies @-@ Nouvelles , which had opened the previous year , Hervé pioneered French light comic opera , or " opérette " . In The Musical Quarterly , Martial <unk> and Theodore Baker wrote , " Without the example set by Hervé , Offenbach might perhaps never have become the musician who penned Orphée aux Enfers , La belle Hélène , and so many other triumphant works . " Offenbach approached Hervé , who agreed to present a new one @-@ act operetta with words by Jules <unk> and music by Offenbach , called <unk> ou La reine des <unk> . It was presented on 26 June 1855 and was well received . Offenbach 's biographer Peter Gammond describes it as " a charming piece of nonsense " . The piece depicts a double @-@ bass player , played by Hervé , shipwrecked on a cannibal island , who after several perilous encounters with the female chief of the cannibals makes his escape using his double @-@ bass as a boat . Offenbach pressed ahead with plans to present his works himself at his own theatre and to abandon further thoughts of acceptance by the Opéra @-@ Comique . 
 Offenbach had chosen his theatre , the Salle Lacaze in the Champs @-@ Élysées . The location and the timing were ideal for him . Paris was about to be filled between May and November with visitors from France and abroad for the 1855 Great Exhibition . The Salle Lacaze was next to the exhibition site . He later wrote : 
 In the Champs @-@ Élysées , there was a little theatre to let , built for [ the magician ] Lacaze but closed for many years . I knew that the Exhibition of 1855 would bring many people into this locality . By May , I had found twenty supporters and on 15 June I secured the lease . Twenty days later , I gathered my librettists and I opened the " Théâtre des Bouffes @-@ Parisiens " . 
 The description of the theatre as " little " was accurate : it could only hold an audience of 300 . It was therefore well suited to the tiny casts permitted under the prevailing licensing laws : Offenbach was limited to three speaking ( or singing ) characters in any piece . With such small forces , full @-@ length works were out of the question , and Offenbach , like Hervé , presented evenings of several one @-@ act pieces . The opening of the theatre was a frantic rush , with less than a month between the issue of the licence and the opening night on 5 July 1855 . During this period Offenbach had to " equip the theatre , recruit actors , orchestra and staff , find authors to write material for the opening programme – and compose the music . " Among those he recruited at short notice was Ludovic Halévy , the nephew of Offenbach 's early mentor Fromental Halévy . Ludovic was a respectable civil servant with a passion for the theatre and a gift for dialogue and verse . While maintaining his civil service career he went on to collaborate ( sometimes under discreet pseudonyms ) with Offenbach in 21 works over the next 24 years . 
 Halévy wrote the libretto for one of the pieces in the opening programme , but the most popular work of the evening had words by <unk> . Les deux <unk> , " The Two Blind Men " is a comedy about two beggars feigning blindness . During rehearsals there had been some concern that the public might judge it to be in poor taste , but it was not only the hit of the season in Paris : it was soon playing successfully in Vienna , London and elsewhere . Another success that summer was Le <unk> , which made a star of Hortense Schneider in her first role for Offenbach . Aged 22 , when she auditioned for him , she was engaged on the spot . From 1855 she was a key member of his companies through much of his career . 
 The Champs @-@ Élysées in 1855 were not yet the grand avenue laid out by Baron Haussmann in the 1860s , but an unpaved <unk> . The public who were flocking to Offenbach 's theatre in the summer and autumn of 1855 could not be expected to venture there in the depths of a Parisian winter . He cast about for a suitable venue and found the Théâtre des Jeunes <unk> , known also as the Salle Choiseul or Théâtre Comte , in central Paris . He entered into partnership with its proprietor and moved the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens there for the winter season . The company returned to the Salle Lacaze for the 1856 , 1857 , and 1859 summer seasons , performing at the Salle Choiseul in the winter . Legislation enacted in March 1861 prevented the company from using both theatres , and appearances at the Salle Lacaze were discontinued . 
 = = = Salle Choiseul = = = 
 Offenbach 's first piece for the company 's new home was Ba @-@ ta @-@ clan ( December 1855 ) , a well @-@ received piece of mock @-@ oriental frivolity , to a libretto by Halévy . He followed it with 15 more one @-@ act operettas over the next three years . They were all for the small casts permitted under his licence , although at the Salle Choiseul he was granted an increase from three to four singers . 
 Under Offenbach 's management , the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens staged works by many composers . These included new pieces by Leon <unk> and Léo Delibes . When Offenbach asked Rossini 's permission to revive his comedy Il signor <unk> , Rossini replied that he was pleased to be able to do anything for " the Mozart of the Champs @-@ Élysées " . Offenbach revered Mozart above all other composers . He had an ambition to present Mozart 's neglected one @-@ act comic opera Der <unk> at the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens , and he acquired the score from Vienna . With a text translated and adapted by Léon Battu and Ludovic Halévy , he presented it during the Mozart centenary celebrations in May 1856 as L <unk> ; it was popular with the public and also greatly enhanced the critical and social standing of the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens . By command of the emperor , Napoleon III , the company performed at the Tuileries palace shortly after the first performance of the Mozart piece . 
 In a long article in Le Figaro in July 1856 , Offenbach traced the history of comic opera . He declared that the first work worthy to be called opéra @-@ comique was Philidor 's 1759 Blaise le <unk> , and he described the gradual divergence of Italian and French notions of comic opera , with verve , imagination and gaiety from Italian composers , and cleverness , common sense , good taste and wit from the French composers . He concluded that comic opera had become too grand and inflated . His disquisition was a preliminary to the announcement of an open competition for aspiring composers . A jury of French composers and playwrights including Daniel Auber , Fromental Halévy , Ambroise Thomas , Charles Gounod and Eugène Scribe considered 78 entries ; the five short @-@ listed entrants were all asked to set a libretto , Le docteur miracle , written by Ludovic Halévy and Léon Battu . The joint winners were Georges Bizet and Charles Lecocq . Bizet became , and remained , a devoted friend of Offenbach . Lecocq and Offenbach took a dislike to one another , and their subsequent rivalry was not altogether friendly . 
 Although the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens played to full houses , the theatre was constantly on the verge of running out of money , principally because of what his biographer Alexander Faris calls " Offenbach 's incorrigible extravagance as a manager " . An earlier biographer , André Martinet , wrote , " Jacques spent money without counting . Whole lengths of velvet were swallowed up in the auditorium ; costumes devoured width after width of satin . " Moreover , Offenbach was personally generous and liberally hospitable . To boost the company 's finances , a London season was organised in 1857 , with half the company remaining in Paris to play at the Salle Choiseul and the other half performing at the St James 's Theatre in the West End of London . The visit was a success , but did not cause the sensation that Offenbach 's later works did in London . 
 = = = Orphée aux enfers = = = 
 In 1858 , the government lifted the licensing restrictions on the number of performers , and Offenbach was able to present more ambitious works . His first full @-@ length operetta , Orphée aux enfers ( " Orpheus in the Underworld " ) , was presented in October 1858 . Offenbach , as usual , spent freely on the production , with scenery by Gustave Doré , lavish costumes , a cast of twenty principals , and a large chorus and orchestra . 
 As the company was particularly short of money following an abortive season in Berlin , a big success was urgently needed . At first the production seemed merely to be a modest success . It soon benefited from an outraged review by Jules Janin , the critic of the Journal des <unk> ; he condemned the piece for profanity and irreverence ( ostensibly to Roman mythology but in reality to Napoleon and his government , generally seen as the targets of its satire ) . Offenbach and his librettist Hector Crémieux seized on this free publicity , and joined in a lively public debate in the columns of the Parisian daily newspaper Le Figaro . Janin 's indignation made the public agog to see the work , and the box office takings were prodigious . Among those who wanted to see the satire of the emperor was the emperor himself , who commanded a performance in April 1860 . Despite many great successes during the rest of Offenbach 's career , Orphée aux enfers remained his most popular . Gammond lists among the reasons for its success , " the sweeping waltzes " reminiscent of Vienna but with a new French flavour , the patter songs , and " above all else , of course , the can @-@ can which had led a naughty life in low places since the 1830s or thereabouts and now became a polite fashion , as uninhibited as ever . " 
 In the 1859 season , the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens presented new works by composers including Flotow , Jules Erlanger , Alphonse Varney , Léo Delibes , and Offenbach himself . Of Offenbach 's new pieces , Geneviève de Brabant though initially only a mild success , was later revised and gained much popularity where the duet of the two gendarmes became a favourite number in England and France and the basis for the Marines ' Hymn in the U.S. 
 = = = Early 1860s = = = 
 The 1860s were Offenbach 's most successful decade . At the beginning of 1860 , he was granted French citizenship by the personal command of Napoleon III , and the following year he was appointed a Chevalier of the Légion d ’ <unk> ; this appointment scandalised those haughty and exclusive members of the musical establishment who resented such an honour for a composer of popular light opera . Offenbach began the decade with his only stand @-@ alone ballet , Le papillon ( " The Butterfly " ) , produced at the Opéra in 1860 . It achieved what was then a successful run of 42 performances , without , as the biographer Andrew Lamb says , " giving him any greater acceptance in more respectable circles . " Among other operettas in the same year , he finally had a piece presented by the Opéra @-@ Comique , the three @-@ act <unk> . It was not a success ; its plot revolved around a dog , and Offenbach attempted canine imitations in his music . Neither the public nor the critics were impressed , and the piece survived for only seven performances . 
 Apart from that setback , Offenbach flourished in the 1860s , with successes greatly outnumbering failures . In 1861 he led the company in a summer season in Vienna . Encountering packed houses and enthusiastic reviews , Offenbach found Vienna much to his liking . He even reverted , for a single evening , to his old role as a cello virtuoso at a command performance before Emperor Franz Joseph . That success was followed by a failure in Berlin . Offenbach , though born a Prussian citizen , observed , " Prussia never does anything to make those of our nationality happy . " He and the company hastened back to Paris . Meanwhile , among his operettas that season were the full @-@ length Le pont des soupirs and the one @-@ act M. <unk> <unk> chez lui le .... 
 In 1862 , Offenbach 's only son , Auguste , was born , the last of five children . In the same year , Offenbach resigned as director of the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens , handing the post over to Alphonse Varney . He continued to write most of his works for the company , with the exception of occasional pieces for the summer season at Bad Ems . Despite problems with the libretto , Offenbach completed a serious opera in 1864 , Die <unk> , a hotchpotch of romantic and mythological themes . The opera was presented with substantial cuts at the Vienna Court Opera and in Cologne in 1865 . It was not given again until 2002 , when it was finally performed in its entirety . Since then it has been given several productions . It contained one number , the " <unk> " , described by the critic Eduard Hanslick as " lovely , luring and sensuous " , which Ernest Guiraud later adapted as the Barcarolle in The Tales of Hoffmann . After December 1864 , Offenbach wrote less frequently for the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens , and many of his new works premiered at larger theatres . 
 = = = Later 1860s = = = 
 Between 1864 and 1868 , Offenbach wrote four of the operettas for which he is chiefly remembered : La belle Hélène ( 1864 ) , La vie parisienne ( 1866 ) , La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein ( 1867 ) and La Périchole ( 1868 ) . Halévy was joined as librettist for all of them by Henri Meilhac . Offenbach , who called them " <unk> " and " Hal " , said of this trinity : " Je suis sans <unk> le Père , mais chacun des deux est mon Fils et plein d 'Esprit , " a play on words loosely translated as " I am certainly the Father , but together they are the Son and the <unk> Spirited " . 
 For La belle Hélène , Offenbach secured Hortense Schneider to play the title role . Since her early success in his short operas , she had become a leading star of the French musical stage . She now commanded large fees and was notoriously temperamental , but Offenbach was adamant that no other singer could match her as Hélène . Rehearsals for the premiere at the Théâtre des <unk> were tempestuous , with Schneider and the principal mezzo @-@ soprano feuding , the censor fretting about the satire of the imperial court , and the manager of the theatre attempting to rein in Offenbach 's extravagance with production expenses . Once again the success of the piece was inadvertently assured by the critic Janin ; his scandalised notice was strongly countered by liberal critics and the ensuing publicity again brought the public flocking . 
 Barbe @-@ bleue was a success in early 1866 and was quickly reproduced elsewhere . La vie parisienne later in the same year was a new departure for Offenbach and his librettists ; for the first time in a large @-@ scale piece they chose a modern setting , instead of disguising their satire under a classical cloak . It needed no accidental boost from Janin but was an instant and prolonged success with Parisian audiences , although its very Parisian themes made it less popular abroad . Gammond describes the libretto as " almost worthy of [ W.S. ] Gilbert " , and Offenbach 's score as " certainly his best so far " . The piece starred Zulma <unk> , who began an affair with the composer that lasted until at least 1875 . 
 In 1867 , Offenbach had his greatest success . The premiere of La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein , a satire on militarism , took place two days after the opening of the Paris Exhibition , an even greater international draw than the 1855 exhibition which had helped him launch his composing career . The Parisian public and the foreign visitors flocked to the new operetta . The foreign royalty who saw the piece included the King of Prussia accompanied by his chief minister , Otto von Bismarck . Halévy , with his experience as a senior civil servant , saw more clearly than most the looming threat from Prussia ; he wrote in his diary , " Bismarck is helping to double our takings . This time it 's war we 're laughing at , and war is at our gates . " La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein was followed quickly by a series of successful pieces : Robinson <unk> , Geneviève de Brabant ( revised version ; both 1867 ) , Le château à Toto , Le pont des soupirs ( revised version ) and L 'île de <unk> ( all in 1868 ) . 
 In October 1868 , La Périchole marked a transition in Offenbach 's style , with less exuberant satire and more human romantic interest . Lamb calls it Offenbach 's " most charming " score . There was some critical grumbling at the change , but the piece , with Schneider in the lead , did good business . It was quickly produced in Europe and both North and South America . Of the pieces that followed it at the end of the decade , Les brigands ( 1869 ) was another work that leaned more to romantic comic opera than to opéra bouffe . It was well received , but has not subsequently been revived as often as Offenbach 's best @-@ known operettas . 
 = = = War and aftermath = = = 
 Offenbach returned hurriedly from Ems and Wiesbaden before the outbreak of the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 . He then went to his home in Étretat and arranged for his family to move to the safety of San Sebastián in northern Spain , joining them shortly afterwards . Having risen to fame under Napoleon III , satirised him , and been rewarded by him , Offenbach was universally associated with the old régime : he was known as " the mocking @-@ bird of the Second Empire " . When the empire fell in the wake of Prussia 's crushing victory at Sedan ( 1870 ) , Offenbach 's music was suddenly out of favour . France was swept by violently anti @-@ German sentiments , and despite his French citizenship and Légion d 'honneur , his birth and upbringing in Cologne made him suspect . His operettas were now frequently vilified as the embodiment of everything superficial and worthless in Napoleon III 's régime . La Grande @-@ Duchesse de Gérolstein was banned in France because of its antimilitarist satire . 
 Although his Parisian audience deserted him , Offenbach had by now become highly popular in England . John Hollingshead of the Gaiety Theatre presented Offenbach 's operettas to large and enthusiastic audiences . Between 1870 and 1872 , the Gaiety produced 15 of his works . At the Royalty Theatre , Richard D 'Oyly Carte presented La Périchole in 1875 . In Vienna , too , Offenbach works were regularly produced . While the war and its aftermath ravaged Paris , the composer supervised Viennese productions and travelled to England as the guest of the Prince of Wales . 
 By the end of 1871 life in Paris had returned to normal , and Offenbach ended his voluntary exile . His new works Le roi <unk> ( 1872 ) and La jolie <unk> ( 1873 ) were modestly profitable , but lavish revivals of his earlier successes did better business . He decided to go back into theatre management and took over the Théâtre de la Gaîté in July 1873 . His spectacular revival of Orphée aux enfers there was highly profitable ; an attempt to repeat that success with a new , lavish version of Geneviève de Brabant proved less popular . Along with the costs of extravagant productions , collaboration with the dramatist Victorien Sardou culminated in financial disaster . An expensive production of Sardou 's La <unk> in 1874 , with incidental music by Offenbach , failed to attract the public to the Gaîté , and Offenbach was forced to sell his interests in the Gaîté and to mortgage future royalties . 
 In 1876 a successful tour of the United States in connection with its Centennial Exhibition enabled Offenbach to recover some of his losses and pay his debts . Beginning with a concert at Gilmore 's Garden before a crowd of 8 @,@ 000 people , he gave a series of more than 40 concerts in New York and Philadelphia . To circumvent a Philadelphia law forbidding entertainments on Sundays , he disguised his operetta numbers as liturgical pieces and advertised a " Grand Sacred Concert by M. Offenbach " . " Dis @-@ moi , Vénus " from La belle Hélène became a " <unk> " , and other equally secular numbers were billed as " <unk> " or " Hymne " . The local authorities were not deceived , and the concert did not take place . At Booth 's Theatre , New York , Offenbach conducted La vie parisienne and his recent ( 1873 ) La jolie <unk> . He returned to France in July 1876 , with profits that were handsome but not spectacular . 
 Offenbach 's later operettas enjoyed renewed popularity in France , especially Madame <unk> ( 1878 ) , which featured a fantasy plot about the real @-@ life French actress Marie Justine <unk> , and La fille du tambour @-@ major ( 1879 ) , which was the most successful of his operettas of the 1870s . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Profitable though La fille du tambour @-@ major was , composing it left Offenbach less time to work on his cherished project , the creation of a successful serious opera . Since the beginning of 1877 , he had been working when he could on a piece based on a stage play , Les contes <unk> d 'Hoffmann , by Jules Barbier and Michel Carré . Offenbach had suffered from gout since the 1860s , often being carried into the theatre in a chair . Now in failing health , he was conscious of his own mortality and wished passionately to live long enough to complete the opera Les contes d 'Hoffmann ( " The Tales of Hoffmann " ) . He was heard saying to <unk> , his dog , " I would give everything I have to be at the première " . However , Offenbach did not live to finish the piece . He left the vocal score substantially complete and had made a start on the orchestration . Ernest Guiraud , a family friend , assisted by Offenbach 's 18 @-@ year @-@ old son Auguste , completed the orchestration , making significant changes as well as the substantial cuts demanded by the Opéra @-@ Comique 's director , Carvalho . The opera was first seen at the Opéra @-@ Comique on 10 February 1881 ; Guiraud added recitatives for the Vienna premiere , in December 1881 , and other versions were made later . 
 Offenbach died in Paris in 1880 at the age of 61 . His cause of death was certified as heart failure brought on by acute gout . He was given a state funeral ; The Times wrote , " The crowd of distinguished men that accompanied him on his last journey amid the general sympathy of the public shows that the late composer was reckoned among the masters of his art . " He is buried in the Montmartre Cemetery . 
 = = Works = = 
 In The Musical Times , Mark Lubbock wrote in 1957 : 
 Offenbach 's music is as individually characteristic as that of Delius , Grieg or Puccini – together with range and variety . He could write straightforward " singing " numbers like Paris ' song in La Belle Hélène , " Au mont Ida trois <unk> " ; comic songs like General Boum 's " <unk> Paff <unk> " and the ridiculous ensemble at the servants ' ball in La Vie Parisienne , " Votre habit a <unk> dans le dos " . He was a specialist at writing music that had a rapturous , hysterical quality . The famous can @-@ can from Orphée aux Enfers has it , and so has the finale of the servants ' party … which ends with the delirious song " Tout <unk> , tout danse ' " . Then , as a contrast , he could compose songs of a simplicity , grace and beauty like the Letter Song from La Périchole , " Chanson de Fortunio " , and the Grand Duchess 's tender love song to Fritz : " Dites @-@ lui qu 'on l 'a <unk> <unk> " . 
 Among other well @-@ known Offenbach numbers are the Doll Song , " Les oiseaux dans la <unk> " ( The Tales of Hoffmann ) ; " Voici le sabre de mon père " and " Ah ! Que j 'aime les <unk> " ( La Grande Duchesse de Gerolstein ) ; and " Tu n 'es pas beau " in La Périchole , which Lamb notes was Offenbach 's last major song for Hortense Schneider . 
 = = = Operettas = = = 
 By his own reckoning , Offenbach composed more than 100 operas . Both the number and the noun are open to question : some works were so extensively revised that he evidently counted the revised versions as new , and commentators generally refer to all but a few of his stage works as operettas , rather than operas . Offenbach reserved the term opérette ( English : operetta ) or opérette bouffe for some of his one @-@ act works , more often using the term opéra bouffe for his full @-@ length ones ( though there are a number of one- and two @-@ act examples of this type ) . It was only with the further development of the <unk> genre in Vienna after 1870 that the French term opérette began to be used for works longer than one act . Offenbach also used the term opéra @-@ comique for at least 24 of his works in either one , two or three acts . 
 Offenbach 's earliest operettas were one @-@ act pieces for small casts . More than 30 of these were presented before his first full @-@ scale " opéra <unk> " , Orphée aux enfers , in 1858 , and he composed over 20 more of them during the rest of his career . Lamb , following the precedent of <unk> 's 1930 study of the composer , divides the one @-@ act pieces into five categories : " ( i ) country idylls ; ( ii ) urban operettas ; ( iii ) military operettas ; ( iv ) farces ; and ( v ) burlesques or parodies . " Offenbach enjoyed his greatest success in the 1860s . His most popular operettas from the decade have remained among his best known . 
 Texts and word setting 
 The first ideas for plots usually came from Offenbach , with his librettists working on lines agreed with him . Lamb writes , " In this respect Offenbach was both well served and skilful at discovering talent . Like Sullivan , and unlike Johann Strauss II , he was consistently blessed with workable subjects and genuinely witty librettos . " He took advantage of the rhythmic flexibility of the French language , but sometimes took this to extremes , forcing words into unnatural stresses . Harding comments that he " wrought much violence on the French language " . A frequent characteristic of Offenbach 's word setting was the nonsensical repetition of isolated syllables of words for comic effect ; an example is the quintet for the kings in La belle Hélène : " Je suis l <unk> de la reine / Poux de la reine / Poux de la reine " and " Le roi <unk> qui s 'avance / Bu qui s 'avance / Bu qui s 'avance . " 
 Musical structure 
 In general , Offenbach followed simple , established forms . His melodies are usually short and unvaried in their basic rhythm , rarely , in Hughes 's words , escaping " the despotism of the four @-@ bar phrase " . In modulation Offenbach was similarly cautious ; he rarely switched a melody to a remote or unexpected key , and kept mostly to a tonic – dominant – subdominant pattern . Within these conventional limits , he employed greater resource in his varied use of rhythm ; in a single number he would contrast rapid patter for one singer with a broad , smooth phrase for another , illustrating their different characters . Similarly , he often switched quickly between major and minor keys , effectively contrasting characters or situations . When he wished to , Offenbach could use unconventional techniques , such as the leitmotiv , used throughout to accompany the eponymous <unk> Ox ( 1877 ) and to parody Wagner in La carnaval des revues ( 1860 ) . 
 Orchestration 
 In his early pieces for the Bouffes @-@ Parisiens , the size of the orchestra pit had restricted Offenbach to an orchestra of 16 players . He composed for flute , oboe , clarinet , bassoon , two horns , piston , trombone , timpani and percussion and a small string section of seven players . After moving to the Salle Choiseul he had an orchestra of 30 players . The musicologist and Offenbach specialist Jean @-@ Christophe Keck notes that when larger orchestras were available , either in bigger Paris theatres or in Vienna or elsewhere , Offenbach would compose , or rearrange existing music , accordingly . Surviving scores show his instrumentation for additional wind and brass , and even extra percussion . When they were available he wrote for cor anglais , harp , and , exceptionally , Keck records , an <unk> ( Le Papillon ) , tubular bells ( Le carnaval des revues ) , and a wind machine ( Le voyage dans la lune ) . 
 Hughes describes Offenbach 's orchestration as " always skilful , often delicate , and occasionally subtle . " He instances Pluton 's song in Orphée aux enfers , introduced by a three @-@ bar phrase for solo clarinet and solo bassoon in octaves immediately repeated on solo flute and solo bassoon an octave higher . In Keck 's view , " Offenbach 's orchestral scoring is full of details , elaborate counter @-@ voices , minute interactions coloured by interjections of the woodwinds or brass , all of which establish a dialogue with the voices . His refinement of design equals that of Mozart or Rossini . " 
 Compositional method 
 Offenbach often composed amidst noise and distractions . According to Keck , Offenbach would first make a note of melodies a libretto suggested to him in a notebook or straight onto the librettist ’ s manuscript . Next using full score manuscript paper he wrote down vocal parts in the centre , then a piano accompaniment at the bottom possibly with notes on orchestration . When Offenbach felt sure the work would be performed , he began full orchestration , often employing a codified system . 
 Parody and influences 
 Offenbach was well known for parodying other composers ' music . Some of them saw the joke and others did not . Adam , Auber and Meyerbeer enjoyed Offenbach 's parodies of their scores . Meyerbeer made a point of attending all Bouffes @-@ Parisiens productions , always seated in Offenbach 's private box . Among the composers who were not amused by Offenbach 's parodies were Berlioz and Wagner . Offenbach mocked Berlioz 's " strivings after the antique " , and his initial light @-@ hearted satire of Wagner 's pretensions later hardened into genuine dislike . Berlioz reacted by bracketing Offenbach and Wagner together as " the product of the mad German mind " , and Wagner , ignoring Berlioz , retaliated by writing some unflattering verses about Offenbach . 
 In general , Offenbach 's <unk> technique was simply to play the original music in unexpected and incongruous circumstances . He slipped the banned revolutionary anthem La Marseillaise into the chorus of rebellious gods in Orphée aux enfers , and quoted the aria " Che farò " from Gluck 's Orfeo in the same work ; in La belle Hélène he quoted the patriotic trio from Rossini 's Guillaume Tell and parodied himself in the ensemble for the kings of Greece , in which the accompaniment quotes the rondeau from Orphée aux enfers . In his one act pieces , Offenbach parodied Rossini 's " Largo al factotum " and familiar arias by Bellini . In <unk> ( 1857 ) , one duet consists of quotations from Halévy 's La Juive and Meyerbeer 's Robert le Diable and Les Huguenots . Even in his later , less satirical period , he included a parodic quotation from Donizetti 's La fille du régiment in La fille du tambour @-@ major . 
 Other examples of Offenbach 's use of incongruity are noted by the critic Paul Taylor : " In La belle Hélène , the kings of Greece denounce Paris as ' un vil <unk> ' to a waltz tempo that is itself unsuitably seductive … the potty @-@ sounding phrase ' L 'homme à la <unk> ' becomes the absurd nucleus of a big cod @-@ ensemble . " Another lyric set to absurdly ceremonious music is " Votre habit a <unk> dans le dos " ( " Your coat has split down the back " ) in La vie parisienne . The Grand Duchess of Gérolstein 's rondo " Ah ! Que j 'aime les <unk> " is rhythmically and melodically similar to the finale of Beethoven 's Seventh Symphony , but it is not clear whether the similarity is parodic or coincidental . 
 In Offenbach 's last decade , he took note of a change in public taste : a simpler , more romantic style was now preferred . Harding writes that Lecocq had successfully moved away from satire and parody , returning to " the genuine spirit of opéra @-@ comique and its peculiarly French gaiety . " Offenbach followed suit in a series of 20 operettas ; the conductor and musicologist Antonio de Almeida names the finest of these as La fille du tambour @-@ major ( 1879 ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Of Offenbach 's two serious operas , Die <unk> , a failure , was not revived until the 21st century . His second attempt , The Tales of Hoffmann , was originally intended as a grand opera . When the work was accepted by Léon Carvalho for production at the Opéra @-@ Comique , Offenbach agreed to make it an opéra comique with spoken dialogue . It was incomplete when he died ; Faris speculates that , but for Georges Bizet 's premature death , Bizet rather than Guiraud would have been asked to complete the piece and would have done so more satisfactorily . The critic Tim Ashley writes , " Stylistically , the opera reveals a remarkable amalgam of French and German influences … Weberian chorales preface Hoffmann 's narrative . Olympia delivers a big coloratura aria straight out of French grand opera , while Antonia sings herself to death to music reminiscent of Schubert . " 
 Although he wrote ballet music for many of his operettas , Offenbach wrote only one ballet , Le papillon . The score was much praised for its orchestration , and it contained one number , the " Valse des rayons " , that became an international success . Between 1836 and 1875 he composed several individual waltzes and polkas , and suites of dances . They include a waltz , <unk> ( " Evening Papers " ) composed for Vienna with Johann Strauss 's <unk> ( " Morning Papers " ) as a companion piece . Other orchestral compositions include a piece in 17th @-@ century style with cello solo , which became a standard work of the cello repertoire . Little of Offenbach 's non @-@ operatic orchestral music has been regularly performed since his death . 
 Offenbach composed more than 50 non @-@ operatic songs between 1838 and 1854 , most of them to French texts , by authors including Alfred de Musset , Théophile Gautier and Jean de La Fontaine , and also ten to German texts . Among the most popular of these songs was " À toi " ( 1843 ) , dedicated to the young Hérminie d <unk> as an early token of his love . 
 = = = Arrangements = = = 
 Although the overtures to Orphée aux enfers and La belle <unk> are well known and frequently recorded , the scores usually performed and recorded were not composed by Offenbach , but were arranged by Carl Binder and Eduard <unk> , respectively , for the Vienna premieres of the two works . Offenbach 's own preludes are much shorter . 
 In 1938 , Manuel Rosenthal assembled the popular ballet Gaîté Parisienne from his own orchestral arrangements of melodies from Offenbach 's stage works , and in 1953 the same composer assembled a symphonic suite , <unk> , also from music by Offenbach . Jean @-@ Christophe Keck regards the 1938 work as " no more than a vulgarly orchestrated pastiche " ; in Gammond 's view , however , it does " full justice " to Offenbach . 
 = = Legacy and reputation = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The musician and author Fritz <unk> wrote in 1980 , " Without Offenbach there would have been no Savoy Opera … no Die Fledermaus or Merry Widow . The two creators of the Savoy operas , the librettist , Gilbert , and the composer , Sullivan , were both indebted to Offenbach and his partners for their satiric and musical styles , even borrowing plot components . For example , Faris argues that the mock @-@ oriental Ba @-@ ta @-@ clan influenced The Mikado , including its character names : Offenbach 's Ko @-@ ko @-@ ri @-@ ko and Gilbert 's Ko @-@ Ko ; Faris also compares Le pont des soupirs ( 1861 ) and The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) : " in both works there are choruses à la barcarolle for gondoliers and <unk> [ in ] thirds and sixths ; Offenbach has a Venetian admiral telling of his cowardice in battle ; Gilbert and Sullivan have their Duke of Plaza @-@ Toro who led his regiment from behind . " Offenbach 's Les <unk> ( 1864 ) , like Gilbert and Sullivan 's Princess Ida ( 1884 ) , depicts a female stronghold challenged by males in disguise . The best @-@ known instance in which a Savoy opera draws on Offenbach 's work is The Pirates of Penzance ( 1879 ) , where both Gilbert and Sullivan follow the lead of Les brigands ( 1869 ) in their treatment of the police , plodding along ineffectually in heavy march @-@ time . Les brigands was presented in London in 1871 , 1873 and 1875 ; for the first of these , Gilbert made an English translation of Meilhac and Halévy 's libretto . 
 However much the young Sullivan was influenced by Offenbach , the influence was evidently not in only one direction . Hughes observes that two numbers in Offenbach 's Maitre <unk> ( 1878 ) bear " an astonishing resemblance " to " My name is John Wellington Wells " from Gilbert and Sullivan 's The Sorcerer ( 1877 ) . 
 It is not clear how directly Offenbach influenced Johann Strauss . He had encouraged Strauss to turn to operetta when they met in Vienna in 1864 , but it was not until seven years later that Strauss did so . However , Offenbach 's operettas were well established in Vienna , and Strauss worked on the lines established by his French colleague ; in 1870s Vienna , an operetta composer who did not do so was quickly called to order by the press . In Gammond 's view , the Viennese composer most influenced by Offenbach was Franz von Suppé , who studied Offenbach 's works carefully and wrote many successful operettas using them as a model . 
 In his 1957 article , Lubbock wrote , " Offenbach is undoubtedly the most significant figure in the history of the ' musical ' , " and traced the development of musical theatre from Offenbach to Irving Berlin and Rodgers and Hammerstein , via Franz Lehár , André Messager , Sullivan and Lionel Monckton . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 During Offenbach 's lifetime , and in the obituary notices in 1880 , fastidious critics ( dubbed " Musical Snobs Ltd " by Gammond ) showed themselves at odds with public appreciation . In a 1980 article in The Musical Times , George Hauger commented that those critics not only underrated Offenbach , but wrongly supposed that his music would soon be forgotten . Although most critics of the time made that erroneous assumption , a few perceived Offenbach 's unusual quality ; in The Times , Francis <unk> wrote , " none of his numerous Parisian imitators has ever been able to rival Offenbach at his best . " Nevertheless , the paper joined in the general prediction : " It is very doubtful whether any of his works will survive . " The New York Times shared this view : " That he had the gift of melody in a very extraordinary degree is not to be denied , but he wrote <unk> <unk> , and the lack of development of his choicest inspirations will , it is to be feared , keep them from reaching even the next generation " . After the posthumous production of The Tales of Hoffmann , The Times partially reconsidered its judgment , writing , " Les Contes de Hoffmann [ will ] confirm the opinion of those who regard him as a great composer in every sense of the word " . It then lapsed into what Gammond calls " Victorian sanctimoniousness " by taking it for granted that the opera " will uphold Offenbach 's fame long after his lighter compositions have passed out of memory . " 
 The critic Sacheverell Sitwell compared Offenbach 's lyrical and comic gifts to those of Mozart and Rossini . Friedrich Nietzsche called Offenbach both an " artistic genius " and a " clown " , but wrote that " nearly every one " of Offenbach 's works achieves half a dozen " moments of wanton perfection " . Émile Zola commented on Offenbach and his work in a novel ( Nana ) and an essay , " La féerie et l <unk> IV / V " . While granting that Offenbach 's best operettas are full of grace , charm and wit , Zola blames Offenbach for what others have made out of the genre . Zola calls operetta a " public enemy " and a " monstrous beast " . While some critics saw the satire in Offenbach 's works as a social protest , an attack against the establishment , Zola saw the works as a homage to the social system in the Second Empire . 
 Otto Klemperer was an admirer ; late in life he reflected : " At the Kroll we did La Périchole . That 's a really delightful score . So is Orpheus in the Underworld and Belle Hélène . Those who called him ' The Mozart of the Boulevards ' were not much mistaken " . Debussy , Bizet , Mussorgsky and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov loved Offenbach 's operettas . Debussy rated them higher than The Tales of Hoffmann : " The one work in which [ Offenbach ] tried to be serious met with no success . " A London critic wrote , on Offenbach 's death : 
 I somewhere read that some of Offenbach 's latest work shows him to be capable of more ambitious work . I , for one , am glad he did what he did , and only wish he had done more of the same . 
 Efforts to present critical editions of Offenbach 's works have been hampered by the dispersion of his autograph scores to several collections after his death , some of which do not grant access to scholars . 
 = = = Sheet music = = = 
 Free scores by Jacques Offenbach in the Choral Public Domain Library ( ChoralWiki ) 
 Free scores by Jacques Offenbach at the International Music Score Library Project 
 Works by Jacques Offenbach at Project Gutenberg 
 Works by or about Jacques Offenbach at Internet Archive 
 = Wonder Mountain 's Guardian = 
 Wonder Mountain 's Guardian ( also known as Guardian or WMG ; during Halloween Haunt known as Zombies 4D ) is a 4D , interactive dark ride roller coaster at the Canada 's Wonderland amusement park located in Vaughan , Ontario , Canada . It is also the first ride part of Cedar Fair 's Amusement Dark collection . Park management first proposed a dark ride located inside Wonder Mountain around 2004 . Technology and budget limitations at the time delayed the project 's planning and design stages until 2011 . The steel track was manufactured by Art Engineering ; it is approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) long and has a maximum height of about 60 feet ( 18 m ) . The ride also has one of the largest drop tracks in the world . 
 Triotech designed the ride 's interactive 3D animations , which are accompanied by other special effects such as wind , adding the fourth dimension . During the park 's Halloween Haunt event in October , the animations are replaced with zombie @-@ themed effects . Delays during construction delayed the ride 's opening until May 24 , 2014 ; three weeks after the 2014 season began . Guardian was inspired by the dragon in Thunder Run — another roller coaster located in the mountain area of the park — and Starlight Spectacular — a nightly light @-@ and @-@ sound show focused on Wonder Mountain . 
 = = History = = 
 Canada 's Wonderland 's first interactive dark ride was Scooby @-@ Doo 's Haunted Mansion ( renamed Boo Blasters on Boo Hill after Cedar Fair 's purchase of the park ) , which opened in 2000 . It was designed by Sally Corporation and relies entirely on physical sets and theming rather than projected animations , and uses basic , moving props . About four years later , park management began discussing the addition of a new attraction inside Wonder Mountain . The technology available at the time meant the cost of building a more advanced dark ride was too expensive for a regional amusement park . In 2011 , as technology improved and the costs decreased , the park started planning a second interactive dark ride . Several companies were contacted to design the audio @-@ visual portion of the future ride ; park management chose Triotech to do so . 
 Speculation that Canada 's Wonderland would build a new attraction for the 2014 season began at the end of July 2013 when maintenance work on the western side of Wonder Mountain was discovered . On August 8 , Cedar Fair confirmed an interactive dark ride would be built at one of the company 's parks . Wonderland officially announced Wonder Mountain 's Guardian — a ten million dollar attraction — on August 30 , 2013 , on Breakfast Television , a morning news program for the Toronto area . During the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions ( IAAPA ) Attractions Expo 2013 , the characters of the ride were revealed during president and CEO of Cedar Fair Matt Ouimet 's keynote address . 
 The first pieces of track and other parts from arrived at the park from Germany in mid @-@ January 2014 . A month later , installation of the track began inside the mountain . By the end of February , erection of the framing for the 3D screens began . By the beginning of March , support columns for the outside portion of the ride were installed . The lift hill was completed at the beginning of April . The park opened to the public on May 4 but the opening of Guardian was delayed . On May 23 , the park announced the ride would open the next day . The entire project involved 10 contractors and at least 47 workers . 
 On November 7 , 2013 , Cedar Fair announced that during Halloween Haunt , Guardian would be altered to a zombie @-@ themed ride . The name of this version of the attraction was later revealed to be Zombies 4D . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 When Guardian first opened , Fast Lane was available to guests but within the first week of operation the Fast Lane option was removed . Riders must be at least 42 inches ( 107 cm ) tall to ride with an adult or 48 inches ( 122 cm ) to ride alone . 
 The rider 's experience is dependent upon the location of her or his seat on the train . Screens are located on both sides of the track but the only continuous screen on the track is on the right @-@ hand side . The train makes several tight turns during the ride ; riders facing forward experience all the animations while riders facing backward miss some scenes because of a the lack of screen space . The cars rotate 90 degrees clockwise to face the screens ; forward @-@ facing riders rotate toward the continuous screen . 
 = = = Wonder Mountain 's Guardian = = = 
 In the ride 's narrative of events preceding those that occur during the ride , King <unk> entered the mountain to fight a dragon called Ormaar . During the battle , the king lost his crown . Stansein , one of the king 's servants , guides riders through the mountain to find and retrieve the crown . Throughout the ride , riders can score points by hitting objects on the screen with their light guns . At the end , the highest scores are placed in the ' Wonder Mountain 's Guardian Hall of Fame ' . 
 After the train leaves the station , it <unk> @-@ degrees right and exits the mountain , leading into a 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) chain lift hill . Once at the top , the train enters a shallow , right @-@ hand drop and runs along the side of the mountain . It makes a banked right turn back into the mountain , then a tarpaulin drops , blocking the entrance to prevent light from entering . The train slows and the cars rotate 90 degrees to face the screens . Stansein tells riders to prepare to battle the enemies . The first scene takes place in forest environment where riders fight Sneaky Spiders and <unk> Bats . At the end of the first scene , riders who began the ride facing forward see Stansein 's first appearance , in which he points in the direction riders should go next . Backward @-@ facing riders do not see this transition . In the next scene , riders — who are surrounded by a lake inside the mountain — battle Wet Ones and Crazy Crabs . The scene starts above the surface of the water but later moves downwards . As the scene ends , the train passes two waterfalls ; this transition is absent for backward @-@ facing riders . 
 Riders then arrive in an underground city named Draconian City , where they battle against Draconians and Archers . Nearing the finale , forward @-@ facing riders see Stansein making his final appearance , following the train . Riders are then confronted by more Draconians and Archers before entering a gold @-@ covered area where King <unk> 's crown is found . Soon after , Ormaar arrives and breathes fire toward the ground . After a few seconds , the drop track releases the train into a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) free fall , escaping from Ormaar . As the train leaves the drop track , the trains are rotated to their original positions and all of the riders ' scores are displayed on both sides of the track . After turning left into the station , riders disembark and the next riders board . One cycle of the ride lasts approximately three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . 
 = = = Zombies 4D = = = 
 In the ride 's Zombies 4D version , riders score points for shooting zombies and police badges found throughout the ride , but lose points if they shoot civilians . 
 After the train is dispatched and enters Wonder Mountain , riders find themselves in a graveyard where zombies are roaming . At the end of the scene , riders who began facing forward see a survivor directing them to the next scene . Riders who were seated backwards do not see this transition . The next scene takes place in a house overrun by the zombies and large spiders . At the end of the scene a truck crashes into the house . Riders then leave the house and pass the survivor ; this transition is again absent for backward @-@ seated riders . The train continues to a road with zombies , where three cars with zombies on them join the riders . Two of the cars crash at the end of the scene . The train then passes through a tunnel with abandoned cars ; this scene is absent for riders facing backward . Riders then battle the zombies for the final time before entering the drop track sequence . The names of the highest @-@ scoring riders are displayed on a leader @-@ board for this version of the attraction . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Guardian operates with five trains , each containing two cars that were manufactured by Art Engineering . Each car seats four riders back @-@ to @-@ back in seated rows ; each train can seat eight riders . Every seat has a lap @-@ bar restraint , a light gun , and a loudspeaker that provides sound during the ride . This configuration allows the ride to theoretically carry 650 riders per hour . The cars can rotate 90 degrees in both directions . The trains ' light guns are programmed to display a unique colour on the ride 's screens to indicate where each rider is shooting and to distinguish between shooters . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Guardian is approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) long and the lift is about 60 feet ( 18 m ) high ; it was manufactured by <unk> Steel located in Stoney Creek , Ontario . The outside portion of the track is grey and has beige supports ; indoor portions of the ride 's infrastructure are painted black . When the train is inside the mountain , drive tires move the trains along the track . The drive tires and other moving parts within the track system were manufactured by Art Engineering . 
 At the end of the interactive part of the ride , there is a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) free @-@ fall drop track , a movable piece of track that can be released into free fall . As of 2015 , this roller coaster element has only been used on five coasters in the world . Once the train exits the drop track , the track returns to its starting position for the next train . Both Polar X @-@ <unk> at Legoland Billund Resort and Thirteen at Alton Towers have vertical drop tracks that release riders into a 16 @.@ 4 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) drop . <unk> at Busch Gardens Williamsburg has a drop track measuring 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) . The drop track used on Guardian is one of the largest drop tracks in the world . 
 = = = Screens = = = 
 Guardian uses 64 720p projectors to display interactive content on the ride 's screens . As the train enters the mountain , the cars rotate to face the screens . Because riders are seated both forwards and backwards , two sets of screens — one for each side — are required . Because Guardian makes tight turns , only the screen on the right @-@ hand side of the track continuously shows content until the end . This screen holds the record for being the longest continuous interactive screen in the world , with a length of approximately 500 feet ( 150 m ) and a height of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . The other screen is set up so that as one scene finishes , the transition scene that is seen on the continuous screen is skipped and the next scene begins soon after , keeping both screens in synchronization . Because no physical sets are used in the attraction , the park management can change the film and theme of Guardian at any time . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The Wonder Mountain 's Guardian version of the attraction features eight characters . <unk> is the riders ' guide who leads them through the mountain . Crazy Crabs are characterized as attractive but dangerous . <unk> Bats are recognizable by their oversized fangs compared to those of regular bats . Sneaky Spiders have the ability to ambush riders and their bites contain venom . Archers fight with bows and arrows , and can move around quickly . Wet Ones are reptilian creatures similar to fish but they can walk on land . These reptiles are most dangerous when they are in the water . Draconians protect Draconian City and carry swords and shields . Ormaar is the dragon that lives inside the mountain and confronts riders at the end of the ride . 
 In the Zombies 4D version of the ride , a survivor of the zombie apocalypse replaces <unk> as the guide character ; zombies are the enemy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Brady MacDonald from Los Angeles Times ranked Guardian as the ninth most anticipated new ride of 2014 ; Sarah Sekula from Fox News ranked the ride in the top nine . Jody Robbins from MSN ranked Guardian in the top 11 best new attractions in Canada . 
 According to Triotech and Cedar Fair , the response from the public during the ride 's opening weekend was positive . Children and parents interviewed by Adam Martin @-@ Robbins from <unk> said they enjoyed the ride . Jeremy <unk> from the IAAPA said , " Cedar Fair seems to have figured out how to create a lavish dark ride on a regional theme park budget " . 
 During the 2014 season , attendance at Canada 's Wonderland dropped one percent — a loss of approximately 36 @,@ 000 visitors — compared to that of the 2013 season . The park 's most recent increase in attendance was in 2012 , the season Leviathan debuted , where there was a five percent increase . Wonder Mountain 's Guardian did not place in the top 50 roller coasters in the world , nor was it in the top five new roller coasters in the Golden Ticket Awards for the 2014 season . 
 = No Pressure ( film ) = 
 No Pressure is a controversial 2010 short film produced by the global warming mitigation campaign 10 : 10 , written by Richard Curtis and Franny Armstrong , and directed by Dougal Wilson . Intended for cinema and television advertisements , No Pressure is composed of scenes in which a variety of people in every @-@ day situations are graphically blown to pieces for failing to be sufficiently enthusiastic about the 10 : 10 campaign to reduce CO2 emissions . The film 's makers said that they viewed No Pressure as " a funny and satirical tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek little film in the over @-@ the @-@ top style of Monty Python or South Park " . Before its release , The Guardian described it as " attention @-@ grabbing " and " pretty edgy . " 
 The film was withdrawn from public circulation by 10 : 10 , on the same day it was released , due to negative publicity . Charities that had backed the film stated they were " absolutely appalled " upon seeing it , and several of 10 : 10 's corporate and strategic partners withdrew from partnership . Fox News called the film " a blood @-@ splattering display that has drawn anger from critics and sheepish embarrassment from its supporters . " 
 = = Background and production = = 
 The film was made in an attempt to challenge the " no pressure " attitude often displayed both by governments and individuals towards taking real action on climate change . 10 : 10 highlighted the urgency of action with claims that carbon dioxide emissions must be stabilised by 2014 ( within four years ) in order to avoid disaster , and that " 300 @,@ 000 real people " are already killed by climate change annually . Lizzie Gillet , 10 : 10 global campaign director , explained : " With climate change becoming increasingly threatening , and decreasingly talked about in the media , we wanted to find a way to bring this critical issue back into the headlines while making people laugh . We were therefore delighted when Richard Curtis agreed to write a short film for the 10 : 10 campaign " . 
 The film was shot on a location at Camden School for Girls , in the London Borough of Camden in North London . According to 10 : 10 , over 50 film professionals and more than 40 actors and extras provided their services at no cost . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The four @-@ minute film consists of a series of short scenes in which groups of people are asked if they are interested in participating in the 10 : 10 project to reduce carbon emissions . Those failing to show enthusiasm for the cause are gruesomely blown to pieces . 
 In the first scene , a bright and chirpy schoolteacher , played by Lyndsey Marshal , tells her class about the 10 : 10 campaign , and asks what they are doing to reduce their carbon footprint . She asks which students are planning to participate ; most raise their hands , but two children shrug apathetically . The teacher reassures them that this is " fine , it 's absolutely fine , it 's your choice " and there is " no pressure " , but then shifts the papers on her desk to reveal a red @-@ buttoned detonator , which she presses . The two children who did not want to participate explode , covering their screaming classmates with blood and body parts . The blood @-@ spattered teacher then goes on casually to explain the night 's homework to her horrified charges . 
 The second scene shows a group of white @-@ collar workers in an office meeting . The office manager similarly explains the purpose of the 10 : 10 campaign , and asks who will be participating . While most raise their hands , four raise their hands unconvinced . The manager reassures them that there is " no pressure " to participate , but he is then handed a detonator by an assistant , which he uses to blow up the four workers , splattering appalled co @-@ workers with gore . 
 The third scene is set on a football pitch during team training . The coach , played by David Ginola , asks the players to explain the 10 : 10 campaign that the team is participating in . They describe a range of energy @-@ saving measures which have been implemented by the team and its fans . However , the coach remains unmoved , remarking the campaign would distract him from football . A player tells him that there 's " no pressure " , produces a detonator and blows him up . Unlike the witnesses depicted in previous scenes , the team is not at all surprised , and casually jogs away to resume training . 
 A brief interlude with captions explains the campaign , accompanied by music from Radiohead . In the final scene , the actress Gillian Anderson is finishing the voice @-@ over for the interlude just seen . The sound engineer asks her what she is planning to do to cut her carbon footprint . Anderson irritably remarks that she thought providing the recording was a sufficient contribution . The sound engineer repeats the film 's catchphrase , " no pressure " , and detonates Anderson before picking up to leave . The film ends with a shot of Anderson 's gory remains sliding down the sound @-@ booth window with the text " Cut your carbon by 10 % . No pressure . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , No Pressure provoked an immediate negative reaction in the media , and the resulting controversy became widely referred to as " <unk> " by bloggers . 
 In The Daily Telegraph , James Delingpole wrote that the film was an " ugly , counterproductive eco @-@ propaganda movie " and that " with No Pressure , the environmental movement has revealed the snarling , wicked , homicidal misanthropy beneath its cloak of gentle , bunny @-@ hugging righteousness " . The <unk> website described it as " crass , tasteless and unfunny as it gets " , while Melanie Phillips in The Spectator commented on the intended humorous aspect of the film by writing that " The joke was only about blowing dissenters to bits and raining their flesh down on terrified people . Because exterminating human beings is acceptable to greens as a joke . From which we can only assume at best indifference towards and at worst a profound loathing of the human condition " . 
 American environmentalist and writer Bill McKibben lamented the film on the Climate Progress website , where he wrote " The climate skeptics can crow . It 's the kind of stupidity that hurts our side , reinforcing in people 's minds a series of preconceived notions , not the least of which is that we 're out @-@ of @-@ control and out of touch — not to mention off the wall , and also with completely misplaced sense of humor " . McKibben added " There 's no question that crap like this will cast a shadow , for a time , over our efforts and everyone else who 's working on global warming . McKibben subsequently withdrew as an organisational partner of 10 : 10 . When The Daily Caller asked about the film , environmental organisation Greenpeace spokeswoman Jane <unk> stated that " as an organisation committed to non @-@ violence , I think you can imagine how Greenpeace views this material . At this time , the only people promoting the material are climate skeptics and think tanks funded by corporations known for lobbying against climate change legislation " . Five other environmental groups contacted by The Daily Caller did not comment on the film . 
 In The Independent , Dominic Lawson wrote " As often as 10 : 10 tried to pull the film off YouTube , their critics re @-@ posted it . This , at least , proves what a cataclysmic misjudgement Curtis had made . When you try to satirise the critics of your campaign , and it turns out that those very critics embrace your film as demonstrating exactly what they find unbearable about the climate @-@ obsessed eco @-@ lobby , then you know that you have kicked the ball into your own net " . 
 The film generated a huge reaction in the blogosphere . One comment to The Guardian read : " To suggest that people who disagree with you deserve to die is incredibly stupid . Imagine if some Christian group in the US did that to gays , Muslims or anyone else they disagree with . The outrage would be palpable . And deserved . " 
 The Guardian , which was a key collaborator with the 10 : 10 campaign since its launch and got exclusive rights to show the film première , responded to the criticism by stating that " the film may have been somewhat tasteless , but it was an imaginative attempt to challenge public apathy over climate change " . This statement originally ended " and , highly unusually for attempts to communicate about this subject , funny too " , but this was later redacted . A later report in the newspaper by Adam Vaughan said that the film , " intended as a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek spoof of hectoring greens " , had created a huge amount of global coverage for 10 : 10 , in print and on the web . The report said that while many people had found the film hilarious , there was a " predictable slating from climate sceptics " as well as furious reactions from some environmentalists . The report also went on to describe other , more reflective responses , which had focused on effective communication , psychology , satire , and ways of engaging with various audiences over climate change . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 Although originally planned to be shown in cinema and television advertisements , 10 : 10 removed the film from their website and YouTube later on 1 October 2010 . On Friday 2 October , 10 : 10 placed a notice on their website saying , " Many people found the resulting film extremely funny , but unfortunately some didn 't and we sincerely apologise to anybody we have offended . [ ... ] At 10 : 10 we 're all about trying new and creative ways of getting people to take action on climate change . Unfortunately in this instance we missed the mark . Oh well , we live and learn . " This was criticised as a non @-@ apology apology by Michelle Malkin in the Litchfield County Register and Andrew <unk> in an opinion piece in the New York Times . A spokesman for 10 : 10 also denied that the withdrawal had been planned from the beginning in order to generate publicity . After removing the video from YouTube , 10 : 10 issued a statement : " We won 't be making any attempt to censor or remove other versions currently in circulation on the internet " . Then , on Monday 5 October 10 : 10 director Eugenie Harvey issued a second , more comprehensive apology , stating : " We are ... sorry to our corporate sponsors , delivery partners and board members , who have been implicated in this situation despite having no involvement in the film 's production or release . " 
 ActionAid , a charity which co @-@ ordinates a schools programme with 10 : 10 , approved the decision to withdraw the film , and stated " Our job is to encourage proactive decisions at class level to reduce carbon emissions . We did it because evidence shows children are deeply concerned about climate change and because we see the impacts of it in the developing world where a lot of our work is . So we think the 10 : 10 campaign is very important , but the moment this film was seen it was clear it was inappropriate . " 
 In the wake of the film 's withdrawal , Richard Curtis admitted that the attempt to draw attention to the cause of lowering CO 
 2 emissions may have backfired . Curtis said " When you try to be funny on a serious subject , it 's obviously risky . I hope people who don 't like the little film will still think about the big issue and try to do something about it . " 
 = = = Withdrawal of sponsors = = = 
 Several sponsors withdrew their support of 10 : 10 as a result of the No Pressure film . Nick Sharples , Sony Europe 's Director of Communications , issued a statement saying , " we strongly condemn the No Pressure video which was conceived , produced and released by 10 : 10 entirely without the knowledge or involvement of Sony " , and cutting ties with 10 : 10 : " As a result we have taken the decision to disassociate ourselves from 10 : 10 at this time " . Kyocera and <unk> were removed from the list of 10 : 10 sponsors , and National Magazine Company was removed from the list of 10 : 10 media partners . At the same time , a spokesman for O2 , a partner of 10 : 10 , refused to disassociate itself from the group : " 10 : 10 is an independent organisation and we don 't ask for editorial control over the content of its campaigns . " 
 350.org , with whom 10 : 10 had been collaborating on the 10 October 2010 day of action , broke all current and future relations with 10 : 10 . In a press release , they said : " We respect 10 : 10 's previous work to encourage companies , schools , and churches to voluntarily cut their carbon emissions 10 % . Upon seeing the video , however , we have informed 10 : 10 that we can no longer remain partners on 10 October 2010 or any other initiative . 350.org maintains an absolute commitment to nonviolence in word and deed " . 
 = Tom Felton = 
 Thomas Andrew " Tom " Felton ( born 22 September 1987 ) is an English actor . Felton began appearing in commercials when he was 8 years old for companies such as Commercial Union and Barclaycard . He made his screen debut in the role of <unk> Clock in The Borrowers ( 1997 ) and he portrayed Louis T. Leonowens in Anna and the King ( 1999 ) . He rose to prominence for his role as Draco Malfoy in the film adaptions of the best @-@ selling Harry Potter fantasy novels by J.K. Rowling . His performances in Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 won him two consecutive MTV Movie Awards for Best Villain in 2010 and 2011 . 
 Following the conclusion of the series in 2011 , Felton appeared in the 2011 film Rise of the Planet of the Apes , a reboot of the Planet of the Apes series . He had roles in minor films , appearing in the 2012 films The Apparition and From the Rough , and he starred as James Ashford in the critically acclaimed period drama film Belle ( 2013 ) , followed by roles in In Secret ( 2014 ) and Against the Sun ( 2014 ) . Felton 's 2016 films include the epic historical drama Risen , alongside Joseph Fiennes , and the period biopic A United Kingdom , alongside David Oyelowo and Rosamund Pike . In 2016 , he will appear as a series regular in The Flash . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Felton was born in Epsom , the son of Sharon and Peter Felton . He was educated at West Horsley 's Cranmore School , until the age of thirteen . He then attended The Howard of Effingham School which is a high school that is located in Effingham that specialises in Sciences . Felton is a singer and was part of a choir at the age of seven . He was a member of four school choirs and was given the chance to be part of the Guildford Cathedral Choir . He has three older brothers ; Ashley , Jonathan and Chris . Felton is the youngest of four sons . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Felton began acting in adverts for companies such as Commercial Union and Barclaycard . In 1995 , he performed the voice of James in the television series Bugs and landed his first feature film role in 1997 when he played the part of <unk> Clock in Peter Hewitt 's film The Borrowers . Felton played witness Thomas Ingham opposite Clive Owen in Second Sight in 1999 . Felton 's role of Louis T. Leonowens in the film Anna and the King , starring Jodie Foster , was also filmed in 1999 in Malaysia . Felton made an appearance in the episode " Hide and Seek " of Second Sight 2 followed in 2000 . The Guildford Cathedral Choir also offered him a position . 
 = = = 2000 – present = = = 
 By autumn 2001 , Felton had become known internationally for his portrayal of Draco Malfoy , the bully , enemy and foil of Harry Potter in Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone . He appeared in all of the Harry Potter films . Before landing the part of Malfoy , Felton had auditioned to play Harry Potter and Ron Weasley . Of the four young actors who succeeded in getting the main roles , Felton had the most extensive film experience . Thereafter Felton 's schedule began to fill with the work of filming the first four films , premieres , and contributing to articles and interviews . He also received the Disney Channel 's Kids Awards for Best DVD for Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets on 22 September 2003 . Felton started his Official Tom Felton Fan Club in 2004 and took part in autograph signing events . His fan club was reported to have attracted so many fans that Felton had to put a temporary stop to people signing up to his fan club . The autographing session in Germany drew people from Chile and one fan in Cologne summarised : " Tom is a real nice , professional young man , always happy , smiling , laughing , full of power — a real gentleman . " When the fan asked Felton what kids should do if someone like his character is bullying them , he said : " Tell someone . You do not want to keep it to yourself . " 
 After filming Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , Felton made a guest appearance on Home Farm Twins in 2005 , where he played Adam Baker in the short @-@ lived series . He attended <unk> on 30 April 2005 and London 's world premiere for Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . On 11 November 2005 , he and Rupert Grint presented Liz Carnell with the Daily Mirror 's Pride of Britain Award for all of her work to raise awareness of the dangers of bullying . Felton worked on Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix throughout 2006 . Having read more of the Harry Potter books , Felton reflected : " I have had input into Draco . If they give me a line and I do not think it is something he would say , I suggest changing it . They do listen to you and you do feel a part of it . " 
 In July 2007 , Felton visited Children 's Hospital in Denver , Colorado in a pre @-@ screening charitable event of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix . He was also present at Leicester Square for the premiere of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix on 3 July 2007 . 
 On 12 November 2008 , Felton appeared alongside Jack Osbourne on Adrenaline Junkie as he participated in various challenges in South African , including a <unk> bungee jump on <unk> Bridge , took a ride in a helicopter , followed by a parachute freefall and came face @-@ to @-@ face with Great White sharks . 
 Felton also appeared in Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , the sixth film of the series . When asked whether he was looking forward to playing a good guy in the future he answered : " No . Well , I don 't know . I suppose for now I 'm happy with sticking to what he is . But after the Potter legacy is over I look forward to playing a good guy , or someone different anyway ; someone not so spiteful . " Felton also played the character Simon in the 2009 horror / thriller movie The Disappeared . 
 Felton posted three music videos on YouTube under an account called " <unk> " , in which he performs fragments of original songs . Nine songs have been re @-@ recorded and are now available on iTunes : " Time Well Spent , " " Time Isn 't Healing " , " One of These Days " , " Under Stars , " " Right Place , Right Time , " " In My Arms , " " All I Need , " and " I Will Be There " join the instrumental " Silhouettes in Sunsets . " He also recorded an album titled In Good Hands . It includes the six songs " If You Could Be Anywhere " , " We Belong " , " When Angels Come " , " Convinced " , " Father of Mine " , and " If That 's Alright with You " . 
 In 2010 , Felton released his original song " Hawaii " on Six String Productions – an independent record label run by Felton , David Proffitt and Philip Haydn @-@ Slater promoting creative independence and ownership of artists ' material and musical talent . 
 In November 2010 the film White Other , which Tom played the main character , Ray Marsden , was released . Tom 's character Ray is a troubled youth in the " ends " of England and Imelda Staunton , who played Dolores Umbridge in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 , also makes an appearance as one of the other main roles in the film . 
 Felton had a cameo role in Get Him to the Greek , released on 4 June 2010 . In February 2010 , he was cast in the thriller film The Apparition . Felton portrays the human character Dodge Landon in the 2011 science @-@ fiction film Rise of the Planet of the Apes . 
 On 18 March 2011 , Felton appeared in a comedy sketch on Red Nose Day 2011 alongside James Corden , Rupert Grint , George Michael , Justin Bieber , Paul McCartney , Ringo Starr , Gordon Brown MP , Professor Robert Winston and Keira <unk> 
 In 2016 , Felton will star as CSI Julian Dorn on The Flash as a regular cast member . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2003 , Felton and his brother Chris worked with Joe Babbitt , the St. Lawrence County Angler 's Association , the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Region 6 , the Chamber of Commerce , and a diverse group of other organisations to form the World Junior Carp Tournament , which involves competitive fishing for ages 11 to 18 . 
 In early 2015 , Felton posted an Instagram photo of himself and Jade Olivia , writing , " To the girl that has my heart . Happy 7 year anniversary . " Felton and Olivia have been together since February 2008 ; they met when filming the Harry Potter series , where Jade was an assistant . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = EPs = = = 
 Time Well Spent ( 2008 ) 
 All I Need ( 2008 ) 
 In Good Hands ( 2009 ) 
 Hawaii ( 2011 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Silhouettes in Sunsets " ( 2008 ) 
 " If You Could Be Anywhere " ( 2010 ) 
 = Harta Berdarah = 
 Harta Berdarah ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Indonesian for Bloody Treasure ) is a 1940 action film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) . Directed by the recently hired Rd Ariffien and R Hu for Union Films , the film was written by Saeroen and attempted to draw educated Native audiences . The film , which stars Zonder and Soelastri , tells of a young man who convinces a stingy hadji to be more charitable and , in the process , falls in love with the man 's daughter . 
 Released during Eid al @-@ Fitr , Harta Berdarah was advertised as a " magnificent Indonesian action hit " and used Zonder 's silat skills and Soelastri 's fame as keroncong singer to draw audiences . Reviews for the work were positive , with praise focused on its acting and story . Although Harta Berdarah was screened as late as 1944 , as with most contemporary productions it is now likely lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the village of <unk> , Mardjan ( Oedjang ) is forcefully evicting people who are unable to pay their taxes to his boss , the landlord Hadji Doerachman ( Moesa ) . Doerachman , though aware of this , is unwilling to stop him , even after his daughter , Atikah ( Soelastri ) , tries to convince him . 
 Mardjan and his men evict Asmadi , his wife <unk> ( RS Fatimah ) , and Asmadi 's sick mother . When Asmadi resists , Mardjan beats and detains him . Meanwhile , a young man named Rachmat ( Zonder ) is visiting his aunt in <unk> . Learning of Mardjan 's dealings , Rachmat finds him at Doerachman 's home and insists that Mardjan stop . When Mardjan and his men try to fight , Rachmat overpowers them and negotiates Asmadi 's release . Afterwards , Rachmat goes back to his aunt 's home . Asmadi returns to his , only to learn that his mother had died shortly after the eviction ; he swears revenge . 
 One day , Rachmat hears screaming and finds Atikah , who has fainted after seeing a snake . After she regains consciousness , Atikah thanks him for rescuing her . Although Rachmat is disgusted that he has helped her after learning the identity of Atikah 's father , as Rachmat and Atikah dedicate their time to social work , they begin to fall in love . Doerachman , however , disapproves of their relationship , and refuses to fund their work ; as a result , Atikah takes her deceased mother 's jewellery and some money to pay for village development . Later , when Rachmat and Atikah are sitting together and singing romantic songs , Mardjan overhears them . Hurrying back to Doerachman 's home , Mardjan convinces his boss that Rachmat intends only to steal Doerachman 's wealth , and to let Mardjan marry Atikah . As Doerachman prepares to leave , Mardjan has the illiterate hadji put his seal on a letter . 
 In preparation for her marriage to Mardjan , Atikah is secluded at home . Learning of this betrothal , Rachmat goes to Doerachman and , after fighting Mardjan and his men , takes the hadji to the village where he and Atikah had initiated development programs . As they had all worked in Doerachman 's name , the villagers do not fear him , but respect him . This , and the extent of the developments , makes Doerachman realise that hoarding his wealth for himself does not make him as happy as using it for charity . The two , accompanied by Asmadi , hurry back to Doerachman 's home , only to find Mardjan and his men sitting <unk> on the front porch . 
 After he is accosted by Doerachman , Mardjan reveals that the letter which Doerachman signed was actually a statement granting Mardjan all of the hadji 's wealth . Furious at Mardjan 's behaviour , Asmadi attacks him while Rachmat restrains the others . After a lengthy knife fight , Mardjan 's foot is caught in the railroad tracks , and he is soon killed by a passing train . Doerachman , pleased with the return of his wealth , destroys the letter and grants Rachmat permission to marry Atikah . 
 = = Production = = 
 Union Films was established in 1940 by ethnic Chinese businessmen Ang Hock Liem and Tjoa Ma Tjoen . After the success of its first production , Kedok Ketawa ( The Laughing Mask ) , the director Jo An Djan left for Populair 's Film . Union hired new talent , including R Hu , Rd Ariffien , and Saeroen . All three were instrumental in the production of Harta Berdarah ; Hu and Ariffien served as co @-@ directors , both in their debuts , and Saeroen – who had written the commercial successes Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ; 1937 ) and Fatima ( 1938 ) for other companies – wrote the story . Ariffien credited their hirings to Union 's interest in attracting educated Native audiences . 
 Harta Berdarah starred Soelastri and Zonder , and featured Moesa , Oedjang , Oesman , <unk> , and Abdullah . Many of these actors , including Soelastri and Fatimah , had had roles in Kedok Ketawa , and Moesa , though only recently signed , had previously acted for another company . Zonder , who made his film debut in Harta Berdarah , was well @-@ versed in the traditional martial art of silat , while Soelastri was also known as a keroncong singer under the stage name Miss Ning ; both made use of these skills for the film , which was scored by Hugo Dumas ' musical troupe Lief Java . Cinematography for the production was handled by KH <unk> . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Harta Berdarah was released in late October 1940 , to coincide with the Eid al @-@ Fitr holiday . The film , sometimes advertised under the Dutch title <unk> , was billed as a " magnificent Indonesian action hit " . A novelisation , published by the Yogyakarta @-@ based Kolff @-@ Buning , was later released ; it includes several production stills . 
 Reception was positive . An anonymous review in De Indische Courant concluded that the film was simple yet well produced , with strong dialogue and humour . Another review , in the Soerabaijasch Handelsblad , was likewise positive ; it found the film dissimilar to earlier domestic productions , in which " a group of stiff people moved woodenly and expelled inarticulate sounds " , becoming something which could be enjoyed by anyone , " Indonesian or European alike " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Harta Berdarah , Union produced a further five films ; all but one were directed by Hu or Ariffien . Saeroen wrote three of them , leaving for Star Film following Wanita dan Satria ( 1941 ) . Most of the cast remained with Union for several productions ; the company 's subsequent production , Bajar dengan Djiwa ( 1941 ) , for instance , again starred Zonder and Soelastri . Union Films was ultimately dissolved following the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies in March 1942 . 
 Harta Berdarah was screened as late as July 1944 . The film is likely lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . As such , American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider suggests that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and the film historian Misbach Yusa Biran writes that some Japanese propaganda films can be found at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Delaware Route 16 = 
 Delaware Route 16 ( DE 16 ) is an east @-@ west state highway in Delaware , mainly across northern Sussex County , with a small portion near the Maryland border in extreme southwestern Kent County . It runs from Maryland Route 16 ( MD 16 ) at the Maryland border in Hickman to the Delaware Bay at Broadkill Beach . The route runs through rural areas , passing through the towns of Greenwood , Ellendale , and Milton . DE 16 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) and DE 36 in Greenwood , US 113 in Ellendale , DE 30 and DE 5 in the Milton area , and DE 1 between Milton and Broadkill Beach . West of DE 1 , the route serves as part of a connection between the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area and the Delaware Beaches . DE 16 was built as a state highway during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1936 , the route was designated onto its current alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 16 begins at the Maryland border in Hickman , Kent County , where the road continues west into that state as MD 16 . From the state line , the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Hickman Road , passing through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . The road crosses into Sussex County and turns to the southeast . DE 16 comes to an intersection with DE 36 , at which point it turns east to form a concurrency with that route . The road enters Greenwood and becomes Market Street , passing several homes along with a few businesses . The highway crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line before it intersects US 13 on the eastern edge of Greenwood . Past this intersection , DE 16 / DE 36 leaves Greenwood and becomes Beach Highway , crossing the Nanticoke River . 
 In Saint Johnstown , DE 36 splits from DE 16 by heading to the northeast on Shawnee Road . DE 16 continues east through agricultural areas and woods with some residences . Farther east , the road passes through Oakley . The route comes to an intersection with US 113 and enters Ellendale , where it becomes Main Street . In Ellendale , DE 16 runs past several homes , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . The road leaves the town and becomes Milton @-@ Ellendale Highway , turning southeast . The route heads through woodland and farms , running immediately to the north of a Delaware Coast Line Railroad line . DE 16 turns east away from the railroad tracks and comes to an intersection with DE 30 . At this point , DE 5 Alternate ( DE 5 Alt . ) , which runs south along DE 30 , heads east along with DE 16 . The road reaches Milton , where it passes homes and businesses . DE 16 comes to an intersection with DE 5 , where DE 5 Alt. ends and the road name changes to Broadkill Road . The route leaves Milton and continues into farmland with a few residences , turning to the northeast . The road intersects DE 1 and runs through a mix of farms and woods with some homes . DE 16 turns east and northeast through marshland within the Prime Hook National Wildlife Refuge before reaching the community of Broadkill Beach , where it crosses Bay Shore Drive before ending at a dead end on the Delaware Bay . 
 The portion of DE 16 west of DE 1 serves as part of a route connecting the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area to the Delaware Beaches . DE 16 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 9 @,@ 886 vehicles at the eastern edge of Greenwood to a low of 1 @,@ 815 vehicles at west end of the DE 36 concurrency . None of DE 16 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 16 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . By 1924 , the section of road in Greenwood was constructed as a state highway . A year later , the route between the Dupont Highway and Ellendale became a state highway . In 1929 , the road was completed as a state highway between Ellendale and Milton . A year later , the state highway was built between Owens and Ellendale . The entire road west of Milton was finished as a state highway by 1931 . By 1936 , DE 16 was designated to run from the Maryland border to Broadkill Beach along its current alignment . The portion of route east of DE 14 ( present @-@ day DE 1 ) was paved by 1942 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 200 euro note = 
 The two hundred euro note ( € 200 ) is the second @-@ highest value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 . The note is used in the 23 countries which have it as their sole currency ( with 22 legally adopting it ) ; with a population of about 332 million . 
 It is the second @-@ largest note , measuring 153 x 82 mm , and has a yellow colour scheme . The two hundred euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways in Art Nouveau style ( 19th and 20th centuries ) . 
 The € 200 note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity . In September 2011 , there were about 178 @,@ 838 @,@ 200 € 200 banknotes in circulation around the eurozone . 
 = = History = = 
 The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe . For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accountancy . Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12 , such as the Finnish <unk> . 
 Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 , Latvia joined on 1 January 2014 and Lithuania joined on 1 January 2015 . 
 = = = The changeover period = = = 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months after that . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for ten years or more . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg , who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean @-@ Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012 . Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi . 
 Until now there has been only one series of euro notes ; however a new series , similar to the current one , is planned to be released . The European Central Bank will in due course announce when banknotes of the first series lose legal tender status . 
 As of June 2012 , current issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union : Cyprus is not depicted on current notes , as the map does not extend far enough east ; and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series ' minimum size for depiction . The European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years , and a second series of banknotes is already in preparation . New production and anti @-@ counterfeiting techniques will be employed on the new notes , but the design will be of the same theme and colours identical to the current series : bridges and arches . However , they will still be recognisable as a new series . 
 = = Design = = 
 The € 200 note measures 153 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) × 82 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) and has a yellow colour scheme . All euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways , each in a different historical European style : the € 200 note shows the Art Nouveau era ( 19th and 20th centuries ) . Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era . 
 Like all euro notes , it contains the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of that bank in different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below . 
 = = = Security features = = = 
 The € 200 note is protected by : 
 Colour changing ink used on the numeral located on the back of the note , that appears to change colour from purple to brown when the note is tilted . 
 A see @-@ through number printed at the top corner of the note , on both sides , appears to combine perfectly to form the value numeral when held against the light . 
 A glossy stripe , at the back of the note , showing the value numeral and the euro symbol . 
 A hologram : the hologram image changes between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , rainbow @-@ coloured concentric circles of micro @-@ letters appear , moving from the centre to the edges of the patch . 
 A EURion constellation : this is a pattern of symbols found on a number of banknote designs worldwide since about 1996 . It is added to help software detect the presence of a banknote in a digital image . 
 Watermarks , which appear when held up to the light . 
 Raised printing : in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes will be raised . 
 Ultraviolet ink ; the paper itself does not glow , fibres embedded in the paper appear , and are coloured red , blue and green : the EU flag is green and has orange stars , the ECB President 's , currently Mario Draghi 's , signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow . 
 Microprinting : on various areas of the banknotes there is microprinting , for example , inside the " EYPΩ " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front . The micro @-@ text is sharp , not blurred . 
 A security thread , embedded in the banknote paper . The thread will appear as a dark stripe when held up to the light . The word " EURO " and the value is embedded in tiny letters on the thread . 
 Perforations in the hologram which will form the euro symbol . There are also small numbers showing the value . 
 A matted surface ; the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , not limp or waxy . 
 Barcodes , 
 A serial number . 
 = = Circulation = = 
 The € 200 banknote is the least used banknote in the Eurozone . As of December 2015 , there are about 206 @,@ 894 @,@ 602 € 200 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone — some € 41 billion worth . The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes . It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area . 
 = = Legal information = = 
 Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the seven different euro banknotes . In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes . The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations . 
 = = Tracking = = 
 There are several communities of people in Europe , in particular EuroBillTracker , who , as a hobby , track the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , recording where they travel . The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about their spread , i.e. where the notes travel , and generate statistics and rankings : for example , in which countries there are more tickets . EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2 @.@ 897 billion . 
 = Hook Me Up ( song ) = 
 " Hook Me Up " is a song recorded by Australian duo The Veronicas for their second album of the same name ( 2007 ) . Produced by Greg Wells and Engineered by Drew Pearson , it was released as the album 's lead single on 18 August 2007 as a digital download . The down @-@ tempo , electropop @-@ dance song , is a change in direction from the pop rock sound from their previous album , The Secret Life Of ... ( 2005 ) . It was written by The Veronicas ' twin sisters , Jessica Origliasso and Lisa Origliasso , together with Shelly Peiken and Wells . The central theme of " Hook Me Up " is about escaping reality and the stresses of life . 
 The recording was well received by critics who praised the song for its " dance @-@ floor friendly " sound . It was commercially successful peaking at number @-@ one on the Australian ARIA Singles Charts , giving The Veronicas their first number @-@ one single . The accompanying music video portrays Jessica and Lisa in a boarding school rebellion . " Hook Me Up " was performed at the 2008 Australia Day Live Concert as well as on the Hook Me Up and Revenge Is Sweeter tours , in 2007 and 2009 , respectively . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2008 , it was nominated for " Highest Selling Single " . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Hook Me Up " was written by The Veronicas ' twin sisters , Jessica and Lisa Origliasso together with Shelly Peiken and Greg Wells – Wells also produced the track . The composition was influenced by the electropop of underground bands in Los Angeles , whose sound The Veronicas were keen to incorporate into their own music . Jessica explained the lyrical content and central theme behind " Hook Me Up " : " It 's about being tired with where you 're at in life and wanting to get away and out for just a little bit of time @-@ whether it 's in a relationship or in life . I guess we went through that a little bit when things started getting full on with us . It went from one extreme , where no one knew who we were , to the complete opposite " . 
 " Hook Me Up " is a down @-@ tempo electropop @-@ dance song that is set in common time . It is written in the key of G minor and moves at a moderate 134 beats per minute . " Hook Me Up " begins with electronic synths and electronic pop beats , then progresses into a down @-@ tempo techno beat with synth washes played by guitars , synthesiser keyboards , and synthesised drums . " Hook Me Up " sampled elements of " Tainted Love " by Soft Cell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ben Norman from About.com called " Hook Me Up " " quite fun " with a " serious drive to the dance floor " . Similarly , Alex Lai from Contactmusic.com commented on the " sexy " and " sassy " track , saying that it , and the album 's fourth single " Take Me on the Floor " , " could fill dance floors " , but he noted that the latter made for " stale listening " . David James Young , from Sputnikmusic , felt it was the best song on the album , " the best thing about this song is how damn infectious it is , thus making it an excellent pop song with top harmonies and a synth hook " . Andrew <unk> from CitySearch Brisbane stated that it " has the kind of breathless , carnivorous sexuality that Madonna still keeps trying to convince us she has " , but it wasn 't " the sexual awakening that most have been waiting for [ them ] to have " . For its lyrics , Evan Sawdey from PopMatters said " Hook Me Up " " sacrifice [ s ] lyrical clarity for the sake of a good hook " . 
 In Australia , " Hook Me Up " debuted at number five on the ARIA Singles Chart . It spent seven weeks on the charts before reaching number @-@ one on 18 November , where it stayed for one week and became their first ever number @-@ one single . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting 70 @,@ 000 copies shipped in Australia . Upon its release it became the second most added track on Australian radio . On the ARIA end of year charts " Hook Me Up " ranked number twenty two . " Hook Me Up " was nominated for " Highest Selling Single " at the ARIA Music Awards of 2008 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Veronicas pushed for a school revolt storyline to the music video 's director Scott Speer , after a concept which would " sex up [ Lisa and Jessica ] " was first presented to them . The Veronicas explained the concept of the music video to the Herald Sun : 
 We explained to him what the song was about and he said , " So , breaking out ... what about a boarding school ? " We love any movies to do with boarding schools – Cruel Intentions , The Craft . We were like " Yes , yes ! " and we all brainstormed from there [ ... ] We really had to push . A lot [ ... ] We had a lot of control over making the music on this record and we wrote " Hook Me Up " so we would have the best idea of what the video would be . So it was " Use our ideas . They 're free " [ ... ] Because the song is so different from the first record , we wanted to make a video that was young and fun that kids could relate to . The video idea that was first proposed really was not for a young market . It was a lot older . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video is based on a boarding school revolt . The video starts off with flash images of the exterior of an old school building . It then cuts to two separate lines of male and female students , the latter being led by Lisa and Jessica , marching down a school corridor . They were led by a teacher with a whip in her hand while being watched on surveillance cameras . The scene then shifts to the male students walking past a sign that says " no girls beyond this point " . The first verse then begins and the students are marching into a classroom and sit at individual tables . When the chorus begins , Lisa and Jessica are standing on a stage in front of their band performing for rows of still students who stare back blankly . When the second verse begins the students are in the classroom while guards patrol its perimeter and the teacher hits a blackboard with a pointing stick . During the second chorus Lisa and Jessica get their band members together in a toilet to start their rebellion at the school . When the bridge starts smash cuts are shown of them taking over the school 's PA system , and the students getting up from their chairs in the classrooms and throwing objects at a teacher standing in front of a blackboard . The video ends with everyone running down stairs out of the school , with Jessica and Lisa leading the way . The scenes are inter cut to scenes of Lisa and Jessica holding each other . They are dressed in tartan skirts with the former wearing a black cardigan and an open collared shirt , and the latter a black blazer and a shirt with a tartan patterned skinny tie . Both the cardigan and blazer have a striped crest with a pink " V " in the middle . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One of the first live performances of " Hook Me Up " was at the ARIA Music Awards of 2007 , held on 21 October . Clothed in costumes similar to the music video , Lisa and Jessica appeared from a yellow school bus . During the performance Lisa and Jessica sang vocals , while the latter also played the electric guitar , with their band , as opposed to using synthesised instruments in the original recording . At the end of the performance , two streamer cannons on opposite ends of the stage , shot out pink streamers . The duo promoted the track on Australian television , including Today and Rove Live . They also performed the song at the 2008 Australia Day Live Concert in Canberra , Australia 's Funniest Home Videos , Take 40 Live Lounge , and on Video Hits in 2009 . " Hook Me Up " was added to the set lists of both the Hook Me Up and Revenge Is Sweeter tours in 2007 and 2009 , respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 iTunes single 
 " Hook Me Up " – 2 : 57 
 CD single 
 " Hook Me Up " – 2 : 57 
 " Everything " – 3 : 20 
 " Insomnia " – 3 : 28 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Jessica Origliasso , Lisa Origliasso , Shelly Peiken , Greg Wells 
 Production – Greg Wells 
 Instruments and programming – Greg Wells , Fabien <unk> , Sven Martin 
 Recording – Drew Pearson 
 Engineering – Josh Alexander 
 Lead and background vocals – Jessica Origliasso , Lisa Origliasso 
 Mixing – Greg Wells 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Adventures of Mana = 
 Adventures of Mana is an action role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix . It is a 3D remake of the 1991 Game Boy game Final Fantasy Adventure , the first game in the Mana series . It was released worldwide for Android and iOS on February 4 , 2016 ; a PlayStation Vita version was also released on the same date in Japan , and in June 2016 in North America and Europe . In addition to these releases , Square Enix is considering developing a PlayStation 4 version . 
 The player takes the role of a young hero who , together with a heroine , tries to stop the Dark Lord of Glaive from destroying the Tree of Mana . The gameplay focuses on sword combat , and is seen from a top @-@ down perspective . The player traverses the game world , which is divided into several areas , and makes their way through dungeons . While fighting monster characters , a gauge is shown on the screen filling up over time and resetting when the player gets hit or attacks ; by waiting to attack until the gauge is full , the player can use a stronger attack . The player is accompanied by various non @-@ player characters , who each have different skills the player can use , and who help them defeat enemies . 
 The idea for the game came from the producer , Masaru Oyamada , who wanted all Mana games to be playable on modern platforms for the series ' 25th anniversary in 2016 . Initially there was some argument at Square Enix about whether the remake should be done in 2D or 3D ; they chose 3D , as it was thought to be easier to control on smartphones and because it could be used as a base for potential future Mana remakes . The game has received positive reviews , with reviewers giving particular praise to the visuals and the music , and some calling it a better Final Fantasy Adventure remake than the Game Boy Advance game Sword of Mana had been . 
 = = Content = = 
 Adventures of Mana is an action role @-@ playing game in which the player controls a young hero who , along with a heroine , tries to stop the Dark Lord of Glaive from destroying the Tree of Mana . The game is a 3D remake of the two @-@ dimensional Game Boy game Final Fantasy Adventure , containing the same content . In the smartphone versions of the game , the player controls the hero by using a customizable virtual joystick and button set . 
 The game is seen from a top @-@ down perspective , and focuses on sword combat . The player moves the hero through the game world , which is divided into several areas ; as the player enters one , enemy characters start to appear there . Among the areas in the game world , there are dungeons that the player needs to get through . These usually consist of a number of rooms divided across three to four floors ; in order to navigate their way through a dungeon , the player needs to break walls , unlock doors , and sometimes press down buttons and break pots . 
 In addition to the regular enemies , the player also needs to defeat several bosses and mini @-@ bosses throughout the game . By defeating enemies , the player gains experience points , which make the hero 's level increase ; when this happens , the player gets points to spend on four different disciplines , each of which gives the hero access to different abilities and enhances different stats associated with the discipline : Warrior is associated with physical attacks , Monk with defense and health points , Mage with magic attacks and magic points , and Sage with an increase in the weapon limit gauge . Sometimes when enemies are defeated , they drop items ; the player can carry items with them , which are grouped into stacks , each taking up one slot in the inventory . 
 During battles , a weapon limit gauge is shown , filling up over time ; by waiting to attack until the gauge is filled up , the player can use a more powerful attack specific to the currently equipped weapon . The gauge resets to zero whenever the player attacks or gets hit by an attack . The player is able to use various different types of weapons , such as swords , axes and flails , each having a different attack pattern : sword attacks , for example , are mid @-@ ranged swings and stabs , while flail attacks are long @-@ ranged and reach out in a straight line from the hero . Most weapons can also be used to affect the environment : the player can cut down trees with axes , for instance . There are also variants of each weapon type with bonus strengths , such as flame variations , which are effective against ice monsters . At various points in the game , the hero is accompanied by non @-@ player characters who help the player defeat enemies . These companions have different abilities that the player can use , such as Fuji 's healing spell and Watt 's shop . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Adventures of Mana is a remake of the 1991 Game Boy game Final Fantasy Adventure , which was the first entry in the Mana series . It is the second remake of Final Fantasy Adventure , the first being the Game Boy Advance game Sword of Mana , which had removed the connections to the Final Fantasy series in favor of being more connected to the rest of the Mana series . According to Adventures of Mana 's producer , Masaru Oyamada , the development team focused on not upsetting what had made the original game good , while adding things that had not been possible to do in the original version due to hardware limitations ; they also aimed to make the game more comfortable and intuitive to play : for instance , switching armor and weapons and using items and magic was made easier , and shortcut commands were added . The game borrows some elements from the original Game Boy version , and some from Sword of Mana . For example , the first remake introduced the ability to play as the heroine , but Adventures of Mana , like the original , only has a male playable character ; conversely Adventures of Mana 's battle system , user interface and sword attack are based on Sword of Mana 's rather than the original 's . Kenji Ito , the composer for Final Fantasy Adventure , returned to create updated and more dramatic rearrangements for the remake . 
 The idea to develop a remake came when Oyamada , due to the Mana series ' 25th anniversary in 2016 , thought about how he would like players to be able to play through the series in sequential order on modern game platforms . The platforms – Android , iOS and PlayStation Vita – were decided on from the beginning . Initially , there were some arguments at Square Enix about whether to create the game using 2D or 3D graphics ; they settled on 3D , as Oyamada thought that 3D games are easier to control on smartphones . Additionally , the development team thought that a 3D version would be better , as it could be used as a base for potential remakes of other Mana games ; depending on the reception of Adventures of Mana , Oyamada said that he would like to develop a remake of Seiken Densetsu 3 , and would consider one of Secret of Mana depending on demand . 
 When the game was announced in September 2015 , development was 50 % complete ; by late December , development was 90 % complete . The game was released worldwide for Android and iOS on February 4 , 2016 ; in Japan , a PlayStation Vita version was also released on the same date . Responding to feedback , Square Enix 's European branch said that the game 's development team was examining the possibility of a Western release of the PlayStation Vita version ; the PlayStation Vita version was later released in North America and Europe on June 28 , 2016 . Square Enix has also said that they are considering a PlayStation 4 version of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Adventures of Mana has been positively received by critics . Campbell Bird at <unk> found it to be a high @-@ quality example of its genre , and called it the definitive version of Final Fantasy Adventure . He still felt that some gameplay systems felt aged , and that the core gameplay , lack of guidance , and lack of explanations of the game mechanics might be off @-@ putting to some modern players . Meanwhile , Shaun Musgrave at TouchArcade felt that the sparse story set @-@ up and lack of " supervision or training " , while likely to " rub some people the wrong way " , was refreshing ; he liked the simplicity and " efficiency " of the game , and said that , as a remake , he was unsure if he could be any happier with it than he was . TouchArcade named Adventures of Mana as their " Game of the Week " , calling it a " truly wonderful remake " . Nadia Oxford at USgamer said that the game was " a very decent re @-@ construction of Final Fantasy Adventure " and less tedious than Sword of Mana . Jason Schreier of Kotaku thought that the game was excellent ; like Oxford , he preferred it over Sword of Mana , which he said felt more like a new game than like a remake . Harry Slater at Pocket Gamer , Musgrave , and Schreier all commented on the price , considering it to be high . 
 Bird thought that the updates to the original Game Boy game 's visuals and audio , along with the updates to the controls , made for a " great first impression " and made the game feel very well put together ; he felt that it was one of Square Enix 's best looking and sounding mobile game to date , and that all actions in the game felt and looked great . Oxford felt that the touch screen @-@ based controls were not ideal for the fast pace of the gameplay . Schreier found the touch controls to be " just fine " , but thought that the game would work better with a D @-@ pad and buttons . He praised the presentation , saying that the music was " superb " and that the game looked great . Slater thought that the game 's look was impressive and that the music was excellent . Musgrave called the music " outstanding " , and found the monster characters to look fantastic , having benefited greatly from the updated 3D graphics ; he was less sure about the art direction for the human characters , but still thought that they looked better than they did in Sword of Mana . 
 = Freak Out ! = 
 Freak Out ! is the debut album by American band The Mothers of Invention , released June 27 , 1966 on Verve Records . Often cited as one of rock music 's first concept albums , the album is a satirical expression of frontman Frank Zappa 's perception of American pop culture . It was also one of the earliest double albums in rock music ( although Bob Dylan 's Blonde on Blonde preceded it by a week ) , and the first 2 @-@ record debut . In the UK the album was originally released as a single disc . 
 The album was produced by Tom Wilson , who signed The Mothers , formerly a bar band called the Soul Giants . Zappa said many years later that Wilson signed the group to a record deal in the belief that they were a white blues band . The album features Zappa on vocals and guitar , along with lead vocalist / tambourine player Ray Collins , bass player / vocalist Roy Estrada , drummer / vocalist Jimmy Carl Black and guitar player Elliot <unk> , who later joined Captain Beefheart 's Magic Band under the name Winged Eel <unk> . 
 The band 's original repertoire consisted of rhythm and blues covers ; though after Zappa joined the band he encouraged them to play his own original material , and the name was changed to The Mothers . The musical content of Freak Out ! ranges from rhythm and blues , doo @-@ wop and standard blues @-@ influenced rock to orchestral arrangements and avant @-@ garde sound collages . Although the album was initially poorly received in the United States , it was a success in Europe . It gained a cult following in America , where it continued to sell in substantial quantities until it was discontinued in the early 1970s . 
 In 1999 , it was honored with the Grammy Hall of Fame Award , and in 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked it among the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . " In 2006 , The MOFO Project / Object , an audio documentary on the making of the album , was released in honor of its 40th anniversary . This is Official Release # 1 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1960s , Zappa met Ray Collins . Collins supported himself by working as a carpenter , and on weekends sang with a group called the Soul Giants . Collins got into a fight with their guitar player , who quit , leaving the band in need of a substitute , and Zappa filled in . The Soul Giants ' repertoire originally consisted of R & B covers ; though after Zappa joined the band he encouraged them to play his own original material and try to get a record contract . While most of the band members liked the idea , then @-@ leader and saxophone player Davy Coronado felt that performing original material would cost them bookings , and quit the band . The Soul Giants became the Mothers and Zappa took over leadership of the band . 
 The group moved to Los Angeles in early 1965 after Zappa got them a management contract with Herb Cohen . They gained steady work at clubs along the Sunset Strip . MGM staff producer Tom Wilson offered the band a record deal on the Verve Records division in early 1966 . He had heard of their growing reputation but had seen them perform only one song , " Trouble Every Day " , which concerned the Watts riots . According to Zappa , this led Wilson to believe that they were a " white blues band . " The group signed their contract on March 1 , 1966 and quickly began work on their first <unk> would have made them a part of the " white blues band " trend , initiated in 1965 with the debut of The Paul Butterfield Blues Band from Chicago and the 1966 debut of the Blues Project from New York City . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The first two songs recorded for the album were " Any Way The Wind Blows " and " Who Are the Brain Police ? " When Tom Wilson heard the latter , he realized that The Mothers were not merely a blues band . In The Real Frank Zappa Book , Zappa wrote " I could see through the window that he was scrambling toward the phone to call his boss — probably saying : ' Well , uh , not exactly a " white blues band " , but ... sort of . ' " In a 1968 article written for Hit Parader magazine , Zappa wrote that when Wilson heard these songs , " he was so impressed he got on the phone and called New York , and as a result I got a more or less unlimited budget to do this monstrosity . " Freak Out ! is an early example of the concept album , a sardonic farce about rock music and America . " All the songs on it were about something , " Zappa wrote in The Real Frank Zappa Book . " It wasn 't as if we had a hit single and we needed to build some filler around it . Each tune had a function within an overall satirical concept . " 
 If you were to graphically analyze the different types of directions of all the songs in the Freak Out ! album , there 's a little something in there for everybody . At least one piece of material is slanted for every type of social orientation within our consumer group , which happens to be six to eighty . Because we got people that like what we do , from kids six years old screaming on us to play " <unk> Zowie " . Like I meet executives doing this and that , and they say , " My kid 's got the record , and ' <unk> Zowie ' ' s their favorite song . " 
 The album was recorded at TTG Studios at the corner of Sunset and Highland in Hollywood , California , between March 9 and March 12 , 1966 . Some songs , such as " <unk> Love " and " I Ain 't Got No Heart " had already been recorded before the Freak Out ! sessions . These early recordings , said to have been made around 1965 , were not officially released until 2004 , when they appeared on the posthumous Zappa album Joe 's <unk> . An early version of the song " Any Way The Wind Blows " , recorded in 1963 , appears on another posthumous release , The Lost Episodes . The song was written when Zappa considered divorcing first wife Kay Sherman . In the liner notes for Freak Out ! , Zappa wrote " If I had never gotten divorced , this piece of trivial nonsense would never have been recorded . " Tom Wilson became more enthusiastic as the sessions continued . In the middle of the week of recording , Zappa told him " I would like to rent $ 500 worth of percussion equipment for a session that starts at midnight on Friday and I want to bring all the freaks from Sunset Boulevard into the studio to do something special . " Wilson agreed . The material was worked into " The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet " . In a November 1967 radio interview ( posthumously included as part of the 2006 MOFO album ) , Zappa is heard complaining that the version of " Monster Magnet " released on Freak Out ! was in fact an unfinished piece ; the percussion track was intended to serve as the foundation for an even more complex piece , but MGM refused to approve the studio time needed to record the intended overdubs that would have completed the composition , and so it was released ( to Zappa 's great dissatisfaction ) in this unfinished form . 
 Zappa later found out that when the material was recorded , Wilson had taken LSD . " I 've tried to imagine what [ Wilson ] must have been thinking , " Zappa recounted , " sitting in that control room , listening to all that weird shit coming out of the speakers , and being responsible for telling the engineer , Ami <unk> ( who was not on acid ) , what to do . " By the time Freak Out ! was edited and shaped into an album , Wilson had spent $ 25 – 35 @,@ 000 of MGM 's money . In Hit Parader magazine , Zappa wrote that " Wilson was sticking his neck out . He laid his job on the line by producing the album . MGM felt that they had spent too much money on the album . " 
 The label requested that two lines be removed from the " It Can 't Happen Here " section of " Help , I 'm a Rock " , ( a song dedicated to Elvis Presley ) both of which had been interpreted by MGM executives to be drug references . However , the label either had no objections to , or else did not notice , a sped @-@ up recording of Zappa shouting the word " fuck " after accidentally smashing his finger , occurring at 11 minutes and 36 seconds into " The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet " . On the 1995 compact disc issue of the album , " Help , I 'm a Rock " and " It Can 't Happen Here " were indexed as separate tracks , as " It Can 't Happen Here " had been on the 1969 vinyl compilation <unk> . 
 MGM also told Zappa that the band would have to change their name , claiming that no DJ would play a record on the air by a group called " The Mothers . " 
 ... at the time , it was , you know , if you were a good musician , you were a motherfucker , and Mothers was short for collection of motherfuckers . And actually , it was kind of presumptuous to name the band that , because we weren 't that good musicians , we were ... But by bar @-@ band standards in the area , we were light @-@ years ahead of our competition , but in terms of real musicianship , I just suppose we were right down there in the swamp . 
 = = Release = = 
 Freak Out ! was released June 27 , 1966 , with the band 's name changed to The Mothers of Invention , a name Zappa chose in favor of MGM 's original suggested name , " The Mothers Auxiliary " . The album 's back cover included a " letter " from Zappa @-@ created fictional character Suzy Creamcheese ( who also appears on the album itself ) , which read : 
 These Mothers is crazy . You can tell by their clothes . One guy wears beads and they all smell bad . We were gonna get them for a dance after the basketball game but my best pal warned me you can never tell how many will show up ... sometimes the guy in the fur coat doesn 't show up and sometimes he does show up only he brings a big bunch of crazy people with him and they dance all over the place . None of the kids at my school like these Mothers ... specially since my teacher told us what the words to their songs meant . Sincerely forever , Suzy Creamcheese , Salt Lake City , Utah . 
 Because the text was printed in a typeface resembling typewriter lettering , some people thought that Suzy Creamcheese was real , and many listeners expected to see her in concert performances . Because of this , it was decided that " it would be best to bring along a Suzy Creamcheese replica who would demonstrate once and for all the veracity of such a beast . " Because the original voice of Suzy Creamcheese , Jeannie <unk> , was unavailable , Pamela Lee <unk> took over the part . 
 Early US pressings of the album included a blurb for a " Freak Out Hot Spots ! " map . Inside the gatefold jacket the small ad was aimed at people coming to visit Los Angeles and it listed several famous restaurants and clubs including Canter 's and The Whiskey A Go @-@ Go . The ad also claimed information concerning police arrests . It states : " Also shows where the heat has been busting frequently , with tips on safety in police terror situations " . Those interested in the map were instructed to send $ 1 @.@ 00 to MGM Records c / o 1540 Broadway NY . <unk> address . The phony map blurb was not included on later pressings but was removed and the space was left blank . , It was eventually reprinted and included with The MOFO Project / Object , a four @-@ disc audio documentary on the making of the album , released posthumously by the Zappa Family Trust in 2006 . 
 = = Response = = 
 Though it reached No. 130 on the Billboard chart , Freak Out ! was neither a major commercial nor critical success when it was first released in the United States . Many listeners were convinced that the album was drug @-@ inspired , and interpreted the album 's title as slang for a bad LSD trip . The album made the Mothers of Invention immediate underground darlings with a strong counter @-@ cultural following . In The Real Frank Zappa Book , Zappa quotes a negative review of the album by Pete Johnson of the Los Angeles Times , who wrote : 
 I guess you might call it surrealistic paintings set to music . Not content to record just two sides of musical gibberish , the MOI devote four full sides to their type of " artistry " . If anyone owns this album , perhaps he can tell me what in hell is going on ... The Mothers of Invention , a talented but warped quintet , have fathered an album poetically entitled Freak Out , which could be the greatest stimulus to the aspirin industry since the income tax . 
 However the album did develop a major cult following in the US by the time MGM / Verve had been merged into a division of PolyGram in 1972 . At that time many MGM / Verve releases including Freak Out ! were prematurely deleted in an attempt to keep the struggling company financially solvent . Zappa had already moved on to his own companies Bizarre Records and Straight Records which were distributed by Warner Bros. Records . Freak Out ! was initially more successful in Europe and quickly influenced many English rock musicians . According to David Fricke , the album was a major influence on The Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . Paul McCartney regarded Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band as The Beatles ' Freak Out ! However , Zappa criticized the Beatles , as he felt they were " only in it for the money " . 
 Freak Out ! was honored with the Grammy Hall of Fame Award in 1999 , ranked at number 243 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " in 2003 , and featured in the 2006 book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . The album was named as one of Classic Rock magazine 's " 50 Albums That Built Prog Rock " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Frank Zappa except where noted . 
 On the 1995 and 2012 CD releases , " Help , I 'm a Rock " is credited as two tracks : " Help , I 'm a Rock " ( 4 : 43 ) and " It Can 't Happen Here " ( 3 : 57 ) 
 = = Credits = = 
 The Mothers of Invention 
 Frank Zappa – guitar , conductor , vocals 
 Jimmy Carl Black – percussion , drums , vocals 
 Ray Collins – vocals , harmonica , cymbals , sound effects , tambourine , finger cymbals , bobby pin & tweezers 
 Roy Estrada – bass & <unk> , boy soprano 
 Elliot <unk> – alternate lead & rhythm guitar with clear white light 
 The Mothers ' Auxiliary 
 Gene Estes – percussion 
 Eugene Di Novi – piano 
 Neil Le Vang – guitar 
 John <unk> – clarinet , sax 
 Carol Kaye – 12 @-@ string guitar 
 Kurt <unk> – cello 
 Raymond Kelley – cello 
 Paul Bergstrom – cello 
 Emmet Sargeant – cello 
 Joseph Saxon – cello 
 Edwin V. Beach – cello 
 Arthur <unk> – French horn , tuba 
 Motorhead Sherwood – noises 
 Kim Fowley - <unk> 
 Mac <unk> – piano 
 Paul Butterfield – vocals 
 Les McCann – piano 
 Jeannie <unk> – ( the voice of Cheese ) 
 Production 
 Producer : Tom Wilson 
 Engineering director : Val Valentin 
 Engineers : Ami , Tom , Val Valentin 
 Assistant : Eugene <unk> , Neil <unk> , Vito , Ken Watson 
 Musical director : Frank Zappa 
 Orchestration : Frank Zappa 
 Arranger : Frank Zappa 
 Cover design : Jack <unk> 
 Hair stylist : Ray Collins 
 = = Charts = = 
 Album 
 = Music of L.A. Noire = 
 The music for the 2011 neo @-@ noir detective video game L.A. Noire , developed by Team Bondi and published by Rockstar Games , was composed by musicians Andrew Hale and Simon Hale . Recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London , the score also features contributions from Woody Jackson , who had collaborated with Rockstar on previous projects . Andrew Hale felt that composing the game 's score was about setting a mood , attempting to compose music that felt accessible to players . The score was inspired by films from the 1940s , though the team avoided specifically composing for this time period , instead opting to focus on that after the music had been produced . Three supplementary vocal recordings were composed by The Real Tuesday Weld and performed by Claudia Brücken ; they also sought to fit with the game 's setting . 
 The soundtrack album for L.A. Noire was released in May 2011 . A second soundtrack , entitled L.A. Noire Remixed EP , was released on the same day , consisting of six jazz classics remixed by contemporary DJs . Critical reception to the soundtracks was positive , as reviewers felt that the music connected appropriately with the gameplay and time period . The game 's music was nominated for numerous awards . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 L.A. Noire features an original score . The game 's score accompanies the gameplay , alerting players at specific times ; musical cues play when players approach items of interest during investigations . Like other games published by Rockstar , L.A. Noire also contains licensed music tracks provided by an in @-@ game radio . Over thirty songs , from artists such as Billie Holiday , Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald , feature in the game . To work on the score , the team engaged Andrew Hale and Simon Hale , as well as Woody Jackson , who had previously collaborated with the team on Red Dead Redemption ( 2010 ) . Recorded at Abbey Road Studios , the score was inspired by orchestral scores from 1940s films . In addition to the original score and licensed tracks , the game also features original vocal recordings that " create an authentic sound to suit the musical identity of the period " . When The Real Tuesday Weld were commissioned to compose the original compositions , they sought vocals that could " evoke the period " , ultimately falling upon Claudia Brücken . Three vocal tracks were produced : " ( I Always Kill ) The Things I Love " , " Guilty " , and " Torched Song " . 
 Music supervisor Ivan Pavlovich stated that Rockstar 's focus on authenticity and realism inspired the composers to reflect the focus in the music . Andrew Hale felt that composing the game 's score was a flexible process " about setting a mood " , as opposed to a " mechanical " process in which the music was specifically composed to fit with the time frames of the game ; the composers decided to focus on the latter after the music was produced . They also attempted to compose something that felt accessible to players , avoiding exclusively focusing on swing or jazz . Andrew Hale felt that the orchestral score assisted in this . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = L.A. Noire Official Soundtrack = = = 
 L.A. Noire Official Soundtrack comprises songs from the game , composed and produced by Andrew Hale and Simon Hale . The soundtrack spans 28 tracks , covering a duration of 55 minutes , and features additional songs composed and performed by The Real Tuesday Weld and Claudia Brücken . It was first released on the iTunes Store on 17 May 2011 , alongside L.A. Noire Remixed . The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London . Additional music was composed by Woody Jackson . 
 In the context of the game , the soundtrack was well received . Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku ranked it upon the best game music of 2011 , appreciating the " vibe " that it sets for the genre and time period of the game . Jen Bosier of Video Game Writers commended the soundtrack 's recreation of the time period , and felt that the music could be enjoyed outside the game . Evan Andra of SF Critic echoed these remarks , and particularly praised the final three vocal tracks of the album , calling them " a suitably enjoyable conclusion to the album " . David Smyth of London Evening Standard named the three vocal tracks " tense and beautiful " , and wrote that the overall soundtrack is " mood music of the finest calibre " . James Southall of Movie Wave wrote that the soundtrack assisted in the creation of the game 's atmosphere , and particularly praised the album 's " action music " . Simon <unk> of Video Game Music Online wrote that the soundtrack " successfully recreates several aspects of 1940s ' jazz and movie scores " , praising Hale 's understanding of the music type . 
 The soundtrack won the award for Original Music at the 8th British Academy Games Awards , and was nominated for Best Original Score for a Video Game or Interactive Media at the 2011 International Film Music Critics Association Awards . The soundtrack was also nominated for Best Score — Contemporary / Alternative from Video Game Music Online . 
 = = = L.A. Noire Remixed EP = = = 
 L.A. Noire Remixed consists of six jazz classics from the game 's era , remixed by contemporary DJs . Advertised as a " special installment " of the Verve Remixed Series , the album includes songs by artists of the period , such as Ella Fitzgerald , Lionel Hampton , Billie Holiday and Dinah Washington , remixed by DJs such as <unk> , DJ Premier , and <unk> . It was first released on the iTunes Store on 17 May 2011 , alongside the game 's main soundtrack . 
 The album received generally positive reviews . Bosier of Video Game Writers dubbed it " the gem of the collection " , stating that it invokes " the feeling of the game " , as well as involving " a nice retro @-@ vibe " . Smyth of London Evening Standard commended the soundtrack , calling the songs " tastefully modernised " . The album was nominated for Best Album – Remix from Video Game Music Online . 
 = Battle of Schellenberg = 
 The Battle of Schellenberg , also known as the Battle of Donauwörth , was fought on 2 July 1704 during the War of the Spanish Succession . The engagement was part of the Duke of Marlborough 's campaign to save the Habsburg capital of Vienna from a threatened advance by King Louis XIV 's Franco @-@ Bavarian forces ranged in southern Germany . Marlborough had commenced his 250 @-@ mile ( 400 km ) march from Bedburg , near Cologne , on 19 May ; within five weeks he had linked his forces with those of the Margrave of Baden , before continuing on to the river Danube . Once in southern Germany , the Allies ' task was to induce Max Emanuel , the Elector of Bavaria , to abandon his allegiance to Louis XIV and rejoin the Grand Alliance ; but to force the issue , the Allies first needed to secure a fortified bridgehead and magazine on the Danube , through which their supplies could cross to the south of the river into the heart of the Elector 's lands . For this purpose , Marlborough selected the town of Donauwörth . 
 Once the Elector and his co @-@ commander , Marshal Marsin , knew of the Allies ' objective , they dispatched Count d 'Arco with an advance force of 12 @,@ 000 men from their main camp at Dillingen to strengthen and hold the Schellenberg heights above the town . Rejecting a protracted siege , Marlborough decided in favour of a quick assault , before the position could be made impregnable . After two failed attempts to storm the barricades , the Allied commanders , acting in unison , finally managed to overwhelm the defenders . It had taken just two hours to secure the bridgehead over the river in a hard fought contest , but following the victory , momentum was lost to indecision . The deliberate devastation of the Elector 's lands in Bavaria failed to bring Max Emanuel to battle or persuade him back into the Imperial fold . Only when Marshal Tallard arrived with reinforcements to strengthen the Elector 's forces , and Prince Eugene of Savoy arrived from the Rhine to bolster the Allies , was the stage finally set for the decisive action at the Battle of Blenheim the following month . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Battle of Schellenberg was part of the Grand Alliance 's campaign of 1704 to prevent the Franco @-@ Bavarian army from threatening Vienna , the capital of Habsburg Austria . The campaign began in earnest on 19 May when the Duke of Marlborough began his 250 @-@ mile ( 400 km ) march from Bedburg near Cologne towards the Elector of Bavaria 's and Marshal Marsin 's Franco @-@ Bavarian army on the Danube . Marlborough had initially deceived the French commanders – Marshal Villeroi in the Spanish Netherlands and Marshal Tallard along the Rhine – into thinking his target was Alsace or the Moselle farther to the north . However , when the Elector was notified on 5 June of Marlborough 's march from the Low Countries , he had correctly predicted that it was his principality of Bavaria that was the Allies ' real target . 
 Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I was keen to lure the Elector back into the Imperial fold after he had switched allegiance to fight for King Louis XIV before the war . Given this duplicity , Marlborough thought the best way to secure Bavaria for the Alliance was to negotiate from a position of strength by invading the Elector 's territories , hoping to persuade him to change sides before he could be reinforced . By 22 June Marlborough 's army had linked up with elements of the Margrave of Baden 's Imperial forces at <unk> ; by the end of June their combined strength totalled nearly 80 @,@ 000 men ( see map on right ) . The Franco @-@ Bavarian army camped at Ulm were numerically inferior to the Allies , and a large part of the Elector 's troops were scattered about garrisons in his territories as far as Munich and the <unk> frontier , but his position was far from desperate : if he could hold out for a month , Tallard would arrive from the Rhine with French reinforcements . 
 Once the Allies had combined their forces , the Elector and Marsin moved their 40 @,@ 000 troops into the entrenched camp between Dillingen and Lauingen on the north bank of the Danube . The Allied commanders – unwilling to attack such a strong position rendered impregnable by redoubts and inundations – passed round Dillingen to the north through <unk> and Armerdingen in the direction of Donauwörth . If captured , the bridgehead at Donauwörth ( overlooked by the Schellenberg ) would offer new communications with the friendly states in central Germany by way of Nördlingen and Nuremberg , as well as providing a good crossing @-@ place over the Danube for re @-@ supply when the Allies were south of the river . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Schellenberg 's defences = = = 
 The Schellenberg heights dominate the skyline to the northeast of Donauwörth – the walled town on the confluence of the Wörnitz and Danube rivers . With one flank of the hill protected by dense , impenetrable trees of the Boschberg wood , and the river Wörnitz and marshes protecting its southern and western quarters , the Schellenberg heights offer a commanding position for any defender . However , its oval shaped summit was flat and open , and its 70 @-@ year @-@ old defences , including an old fort built by the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years ' War , were neglected and in a dilapidated state . When the unexpected attack took place the bastions , the curtain , and the ditch were fairly complete along the long eastern face from the shore of the Danube to the wooded hilltop , but in the shorter section from the wood to the fort – the angle where Marlborough 's attack was delivered – the earthwork had been more hastily made up of fascines of brushwood thinly covered with soil . The western section of the lines ran steeply downhill from the fort to the city walls . Here , there was little to show in terms of defences , but to compensate the line could be protected by a flanking fire from the town . ( See ' Schellenberg ' map below . ) 
 In 1703 Marshal Villars had advised the Elector to fortify his towns , " ... and above all the Schellenberg , that fort above Donauwörth , the importance of which the great Gustavus taught us . " The Elector , whose relationship with Villars had since collapsed , had initially ignored the advice to repair the decaying defences , but once it was realised that Donauwörth was to be attacked , Count d 'Arco , a Piedmontese officer , was despatched from the camp at Dillingen with orders to strengthen and hold the position . D 'Arco was entrusted with 12 @,@ 000 men , most of whom were drawn from Bavaria 's best units including the Elector 's Guards and the regiment of the Prince Electoral , led by veteran officers . In total , the garrison defending the Schellenberg consisted of 16 Bavarian and seven French infantry battalions , six squadrons of French and three squadrons of Bavarian dragoons , supported by 16 guns . In addition , Donauwörth was held by a French battalion and two battalions of Bavarian militia . 
 = = = Initial manoeuvres = = = 
 On the night of 1 – 2 July , the Allies were camped at Armerdingen , 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Donauwörth . It was here when Marlborough received an urgent message from Baron <unk> , Prince Eugene 's Adjutant @-@ General , that Marshal Tallard was marching with 35 @,@ 000 troops through the Black Forest to reinforce the Franco @-@ Bavarian army . This news convinced Marlborough that he did not have time for a protracted siege and , despite protestations from Baden – arguing that a direct assault would incur severe casualties – the Duke planned for an outright assault on the position . D 'Arco knew of the whereabouts of the Allied camp at Armerdingen , and was confident he had at least a full day and night to prepare his defences . 
 At 03 : 00 on 2 July the Allied advance guard began to break camp for the march towards Donauwörth and the Schellenberg heights . Marlborough personally oversaw the advance of the initial assault force of 5 @,@ 850 @-@ foot , drawn up in groups of approximately 130 men from each battalion under his command . The Dutch General Johan Wijnand van Goor would lead this vanguard . Behind these <unk> came 12 @,@ 000 Allied infantry in two echelons , each of eight battalions ( English , Dutch , Hanoverian and Hessian ) under Major General Henry Withers and Count Horn , supported by Henry Lumley 's and Graf Reynard van Hompesch 's 35 squadrons of British and Dutch cavalry and dragoons . Baden , whose wing of the army marched behind Marlborough 's , would hold a brigade of Imperial grenadiers ready for action when the opportunity came as there was insufficient room in front of the Schellenberg for them to fully deploy . In all , the Allies were deploying 22 @,@ 000 men in the operation . 
 Riding far ahead of the army Marlborough personally examined the enemy position , observing through his telescope preparations for a camp on the far side of the river in expectation of the arrival of the Elector 's main force the following day . There was , therefore , no time to be lost . Although the Duke had 12 hours of light remaining in the day his men were still struggling in the mud , miles away behind the river Wörnitz , and they could not hope to launch the attack before about 18 : 00 , leaving just two hours before nightfall . As the Allies marched , work on the defences of Donauwörth and the Schellenberg were proceeding in earnest . With the aid of French engineer officers d 'Arco started to repair and strengthen the two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of old entrenchments that connected the fort of Gustavus with the Danube on one side , and the town walls on the other . A French commander in Bavarian service and chronicler of the period , Colonel Jean Martin de la Colonie , later wrote – " The time left to us was too short to complete this satisfactorily . " 
 The Allied cavalry began to appear at about 08 : 00 , five miles ( 8 km ) or six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away on d 'Arco 's left front to the north @-@ west , followed by the infantry . By 10 : 00 Marlborough 's Quartermaster @-@ General , William Cadogan , began to mark out land for an encampment within sight of the Schellenberg – short of the Wörnitz – to give the impression they were intending a leisurely siege . Count d 'Arco watched Cadogan 's preparations and , falling for the deception , left the supervision of the still incomplete defences to lunch with the French commander of Donauwörth , Colonel DuBordet , safe in the belief that he had the rest of the day and night to finish the defences . However , the columns marched purposefully onwards , and by mid @-@ afternoon they had crossed the river Wörnitz at <unk> , intent on launching an immediate assault . The Allies were spotted by the Bavarian outposts who , after setting fire to Berg and surrounding hamlets , rushed off to sound the alarm . General d 'Arco , rudely interrupted from his lunch , rushed up the Schellenberg and called his men to arms . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Marlborough 's first assault = = = 
 Although Marlborough knew a frontal attack on the Schellenberg would be costly , he was convinced that it was the only way of securing the speedy capture of the town : unless he captured the summit by nightfall , it would never be taken – the defences would be too strong , and the main Franco @-@ Bavarian army , which was hastening from Dillingen towards Donauwörth , would arrive to defend the position . A female dragoon , Christian Welsh ( she had disguised her true sex ) remembered , " Our vanguard did not come into sight of the enemy entrenchments til the afternoon ; however , not to give the Bavarians time to make themselves yet stronger , the duke ordered the Dutch General Goor ... to attack as soon as possible . " At about 17 : 00 , as a preliminary to the attack , Marlborough 's artillery commander , Colonel Holcroft Blood , pounded the enemy from a position near Berg ; each salvo was countered by d 'Arco 's guns from Gustavus 's fort and from just outside the Boschberg wood . 
 General d 'Arco now ordered de la Colonie 's French grenadiers into reserve on top of the Heights ( above the breastworks manned by the Bavarians ) , ready to plug any gaps in their defences at the appropriate time . However , due to the flatness of the summit this position offered his men limited protection from the Allied guns . This exposure was noted by Colonel Blood who , sighting his artillery upon the summit , was able to inflict serious casualties upon de la Colonie 's men . De la Colonie later recorded – " They concentrated their fire upon us , and with their first discharge carried off Count de la Bastide ... so that my coat was covered with brains and blood . " Notwithstanding this barrage , and despite losing five officers and 80 grenadiers before firing a shot , de la Colonie insisted his French regiment stayed at their post , determined as he was to maintain discipline and ensure his troops would be in good order when called into action . 
 There was just enough time before nightfall to storm the position on its north side ( mainly up the steepest part of the slope immediately north of Gustavus 's fort ) , but not enough time to develop simultaneous attacks from other sides . The attack went in around 18 : 00 , led by the advanced guard of the ' forlorn hope ' . This force of 80 English grenadiers from the 1st English Foot Guards , led by Viscount Mordaunt and Colonel Richard Munden , was designed to draw the enemy fire and thus enable the Allied commanders to discern the defensive strong points . The main force followed closely behind . " The rapidity of their movements , together with their loud yells , were truly alarming " , recalled la Colonie , who , in order to drown out the shouts and <unk> , ordered his drummer to beat charge " so as to drown them with their noise , lest they should have a bad effect upon our people . " 
 As the range closed the Allies became easy targets for the Franco @-@ Bavarian <unk> and grape @-@ shot ; the confusion exacerbated by fizzing hand @-@ grenades thrown down the slope by the defenders . To aid their assault , each Allied soldier carried a bundle of fascines ( earlier cut from the Boschberg wood ) , with which to bridge the ditches in front of the breastworks to speed their passage . However , the fascines were mistakenly thrown into a dry gully – formed by the recent summer rains – instead of the Bavarians ' defensive trench about 45 m ( 50 yards ) farther on . Nevertheless , the Allies continued to push forward , joining battle with the Bavarians in savage hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . Behind the defences the Elector 's Guards and la Colonie 's men bore the brunt of the attack so that , " The little parapet which separates the two forces became the scene of the bloodiest struggle that could be conceived . " But the assault failed to penetrate the defences , and the Allies were forced to fall back to their lines . General Johan Wijnand van Goor , a favourite of Marlborough who had led the attack , numbered among the Allied fatalities . 
 = = = Marlborough 's second assault = = = 
 The second assault proved no more successful . The red @-@ coated English and the blue @-@ coated Dutch advanced side by side in perfect order for a second attempt . Requiring from them another concerted effort their general officers personally led the men from the front into a second torrent of musket @-@ shot and grenades . Again the Allies left many dead and wounded at the enemy palisade including Marshal Count von Limburg <unk> who had led the second assault . With broken ranks , and in confusion , the attacking troops fell once more back down the hill . With the Allies repulsed for a second time the exultant Bavarian grenadiers , with bayonets fixed , poured over their breastworks to pursue the attackers and drive them to defeat . But English guardsmen , aided by Lumley 's dismounted cavalrymen , prevented a total rout , compelling the Bavarians back behind their defences . 
 = = = Baden 's assault = = = 
 At this moment , having failed twice to make a breakthrough , Marlborough received intelligence that the defences linking the town walls with the breastwork on the hill were now sparsely manned ( Marlborough 's unsuccessful attacks had drawn d 'Arco 's men away from other parts of the stronghold , leaving his left flank almost defenceless and highly vulnerable ) . The other Allied commander , the Margrave of Baden ( who had entered the battle half an hour after Marlborough ) , also noticed this opportunity and was soon hurrying with his grenadiers from the hamlet of Berg , and across the <unk> stream to assault the position . 
 Critically , Donauwörth 's garrison commander had withdrawn his men inside the town , locked the gates , and could now only offer scattered shots from its walls . Baden 's Imperial troops ( now supported by eight of Marlborough 's reserve battalions ) , easily breached these weakened defences , defeated the two battalions of infantry and a handful of cavalry still defending the area , and were able to form up at the foot of the Schellenberg , interposing themselves between d 'Arco and the town . Noticing the danger d 'Arco hurried to the rear to summon his dismounted French dragoons ( held back in the lee of the hill ) in an attempt to stem the advancing Imperialists marching up the glacis . However , three companies of Baden 's grenadiers confronted them with concentrated volleys , forcing the cavalry to retire . This action subsequently left d 'Arco out of position and out of contact with his main force fiercely resisting on the crest of the hill . The Franco @-@ Bavarian commander headed for the town and , according to de la Colonie – " ... had some difficulty in entering owing to the hesitation of the commandant to open the gates . " 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 Aware that Imperial troops had breached the Schellenberg 's defences Marlborough launched a third assault . This time the attackers formed a broader front , requiring d 'Arco 's men to spread their fire , thus reducing the deadly effectiveness of their musketry and grenades . But the defenders , including la Colonie , ( unaware that the Imperialists had penetrated their left flank , and that d 'Arco had retreated to Donauwörth ) , were still confident in their ability to repel the enemy – " We remained steady at our post ; our fire was regular as ever , and kept our opponents in check . " It was not long , however , before the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces fighting on the hill became conscious of Baden 's infantry approaching from the direction of the town . Many of the officers , including de la Colonie , initially thought that the advancing troops were reinforcements from DuBordet 's garrison in Donauwörth , but it soon became apparent that they were in fact Baden 's troops . " They [ Baden 's Imperial grenadiers ] arrived within gunshot of our flank about 7 : 30 in the evening , without our being aware of the possibility of such a thing . " Wrote de la Colonie . " So occupied were we in defence of our own particular post ... " After establishing themselves at the summit of the Heights on the Allied right , Baden 's men now fired upon the surprised defenders of the Schellenberg , compelling them to re @-@ align in order to meet this unexpected threat . Consequently , Marlborough 's assaulting troops on the Allied left , supported by a fresh echelon of dismounted English dragoons , were able to scramble over the now weakly defended breastwork and push the defenders back to the crown of the hill . The enemy at last fell into confusion . 
 The outnumbered defenders of the Schellenberg had resisted the Allied assaults for two hours , but now under pressure from both Baden 's and Marlborough 's forces , their stalwart defence was over . As panic spread through the Franco @-@ Bavarian army , Marlborough unleashed 35 squadrons of cavalry and dragoons to pursue the fleeing troops , ruthlessly cutting down the enemy soldiers to the shouts of " Kill , kill and destroy ! " There was no easy escape route . A pontoon bridge over the Danube had collapsed under their weight , and many of d 'Arco 's troops , most of whom could not swim , drowned trying to cross the fast @-@ flowing river . Many others who had been cut off on the northern shore of the Danube ran for their lives amongst the reed @-@ beds , vainly endeavouring to avoid the Allied sabres . Others headed for the village of <unk> , straining to escape to the wooded hills beyond . Only to the west could Marlborough detect a few Franco @-@ Bavarian battalions crossing the Danube by Donauwörth 's bridge in tolerable order , before darkness descended over the battlefield . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 De la Colonie was one of the few to escape , but the Elector of Bavaria had lost many of his best troops which was to have a profound effect on the ability of the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces to face the Allies in the rest of the campaign . Very few of the men who had defended the Schellenberg rejoined the Elector 's and Marsin 's army . Included amongst this number , however , were the Comte d 'Arco and his second @-@ in @-@ command , the Marquis de Maffei , both of whom later defended Lutzingen at the Battle of Blenheim . Of the 22 @,@ 000 Allied troops engaged , over 5 @,@ 000 had become casualties , overwhelming the hospitals that Marlborough had set up in Nördlingen . Amongst the Allied fatalities were six lieutenant @-@ generals , four major @-@ generals , and 28 brigadiers , colonels and lieutenant @-@ colonels , reflecting the exposed positions of senior officers as they led their men forward in the assaults . No other action in the War of the Spanish Succession claimed so many lives of senior officers . 
 The victory produced the usual spoils of war . As well as capturing all the guns on the Schellenberg the Allies captured all the regimental colours ( apart from de la Colonie 's Grenadiers Rouge Régiment ) , their ammunition , baggage and other rich booty . But the large casualty figures caused some consternation throughout the Grand Alliance . Although the Dutch cast a victory medal showing Baden on the obverse and a Latin inscription on the other side , there was no mention of the Duke of Marlborough . The Emperor , though , wrote personally to the Duke : " Nothing can be more glorious than the celerity and vigour with which ... you forced the camp of the enemy at Donauwörth " . With the town abandoned that night by Colonel DuBordet , the Elector , who had arrived within sight of the battle with reinforcements only to see the flight and massacre of his best troops , drew his garrisons out of Neuburg and Ratisbon , and fell back behind the river Lech near Augsburg . 
 = = = Devastation of Bavaria = = = 
 Marlborough had won his bridgehead over the Danube , and had put himself between the French and Vienna ; yet the battle was followed by a curious , dragging anti @-@ climax . The Duke was determined to lure the Elector into battle before Tallard arrived with reinforcements , but since the battle on the Schellenberg neither Allied commander could agree on their next move , resulting in a protracted siege of Rain . Due to the initial lack of heavy guns and ammunition ( promised by the Empire but not delivered on time ) the town did not fall until 16 July . Nevertheless , Marlborough promptly occupied Neuburg which , together with Donauwörth and Rain , provided the Allies with enough fortified bridges across the Danube and Lech rivers to manoeuvre with ease . 
 The Allied commanders now marched to Friedberg , watching their enemy across the river Lech in Augsburg , at the same time preventing them from entering Bavaria or drawing from it any supplies . But the transfer of Bavaria from the party of the Two Crowns to the Grand Alliance was the prime concern to the Allies . As the Elector sat behind his defences at Augsburg Marlborough sent his troops deep into Bavaria on raids of destruction , burning buildings and destroying crops , trying to lure the Bavarian commander into battle or convince him to change his allegiance back to Emperor Leopold I. The Emperor had offered a full pardon , as well as subsidies and restoration of all his territories , with additional lands of Pfalz @-@ Neuburg and <unk> if he returned to the Imperial fold , but negotiations between the parties were making little headway . 
 The spoliation of Bavaria led to entreaties from the Elector 's wife , Theresa <unk> Sobieska , for him to divest himself of the French alliance . Although the Elector wavered somewhat in his allegiance to Louis XIV , his resolve to continue fighting against Leopold I and the Grand Alliance was stiffened when news arrived that Tallard 's reinforcements – some 35 @,@ 000 men – would soon be in Bavaria . Marlborough now intensified the policy of devastating the Elector 's territory . On 16 July the Duke wrote to his friend Heinsius , the Grand Pensionary of Holland , " We are advancing into the heart of Bavaria to destroy the country and oblige the Elector one way or the other to a compliance " . The policy compelled the Elector to send 8 @,@ 000 troops from Augsburg to defend his own property , reserving only a fraction of his army to join the French under Marsin and Tallard . But although Marlborough thought it a necessary strategy to secure success , it was of doubtful morality . The Duke himself confessed his reservations to his wife , Sarah , " This is so uneasy to my nature that nothing but an absolute necessity would have obliged me to consent to it . For these poor people suffer only for their master 's ambition . " Accounts differ as to the actual amounts of damage done . De La Colonie thought that reports of the devastation were perhaps exaggerated for propaganda purposes ; yet Christian Davies serving with Hay 's Dragoons wrote , " The allies sent parties on every hand to ravage the country ... We spared nothing , killing , burning or otherwise destroying whatever we could not carry off . " To Historian David Chandler , Marlborough must bear the full responsibility for the destruction , for although he undoubtedly found it hard to stomach it was taken under Baden 's , and the Emperor 's protests . 
 The failure of the Empire to provide an effective siege train had , up to this point , robbed the Allies of victory – neither Munich nor Ulm could be taken , and the Elector had neither been defeated nor compelled to change allegiance . Prince Eugene had become increasingly worried that no decisive action had followed the victory on the Schellenberg , writing to the Duke of Savoy , " ... I cannot admire their performances . They have been counting on the Elector coming to terms ... they have amused themselves with ... burning a few villages instead of ... marching straight upon the enemy . " Tallard arrived in Augsburg with French reinforcements on 5 August . Eugene , shadowing Tallard , was also heading south with 18 @,@ 000 men , but he had been forced to leave behind 12 @,@ 000 troops guarding the Lines of Stollhofen with which to prevent Villeroi bringing further French reinforcements to the Danube . Moreover , the Elector had at last sent orders to the large Bavarian contingents on the <unk> border to rejoin the main army . For the Allies , therefore , time was short : they must defeat the French and their allies at once , or all south Germany would be lost . 
 On 7 August the three Allied commanders – Marlborough , Baden and Eugene – met to decide their strategy . To give themselves another major crossing over the Danube a plan by Baden to besiege the city of Ingolstadt with a force of 15 @,@ 000 men was agreed to , despite leaving the Allied army numerically inferior . This army , totalling 52 @,@ 000 men and now without the commander who led the Imperial troops on the Schellenberg , would meet the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces , numbering 56 @,@ 000 men , in and around the small village of Blindheim . The engagement , fought on 13 August 1704 , would become known in German as the Battle of Höchstädt , and in English , as the Battle of Blenheim . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Joseph Addison 's poem The Campaign 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 La Colonie , Jean Martin de ( 1904 ) . The Chronicles of an Old Campaigner ( trans . W. C. Horsley ) . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 Barnett , Correlli ( 1999 ) . Marlborough . Wordsworth Editions Limited . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 200 @-@ 5 . 
 Chandler , David G ( 2003 ) . Marlborough as Military Commander . <unk> Ltd . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 195 @-@ 1 . 
 Churchill , Winston ( 2002 ) . Marlborough : His Life and Times , Bk . 1 , vol . II . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Falkner , James ( 2004 ) . Blenheim 1704 : Marlborough 's Greatest Victory . Pen & Sword Books Ltd . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84415 @-@ 050 @-@ 2 . 
 Holmes , Richard ( 2008 ) . Marlborough : England 's Fragile Genius . HarperCollins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Lynn , John A ( 1999 ) . The Wars of Louis XIV , 1667 – 1714 . Longman . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 582 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 McKay , Derek ( 1997 ) . Prince Eugene of Savoy . Thames and Hudson Ltd . ISBN 0 @-@ 500 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Spencer , Charles ( 2005 ) . Blenheim : Battle for Europe . Phoenix . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 304 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Trevelyan , G. M. ( 1948 ) . England Under Queen Anne : Blenheim . Longmans , Green and co . 
 = Her Battle for Existence = 
 Her Battle for Existence is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The fictional drama follows Susan Dale , a young woman used to luxury . She chooses between two suitors , but her fiancé breaks the engagement off after Susan 's father loses his money and life . Susan now tries to support herself , but fails in the role and decides to kill herself . Her other suitor rushes in and stops her suicide and they get married . Little is known about the production of the film , but it was released as a split reel with Sand Man 's Cure on April 22 , 1910 . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An official synopsis was published in the The Moving Picture World . It states , " Susan Dale has been brought up in luxury . She has two suitors , Will Emory and Jim Briggs . She chooses Will , and at the opening of the picture informs Jim of her choice . But a change comes to the fortunes of Susan 's father : an unlucky speculation claims his wealth and his life . When Will discovers that his fiancé is penniless his love cools ; he breaks the engagement and goes to Europe to avoid the girl . Susan , friendless , starts out to earn her own living . She applies for a job in a lawyer 's office , but leaves when the man insults her . She secures a place in a department store , but is discharged because , fatigued after an arduous day at the counter , she took a seat while on duty . She applies for work in a factory , but is rejected , owing to lack of experience . Finally , in desperation , she takes a place as maid in the home of Mrs. Gray . There Burg , the offensive lawyer , meets her , and in a spirit of revenge , denounces her as a thief . The mistress discharges her and Susan decides to end her life . Fortunately for Susan , Burg meets Jim Briggs , the rejected suitor , on the street and laughingly tells him how he brought about Susan 's discharge . Jim knocks the wretch down and rushes to Mrs. Gray 's residence . He arrives in time to dissuade Susan from her purpose , and all ends happily to the peal of wedding chimes . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The director of the film is not known , but two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production nor does Bowers credit a cameraman . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Bowers does not indicate any cast roles or provides any further information into the production of this work . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was released on April 22 , 1910 . The production was a split reel , containing both Her Battle for Existence and Sand Man 's Cure , with an estimated length of 1000 feet . The American Film Institute refers more specifically to the entire reel being 998 feet in length , but does not distinguish between the lengths of the productions . A Thanhouser Filmography Analysis , provided by Thanhouser Company Film Preservation , lists the film as comprising three quarters of a reel - approximately 750 feet . The reasoning is not provided , but the previous release and the next to follow were split reels of similar lengths . Billboard would not identify the film as a split release or give the length for this and the other Thanhouser split reel that followed . The film had advertisements for theaters across the United States , locations included Missouri , Arizona , New York , Wisconsin , Vermont , and California . 
 The film received mixed reviews by film critics . The first review of the film in the The Moving Picture World found no fault with the acting and photography , but did not believe the ending was believable . The second review was more favorable , but again noted the scenario is a cautionary one for women without aid or occupation to support themselves in life . The New York Dramatic Mirror stated , " A number of overdrawn and inconsistent incidents in this film story do not rob it of its interesting strength . The acting is good and the scenic backgrounds appropriate . " However , the reviewer makes references to the plot that are not consistent with the official synopsis . The film is presumed lost . 
 = 2015 Singapore Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Singapore Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2015 Formula 1 Singapore Airlines Singapore Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 20 September 2015 at the Marina Bay Street Circuit in Marina Bay , Singapore . The race was the thirteenth round of the 2015 season . It was the eighth time the race was run as a round of the Formula One World Championship . 
 Defending race winner Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes entered as the leader in the World Drivers ' Championship with 252 points , 53 points ahead of teammate Nico Rosberg and 74 points ahead of Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel . Mercedes came into the race leading the Constructors ' Championship by 181 points ahead of Ferrari , with Williams a further 82 points back in third place . 
 Vettel won the race from pole position , ahead of Red Bull 's Daniel Ricciardo in second and Vettel 's Ferrari teammate Kimi Räikkönen in third . The Mercedes team struggled at Singapore ; Lewis Hamilton recorded his first retirement of the season , while Nico Rosberg managed only fourth place , closing the gap in the championship to 41 points . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Coming to Singapore , Nico Rosberg was forced to change his power unit after his engine failure at the previous race in Italy . Using his fourth unit of the season , Rosberg was one power unit change away from a possible grid penalty . Alexander Rossi made his Formula One debut after signing a five @-@ race deal to replace Roberto Merhi at Manor Marussia . Acting as race stewards at the Grand Prix were Garry Connelly from Australia and Vincenzo Spano from Venezuela , who assisted driver steward Martin Donnelly in his first appearance in this position since the 2014 Malaysian Grand Prix . Sauber brought a " heavily @-@ updated car " to the Grand Prix , featuring a shorter nose and revised front and rear wings as well as a new engine cover and brake ducts . Toro Rosso also came to Singapore with new parts , bringing a revised front wing . Red Bull introduced a new component as well : Daniil Kvyat 's car was equipped with new turning vanes installed to improve the airflow under the car and therefore create more downforce . The feature would be run by both cars at the following Japanese Grand Prix . Further updates included changes to the diffuser , rear wing , brake ducts and bodywork of the Force India <unk> and modifications to the floor in front of the rear wheels of the Ferrari SF15 @-@ T. 
 The FIA approved minor changes to the layout of the Marina Bay Street Circuit ahead of the Grand Prix . The modifications ran from turn 11 to turn 13 ; drivers still turned right at turn 11 but it now kinked left slightly on entry , with the track shifting to the left @-@ hand side of Fullerton Road . This changed the profile of turn 12 , as drivers now used the other side of the Anderson Bridge , while the hairpin at turn 13 has been widened by a metre in order to increase overtaking opportunities . The drag reduction system ( DRS ) had two activation zones for the race ; the first between turns five and seven down the length of Raffles Boulevard , and the second on the start / finish straight between turn 23 to turn one . 
 As in the previous year 's event , and third season in a row , Pirelli , Formula One 's sole tyre supplier , brought its yellow @-@ banded soft compound tyre as the harder " prime " tyre and the red @-@ banded supersoft compound tyre as the softer " option " tyre , as well as the green @-@ banded intermediate weather and the blue @-@ banded full @-@ wet weather compounds . 
 With forest fires continuing to burn in neighboring Indonesia , heavy smog was a concern for the event . Unhealthy levels forced the cancellation of other events in Singapore in the week leading up to the Grand Prix . Race organisers , however , did not speculate whether the Grand Prix was also under threat of cancellation . It was later reported that the smog had lifted and that the race could go ahead without any restrictions . 
 Coming into the race weekend , Lewis Hamilton was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 252 points , 53 points ahead of Nico Rosberg , his teammate at Mercedes . Another 21 points behind in third was Sebastian Vettel , driving for Ferrari . In the Constructors ' Standings , Mercedes were leading on 451 points , followed by Ferrari and Williams with 270 and 188 points respectively . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held ; there were two 90 @-@ minute sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Since Singapore was a night race , the practice sessions started at a later local time ; 18 : 00 for the first and 21 : 30 for the second session on Friday . This meant that the gap between the first two practice sessions was half an hour shorter than in other races . The two Mercedes cars were fastest in the first session on Friday , with Nico Rosberg topping the time sheets at 1 : 47 @.@ 995 . Championship leader Lewis Hamilton was second , 0 @.@ 319 seconds behind , while Daniel Ricciardo was 0 @.@ 017 seconds slower in third , ahead of the two Ferraris of Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen , even though Vettel briefly left the track in turn five towards the end of the session . While Ricciardo felt he could go even faster , his teammate Daniil Kvyat was able to put in only eight laps due to a fuel system problem , and he finished the session eighteenth , just ahead of the two Manor Marussia drivers . Manor 's Alexander Rossi placed last , albeit close to teammate Will Stevens , before crashing out at turn 18 , ending the last timed runs of all other drivers left on track . 
 Early on in practice two , Will Stevens became the second Manor driver to make contact with the barriers , damaging his car . Teammate Rossi was limited to only three laps of running as his team spent most of the session repairing the damage from the shunt in first practice , he eventually finished almost 14 seconds down on Daniil Kvyat , who topped the session with a time of 1 : 46 @.@ 142 . The second Red Bull of Daniel Ricciardo finished third , with Räikkönen in between the two . Hamilton was the fastest Mercedes driver in fourth , while Rosberg managed only seventh fastest , behind Sebastian Vettel and Sergio Pérez . Fernando Alonso finished eighth for McLaren , also within a second of Kvyat . However , his teammate Jenson Button , who was 14th with a detuned power unit , still expressed disappointment at the team 's pace , saying he had hoped the car to be better . Several drivers made minor contact with the walls on the narrow Singapore circuit , including Pastor Maldonado and Carlos Sainz , Jr . , who suffered a left @-@ rear puncture after hitting the wall at turn five . After the performances by both Red Bull and Ferrari , Lewis Hamilton expected a " genuine challenge " from both teams over the rest of the weekend . Meanwhile , both Red Bull 's Daniel Ricciardo and Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel were less optimistic . While Ricciardo said he was " still not looking to them [ Mercedes ] " , Vettel felt that Mercedes " looked a bit slow but I 'm sure they will change it for tomorrow " . 
 In the third practice session on Saturday evening , the two Ferraris were in front , with Vettel fastest at 1 : 45 @.@ 682 , while Räikkönen was almost half a second off his teammate 's pace . The two Red Bulls of Kvyat and Ricciardo were behind , followed by both Mercedes cars , who trailed Vettel by more than a second . Meanwhile , Fernando Alonso continued McLaren 's good form and finished seventh fastest . Lewis Hamilton had several problems during the session ; an early run was interrupted by him leaving the track and he was later called to drive through the pit lane to cool down his overheating car . Valtteri Bottas was the fastest Williams driver in eleventh , just in front of Nico Hülkenberg , who drove a revised version of his Force India . The two Manor Marussia cars were again last , with Rossi almost three seconds ahead of Stevens . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , only the Ferrari were confident enough to run only on the slower , harder tyres , while the rest of the field needed to equip the super @-@ soft compound . Daniil Kvyat topped the session with a time of 1 : 45 @.@ 340 on the supersoft tyre . Pastor Maldonado was eliminated , as were the two Manor Marussias , who were even further off the pace than usual . Both of the team 's drivers received a five @-@ place grid penalty for a gearbox change . Both Sauber drivers also did not make it into Q2 , when Jenson Button was the last to set a fast lap , edging out Felipe Nasr by less than a tenth of a second . 
 Vettel set the fastest time in the second part of qualifying as well , being two tenths faster than second placed Daniil Kvyat . While Max Verstappen made it into Q3 , his teammate Sainz hit the wall in turn 19 close to the end of the session , damaging his suspension and front wing , with parts of debris left on the track . With the session ending under yellow flags , both Force India and both McLaren drivers joined Sainz in elimination , with Nico Hülkenberg fastest in eleventh place on the grid . Everyone behind Sainz failed to finish their laps , including Mercedes drivers Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton . 
 At the beginning of Q3 , Lewis Hamilton aborted his first fast lap . Mercedes seemed to struggle most in the final sector , where Hamilton lost half a second to the Red Bull of Kvyat . Hamilton later stated that the team had problems generating heat in the tyres , essential for the final sector that benefitted high traction . It was Sebastian Vettel who took pole position , having led the final two parts of qualifying , ahead of Daniel Ricciardo , who lost time in the first sector after having to back off from Valtteri Bottas in front of him . The other Ferrari and Red Bull of Räikkönen and Kvyat claimed third and fourth on the grid respectively , followed by both Mercedes cars , who were one and a half seconds down on Vettel 's pole time of 1 : 43 @.@ 885 . This was the first pole position for Ferrari since the 2012 German Grand Prix , the first in dry conditions for five years , and also prevented Lewis Hamilton from equalling Ayrton Senna 's record of eight consecutive pole positions . Vettel 's pole also brought an end to Mercedes ' 23 @-@ race long run of pole positions , and it was the first time since the beginning of the 2014 season that the first spot on the grid was not taken by a Mercedes @-@ powered car . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Before the formation lap , Rosberg appeared to have an issue with his car , when he stopped at the end of pit lane on the way to the start grid . However , his mechanics were able to rectify the problem , described by Niki Lauda as " a glitch " , and he made it to the grid . With everyone starting on the super @-@ soft tyre compound , a race with two pit stops was expected for most drivers . At the start , all drivers at the front of the field held their positions , while further back , Nico Hülkenberg , who had a good start , and Sergio Pérez nearly collided while fighting for position . Max Verstappen 's Toro Rosso <unk> stalled on the grid and was pushed back to the pits , only to start his race shortly after , more than one lap down on the leaders . Vettel was able to build a gap to Ricciardo behind him quickly , leading the Red Bull by three seconds after the first lap . Fernando Alonso , who had enjoyed a decent start to move up into eleventh , came under pressure from Sainz by lap four , followed by Grosjean , who lost places at the start because he had to move around the stationary Verstappen . While Vettel 's lead was about five seconds on lap five , Verstappen <unk> himself by lap six and posted fast lap times . Meanwhile , Nico Rosberg held off the two Williams cars of Bottas and Massa , while Lewis Hamilton in front was able to move clear of the pack fighting for sixth place . Kimi Räikkönen in third place was held at a distance by Ricciardo , trailing him by 1 @.@ 6 seconds on lap nine . A lap later , Grosjean became the first driver to pit . More cars came in on lap eleven , leading to heavy traffic that prevented Sainz and Alonso from leaving their pit boxes , costing time . Alonso emerged from pit lane ahead of Grosjean , who moved past him into thirteenth . Felipe Massa had a slow stop of 4 @.@ 8 seconds when he pitted at the end of lap 13 . When he emerged from pit lane , Nico Hülkenberg was approaching on the racing line . Both drivers collided , with Hülkenberg being catapulted off Massa 's front right tyre , causing him to retire from the race . A Virtual Safety Car period ensued , that saw all drivers pit that had not done so before . Since Kvyat had pitted shortly before the safety car was deployed , both Mercedes cars were able to move in front of him , leaving Kvyat in sixth place . Jenson Button 's stop took a long time , dropping him to 16th place . By lap 16 , the virtual was replaced by the actual safety car , which stayed out until the end of lap 18 . 
 At the restart , Sainz was caught out by his car being stuck in neutral , losing many places and dropping back to 18th position , but managed to continue . The safety car had meanwhile allowed his teammate Verstappen to move closer to the pack , being about half a lap down on lap 20 . The next laps saw Vettel setting a steady pace at the front to conserve his tyres , leading Hamilton to declare that " Vettel 's backing up Ricciardo " on team radio . On lap 26 , Hamilton reported a loss of power to his crew . He subsequently lost positions rapidly , dropping back to ninth by lap 28 , eventually retiring on lap 33 . Meanwhile , Felipe Massa had problems with his car as well . Similar to Sainz , he saw his car switch to neutral . After driving through pit lane without stopping on lap 30 , he retired a lap later , with Fernando Alonso also ending his race on lap 34 with a defective gearbox . On the same lap , Daniil Kvyat came in for his second pit stop , but trouble with the tyres caused him to lose positions as he dropped to ninth . Around the same time , Vettel held a five @-@ second advantage over Ricciardo , while Pérez overtook Grosjean for ninth on lap 36 . 
 A second safety car period was caused on lap 37 by a man walking on the track . Several drivers again used the safety car to pit for new tyres , including Jenson Button , who emerged in tenth place . By lap 40 , Alexander Rossi was instructed to unlap himself behind the safety car , but when he failed to do so in an acceptable time , the race was resumed on lap 41 , with Rossi stuck between the front runners . By lap 42 , Button was racing Pastor Maldonado for position , when both collided in turn 15 , damaging Button 's front wing , who was forced to pit to have it exchanged . Button rejoined in 14th place , telling his team on the radio " I should have known , really , that he 's mental " , speaking about Maldonado . By lap 45 , Max Verstappen , who had started more than a lap behind , was up to ninth and set the new fastest lap of the race . One lap later , he took eighth place from Grosjean . His teammate Sainz followed two laps later , with Grosjean complaining that Sainz had left him " nowhere to go " . Meanwhile , at the front , Ricciardo set a fastest lap on lap 51 , being 2 @.@ 9 seconds behind leading man Vettel . Lap 53 saw Jenson Button become the second McLaren to retire , suffering from a gearbox issue as well . During the closing stages of the race , Valtteri Bottas in fifth experienced gearbox problems of his own , but was able to continue . On lap 60 , Grosjean ran wide and let Felipe Nasr move through into the final point scoring position , tenth . During the last lap , Toro Rosso instructed Verstappen to let his teammate Sainz pass him for eighth , but Verstappen refused and stayed in place . Sebastian Vettel crossed the line to win the race , which took the entire allowed span of two hours . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interviews , conducted by former team owner Eddie Jordan , Sebastian Vettel described the race as one of his best ever , calling it " a great day ; we had a really great weekend " . He also revealed that his drink bottle had failed halfway into the race , causing him to become thirsty as drivers lose two to three litres in sweat during the Singapore race . Second placed Daniel Ricciardo said he felt that an undercut , overtaking Vettel by pitting earlier might have been possible had it not been for the safety car periods . Kimi Räikkönen expressed surprise at his performance , considering that he had struggled with the handling of the car both in qualifying and the race . Speaking about the track intruder , Sebastian Vettel stated at the post @-@ race press conference that he " saw him taking a picture " and continued : " I hope it was a good one at least . I hope it was in focus ! Yeah , pretty crazy , we approach that corner at around 280 – 290 <unk> so , I don 't know , I wouldn 't cross the track if I was him . It was crazy , obviously [ ... ] . " The intruder was later revealed to be 27 @-@ year old British citizen <unk> Pravin <unk> . He appeared in court on the Tuesday following the race and was offered a bail of S $ 15 @,@ 000 , which he was unable to pay . He was later sentenced to serve six weeks in jail . 
 Still during the race , the stewards handed Nico Hülkenberg a three @-@ place grid penalty for the following race in Japan for causing the collision with Felipe Massa on lap 14 . Hülkenberg was " frustrated " with the decision , saying : " The accident with Felipe was very unlucky and I don 't understand why I 've been given a penalty before there has even been the chance to discuss the incident in the stewards ' room [ ... ] In my view it was my corner and I 'm surprised Felipe backed out of it much too late , locking up just before he hit me . " Massa had a different view about the incident , stating : " I was braking for the corner and he turned his car in on mine , leaving me with nowhere to go , so we hit . " Force India decided not to appeal the decision . Williams ' Head of Vehicle Performance Rob Smedley lamented the slow pit stop of his team that preceded the incident , saying that Massa should have exited the pits safely ahead of Hülkenberg . While initial reactions in the United Kingdom agreed with the stewards ' decision , German tabloid Bild called the penalty a " joke " . Hülkenberg later accepted that he was at fault and apologised to Massa via text message . Concerning the accident between Button and Maldonado , no further action was taken by the stewards . Jenson Button however followed up on his " mental " <unk> during the race , by stating that he felt Maldonado 's driving was " very strange " and that he " won 't ever change " . Maldonado answered by saying : " No driver 's happy if there 's a car in front of them and they want to get past , especially if it damages their car trying to overtake [ ... ] . We both got damage to our cars ; he was behind me trying to get past , I was defending my position . That 's racing . " 
 Following the controversial refusal by Max Verstappen to follow team orders and let his teammate pass in the final lap of the race , team principal Franz Tost later backed up his driver : " The team wanted to swap positions because we thought Carlos was faster with the new tyres , but this was not the case , he could not catch up . He was too far away , so Max said no , and he was right . " The Ferrari team came under criticism after the race , when team personnel broke through a barrier by security to enter parc fermé and celebrate Vettel 's victory . The team announced that they intended to " send a written unconditional apology " to the Grand Prix officials and security staff over the incident . 
 As a result of the race , Hamilton 's lead in the Drivers ' Championship was cut down to 41 points , with Rosberg still in second place . Sebastian Vettel moved closer as well , now being 49 points behind Hamilton . Felipe Massa 's retirement saw him drop from fourth to sixth in the standings , being overtaken by both Räikkönen and Bottas . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari closed the gap to leaders Mercedes , now trailing 310 to 463 points . This race would prove to be the only one that Lewis Hamilton did not finish on course for his third Drivers ' Championship . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Will Stevens received a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change , but remained 19th due to Rossi 's identical penalty . 
 ^ 2 – Alexander Rossi received a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Romain Grosjean was classified despite retiring due to completing 90 % of the race distance . 
 ^ 2 – Nico Hülkenberg was penalised with a three @-@ place grid penalty at the Japanese Grand Prix for causing the collision with Massa . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Bold text indicates who still had a mathematical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Tropical Storm Becky ( 1970 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Becky was the second tropical cyclone and named storm of the 1970 Atlantic hurricane season . Becky formed from a tropical depression that was designated on July 19 . The next day it organized over the Yucatan Channel and became Tropical Storm Becky . Initially thought to have attained minimal hurricane status , Becky reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , but the storm began to deteriorate shortly thereafter . The storm made landfall on the Florida Panhandle on July 22 , and rapidly weakened over land . Overall , damage was related to heavy rainfall that caused flooding in Tallahassee , Florida ; 104 families suffered flood @-@ related losses . About $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1970 USD ) in damage was attributed to the storm . Further north , the heavy rainfall swelled rivers . Becky may have been partially responsible for spawning tornadoes that destroyed or damaged several houses . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 16 , 1970 , a large disturbance separated from the Intertropical Convergence Zone near Panama . The broad area of convection dominated the region between Swan Island and western Cuba by July 18 . Some sources state that the area of convection was joined by a low @-@ level vortex that entered the area , eventually forming a depression . Others believe that the origins of Becky can be tracked back to a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on July 9 . A tropical depression formed on July 19 , 1970 . As the depression moved through the Yucatan Channel , the convective cloud system became better organized . On July 20 , in light of data from a Reconnaissance Aircraft flight , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Becky . 
 The storm moved roughly northward under the influence of the Bermuda High to the east and a low pressure area over Mexico . Reports from a Reconnaissance flight indicated that Becky was disorganized , with a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Although a fairly strong low @-@ level circulation developed , there was insufficient warming of the center to produce a significant drop in barometric pressure at the surface . Late on July 20 , a ship reported a minimum pressure of about 1 @,@ 003 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) , and another ship reported sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , which would be Becky 's peak intensity . A Reconnaissance flight and weather radars suggested the development of an eye feature , and initially it was believed that the storm attained minimal hurricane status . Later it was later confirmed that Becky remained a tropical storm , and the previously forming eye failed to persist . 
 On July 21 , the storm deteriorated in organization as it continued northward . The lack of banding features indicated that by early on July 22 , Becky was barely a tropical storm . The storm made landfall near Port St. Joe , Florida shortly thereafter , and weakened rapidly as it moved inland ; as a rainstorm , it progressed northward into the Midwestern United States and completely dissipated over Michigan . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Offshore , Shell Oil removed some workers and equipment from offshore platforms . A hurricane warning was issued from Fort Walton , Florida to Port St. Joe , Florida . Similarly , a gale warning was posted for coastal areas of Alabama and Florida . A hurricane watch was issued for locations in Mississippi and Louisiana . On July 22 , a tornado watch was posted for northern Florida . Tornado warnings were also issued , and a flash flood watch was declared for parts of western North Carolina . Gale warnings were posted from Panama City , Florida to St. Marks , Florida , with the expectation of winds to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Heavy rainfall of up to 8 inches ( 200 mm ) was predicted , and tides of 2 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) forecast . Isolated tornadoes were possible as the storm made landfall . 
 Thousands of residents were evacuated from the Panhandle of Florida , including Santa Rosa Island and Destin , as well as other low @-@ lying locations . Some residents evacuated to storm shelters that were set up in various cities along the coast . A store in Destin reported increased sales in hurricane @-@ related supplies such as canned goods and flashlights . Florida Governor Claude Kirk ordered health units and law enforcement to operate on emergency alert . Small craft in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico were advised to remain in port until the high seas subsided . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Upon making landfall , a barometric pressure of 1007 mb accompanied the storm . Along the coast of the Panhandle , gale @-@ force winds and tides of 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above @-@ normal were reported . Tallahassee , Florida received 8 inches ( 0 @.@ 20 m ) of rainfall ; due to the heavy precipitation , serious flooding occurred . At Anna Marie Island in Florida , heavy rainfall and squalls accompanied by winds of 56 miles per hour ( 90 km / h ) were reported . In South Carolina , heavy precipitation led to rivers approaching flood stage . Locally heavy rainfall caused rivers to rise in North Carolina , though they remained below flood stage . Along the Cape Fear River , a boat ramp was washed out . Farther towards the north in Georgia and Alabama , the rainfall helped to relieve persistent drought conditions . 
 According to the Red Cross , 104 families in the Tallahassee region suffered flood @-@ related losses , and two injuries were reported . There , winds gusted to 44 miles per hour ( 71 km / h ) . Flood waters were knee @-@ deep around a county courthouse at Crawfordville , Florida . In low @-@ lying areas , flooding damaged homes , and to the southwest of Tallahassee , 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water forced the evacuation of 15 homes by rowboat . Over 100 cars were stranded in the flooding . As precautionary measures , a few secondary roads were closed in the region . Damage from Becky in the state totaled $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1970 USD ) , mostly in Leon and Wakulla counties . Two injuries were reported . 
 Several tornadoes were reported . Near Panacea , Florida , a tornado destroyed a house and damaged two others . Another tornado in Emanuel County , Georgia killed one person and demolished two homes . However , due to the conditions that spawned the tornadoes , they are not directly attributed to Becky . 
 = SMS Deutschland ( 1874 ) = 
 SMS Deutschland was the second and final ship of the Kaiser @-@ class ironclads ; SMS Kaiser was her sister ship . Named for Germany ( Deutschland in German ) , the ship was laid down in the Samuda Brothers shipyard in London in 1872 . The ship was launched in September 1874 and commissioned into the German fleet in July 1875 . Deutschland mounted a main battery of eight 26 cm ( 10 in ) guns in a central battery amidships . She was the last capital ship built for the German Navy by a foreign ship @-@ builder ; all subsequent ships were built in Germany . 
 Deutschland served with the fleet from her commissioning until 1896 , though she was frequently placed in reserve throughout her career . The ship was a regular participant in the annual fleet training maneuvers conducted with the exception of the mid @-@ 1880s , when she was temporarily replaced by newer vessels . She participated in several cruises in the Baltic and Mediterranean , often escorting Kaiser Wilhelm II on official state visits . Deutschland was rebuilt in the early 1890s as an armored cruiser , though she was too slow to perform satisfactorily in this role . Nevertheless , she spent three years in the East Asia Squadron before returning to Germany in 1900 . She was used in secondary roles after 1904 , until 1908 when she was sold and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Deutschland was ordered by the Imperial Navy from the Samuda Brothers shipyard in London , UK ; her keel was laid in 1872 . Deutschland and her sister Kaiser were ordered shortly after the end of the Franco @-@ Prussian War , under the assumption that the French would quickly attempt a war of revenge . The ship was launched on 12 September 1874 and commissioned into the German fleet on 20 July 1875 . Deutschland cost the German government 8 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 gold marks . She was the last German capital ship built by a foreign shipbuilder . 
 The ship was 89 @.@ 34 meters ( 293 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 10 m ( 62 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 39 m ( 24 @.@ 2 ft ) forward . Deutschland was powered by one 2 @-@ cylinder single expansion engine , which was supplied with steam by eight coal @-@ fired trunk boilers . The ship 's top speed was 14 @.@ 6 knots ( 27 @.@ 0 km / h ; 16 @.@ 8 mph ) , at 5 @,@ 779 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 309 kW ) . She was also equipped with a full ship rig . Her standard complement consisted of 32 officers and 568 enlisted men . 
 She was armed with eight 26 cm ( 10 in ) L / 20 guns mounted in a central battery amidships . As built , the ship was also equipped with a single 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) L / 22 gun . After being rebuilt in 1891 – 1895 , her armament was increased by six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 22 and one 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 30 guns , four and later twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) auto @-@ cannons , and five 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the ship 's hull . Deutschland 's armor was made of wrought iron and backed with teak . The armored belt was 127 to 254 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 to 10 @.@ 0 in ) thick ; this was backed with 90 to 226 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 9 in ) of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Following her commissioning in July 1875 , a German crew sailed Deutschland to Germany . She arrived too late , however , to participate in the annual summer training maneuvers . The ship was ready for the 1876 maneuvers ; the squadron consisted of Deutschland , her sister Kaiser , and the older ironclads Friedrich Carl and Kronprinz , commanded by Rear Admiral Carl Ferdinand Batsch . At around the time Batch 's squadron was working up for the summer cruise , the German consul in Salonika , then in the Ottoman Empire , was murdered . Further attacks on German citizens living in the area were feared , and so Batsch was ordered to sail to the Mediterranean Sea to stage a naval demonstration in June 1876 . After arriving with the four ironclads , he was reinforced by three unarmored vessels . After the threat of violence subsided in August , Batsch departed with Kaiser and Deutschland ; the other two ironclads remained in the Mediterranean for the rest of the summer . 
 For the 1877 maneuvers , the new turret ironclad Preussen replaced Kronprinz . The squadron was again sent to the Mediterranean , in response to unrest in the Ottoman Empire related to the Russo @-@ Turkish War ; the violence threatened German citizens living there . The squadron , again under the command of Batsch , steamed to the ports of Haifa and Jaffa in July 1877 , but found no significant tensions ashore . Batsch then departed and cruised the Mediterranean for the remainder of the summer , returning to Germany in October . The newly commissioned Friedrich der Grosse and Grosser Kurfürst , sister ships of Preussen , replaced Deutschland and Kaiser in the 1878 maneuvers , during which Grosser Kurfürst was accidentally rammed and sank with great loss of life . Deutschland and her sister Kaiser remained in reserve for the next six years . They were reactivated in the spring of 1883 for the summer maneuvers under the command of Wilhelm von Wickede . Due to their long period out of service , their engines proved troublesome during the training cruise . Indeed , the maneuvers were temporarily put on hold when the steam plants in Deutschland , Kaiser , and Kronprinz broke down . Regardless , the 1883 cruise was the first year the German navy completely abandoned the use of sails on its large ironclads . Deutschland went into reserve during the 1884 maneuvers , which were conducted by a homogenous squadron composed of the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . 
 The ship did not see active duty again until the summer of 1889 , when Deutschland joined the fleet that steamed to Great Britain to celebrate the coronation of Kaiser Wilhelm II ; the ship joined her sister Kaiser and the turret ships Preussen and Friedrich der Grosse in the II Division . The fleet then held training maneuvers in the North Sea under command of Rear Admiral Friedrich Hollmann . Deutschland and the rest of the II Division became the training squadron for the fleet in 1889 – 1890 , the first year the Kaiserliche Marine maintained a year @-@ round ironclad force . The squadron escorted Wilhelm II 's imperial yacht to the Mediterranean ; the voyage included state visits to Italy and the Ottoman Empire . The squadron remained in the Mediterranean until April 1890 , when it returned to Germany . Deutschland participated in the ceremonial transfer of the island of Helgoland from British to German control in the summer of 1890 . She was present during the fleet maneuvers in September , where the entire eight @-@ ship armored squadron simulated a Russian fleet blockading Kiel . The II Division , including Deutschland , served as the training squadron in the winter of 1890 – 1891 . The squadron again cruised the Mediterranean , under the command of Rear Admiral Wilhelm Schröder . 
 During the winter of 1892 – 1893 , Deutschland participated in a training squadron alongside the old ironclad König Wilhelm and the new coastal defense ships Siegfried and Beowulf . The squadron carried over for the fleet maneuvers during the summer of 1893 , when they were joined by the four Sachsen @-@ class vessels . In November 1893 , the Deutschland , König Wilhelm , and Friedrich der Grosse were joined by the brand @-@ new pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Brandenburg , under the command of Otto von Diederichs . The squadron participated in the fall maneuvers in 1894 , which simulated a two @-@ front war against France and Russia ; Deutschland 's squadron acted as the Russian fleet during the exercises . Between 1894 and 1897 , Deutschland was rebuilt in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven . The ship was converted into an armored cruiser ; her heavy guns were removed and replaced with lighter weapons , including eight 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns . Her entire rigging equipment was removed and two heavy military masts were installed in place of the rigging . Despite the modernization , she remained quite slow . Kaiser and the old ironclad König Wilhelm were similarly converted . Deutschland rejoined the fleet on 25 January 1897 . 
 Following Diederichs 's seizure of Kiautschou Bay in November 1897 , Deutschland , the protected cruiser Kaiserin Augusta , and the light cruisers Gefion and Cormoran reinforced the East Asia Cruiser Division . The arrival of the four ships allowed the division to be expanded to the East Asia Squadron . Prince Heinrich , with his flag aboard Deutschland , departed Germany in December 1897 with Gefion ; the two ships arrived in Hong Kong in March 1898 . Prince Heinrich took the two ships on a tour of Asia , culminating in a state visit to Peking in April . While most of the Squadron went to the Philippines to safeguard German interests during the Spanish – American War in the summer of 1898 , Deutschland , Gefion , and Irene remained in Chinese waters . On 14 April 1899 , Diederichs left the East Asia Squadron ; command passed to Prince Henry and Deutschland became the Squadron flagship . 
 Deutschland remained on the East Asia station until 1900 . After returning to Germany , Deutschland was used as a harbor ship , starting on 3 May 1904 . She was renamed Jupiter on 22 November of that year . On 21 May 1906 , the ship was stricken from the naval register and used briefly as a target ship in 1907 . The Kaiserliche Marine sold the ship in 1908 for 120 @,@ 000 marks ; she was broken up for scrap the following year in Hamburg @-@ <unk> . 
 = Legal Services Corp. v. Velazquez = 
 Legal Services Corp. v. Velazquez , 531 U.S. 533 ( 2001 ) , was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning the constitutionality of funding restrictions imposed by the United States Congress . At issue were restrictions on the Legal Services Corporation ( LSC ) , a private , non @-@ profit corporation established by Congress . The restrictions prohibited LSC attorneys from representing clients attempting to amend ( or challenge ) existing welfare law . The case was brought by Carmen Velazquez , whose LSC @-@ funded attorneys sought to challenge existing welfare provisions , believing it was the only way to get Velazquez financial relief . 
 The Court ruled that this specific restriction violated the free speech guarantees of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . Because LSC facilitated " private " speech — that of its grantees — the restrictions did not simply regulate government speech . Because the restrictions blocked attempts to change only a specific area of law , the Court held , they could not be considered viewpoint @-@ neutral ; the government is prohibited from making such viewpoint @-@ based restrictions of private speech . 
 Reactions to the decision were mixed within Congress , with Republicans and Democrats disagreeing on the propriety of the decision . Several law review articles argued that the use of a " distortion principle " to decide violations of free speech was an unreasonable and unconstitutional rule whose conditions on funding might " distort " speech advocacy ; others contended that the Court mishandled the interpretation of the statute at issue . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History of funding restriction jurisprudence = = = 
 The first major test of the federal government 's power over funding restrictions based on speech was the 1991 case Rust v. Sullivan . In Rust , the Supreme Court upheld a restriction on the use of Department of Health and Human Services funds for counseling , referring patients to , or advocating the use of abortion services . The Court reasoned that the restriction at issue " merely [ chose ] to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other . " Here , the government was using private speakers to transmit information pertaining to the government 's own program . 
 Six years later , the Court reviewed another restriction , this time concerning funding restrictions imposed by a public university . In the 1997 case Rosenberger v. University of Virginia , a government supported university sought to withhold funds from religious student publications despite funding similar secular publications . While the Court said the government could seek to shape funding to support a government message , such restrictive steps could not be imposed to the exclusion of a particular viewpoint . 
 = = = Legal Services Corporation = = = 
 In 1974 the United States Congress passed the Legal Services Corporation Act , which established the LSC . The purpose of the act was to provide government @-@ funded legal aid to indigent clients , funded through grants to regional entities throughout the country . In 1996 Congress amended the act with that year 's appropriations bill , imposing restrictions on the LSC . These restrictions included prohibitions against filing class action lawsuits , providing legal assistance to immigrants in particular types of cases , collecting attorney 's fees , soliciting clients , providing advocacy training programs and attempting to reform welfare laws . The restrictions affected only a small portion of the caseload . The restrictions prohibited funding cases : 
 ... initiating legal representation or participating in any other way , in litigation , lobbying , or rulemaking , involving an effort to reform a Federal or State welfare system , except that this paragraph shall not be construed to preclude a recipient from representing an individual eligible client who is seeking specific relief from a welfare agency if such relief does not involve an effort to amend or otherwise challenge existing welfare law in effect on the date of the initiation of the representation . 
 = = = Lower @-@ court proceedings = = = 
 In 1997 , Carmen Velazquez lost welfare benefits from the government under the provisions of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Act ( <unk> ) . An attorney from an LSC grantee , Bronx Legal Services , litigated her claim . Bronx Legal Services , on behalf of Velazquez , filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York seeking a declaration that the provision of the act prohibiting challenges to existing welfare law was unconstitutional under the First Amendment . It argued that there was no way to help Velazquez without challenging the welfare system itself , and sought to challenge the provisions of <unk> under which Velazquez lost her benefits ; a challenge they could not make due to the 1996 restrictions . The district court denied an injunction . 
 The court 's decision was affirmed in part and reversed in part by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit . The Second Circuit unanimously held that the welfare @-@ advocacy restriction was unconstitutional , but upheld other restrictions that Bronx Legal Services had challenged ( such as the lobbying restriction ) by a 2 – 1 vote . The Second Circuit also rejected the claim that any funding conditions would be illegitimate , instead preferring a restriction @-@ by @-@ restriction analysis . The national LSC asked the Supreme Court for review by petitioning for a writ of certiorari , arguing that the Second Circuit was wrong in striking down the welfare @-@ advocacy restriction . 
 = = Supreme Court decision = = 
 The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case on October 4 , 2000 , issuing its decision four months later . 
 The Court affirmed the decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals , holding that the restriction on pursuing welfare advocacy was unconstitutional under the First Amendment by a vote of 5 – 4 . 
 Justice Kennedy delivered the majority opinion . It distinguished a 1991 Supreme Court case , Rust v. Sullivan , which upheld a prohibition on federally funded family planning services from discussing abortion with their patients . The majority reasoned that in Rust the government was attempting to use its funds to express its own message , but the purpose of the act was to promote a diversity of private views with its funding ; not an attempt to restrict any views . The Court said that the government can only issue " content @-@ neutral " conditions on such speech , and that the specific prohibition on welfare @-@ reform litigation was viewpoint @-@ based , as it restricted only support for welfare @-@ reform advocacy . " If the restriction on speech and legal advice were to stand , the result would be two tiers of cases ... there would be lingering doubt whether the truncated representation had resulted in complete analysis of the case , full advice to the client , and proper presentation to the court . " 
 The Court also criticized the fact that the restriction functionally barred attorneys from participating in the courts . Any attorney receiving LSC funding would not be able to litigate welfare claims that challenged welfare rules , thereby preventing certain cases from being filed . " The restriction imposed by the statute here threatens severe impairment of the judicial function ... We must be vigilant when Congress imposes rules and conditions which , in effect , insulate its own laws from legitimate judicial challenge . " 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Justice Scalia dissented from the decision of the Court , due to the belief that Rust mandated a ruling upholding the restriction . Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Associate Justices Sandra Day O 'Connor and Clarence Thomas joined the dissent . Scalia wrote , " The [ act ] is a federal subsidy program , not a federal regulatory program ... regulations directly restrict speech ; subsidies do not . " He disagreed with the majority 's contention that there was viewpoint discrimination , arguing that no specific viewpoint was restricted . Scalia was also concerned with dicta within the majority opinion that seemed to him to indicate a " fondness " for the concept of reform through the courts . His dissent argued that the majority 's holding was " unprecedented " because it was the first time the government would be limited in advocating its own message . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The immediate reaction was mixed among members of Congress . Democratic supporters of the ruling were optimistic of future victories against funding restrictions , stating that , while they were glad the restriction fell , " [ the decision ] opens the LSC up to even more attacks " . Republicans in Congress condemned the decision , agreeing to work against it . Representative Steve Largent ( R @-@ OK ) said , " It 'll be on the radar screen for sure ... Why are we giving taxpayer money to sue taxpayers ? " The New York Times described the decision as the end of the " latest chapter , although almost certainly not the last , in a long political struggle over the federally financed program of civil legal services for the poor . " 
 Parties involved in the case also had mixed reactions . The Legal Services Corporation , which had sought to protect the restrictions , said it would " immediately review [ their ] regulations and then modify them to adhere to the Court 's ruling " , which it did quickly after the decision . Burt <unk> , the lawyer who argued against the restriction before the Supreme Court , said the ruling " really reads like a First Amendment textbook " . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 In the weeks following the Velazquez decision , the Supreme Court rejected appeals related to other LSC restrictions . LSC has engaged in welfare @-@ reform litigation since the original injunction was lifted . 
 The case provided the basis for other challenges to restrictions imposed on LSC , such as bans against lobbying or class action . These challenges were rejected by the Ninth Circuit and the Second Circuit in separate suits . The challenges failed because the relevant provisions do not regulate a specific type of advocacy ; for example , the restriction on LSC grantees from collecting attorney 's fees would not raise a speech issue because there is no speech involved in such a process . The argument raised in these challenges was that the Court articulated a new " conditions " principle in Velazquez — a distortion @-@ of @-@ speech test — which , they argued , would require the restrictions to be struck down . Both courts of appeal reviewing this claim have rejected this reading of Velazquez . Instead of a distortion @-@ of @-@ speech test , the decision was based on the application of limited public forum principles : when the government provides funds to an entity , and this funding 's purpose was to encourage a diversity of private views , it must act in a viewpoint @-@ neutral way . Programs funded in this manner are treated as a public forum , where the ability of the government to restrict speech is highly limited . 
 The implications of these subsequent rulings mandated two new rules , one narrow and one broad . First , restrictions may be imposed on LSC so long as they do not discriminate on the basis of " viewpoint " or " opinion " . Because the other restrictions were not based on viewpoint , they were upheld . Second , on a broader scale the government may not discriminate against viewpoints in any instance where it is funding a private entity to promote a diversity of views . For this reason , the decision in Velazquez set an important precedent for how the government may act as <unk> and speaker . 
 = = Analysis and commentary = = 
 A Journal of Law and Politics article was critical of the decision , criticizing the Court 's claimed distinction between the speech restriction in Rust and the one on the Legal Services Corporation and contending that there was no functional difference between the two . The article highlighted a problem with the Court 's interpretation of the statute 's purpose at hand , stating : " Even assuming the propriety of invoking legislative purpose in statutory interpretation , the text of the [ Act ] does not support the Court 's understanding of the Act 's purpose . " The article noted that , although the Court looked at a section of the Act discussing attorneys " protecting the best interest of their clients " , the same section noted that the program must be free of " political pressures " . Because a factor in the Court 's reasoning was its understanding of the Act 's purpose , this alleged error purportedly misguided the rest of the Court 's analysis . 
 Further criticism from the article was that the Court unduly rested its decision on a separation of powers determination . The Court held in Velazquez that the restriction on welfare advocacy cases disrupted the " vital relationship between the bar and the judiciary " . This finding , the article argued , is baseless because there is no connection between preventing some government lawyers from arguing a single point and the deprivation of due process rights . It concluded that the fundamental problems of statutory interpretation and a lack of a credible distinction with Rust in Justice Kennedy 's analysis renders the opinion " unconvincing " . 
 An article in the Maryland Law Review authored by Christopher Gozdor ( a lawyer in the Maryland Attorney General 's office ) was also critical of the decision , although he was concerned instead with an alleged lack of clarity in the majority opinion . It discussed the case law relating to government speech and examined what it described as the " conditions doctrine " , where certain conditions on receiving federal funds were upheld or struck down . The article then turned to the Rust distinction . Gozdor explained : " The Court distinguished Velazquez from Rust because Rust involved a subsidy to facilitate private expression of the government 's message , while Velazquez involved LSC funding that was designed [ for ] private speech . " The critical question for the court was the characterization of the speech that the law promoted . Because advocacy by LSC grantees to change welfare laws was not in advance of the government 's own message , the restriction placed on it essentially prohibited a form of private speech . The relationship , Gozdor asserted , that the Court set forth was that the restriction " distorted " private speech . This " distortion principle " was the main criticism of the article ( as was Scalia 's dissent ) . Gozdor , agreeing with Scalia 's dissent , wrote that the restriction did not create such a distortion of private speech because Congress had still permitted LSC to form affiliate organizations which would be considered " legally separate " . Notwithstanding the difficulty of an organization to classify itself as an " affiliate entity " of LSC , Gozdor argued that there was no real prevention of speech when there were ample alternative means of relaying the message . 
 Further , in attacking the distortion principle 's application , Gozdor also argued against the principle as a legal concept in the first place . He wrote , " Regardless of the Court 's rationale for its distortion principle , determining a First Amendment violation by measuring whether the government used a subsidy ' in ways which distorted the medium 's usual functioning ' suggests that forum functions become unchangeable once created . " He claimed the unworkability of the distortion principle in a hypothetical example , which would moot the very existence of the Legal Services Corporation . " Taking the Velazquez rationale to its logical ends " , he wrote , " the LSC subsidy itself could become an unconstitutional speech restriction . If Congress substantially increased LSC appropriations in order to allow LSC to take all of its cases ... the functioning of the legal system would be distorted because such a subsidy likely would result in a dramatic increase in the federal courts ' <unk> . " With this in mind , he concluded with a process by which the Court should have decided the case : a process leading to the upholding of the restriction by finding that LSC 's purpose was in promoting the government 's message , in contrast to a diversity of private views . 
 An article in the North Carolina Law Review argued that Kennedy 's majority opinion wrongly set forth the understanding of the role of an attorney . The author , Jessica Sharpe , criticized the Court 's thesis that the role of the attorney is that of an advocate such that a restriction on the attorney served as a direct restriction of advocacy . This rationale , Sharpe argued , could undermine the balance of abortion restrictions because state regulations on abortion access also could be seen as an intrusion into doctor – patient speech . Because Velazquez " blurred " this distinction , the privileged nature of doctor – patient conversations could be subjected to future regulations and limitations . 
 = 1980 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1980 Atlantic hurricane season was tied with 1932 , 1969 , and 1994 for most named storms in Atlantic Ocean during the month of November – only to be surpassed in 2001 and 2005 . The season officially began on June 1 , 1980 , and lasted until November 30 , 1980 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic Ocean . 
 The season was fairly active , with fifteen tropical cyclones forming . It was the first time since the 1971 season that there were no active tropical cyclones in the Atlantic basin during the month of June . The season was neutral , having neither an El Niño nor a La Niña . Three tropical cyclones during in the Atlantic Ocean in 1980 were notable . Hurricane Allen was then the earliest Category 5 hurricane on record and also devastated portions of the Caribbean Sea , Mexico , and the United States . Tropical Storm Hermine caused significant flooding in Mexico , which resulted in at least 38 fatalities . Hurricane Jeanne was one of only four tropical cyclones at hurricane intensity to enter the Gulf of Mexico and not make landfall . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , though the first tropical depression did not develop until July 17 . During the season , 15 tropical depressions formed . Eight of the depressions attained tropical storm status , and eight of these attained hurricane status . Two of the hurricanes further strengthened to become major hurricanes . Only Allen made landfall at hurricane strength during the season , although Hurricane Charley and tropical storms Danielle and Hermine also caused damage and fatalities . Those three cyclones collectively caused 337 deaths and $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 1980 USD ) in damage . The last storm of the season , Hurricane Karl , dissipated on November 27 , only three days before the official end date of November 30 . 
 The 1980 Atlantic hurricane season had a rather slow beginning , with only one tropical depression developing prior to the month of August . In contrast , August was an active month , with five tropical cyclones forming , three of which became hurricanes . During that month , Hurricane Allen became the earliest known Category 5 hurricane on August 5 , a record later broken by only Hurricane Emily on July 16 , 2005 . September also had five tropical cyclones , all of which became named storms . Tropical cyclogenesis abruptly halted in October , with only Hurricane Ivan developing in that month . However , the month of November was considered to be very active , with three storms forming during that month . Two of the systems became named storms , a record that was tied with 1932 , 1969 , and 1994 , but later surpassed when three tropical storms existed in the Atlantic in November 2001 and November 2005 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 149 , which is classified as " above normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 A decaying cold front entered into Gulf of Mexico , and developed a low @-@ pressure area of July 17 . Later that day , the low @-@ pressure area developed into Tropical Depression One almost halfway between Louisiana and the Yucatan Peninsula . The depression moved northwestward , and minimal intensification occurred , as it approached the Gulf Coast of the United States . The depression made landfall in Texas near the Galveston area , and dissipated by July 21 . Minimal impact was recorded from the depression , and light rainfall was reported in Texas and western Louisiana , peaking at 3 @.@ 77 in ( 96 mm ) in Refugio , Texas . 
 = = = Hurricane Allen = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa on July 30 and quickly developed into Tropical Depression Two about two days later . By August 2 , the depression had strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Allen . The storm steadily intensified and became a hurricane on August 3 . Thereafter , Allen rapidly deepened , and was a major hurricane only 24 hours later . While it was becoming a Category 3 hurricane , and a Category 4 hurricane , shortly after , Allen passed through the Windward Islands . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea , Allen continued to strengthen and became a Category 5 hurricane on August 5 , while about halfway between Puerto Rico and Venezuela . Allen briefly curved northwestward and approached the Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti . Shortly thereafter , Allen weakened significantly on August 6 , but was still a Category 4 when it bypassed Jamaica . While paralleling the south coast of Cuba , Allen re @-@ strengthened into a Category 5 hurricane . Later that day , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 190 mph ( 305 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 899 mbar ( 26 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Immediately following peak intensity , Allen entered the Gulf of Mexico and weakened back to a Category 4 hurricane on August 8 . On the day next , Allen re @-@ intensified into a Category 5 hurricane while approaching Texas . However , just offshore Allen abruptly weakened to a low @-@ end Category 3 hurricane prior to landfall near Brownsville , Texas on August 10 . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated about 36 hours after striking land . 
 Although 500 houses were either damaged or destroyed on Barbados , losses totaled to only $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1980 USD ) . Having passed only 8 miles ( 13 km ) south of St. Lucia , Allen produced sustained winds as high as 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) on the island . The storm caused 27 fatalities and $ 88 million ( 1980 USD ) in damage on that island . In addition , one death was reported in Guadeloupe . High winds and flooding in Haiti left 836 @,@ 200 people homeless . In addition , 220 deaths were reported and damage exceeded $ 400 million ( 1980 USD ) . To the east in Dominican Republic , effects were less severe , though seven deaths were reported and damage was estimated at $ 47 million ( 1980 USD ) . On the island of Cuba , three fatalities occurred and losses were unknown . In northeastern Mexico , heavy rainfall occurred , though damage was minimal and no fatalities were reported . Damage was most significant in the United States , especially in the state of Texas . In Corpus Christi , gravel blew off the roofs , which broke windows throughout the city . Several tornadoes were spawned in Texas , one of which caused $ 100 million ( 1980 USD ) in damage in Austin . Rainfall in the state of Texas exceeded 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in some locations . 24 fatalities occurred in the United States – seven in Texas and seventeen in Louisiana – most resulting from the crash of a helicopter evacuating workers from an offshore platform . Damage in United States totaled to $ 860 million ( 1980 USD ) . Overall , Hurricane Allen caused $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 1980 USD ) in losses and caused 290 deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four = = = 
 The third tropical depression of the season developed east of Cape Verde on August 13 . However , the National Hurricane Center did not initiate advisories until August 16 . As a result , the system was classified as Tropical Depression Four . After forming on August 13 , the depression crossed through the Cape Verde Islands . The depression tracked northwestward and strengthened minimally , with winds never exceeding 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Thereafter , the depression curved and approached the eastern portion of the Azores . Tropical Depression Four moved through the islands shortly later . By early on August 17 , the depression dissipated near Santa Maria Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Bonnie = = = 
 Starting on August 13 , a tropical wave in the vicinity of the Cape Verde began organizing into a tropical cyclone . Early on the following day , the system had developed into Tropical Depression Four while nearly halfway between the west coast of Africa and the Windward Islands . However , in post @-@ analysis , it was revealed that the previous tropical depression had actually developed before Bonnie . Thus , those two depressions were operationally numbered incorrectly . Two reports of gale force winds were received from ships later that day . As a result , the depression was re @-@ classified as Tropical Storm Bonnie about twelve hours after developing . Bonnie turned in a general northward direction , possibly due to interaction with nearby Tropical Depression Three . 
 Based on satellite estimates , Bonnie was upgraded to a hurricane at 0000 UTC on August 16 . The storm strengthened slightly further and attained its peak intensity with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . After attaining peak intensity on August 16 , Bonnie slowly weakened as it continued in an unusual northward direction . On the following day , Bonnie weakened slightly to a minimal Category 1 hurricane . The storm remained at that intensity for 72 hours as it accelerated northward across the open Atlantic . By 1800 UTC on August 19 , Bonnie transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while almost halfway between the southern tip of Greenland and the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Charley = = = 
 An extratropical low pressure system was centered over the Mid @-@ Atlantic United States , though it tracked southeastward and emerged into the Atlantic on August 20 . Later that day , satellite imagery indicated that a well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation . As a result , it was determine that the system developed into a subtropical depression at 1200 UTC , while located about 150 miles ( 240 km ) east @-@ northeast of Hatteras , North Carolina . Initially , the depression tracked east @-@ southeastward , though it curved east @-@ northeastward by August 21 . Shortly thereafter , the depression strengthened into a subtropical storm . By early on August 23 , the storm had intensified and acquired enough tropical characteristics to be re @-@ classified as Hurricane Charley . 
 At 1200 UTC on August 23 , Charley attained its peak intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 989 mbar ( 29 @.@ 2 inHg ) . Following peak intensity , Charley completed a cyclonic loop and began weakening as it headed almost due @-@ east . Charley was downgraded to a tropical storm early on August 24 . The storm continued eastward and by August 26 , Charley became unidentifiable as it merged with an intense extratropical cyclone , while located about 790 miles ( 1 @,@ 270 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . While a tropical cyclone , Charley produced rip currents along the Outer Banks of North Carolina , which drowned seven people . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six = = = 
