 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean on August 22 . The system developed into Tropical Depression Six , while centered to the west of Cape Verde at 0000 UTC on August 25 . The depression tracked westward with minimal intensification . By 1800 UTC on August 26 , the depression reached 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and did not strengthen further . On the following day , the depression curved northwestward and slowly began to weaken . The depression degenerated into a tropical wave while well northeast of Puerto Rico on August 29 . The remnants of Tropical Depression Six continued westward and interacted with a low @-@ pressure system over Florida . Eventually , the system developed into Tropical Depression Eight on September 4 , which later became Tropical Storm Danielle . 
 = = = Hurricane Georges = = = 
 On August 28 , a tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic off the west coast of Africa . At 0000 UTC on September 1 , the system developed into Tropical Depression Seven , while centered roughly midway between the Lesser Antilles and the west coast of Africa . Sixteen hours later , the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories on the depression . The depression tracked westward in the trade winds during the following three days , without any intensification . After curving northwestward an Air Force reconnaissance flight found little evidence of a closed circulation , while satellite imagery also showed a disorganized and elongated cloud pattern on September 4 . As a result , it was determined that the depression degenerated into a tropical disturbance at 0600 UTC on that day . However , the National Hurricane Center did not discontinue advisories until 2200 UTC . 
 On September 5 , satellite imagery suggested a surface circulation had developed , possibly due to interaction with a cold low . As a result , the system regenerated into a subtropical depression at 1200 UTC on that day , while centered about 360 miles ( 580 km ) southwest of Bermuda . Ten hours later , the National Hurricane Center resumed advisories on the subtropical depression . While the subtropical depression was curved northeastward , it strengthened and acquired tropical characteristics . At 0000 UTC on September 7 , the subtropical depression became Tropical Storm Georges . The storm continued to intensify while tracking northeastward and was upgraded to a hurricane about 24 hours after becoming a tropical storm . Simultaneously , Georges attained its peak intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 993 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . However , later that day , Georges transitioned into an extratropical cyclone near Cape Race , Newfoundland . While bypassing Newfoundland , Georges dropped light rainfall , with amounts under 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of precipitation . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Danielle = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 22 . The system developed into Tropical Depression Six on August 25 . However , the depression did not strengthen further , and about four days later , it degenerated back into a tropical wave . Tracking westward , the system crossed Florida and entered into the Gulf of Mexico on September 2 . Two days later , the system developed into Tropical Depression Eight while offshore of Louisiana . The depression gradually strengthened and became Tropical Storm Danielle late on September 5 . After peaking with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , further intensification was halted , as Danielle soon made landfall in eastern Texas . Danielle steadily weakened inland and dissipated two days later . 
 A barge in the Gulf of Mexico capsized due to rough seas , sending 11 of the crewmen overboard ; one person drowned as a result . Danielle produced widespread rainfall in Louisiana , though few areas reported more than 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of precipitation . Damage in that state was minimal . Rainfall was heavier in Texas , peaking at 18 @.@ 29 inches ( 465 mm ) . Much of the damage caused by the storm was as a result of flooding . In Port Arthur , twelve homes were damaged , while Interstate 10 was inundated by flood waters . One fatality occurred in Texas due to an automobile accident in Beaumont . Danielle also spawned five tornadoes in Texas , three of which collectively caused $ 277 @,@ 500 in damage ( 1980 USD ) . Outside of Texas and Louisiana , the storm also dropped light rainfall in Oklahoma and Mississippi , though minimal damage occurred in either state . Overall , Danielle caused two fatalities and $ 277 @,@ 500 ( 1980 USD ) in losses . 
 = = = Hurricane Earl = = = 
 Between September 2 and September 3 , a tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and entered the Atlantic Ocean . Satellite imagery indicated that the system had rapidly organized and was classified as a tropical depression on September 4 . The depression quickly strengthened and by early on September 2 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Earl . Because convection associated with the storm waxed and waned significantly , Earl was operationally considered a tropical depression until September 6 . On the following day , Earl curved north @-@ northwestward and accelerated due to an upper @-@ level low pressure trough in the central Atlantic Ocean . 
 After evidence of an eye feature appeared , Earl was upgraded to a hurricane on September 8 . Six hours later , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . Under the influence of an upper cold low , Earl began re @-@ curving and accelerated to the northeast . By 1200 UTC on September 10 , Earl weakened to a tropical storm . Six hours later , Earl transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , while centered about halfway between the Azores and Greenland . 
 = = = Hurricane Frances = = = 
 A strong low pressure system moved off the African coast on September 5 . By the following day , it developed into Tropical Depression Ten while a short distance off the west coast of Africa . About 18 hours later , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Frances . The National Hurricane Center did not issue advisories until 1600 UTC on September 7 , at which time the system was already a tropical storm . By early on September 8 , Frances had reached hurricane status , though it was not operationally upgraded until about 16 hours later . After becoming a hurricane , Frances began to rapidly strengthen , and became a Category 2 hurricane later that day . Early on September 9 , the storm further intensified to a Category 3 hurricane . At 0600 UTC on that day , Frances attained its peak intensity with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) . 
 After peak intensity , Frances began to weaken and was downgraded to a Category 2 hurricane later on September 9 . Following day , the storm fluctuated between Category 2 and Category 1 hurricane strengthen . While curving northwestward on September 13 , Frances remained steady in intensity as a Category 2 hurricane . Eventually , Frances re @-@ curved northward , thereby avoiding any land . After minimal change in intensity , Frances weakened to a Category 1 hurricane while tracking northeastward on September 17 . After briefly heading northward , the storm re @-@ curved back to the northeast . Early on September 20 , Frances weakened to a tropical storm , before merging with a frontal low while centered about halfway between Greenland and Iceland . Reports of strong tropical storm force winds were received from ships , but no damage was reported except for minor squalls in Cape Verde . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hermine = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 11 and tracked westward with minimal development until reaching the Caribbean Sea . By September 20 , a low @-@ level circulation had developed and the system was then classified as Tropical Depression Eleven , while located almost midway between Panama and Jamaica . While heading almost due westward , the depression steadily intensified , becoming Tropical Storm Hermine on September 21 , 18 hours after forming . Later on September 21 , the storm passed only 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) offshore of Honduras . Hermine curved west @-@ northwestward and nearly strengthened into a hurricane before landfall in northern British Honduras ( present @-@ day Belize ) on September 22 . After crossing the Yucatan Peninsula , Hermine emerged into the Bay of Campeche on the following day . 
 Once again , the storm intensified to near hurricane strength , though Hermine made landfall near Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , Mexico on September 24 . After moving inland , the storm steadily weakened while tracking south @-@ southwestward toward the Pacific Ocean . However , by early on September 26 , Hermine dissipated near the southwestern coast of Mexico . In Mexico , many areas reported at least 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation , while a few locations experienced more than 30 inches ( 760 mm ) of rain . As a result of torrential rainfall , at least 30 fatalities occurred , with dozens more missing , and leaving 25 @,@ 000 homeless . Additionally , landslides triggered by Hermine in Guatemala killed at least eight people . 
 = = = Hurricane Ivan = = = 
 In late September , a cold @-@ core low persisted off the coast of Portugal , moving southwestward . The system gradually developed tropical characteristics as it turned northwestward and executed a loop near the Azores . Eventually , the system organized enough to be designated as a tropical depression on October 4 , while just east of the Azores . Shortly thereafter , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Ivan . However , the National Hurricane Center did not initiate advisories on Ivan until late on October 5 . Ivan moved largely in tandem with the upper @-@ level low above it , while its southwest movement was caused by a building ridge to its north . Late on October 5 , an eye developed , and Ivan was upgraded to a hurricane on the following day . 
 It de @-@ accelerated as the ridge to its north weakened , and 18 hours after becoming a hurricane , Ivan peaked with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Between October 6 and October 7 , Ivan executed a tight loop , followed by a motion to the west @-@ northwest . Ultimately , the intensity did not change for about 90 hours . During that time , the eye fluctuated occasionally as the convection waxed and waned . On October 9 , Ivan turned to the north in advance of an approaching cold front and extratropical storm , while slowly weakening as it accelerated over cooler waters of the far northern Atlantic Ocean . By October 12 , the cold front absorbed Ivan , which was about 665 miles ( 1 @,@ 070 km ) west of Ireland . 
 = = = Hurricane Jeanne = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather organized into a tropical depression late on November 8 . The depression slowly intensified as it tracked north @-@ northwestward into the northwestern Caribbean Sea . Shortly before entering the Yucatan Channel , the depression had strengthened enough to be upgraded to Tropical Storm Jeanne on November 9 . Further intensification was still gradual in the Gulf of Mexico , though the rate of deepening accelerated as the storm began to curve westward . By November 11 , Jeanne was upgraded to a hurricane while paralleling the northern coast of the Yucatan Peninsula . Early on the following day , Jeanne peaked as a 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane . Thereafter , Jeanne began to weaken due to dry air and was downgraded to a tropical storm 24 hours after peak intensity . The storm briefly tracked west @-@ northwestward and then westward , before becoming nearly stationary in the western Gulf of Mexico . 
 Moving slowly and erratically , Jeanne weakened further and was downgraded to a tropical depression on November 15 . The storm curved southward and completed a cyclonic loop , before being absorbed by a cold front on November 16 . Fringe effects of Hurricane Jeanne triggered a record @-@ breaking 23 @.@ 28 inches ( 591 mm ) of rain at Key West , Florida within a 24 @-@ hour period . As a result of heavy precipitation , schools were and numerous businesses were closed , flights at Key West International Airport were grounded , and power outages and disruptions in telephone service occurred in Key West . In Texas , high tides caused flooding along much of the coast of the state , especially in Galveston . Offshore , several ships were caught off guard by the late season storm . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fourteen = = = 
 While Jeanne meandered through the Gulf of Mexico , Tropical Depression Fourteen developed north of Panama on November 12 . Steered northward by deep southerly flow southeast of Jeanne , the depression oscillated in organization while tracking west @-@ northwestward . The cloud pattern between Jeanne and the depression briefly merged , with a line of thunderstorms moving across the Florida peninsula between the two systems . Westerly vertical wind shear increased on the depression in the process . By November 15 , the depression reorganized its convective organization while making landfall in western Cuba early on November 16 . Once again , vertical wind shear increased , causing convection to detach from the center of the depression . 
 Late on November 17 , the depression was absorbed by an intense " winter type storm " that was moving across the Southeastern United States . Shortly thereafter , the remnants of the depression crossed Central and North Florida . While crossing Cuba , the depression dumped heavy rainfall . No other impact is known to have occurred on the island . The depression impact from both while tropical and a remnant system . In Key West , sustained winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) and gusts to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) were reported . Across much of Florida , light rainfall was reported , peaking at 4 @.@ 81 inches ( 122 mm ) in Brooksville . 
 = = = Hurricane Karl = = = 
 A low pressure area formed along a frontal boundary near the southeastern United States . The system slowly strengthened and developed into a separate vortex . Early on November 25 , it became a subtropical storm while centered about 825 miles ( 1 @,@ 328 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Shortly thereafter , the storm executing a tight counterclockwise loop as it rotated within the larger cyclone . About 18 hours later , the storm intensified and acquired enough tropical characteristics to be designated a hurricane . After being classified as a hurricane , Karl gradually strengthened while tracking eastward , eventually attaining its peak intensity with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) . 
 Karl maintained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) for approximately 18 hours and later weakened slightly while accelerating northeastward . On November 27 , the eye of Karl became ragged while passing within 230 miles ( 370 km ) of the Azores and started to show signs of deterioration . A trough over the North Atlantic developed into the dominant low pressure area , causing Karl to turn northward around its periphery . By November 27 , Karl merged with another approaching system and was declared extratropical by November 28 , while it was centered roughly halfway between Cape Race , Newfoundland and Spain . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1980 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1986 season . It was the first use for all of these names since the post @-@ 1978 naming change , except for Frances , which had been used in 1961 , 1968 , and 1976 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1981 : Allen . It was replaced by Andrew in 1986 . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that formed in the 1980 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low , and all of the damage figures are in 1980 USD . 
 = Sakura Haruno = 
 Sakura Haruno ( <unk> <unk> , Haruno Sakura ) is a fictional character in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto . In the anime and manga , Sakura is a kunoichi affiliated with the village of Konohagakure , and part of Team 7 , which consists of herself , Naruto Uzumaki , Sasuke Uchiha , and their sensei , Kakashi Hatake . Sakura initially has an infatuation for Sasuke , praising him at every juncture , and heaping scorn upon the less skilled Naruto . Over the course of the series , she begins to shed this singularly driven persona , and grows more appreciative and accepting of Naruto . Sakura has appeared in several pieces of Naruto media , including the nine feature films in the series , all of the original video animations , and several video games . 
 Sakura has become the series ' female lead , although she was not immediately intended for the role . Kishimoto has had difficulty in drawing her , resulting in Kishimoto inadvertently emphasizing certain parts of her appearance , including her large forehead . Chie Nakamura voices the character in the animated adaptations of the series , while Kate Higgins plays her in the English dub . 
 Numerous anime and manga publications have praised and criticized Sakura 's character . She was initially noted to be a stereotypical shōnen character , serving as a love interest for the protagonist , and served little purpose in the series initially beyond being comic relief . Her emergence from this stereotype as the series progressed , however , has been celebrated by reviewers . Amongst the Naruto reader base , Sakura has been popular , placing high in some polls . Several pieces of merchandise have been released in Sakura 's likeness , including a plush doll and key chains . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Naruto = = = 
 Sakura is a young ninja who is part of Team 7 alongside Naruto Uzumaki and Sasuke Uchiha under the leadership from Kakashi Hatake . Within Sakura resides " Inner Sakura , " a manifestation of her inner emotions . In addition to comic relief , Inner Sakura represents Sakura 's actual opinion on things when she outwardly displays something opposite . As Sakura has a deep infatuation for Sasuke many of her earlier appearances are dedicated to her continuing effort to win his affection . She accompanies the rest of Team 7 during all of its early missions , though she does little to contribute to the battles that take place . Sakura lacks any unique traits that set her apart from the rest of Team 7 although Kakashi notes that she has an excellent control over her chakra early in Part I. As a result , Sakura sits on the sidelines , content in allowing her teammates to protect her and defeat their opponents . During the Chunin Exams , when the rest of Team 7 is left in need of her protection , Sakura realizes that relying on others to fight her battles has been unwise . She resolves to better her ninja abilities from that point further , and throughout the rest of the series takes a more active role in Team 7 's battles . After Sasuke 's defection from Konoha at the end of Part I , Naruto 's failure to bring him back , and Sakura 's inability to help either of them , she becomes Tsunade 's apprentice so that she can do more for her teammates in the future . Since then , Sakura makes it her personal goal to bring Sasuke home . 
 After training under Tsunade for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , Sakura acquires the ability to heal wounds , becoming one of the most experienced medical ninja . In order to secure her survival to heal other , Sakura also developed superhuman strength by building up chakra in her fists . Thanks to this , Sakura joins Team 7 as medical ninja to save Gaara from the criminal group Akatsuki . With help from the elder Chiyo , Sakura defeats the Akatsuki member Sasori who gives her hints of Sasuke 's whereabouts . Naruto , Sakura , and the new members of Team 7 use this intelligence to track Sasuke down , but they are once again unable to prevent him from escaping . While disappointed in their failure , Team 7 tries once again to find Sasuke , though after almost apprehending him they lose his trail and are forced to return home . As they search for Sasuke during Part II , Sakura learns of the various hardships Naruto faces : the Nine @-@ Tailed Demon Fox creature inside him which is being pursued by Akatsuki . Saddened by the impact both forces have had on his life , Sakura becomes protective of Naruto and tries to do whatever she can to help him overcome these obstacles . Sakura later resolves to kill Sasuke after understanding he is becoming a menace to the villages . However , when she fails to do it , Naruto decides to settle things with Sasuke himself . When a war against the remaining Akatsuki is announced , Sakura participates as a medical ninja . She moves to fighting side when Akatsuki releases the Ten Tails creature and she battles it alongside Naruto and Sasuke . 
 = = = Post Naruto = = = 
 After Sasuke is pardoned of his crimes , Sakura sees him off as he decides to travel the world in search for redemption and shows signs that he finally accepts her feelings for him . In the epilogue , set years after the end of the Fourth Ninja War , it is shown that Sakura and Sasuke had married and had a daughter , Sarada . Sasuke 's travels keep him away from their daughter , his whereabouts becoming a touchy subject for Sakura who insists over the years that Sasuke will return home once having completed his mission . After punching the ground in a fit of rage over Sarada asking if her and Sasuke are married , Sakura wakes to discover her daughter has left the village in search of Sasuke . By the time she catches up to the two , they are in the presence of Shin Uchiha , who Sakura attacks and in doing so is teleported away with to his hideout where she declines to assist him with her medical skills and pretends to be helpless in order to gain information on him , returning to the village after his defeat and seeing Sasuke off . She later serves as a spectator for Sarada while she participates in the Chunin Exams and saves both herself and other onlookers from falling debris , afterward healing Hinata . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Sakura has made several appearances outside of the Naruto anime and manga . She is in all ten of the featured films in the series : in the first movie , she battles <unk> <unk> , and later defeats him ; in the second she helps Naruto and Shikamaru Nara in their battle against Haido and his subordinates ; the third has Sakura battling the hired ninja <unk> , whom she defeats using her enhanced strength ; in the fourth , Sakura , alongside Naruto , Rock Lee , and Neji Hyuga are assigned to escort the maiden Shion ; in the fifth , Sakura is assigned alongside Naruto and Hinata Hyuga to help a girl , Amaru , and her sensei , <unk> , return to their village and in the process learning of an upcoming invasion of the Sky Country ; the sixth has Sakura with Naruto desperately following and trying to bring back their sensei , Kakashi who has gone on a suicide mission to prevent the Fourth Great Ninja World War ; in the seventh , Sakura and the rest of Team Kakashi are sent to capture a missing nin , <unk> ; in the eighth , Sakura assists in the battle against the demon Satori who has been released from the Box of Enlightenment ; in the ninth , Sakura and Naruto are transported to an illusion world by Obito Uchiha in which instead of Naruto 's parents , it were Sakura 's parents who had sacrificed their lives in preventing the Nine Tails from destroying Konoha as thus deemed as the village 's heroes ; and finally , in the tenth , Sakura , in her young adult years , sets out alongside Naruto , Sai , Shikamaru , and Hinata to rescue a kidnapped Hanabi Hyuga , Hinata 's younger sister . She is also present in all three of the original video animations produced for the series , helping Naruto and Konohamaru to find a four leaf clover in the first original video animation , joining her team in escorting a ninja named Shibuki to his village and helping him fight the missing @-@ nin that stole the village 's " Hero 's Water " in the second , and participating in a tournament in the third . A light novel titled Sakura Hiden : Thoughts of Love , Riding Upon a Spring Breeze , written by Tomohito <unk> and illustrated by Kishimoto , focuses on Sakura sometime after the events of The Last : Naruto the Movie , where she , now a celebrated medical ninja who is in the middle of opening a new mental clinic with Ino , becomes worried when a conspiracy that threatens to destroy Konoha is using Sasuke as a scapegoat , potentially ruining his chance at redemption amongst the villagers . 
 Sakura is a playable character in nearly all Naruto video games , including the Clash of Ninja series and the Ultimate Ninja series . In some games , she uses " Inner Sakura " in combat , as well as numerous different genjutsu . Naruto Shippūden : Gekitō Ninja Taisen ! EX marks the first appearance of Sakura in her Part II appearance in a video game , with the second one being Naruto Shippūden : Ultimate Ninja 4 . Meanwhile , Naruto Shippuden : Ultimate Ninja Storm 4 would mark the first appearance of Sakura post @-@ Part II ; specifically , her appearance in The Last : Naruto the Movie , set two years after Chapter 699 of the manga . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Although Sakura is the most recurring female character in Naruto , Masashi Kishimoto did not originally intend for Sakura to be the heroine of the series . Kishimoto attributes this to his being unable to draw good heroine characters , and fashioned Sakura as a girl who cannot understand men , the best example of a heroine he could come up with . Sakura 's creation is a result of Kishimoto 's desire to make a somewhat irritating character who was well @-@ intentioned . Despite these elements , Kishimoto is fond of Sakura , as he feels that many of her personality traits are common among all people , thus giving her a sense of real humanity . When asked in an interview if there is something about Sakura 's background that was never revealed , Kishimoto explains that he has never thought of Sakura as she is a " normal girl . " 
 When designing Sakura , Kishimoto focused on her silhouette and created a costume as simple as possible . This is a divergence from the other main characters of the series , whose costumes are very detailed . The leggings are the most notable aspect of her design , as they are meant to show that she is very active . At the start of the series her leggings extended below her knees and closely resembled trousers . As Part I progressed , the leggings became increasingly shorter and tighter . Similar to his inexperience with drawing heroines , Kishimoto lacked the experience needed to make Sakura " cute " when he first began drawing her . Although he implies that her appearance has become cuter since then , Kishimoto and much of the Naruto manga staff agree that Sakura was " far from cute " at the start of the series . 
 Sakura 's most well @-@ known physical characteristic is her broad forehead . Because of this , Kishimoto at times focuses too much effort on drawing it in scenes or promotional artwork where Sakura is featured prominently . This results in her forehead appearing too large . When designing Sakura in her Part II appearance , Kishimoto decided to change her clothes to a more lively karate suit style . The upper part , though , still has a <unk> feeling to it , so as to make her more feminine . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the Weekly Shōnen Jump character popularity polls , Sakura has many times been placed in the top ten and reached the top five once ; however , she was ranked twelfth in the most recent poll . In an interview , Kate Higgins , who does the voice acting for Sakura in the English dub , notes the development of Sakura in the series , remarking that she becomes a more complex character as she becomes more sensitive and caring . Numerous pieces of merchandise based on Sakura have been released , including a plush doll , key chains of her Part I and Part II appearances , and various character patches . 
 Several publications for manga , anime , video games , and other related media have provided praise and criticism on Sakura 's character . IGN writer A.E. Sparrow commented that every anime and manga benefited from a strong female presence that Sakura provided for the Naruto series , although characterizing her as " stereotypically girly . " In a review of episode 110 of the anime , IGN celebrated the culmination of the development of Sakura 's character throughout the series , and the growing out of the " girly " personality . GameSpot noted that Sakura 's character has largely been used in the series as a form of comic relief , as well as often stating the obvious . T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews considered Sakura to be a stereotypical echo of similar love interests of protagonists in other shōnen manga , and that she was not likable . On the other hand , she was also regarded as " an interesting character to throw into the mix [ of Naruto ] " by Mania Entertainment 's Dani Moure due to how her differences with Sasuke and Naruto help to balance Team 7 . In the book New Media <unk> and Participatory Popular Culture Across Borders , Amy A. Zenger notes Sasuke and Sakura 's relationship to be popular within fans of the series even though the former does not reciprocate to the latter 's feelings . 
 The character 's change in Part II has been praised for being one of the most developed ones in the series by Anime News Network 's Casey Brienza , as she has become stronger than her Part I counterpart which was considerably weaker than Naruto and Sasuke . This allows her to take a more active and appealing role in the series . Major praise has been given to her encounters with Sasori and Sasuke owing to her fighting skills and mature reactions , respectively . Sakura 's love confession to Naruto in later parts has been commented to be one of the deepest ones parts from its story arc , for bringing confusion regarding whether or not she is serious as she intended to stop Naruto 's suffering . It also came as a surprise as fans wondered what were Sakura 's real intention regarding Sasuke who had become a dangerous criminal during such time of the series . Jason Thompson believes Sakura 's feelings were well @-@ handled by Kishimoto . 
 Critic Yukari Fujimoto says that Sakura is an example of Naruto showing a conservative view of women . Ino , Sakura and Hinata place priority on love , treating it as more important than <unk> as ninja . Fujimoto states that during the ninja examinations , Sakura 's climactic fight with Ino , her love rival , is conducted on a purely physical level , contrasting this level of skill with the supernatural abilities displayed by her male classmates at this point . When the medical ninja Tsunade is introduced , Sakura takes on a daughter @-@ like role , learning to heal others from Tsunade , which Fujimoto regards as reinforcing a conservative idea of women - that women do not belong on the battlefield as warriors , only as nurses . 
 = The Disasters of War = 
 The Disasters of War ( Spanish : Los desastres de la guerra ) are a series of 82 prints created between 1810 and 1820 by the Spanish painter and printmaker Francisco Goya ( 1746 – 1828 ) . Although Goya did not make known his intention when creating the plates , art historians view them as a visual protest against the violence of the 1808 Dos de Mayo Uprising , the subsequent Peninsular War of 1808 – 14 and the setbacks to the liberal cause following the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy in 1814 . During the conflicts between Napoleon 's French Empire and Spain , Goya retained his position as first court painter to the Spanish crown and continued to produce portraits of the Spanish and French rulers . Although deeply affected by the war , he kept private his thoughts on the art he produced in response to the conflict and its aftermath . He was in poor health and almost deaf when , at 62 , he began work on the prints . They were not published until 1863 , 35 years after his death . It is likely that only then was it considered politically safe to distribute a sequence of artworks criticising both the French and restored Bourbons . In total over a thousand sets have been printed , though later ones are of lower quality , and most print room collections have at least some of the set . 
 The name by which the series is known today is not Goya 's own . His handwritten title on an album of proofs given to a friend reads : Fatal consequences of Spain 's bloody war with Bonaparte , and other emphatic caprices ( Spanish : Fatales <unk> de la <unk> guerra en España con Buonaparte , Y otros <unk> <unk> ) . Aside from the titles or captions given to each print , these are Goya 's only known words on the series . With these works , he breaks from a number of painterly traditions . He rejects the bombastic heroics of most previous Spanish war art to show the effect of conflict on individuals . In addition he abandons colour in favour of a more direct truth he found in shadow and shade . 
 The series was produced using a variety of intaglio printmaking techniques , mainly etching for the line work and aquatint for the tonal areas , but also engraving and drypoint . As with many other Goya prints , they are sometimes referred to as <unk> , but more often as etchings . The series is usually considered in three groups which broadly mirror the order of their creation . The first 47 focus on incidents from the war and show the consequences of the conflict on individual soldiers and civilians . The middle series ( plates 48 to 64 ) record the effects of the famine that hit Madrid in 1811 – 12 , before the city was liberated from the French . The final 17 reflect the bitter disappointment of liberals when the restored Bourbon monarchy , encouraged by the Catholic hierarchy , rejected the Spanish Constitution of 1812 and opposed both state and religious reform . Goya 's scenes of atrocities , starvation , degradation and humiliation have been described as the " prodigious flowering of rage " The serial nature in which the plates unfold has led some to see the images as similar in nature to photography . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Napoleon I of France declared himself First Consul of the French Republic on 18 February 1799 , and was crowned Emperor in 1804 . Because Spain controlled access to the Mediterranean , it was politically and strategically important to the French . The reigning Spanish sovereign , Charles IV , was internationally regarded as ineffectual , and his position at the time was threatened by his pro @-@ British heir , Crown Prince Ferdinand . Napoleon took advantage of Charles 's weak standing by suggesting the two nations conquer Portugal — the spoils to be divided equally between France , Spain and the Spanish Prime Minister , Manuel de Godoy , who would take the title " Prince of the Algarve " . Seduced by the French offer , Godoy accepted , failing to detect the true motivations of either Napoleon or Ferdinand , who both intended to use the invasion as a ploy , to seize power in Spain . 
 Under the guise of reinforcing the Spanish armies , 23 @,@ 000 French troops entered Spain unopposed in November 1807 . Even when their intentions became clear the following February , the occupying forces faced little resistance besides isolated actions in disconnected areas . In 1808 , a popular uprising — incited by Ferdinand 's supporters — saw Godoy captured and left Charles with no choice but to abdicate ; he did so on 19 March 1808 , allowing his son to ascend the throne as Ferdinand VII . Ferdinand had been seeking French patronage , but Napoleon and his principal commander , Marshal Joachim Murat , believed that Spain would benefit from rulers who were more progressive and competent than the Bourbons . They decided that Napoleon 's brother , Joseph Bonaparte , should be king . Under a pretext of mediation , Napoleon summoned Charles and Ferdinand to Bayonne , France , where they were coerced into relinquishing their rights to the throne in favour of Joseph . 
 Like other Spanish liberals , Goya was left in a difficult position after the French invasion . He had supported the initial aims of the French Revolution , and hoped its ideals would help liberate Spain from feudalism to become a secular , democratic political system . There were two conflicts being fought in Spain : the resistance against the French threat , and a domestic struggle between the ideals of liberal modernisation and the pre @-@ political incumbent ruling class . The latter divide became more pronounced — and the differences far more entrenched — following the eventual withdrawal of the French . 
 Several of Goya 's friends , including the poets Juan Meléndez Valdés and Leandro Fernández de <unk> , were overt afrancesados : the supporters ( or collaborators , in the view of many ) of Joseph Bonaparte . He maintained his position as court painter , for which an oath of loyalty to Joseph was necessary . However , Goya had an instinctive dislike of authority , and witnessed first @-@ hand the subjugation of his countrymen by French troops . During these years he painted little aside from portraits of figures from all parties , including an allegorical painting of Joseph Bonaparte in 1810 , Wellington from 1812 to 1814 , and French and Spanish generals . Meanwhile , Goya was working on drawings that would form the basis for The Disasters of War . He visited many battle sites around Madrid to witness the Spanish resistance . The final plates are testament to what he described as " el <unk> d <unk> " — the dismemberment of Spain . 
 = = Plates = = 
 Art historians broadly agree that The Disasters of War is divided into three thematic groupings — war , famine , and political and cultural allegories . This sequence broadly reflects the order in which the plates were created . Few of the plates or drawings are dated ; instead , their chronology has been established by identifying specific incidents to which the plates refer , and the different batches of plates used , which allow sequential groups to be divined . For the most part , Goya 's numbering agrees with these other methods . However , there are several exceptions . For example , plate 1 was among the last to be completed , after the end of the war . 
 In the early plates of the war grouping , Goya 's sympathies appear to lie with the Spanish defenders . These images typically show patriots facing hulking , anonymous invaders who treat them with fierce cruelty . As the series progresses , the distinction between the Spanish and the imperialists becomes ambiguous . In other plates , it is difficult to tell to which camp the distorted and disfigured corpses belong . Some of the titles deliberately question the intentions of both sides ; for example , Con <unk> ó sin ella can mean with or without reason , rightly or wrongly , or for something or for nothing . Critic Philip Shaw notes that the ambiguity is still present in the final group of plates , saying there is no distinction between the " heroic defenders of the Fatherland and the barbaric supporters of the old regime " . There have been a variety of English translations offered for the plate titles . In many instances , the satirical and often sardonic ambiguity and play on Spanish proverbs found in Goya 's carefully worded original titles is lost . 
 = = = War = = = 
 Plates 1 to 47 consist mainly of realistic depictions of the horrors of the war fought against the French . Most portray the aftermath of battle ; they include mutilated torsos and limbs mounted on trees , like " fragments of marble sculpture " . Both French and Spanish troops tortured and mutilated captives ; evidence of such acts is minutely detailed across a number of Goya 's plates . Civilian death is also captured in detail . Spanish women were commonly victims of assault and rape . Civilians often followed armies to battle scenes . If their side won , women and children would search the battlefield for their husbands , fathers and sons . If they lost , they fled in fear of being raped or murdered . In plate 9 , No <unk> ( They do not want to ) , an elderly woman is shown wielding a knife in defence of a young woman who is being assaulted by a soldier . 
 The group begins with <unk> <unk> de lo que ha de <unk> ( Gloomy premonitions of what must come to pass ) , in which a man kneels in the darkness with outstretched arms . The following plates describe combat with the French , who — according to art critic Vivien Raynor — are depicted " rather like Cossacks , bayoneting civilians " , while Spanish civilians are shown " <unk> the French . " Plates 31 to 39 focus on atrocities and were produced on the same batch of plates as the famine group . Others are based on drawings Goya had completed in his Sketchbook @-@ journal , in studies where he examined the theme of the grotesque body in relation to the iconography of the tortured or martyred one . In his India ink wash drawing We cannot look at this ( 1814 – 24 ) , he examined the idea of a humiliated inverted body with pathos and tragedy , as he did to comical effect in The Straw Mannequin ( 1791 – 92 ) . 
 Unlike most earlier Spanish art , Goya 's rejects the ideals of heroic dignity . He refuses to focus on individual participants ; though he drew from many classic art sources , his works pointedly portray the protagonists as anonymous casualties , rather than known patriots . The exception is plate 7 , Que valor ! ( What courage ! ) , which depicts Agustina de Aragón ( 1786 – 1857 ) , the heroine of Zaragoza , who brought food to the cannoneers at the city defensive walls during the siege in which 54 @,@ 000 Spaniards died . When all the cannoneers had been killed , Agustina manned and fired the cannons herself . Although it is agreed that Goya could not have witnessed this incident , Robert Hughes believes it may have been his visit to Zaragoza in the lull between the first and second phases of the siege that inspired him to produce the series . 
 = = = Famine = = = 
 The second group , plates 48 to 64 , detail the effects of the famine which ravaged Madrid from August 1811 until after Wellington 's armies liberated the city in August 1812 . Starvation killed 20 @,@ 000 people in the city that year . In these plates , Goya 's focus is directed away from the generalised scenes of slaughter of anonymous , unaligned people in unnamed regions of Spain ; he turns towards a specific horror unfolding in Madrid . The famine was a result of many factors . For example , French invaders and Spanish guerrillas and bandits blocked paths and roads into the city , hampering the provision of food . 
 Goya does not focus on the reasons for the shortage , nor does he apportion blame to any one party . Instead , he is concerned only with its effect on the population . Although the images in the group were based on the experience of Madrid , none of the scenes depict specific events , and there are no identifiable buildings to place the scenes . Goya 's focus is on the darkened masses of dead and barely alive bodies , men carrying corpses of women , and bereaved children mourning for lost parents . Hughes believes plate 50 , Madre <unk> ! ( Unhappy mother ! ) , to be the most powerful and poignant of the group . He suggests that the space between the small girl sobbing and the corpse of her mother represents " a darkness that seems to be the very essence of loss and <unk> " . This group of plates was probably completed by early 1814 . A scarcity of materials during the famine may have accounted for the freer application of aquatint in these prints ; Goya was sometimes forced to use defective plates or reuse old plates after they were burnished . 
 = = = Bourbons and clergy = = = 
 Plates 65 to 82 were named " <unk> <unk> " ( " emphatic caprices " ) in the original series title . Completed between 1813 and 1820 and spanning Ferdinand VII 's fall and return to power , they consist of allegorical scenes that critique post @-@ war Spanish politics , including the Inquisition and the then @-@ common judicial practice of torture . Although peace was welcomed , it produced a political environment that was in ways more repressive than before . The new regime stifled the hopes of liberals such as Goya , who used the term " fatal consequences " to describe the situation in his title for the series . Hughes refers to the group as the " disasters of peace " . 
 After the six years of absolutism that followed Ferdinand 's return to the throne on 1 January 1820 , Rafael del Riego initiated an army revolt with the intent of restoring the 1812 Constitution . By March , the king was forced to agree , but by September 1823 , after an unstable period , a French invasion supported by an alliance of the major powers had removed the constitutional government . The last prints were probably not completed until after the Constitution was restored , though certainly before Goya left Spain in May 1824 . Their balance of optimism and cynicism makes it difficult to relate them directly to particular moments in these rapidly moving events . 
 Many of these images return to the savage burlesque style seen in Goya 's earlier Caprichos . Plate 75 <unk> de <unk> ( Troupe of charlatans ) shows a priest with a parrot 's head performing before an audience of donkeys and monkeys . In plate 77 , a pope walking a tightrope was " prudently reduced " to a cardinal or bishop in the print published in 1863 . Some prints showing animal scenes seem to draw from a satirical verse fable by Giovanni Battista Casti , published in Italian in 1802 ; the Animal Farm of its day . In plate 74 , the wolf , representing a minister , quotes from the fable — " Miserable humanity , the fault is thine " — and signs with Casti 's name . The print " lays the blame for their rulers ' barbarity on the victims ' own acceptance of it " . 
 A number of plates in this group reveal a scepticism towards idolatry of religious images . There are instances in the group where early Christian iconography , in particular statues and processional images , are mocked and denigrated . Plate 67 , Esta no lo es <unk> ( This is no less curious ) , shows two statues carried by two stooped members of clergy . One statue is recognisable as the " Virgin of Solitude " . In Goya 's image , the statue is not carried vertically in processional triumph , rather it lies flat and undignified on the backs of the two almost crouched men . Shown horizontal , the object loses its aura , and becomes a mere everyday object . Art critics Victor <unk> and Anna Maria <unk> wrote , " It is in effect a deposed , toppled image , stripped of its powers and its connotations . " Goya is making a general statement : that the Church 's attempts to support and restore the Bourbons were " illusory , since what they proposed was nothing more than the adoration of an empty form " . 
 The published edition of The Disasters of War ends as it begins ; with the portrayal of a single , agonized figure . The last two plates show a woman wearing a wreath , intended as a personification of Spain , Truth , or the Constitution of 1812 — which Ferdinand had rejected in 1814 . In plate 79 , Murió la Verdad ( The Truth has died ) , she lies dead . In plate 80 , Si <unk> ? ( Will she live again ? ) , she is shown lying on her back with breasts exposed , bathed in a halo of light before a mob of " monks and monsters " . In plate 82 , Esto es lo <unk> ( This is the true way ) , she is again bare @-@ breasted and apparently represents peace and plenty . Here , she lies in front of a peasant . 
 = = Execution = = 
 Many of Goya 's preparatory drawings , mostly in red chalk , have survived and are numbered differently from the published prints . He produced two albums of proofs — among many individual proof impressions — of which only one is complete . The full album consists of 85 works , including three small Prisioneros ( " Prisoners " ) made in 1811 which are not part of the series . Goya gave the copy of the full album , now in the British Museum , to his friend Juan Agustín Ceán Bermúdez . It contains a title @-@ page inscription in Goya 's hand , is signed at the page edges , and has numbers and titles to the prints written by Goya . These were copied on the plates when the published edition was prepared in 1863 . By then , 80 had passed from Goya 's son , Javier — who had stored them in Madrid after his father left Spain — to the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando ( Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando ) , of which Goya had been director . Numbers 81 and 82 rejoined the others in the Academy in 1870 , and were not published until 1957 . 
 As the series progressed , Goya evidently began to experience shortages of good quality paper and copper plates , and was forced to take what art historian Juliet Wilson @-@ <unk> calls the " drastic step " of destroying two depicting landscapes , from which very few impressions had been printed . These were cut in half to produce four of The Disasters of War 's prints . Partly because of the material shortages , the sizes and shapes of the plates vary somewhat , ranging from as small as 142 × 168 mm ( 5 @.@ 6 × 6 @.@ 6 in ) to as large as 163 × 260 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 × 10 @.@ 2 in ) . 
 Goya completed 56 plates during the war against France , and these are often viewed as eye @-@ witness accounts . A final batch — including plate 1 , several in the middle of the series , and the last 17 plates — are likely to have been produced after the end of the war , when materials were more abundant . The titles of some plates , written beneath each , indicate his presence : I saw this ( plate 44 ) and One can not look ( plate 26 ) . While it is unclear how much of the conflict Goya witnessed , it is generally accepted that he observed first @-@ hand many of the events recorded in the first two groups . A number of other scenes are known to have been related to him second hand . It is known that he used a sketchbook when visiting battle sites ; at his studio , he set to work on copper plate once he had absorbed and assimilated meaning from his sketches . All drawings are from the same paper , and all the copper plates are uniform . 
 The titles of a number of scenes link pairs or larger groups , even if the scenes themselves are not related . Examples include plates 2 and 3 ( With or without reason and The same ) , 4 and 5 ( The women are courageous and And they are fierce ) , and 9 , 10 and 11 ( They do not want to , Nor these and Or these ) . Other plates show scenes from the same story or incident , as in plates 46 and 47 ( This is bad and This is how it happened ) , in which a monk is murdered by French soldiers looting church treasures ; a rare sympathetic image of the clergy , who are generally shown to be on the side of oppression and injustice . 
 The Bermúdez album was borrowed by the Academy for the 1863 edition . The original titles or captions were etched onto the plates , even with Goya 's spelling mistakes . One title was changed , one plate had work added , and the printing was carried out with much more ink on the plates ( producing " surface tone " ) than in the proofs , in accordance with mid @-@ century taste . The Bermúdez set is considered " uniquely important ... because it shows the series as Goya must have intended to publish it , and the way he intended the plates to be printed " . There is therefore a distinction between the published edition of 1863 , with 80 plates , and the full series in the album , which contains 82 ( ignoring the three small Prisioneros ) . 
 The Disasters of War was not published during Goya 's lifetime , possibly because he feared political repercussions from Fernando VII 's repressive regime . Some art historians suggest that he did not publish because he was sceptical about the use of images for political motives , and instead saw them as a personal meditation and release . Most , however , believe the artist preferred to wait until they could be made public without censorship . A further four editions were published , the last in 1937 , so that in total over 1 @,@ 000 impressions of each print have been printed , though not all of the same quality . As with his other series , later impressions show wear to the aquatint . The 1863 edition had 500 impressions , and editions followed in 1892 ( 100 ) before which the plates were probably steel @-@ faced to prevent further wear , 1903 ( 100 ) , 1906 ( 275 ) , and 1937 . Many sets have been broken up , and most print room collections will have at least some of the set . Examples , especially from later editions , are available on the art market . 
 In 1873 , Spanish novelist Antonio de Trueba published the purported reminiscences of Goya 's gardener , Isidro , on the genesis of the series. de Trueba claims to have spoken to Isidro in 1836 , when the gardener recalled accompanying Goya to the hill of Principe Pio to sketch the victims of the executions of 3 May 1808 . Goya scholars are sceptical of the account ; Nigel Glendinning described it as a " romantic fantasy " , and detailed its many inaccuracies . 
 = = Technique and style = = 
 Detailing and protesting the ugliness of life is a common theme throughout the history of Spanish art , from the dwarves of Diego Velázquez to Pablo Picasso 's Guernica ( 1937 ) . Reflecting on The Disasters of War , biographer Margherita Abbruzzese notes that Goya asks that the truth " be seen and ... shown to others ; including those who have no wish to see it .... And the blind in spirit stay their eyes on the outward aspect of things , then these outward aspects must be twisted and deformed until they cry out what they are trying to say . " The series follows a wider European tradition of war art and the examination of the effect of military conflict on civilian life — probably mostly known to Goya via prints . This tradition is reflected especially in Dutch depictions of the Eighty Years ' War with Spain , and in the work of 16th @-@ century German artists like Hans <unk> . It is believed Goya owned a copy of a famous set of 18 etchings by Jacques Callot known as Les Grandes <unk> de la guerre ( 1633 ) , which record the devastating impact on Lorraine of Louis XIII 's troops during the Thirty Years ' War . 
 The dead man in plate 37 , Esto es <unk> ( This is worse ) , forms a mutilated body of a Spanish fighter spiked on a tree , surrounded by the corpses of French soldiers . It is based in part on the Hellenistic fragment of a male nude , the Belvedere Torso by the Athenian " <unk> son of Nestor " . Goya had earlier made a black wash drawing study of the statue during a visit to Rome . In Esto es <unk> he subverts the classical motifs used in war art through his addition of a degree of black theatre – the branch piercing the body through the anus , twisted neck and close framing . The man is naked ; a daring factor for Spanish art in the 19th century , during the time of the Spanish Inquisition . Art critic Robert Hughes remarked that the figures in this image " remind us that , if only they had been marble and the work of their destruction had been done by time rather than sabres , neo @-@ classicists like Menges would have been in aesthetic raptures over them . " 
 Goya abandons colour in the series , believing that light , shade and shadow provide for a more direct expression of the truth . He wrote , " In art there is no need for colour . Give me a crayon and I will ' paint ' your portrait . " He uses line not so much to delineate shape but , according to art historian Anne Hollander , " to scratch forms into existence and then splinter them , as a squinting , half blind eye might apprehend them , to create the distorting visual detritus that shudders around the edge of things seen in agonized haste .... This ' graphic ' kind of clarity can be most sharp when it is most jagged . " The immediacy of the approach suited his desire to convey the primitive side of man 's nature . He was not the first to work in this manner ; Rembrandt had sought a similar directness , but did not have access to aquatint . William Blake and Henry Fuseli , contemporaries of Goya 's , produced works with similarly fantastical content , but , as Hollander describes , they muted its disturbing impact with " exquisitely applied linearity ... lodging it firmly in the safe citadels of beauty and rhythm . " 
 In his 1947 book on Goya 's etchings , English author Aldous Huxley observed that the images depict a recurrent series of pictorial themes : darkened archways " more sinister than those even of Piranesi 's Prisons " ; street corners as settings for the cruelty of the disparities of class ; and silhouetted hilltops carrying the dead , sometimes featuring a single tree serving as gallows or repository for dismembered corpses . " And so the record proceeds , horror after horror , <unk> by any of the splendors which other painters have been able to discover in war ; for , significantly , Goya never illustrates an engagement , never shows us impressive masses of troops marching in column or deployed in the order of battle .... All he shows us is war 's disasters and <unk> , without any of the glory or even picturesqueness . " 
 The Disasters of War is the second of Goya 's four major print series , which constitute almost all of his most important work in the medium . He also created 35 prints early in his career — many of which are reproductions of his portraits and other works — and about 16 lithographs while living in France . Goya created his first series , the 80 @-@ plate Caprichos , between 1797 and 1799 to document " the innumerable foibles and follies to be found in any civilized society , and ... the common prejudices and deceitful practices which custom , ignorance , or self @-@ interest have made usual . " Caprichos was put on sale in 1799 , but was almost immediately withdrawn after threats from the Inquisition . In The Disasters of War 's first two groups of prints , Goya largely departs from the imaginative , synthetic approach of Caprichos to realistically depict life @-@ and @-@ death scenes of war . In the last group , the Caprichos sense of the fantastic returns . 
 Between 1815 and 1816 , Goya produced the <unk> , a series of 33 bullfighting scenes , during a break from The Disasters of War . <unk> was not politically sensitive , and was published at the end of 1816 in an edition of 320 — for sale individually or in sets — without incident . It did not meet with critical or commercial success . In France , Goya completed a set of four larger lithographs , Los toros de <unk> ( The Bulls of Bordeaux ) . His final series , known as Los <unk> ( The Follies ) , <unk> ( Proverbs ) , or Sueños ( Dreams ) , contains 22 large plates and at least five drawings that are seemingly part of the series but which were never etched . All these were left in Madrid — apparently incomplete and with only a handful of proofs printed — when Goya went to France in 1823 . One plate is known to have been etched in 1816 , but little else is established about the chronology of the works , or Goya 's plans for the set . 
 Goya worked on The Disasters of War during a period when he was producing images more for his own satisfaction than for any contemporary audience . His work came to rely less on historical incidents than his own imagination . Many of the later plates contain fantastical motifs which can be seen as a return to the imagery of the Caprichos . In this , he is relying on visual clues derived from his inner life , rather than anything that could be recognised from real events or settings . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 In The Disasters of War , Goya does not excuse any purpose to the random slaughter — the plates are devoid of the consolation of divine order or the dispensation of human justice . This in part a result of the absence of melodrama or consciously artful presentation that would distance the viewer from the brutality of the subjects , as found in Baroque martyrdom . In addition , Goya refuses to offer the stability of traditional narrative . Instead , his composition tends to highlight the most disturbing aspects of each work . 
 The plates are set spaces without fixed boundaries ; the mayhem extends outside the frames of the picture plane in all directions . Thus , they express the randomness of violence , and in their immediacy and brutality they have been described as analogous to 19th- and 20th @-@ century photojournalism . According to Robert Hughes , as with Goya 's earlier Caprichos series , The Disasters of War is likely to have been intended as a " social speech " ; satires on the then prevailing " hysteria , evil , cruelty and irrationality [ and ] the absence of wisdom " of Spain under Napoleon , and later the Inquisition . It is evident Goya viewed the Spanish war with disillusionment , and despaired both for the violence around him and for the loss of a liberal ideal he believed was being replaced by a new militant unreason . Hughes believed Goya 's decision to render the images through etchings , which by definition are absent of colour , indicates feelings of utter hopelessness . 
 His message late in life is contrary to the humanistic view of man as essentially good but easily corrupted . He seems to be saying that violence is innate in man , " forged in the substance of what , since Freud , we have called the id . " Hughes believed that in the end there is only the violated emptiness of acceptance of our fallen nature : like the painting of Goya 's dog , " whose master is as absent from him as God is from Goya . " 
 The Disasters of War plates are preoccupied with wasted bodies , undifferentiated body parts , castration and female abjection . There are dark erotic undertones to a number of the works . Connell notes the innate sexuality of the image in plate 7 — Agustina de Aragón 's igniting a long cannon . The art historian Lennard Davis suggests that Goya was fascinated with the " erotics of dismemberment " , while Hughes mentions plate 10 in Los <unk> , which shows a woman carried in the grip of a horse 's mouth . To Hughes , the woman 's euphoria suggests , among other possible meanings , orgasm . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite being one of the most significant anti @-@ war works of art , The Disasters of War had no impact on the European consciousness for two generations , as it was not seen outside a small circle in Spain until it was published by Madrid 's Royal Academy of San Fernando in 1863 . 
 Since then , interpretations in successive eras have reflected the sensibilities of the time . Goya was seen as a proto @-@ Romantic in the early 19th century , and the series ' graphically rendered dismembered carcasses were a direct influence on Théodore Géricault , best known for the politically charged Raft of the Medusa ( 1818 – 19 ) . Luis Buñuel identified with Goya 's sense of the absurd , and referenced his works in such films as the 1930 L 'Âge d 'Or , on which he collaborated with Salvador Dalí , and his 1962 The Exterminating Angel . 
 The series ' impact on Dalí is evident in Soft Construction with Boiled Beans ( Premonition of Civil War ) , painted in 1936 in response to events leading to the Spanish Civil War . Here , the distorted limbs , brutal suppression , agonised expressions and ominous clouds are reminiscent of plate 39 , Grande <unk> ! Con muertos ! ( A heroic feat ! With dead men ! ) , in which mutilated bodies are shown against a backdrop barren landscape . 
 In 1993 , Jake and Dinos Chapman of the Young British Artists movement created 82 miniature , toy @-@ like sculptures modelled on The Disasters of War . The works were widely acclaimed and purchased that year by the Tate gallery . For decades , Goya 's series of etching served as a constant point of reference for the Chapman brothers ; in particular , they created a number of variations based on the plate Grande <unk> ! Con muertos ! . In 2003 , the Chapman brothers exhibited an altered version of The Disasters of War . They purchased a complete set of prints , over which they drew and pasted demonic clown and puppy heads . The <unk> described their " rectified " images as making a connection between Napoleon 's supposed introduction of Enlightenment ideals to early @-@ 19th @-@ century Spain and Tony Blair and George W. Bush purporting to bring democracy to Iraq . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Media related to The Disasters of War at Wikimedia Commons 
 = Asylum of the Daleks = 
 " Asylum of the Daleks " is the first episode of the seventh series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , broadcast on BBC One on 1 September 2012 . It was written by executive producer Steven Moffat and directed by Nick Hurran . 
 The episode features the alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) being captured by the Daleks , along with his companions Amy ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) , who are about to divorce . They are sent by the Daleks to the Asylum , a planet where insane Daleks are exiled , to enable the Asylum to be destroyed before the insane Daleks can escape . The Doctor is helped along the way by Oswin Oswald ( Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman ) , a woman whose spaceship had crashed on the planet a year ago and has been trapped there since then . 
 " Asylum of the Daleks " incorporates many of the different varieties of Daleks seen throughout the programme 's 50 @-@ year history , and was intended to make the Daleks scary again . Coleman makes her first appearance in Doctor Who in this episode , before returning as the Doctor 's new companion in the 2012 Christmas special ; her appearance was successfully kept a secret from the general public prior to the episode 's broadcast , as her casting as the new companion had already been announced . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 33 million viewers in the UK , and received attention on BBC iPlayer and international broadcasts . Critical reception was positive , though some critics questioned the circumstances behind Amy and Rory 's divorce . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Prequels = = = 
 A prequel was released to iTunes on 1 September 2012 , and to Zune and Amazon Video on 2 September 2012 . In the prequel , a hooded messenger informs the Doctor that a woman , Darla von Karlsen , requests his help for her daughter . The messenger provides space @-@ time coordinates to the planet Skaro , home planet of the Daleks . 
 In addition , Pond Life is an earlier five @-@ part mini serial prequel to this episode , which was released serially in the week leading up to the premiere . The fifth part hints at Amy and Rory 's divorce . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the ruins of Skaro , homeworld of the Daleks , the Doctor is approached by Darla von Karlsen , who requests his help in freeing her daughter from a Dalek prison camp . The Doctor 's suspicions are confirmed when Darla turns out to be a humanoid Dalek puppet and teleports him to the spaceship housing the Parliament of the Daleks . There he is reunited with a now divorced Amy and Rory , who have been similarly kidnapped from present @-@ day Earth , just after Rory has delivered Amy their divorce papers . The Doctor is surprised when , rather than exterminate him as he expects , the Daleks ask him for help . 
 The Dalek Prime Minister explains that they have a planet known as the Asylum - which the Parliament is currently orbiting - where they keep battle @-@ scarred Daleks that have gone insane . They are unwilling to kill these Daleks , as destroying such pure hatred would contravene their sense of beauty - something which sickens the Doctor . The Parliament has received a transmission of the Habanera Aria from the heart of the Asylum . The Doctor makes contact with the source of the transmission : a woman named Oswin Oswald , who states that she was Junior Entertainment Manager on the starliner Alaska , which crashed into the Asylum . Oswin claims to have been fending off Dalek attacks for a year , occupying herself by making soufflés , which intrigues the Doctor as he wonders where she got the milk and eggs . The crash had ruptured the planet 's force @-@ field , thus risking escape of the planet 's inmates . To prevent this , the Parliament wishes to destroy the planet remotely , but the force @-@ field is not ruptured sufficiently to allow that . The force @-@ field can only be deactivated from the planet itself , but afraid to face such a mission themselves , the Daleks task the Doctor , Amy and Rory with doing so . 
 The three are given bracelets to protect them from the planet 's <unk> cloud , which would convert them into Dalek puppets to serve the facility 's security systems , before being dropped through the force @-@ field breach onto the surface of the planet via a gravity tunnel . The Doctor and Amy land close to each other , and are discovered by Harvey , another survivor from the Alaska . Rory , however , is dropped to the bottom of a long shaft into the Asylum . There he accidentally awakens some of its inhabitants , but is guided to a safe room by Oswin , who has accessed the computers . Meanwhile , Harvey guides the Doctor and Amy to his Alaska escape pod , where he attacks them after being revealed as a Dalek puppet , converted by the <unk> cloud . A similar fate has befallen the corpses of other Alaska survivors , who re @-@ animate and attack the Doctor and Amy , stealing Amy 's nano @-@ field bracelet just before the pair are saved by Oswin , who also guides them to Rory through a hatch in the bottom of the pod . Now unprotected against the nanogenes , Amy begins to be converted , experiencing memory loss and hallucinations . 
 The Doctor guesses that the Daleks will destroy the planet as soon as he deactivates the force @-@ field , but he realises that Rory 's hideout is a <unk> , via which they can teleport onto the Dalek Parliament ship . Oswin agrees to deactivate the force @-@ field in return for the Doctor coming to rescue her . While the Doctor is gone , Rory tries to give Amy his bracelet . The Doctor had stated that love slows the Dalek puppet conversion , so Rory argues that he would be converted more slowly because he has always loved Amy more than she loves him , referring his 2000 @-@ year vigil in " The Big Bang " . Amy angrily replies that she loves him equally , but gave him up since she is unable to have children as a result of the events of " A Good Man Goes to War " . They realise that the Doctor had secretly slipped his bracelet onto her without telling them ( since as a Time Lord he is probably immune to the nanogenes ) to possibly get them to discuss their feelings . 
 The Doctor makes his way to Oswin , venturing through the " intensive care section " , which holds Daleks who survived encounters with him . They begin to re @-@ activate , but he is saved by Oswin , who deletes the Doctor from the Daleks ' collective telepathically @-@ shared knowledge , leaving them with no memory of him . The Doctor has never been able to hack into their hive intelligence , let alone remove anything from it , and is confused to how she has done so . The Doctor enters Oswin 's chamber , only to discover to his horror that she is really a Dalek . It turns out that Oswin had been captured by Daleks after the Alaska crashed on the Asylum and , to preserve her genius @-@ level intellect for Dalek use , was turned into a full Dalek rather than a standard puppet . Unable to cope with her conversion , her mind retreated into a fantasy of survival as a human . The Doctor had suspected that something was wrong from the beginning , however , as one of the things Oswin had kept herself busy with while in hiding had been making soufflés , which the Doctor noticed would be impossible to get the ingredients for . Oswin is nearly overcome by her Dalek personality at this revelation , but she still possesses human emotions and is unable to kill the Doctor . Her confrontation causes the Doctor to reflect that the Daleks ' many achievements — including their parliamentary discourse and newfound diversity — have been developed in fearful response to his threat to their existence . Oswin fulfils her promise of deactivating the force @-@ field , making her final request that the Doctor remember her as the human she once was : " Run . Run , you clever boy , and remember ... " . The Doctor returns to Amy and Rory , and they teleport back to the TARDIS just as the planet is destroyed . The Daleks fail to recognise the Doctor due to his removal from their hive intelligence . He jubilantly leaves the ship , and drops the reunited Amy and Rory back home . He then departs alone , delighting in the Dalek Parliament 's closing question to him : " Doctor Who ? " . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Some of the Daleks are survivors of previous encounters with the Doctor on Spiridon ( Planet of the Daleks ) , <unk> ( The Daleks ' Master Plan ) , <unk> ( Death to the Daleks ) , <unk> ( The Chase ) , and Vulcan ( The Power of the Daleks ) . The Special Weapons Dalek that appears in Remembrance of the Daleks appears in a cameo . In her opening speech , Darla refers to the Doctor faking his death in the episodes " The Impossible Astronaut " and " The Wedding of River Song " . The concept of nanogenes - microscopic machines - is mentioned in the two @-@ parter " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " , also written by Moffat . In the closing exchange in the Parliament , the Doctor refers to one of his nicknames as " The <unk> Storm " , first mentioned in the episode " The Parting of the Ways " . The final question of " Doctor who ? " , besides being a callback to the programme 's title , is the " question that must never be answered " that Dorium asks at the end of " The Wedding of River Song " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Executive producer Steven Moffat announced in 2011 that he intended to give a " rest " to the Daleks . The reason for the rest was that Moffat felt their frequent appearances made them the " most reliably <unk> enemies in the universe " . Moffat recalled that the Daleks were remembered for being scary , but due to their legacy as British icons they had become " cuddly " over the years and their true menace forgotten ; with " Asylum " he intended to make them scary again , reminding the audience of their intentions . He thought the best way to do this would be to show Daleks that were considered even madder than usual . Gillan admitted that she had not been scared of the Daleks before working on the episode . It is also the first Dalek story Moffat has written for the show ; he stated that he " couldn 't resist " the opportunity . 
 In March 2012 , it was announced that Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman would replace Gillan and Darvill as the next companion , first appearing in the 2012 Christmas special . It was Moffat 's idea to have her appear in " Asylum of the Daleks " as the character of Oswin ; it was not originally planned , and Coleman assumed it was part of her audition at first to see which character fitted her best . He intended to keep her appearance a secret , and thanked the press and fans that it was not leaked . Coleman 's scenes were filmed over six days on a closed set with a green screen which she acted to . Whether her later character was the same as Oswin was not confirmed at the time , but her appearance in " The Snowmen " makes it clear that there is a connection . Coleman played each version of the character as individuals with " trust that there would be a payoff " to her mystery . 
 " Asylum of the Daleks " was directed by Nick Hurran , who directed " The Girl Who Waited " and " The God Complex " of the previous series , as well as the fifth episode of the seventh series . " Asylum of the Daleks " contains many of the Dalek types that the Doctor has faced over the years , including the Special Weapons Dalek from the 1988 story , Remembrance of the Daleks . According to The Daily Telegraph , the production team located the remaining models of the various versions of the Daleks and shipped them to the studios in Cardiff Bay . This included a Dalek owned by Russell T Davies , Moffat 's predecessor . Executive producer Caroline Skinner knew Davies well and asked to borrow his replica . She stated that he was " thrilled " that it was canonised . The total number of different Daleks was around 25 , with models from 1963 to 2010 ; Skinner said that " there was just a real magic and sense of history about having them " . Moffat was concerned about how all the different Daleks would look together , but was pleased once he saw them ; he commented that the diversity made them look like a species , rather than identical robots . Many of the props were built from scratch . The snow scenes on the asylum planet were filmed in Spain during the production of " A Town Called Mercy " . Music featured in the episode are the " Habanera " from the Georges Bizet opera Carmen , which is used <unk> , and " Feel the Love " by <unk> is also featured . The Doctor Who logo in the title sequence featured the texture of a Dalek , in keeping with the varied " blockbuster " themes for each of the opening titles of the first half of the series . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Asylum of the Daleks " was preview screened at BFI Southbank on 14 August 2012 , and at the MediaGuardian Edinburgh International Television Festival during 23 – 25 August . On 25 August it was also screened in New York City and Toronto . The episode was broadcast to the public on 1 September on BBC One in the United Kingdom , BBC America in the United States , and on Space in Canada , and on 2 September on the ABC iView service . It premiered on 8 September 2012 on ABC1 in Australia , and on 13 September on Prime TV in New Zealand . 
 Overnight viewing figures for the UK showed that the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million viewers , the lowest overnight figure for a premiere episode of the revived series ; however , viewing patterns indicate that fewer people watch Doctor Who live , and it won its timeslot . The final consolidated rating was 8 @.@ 33 million viewers , ranking third for the week on BBC One . It was also the most @-@ viewed episode on BBC 's online iPlayer the day that it aired , and ended September in the number one spot , with 2 @.@ 2 million requests . " Asylum of the Daleks " achieved an Appreciation Index of 89 , the highest for a series opener of Doctor Who . 
 Viewing figures in the US on BBC America showed that the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 555 million viewers . It was the # 1 cable program in its timeslot , and the most watched telecast in the history of the network . The episode also garnered a 0 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . " Asylum of the Daleks " also was viewed 75 @,@ 000 times on ABC 's iView in Australia , a record audience , and 620 @,@ 000 watched the premiere on Space in Canada , Doctor Who 's second @-@ best ratings for the channel . On Prime in New Zealand , the episode attracted 171 @,@ 690 viewers , Doctor Who 's second @-@ highest rating on the channel and the highest rated show on the channel that day . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Asylum of the Daleks " received positive reviews from critics . Dan Martin of The Guardian praised Moffat 's " script packed with ace curveballs and <unk> dialogue " and Nick Hurran 's direction . Martin also notes that " more happened in the opening episode than has been covered in most recent two @-@ <unk> – and events were also dealt with in a lot more depth . " He also was pleased that the asylum setting could explore the Daleks while making it reminiscent of the classic series . The Daily Telegraph reviewer Gavin Fuller gave it four out of five stars , describing it as a " confident opener " and highlighting the concept and set design of the asylum . He particularly praised Coleman , whom he called " the star of the episode " . Michael Hogan , also writing for The Telegraph , gave " Asylum of the Daleks " a slightly higher rating of four and a half stars out of five , also commending Coleman as well as many details of the script . 
 Neela Debnath of The Independent commented positively on the show 's continuing exploration of the Daleks and the more " adult tone " , praising the performance of the three leads . Radio Times writer Patrick Mulkern stated that it " ticks all [ his ] boxes as a Doctor Who fan of more than 40 years standing " , describing it as " clever , fast , funny , eerie , surprising and tearjerking " . Nick Setchfield of SFX gave the episode five out of five stars , calling it a " strong , cinematically @-@ minded series opener " which succeeded in making the Daleks scary . He also praised Coleman 's debut , Smith 's performance , the special effects , and Amy and Rory 's emotional <unk> io9 reviewer Charlie Jane Anders noted that the plot " is mostly just an excuse to explore the Doctor 's ongoing relationship with the Daleks , and to show how sad it 's gotten " . Both Anders and Mulkern ( the latter citing a Doctor Who veteran , Katy Manning ) noted that Oswin 's fascination with eggs , required for making soufflés , is really just a mental trick to block out the " exterminate " ( " eggs @-@ terminate " ) conditioning ; this literary device is woven throughout the episode as a series of subtle hints , as Rory is confused by a dormant Dalek , initially misinterpreting him as saying " eggs " . 
 Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery also awarded it five stars , though he felt Amy and Rory 's breakup was " a little difficult to buy " as it was resolved quickly , even if the situation was " sensitively handled " and " deftly performed " . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club graded " Asylum of the Daleks " as a " B + " , also writing that he had a " quibble " with the Ponds ' marriage issue as it had not been foreshadowed , but ultimately felt that the episode " gets the season off to a great start while creating a sense that anything could happen " . IGN 's Matt Risley rated the episode as 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , finding that the " only downside " was that " it felt less a tale about the Daleks than an adventure that just happened to have them in it " . Maureen Ryan , writing for The Huffington Post , felt it was a " ripping start to the season " that redeemed the Daleks from " Victory of the Daleks " . While she commended Gillan and Darvill 's acting during Amy and Rory 's emotional confrontation , she noted that they were not a couple that would break up because of infertility . 
 The episode was nominated for the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , alongside " The Angels Take Manhattan " and " The Snowmen " . 
 = Kew Gardens – Union Turnpike ( IND Queens Boulevard Line ) = 
 Kew Gardens – Union Turnpike is an express station on the IND Queens Boulevard Line of the New York City Subway . Located at Union Turnpike and Queens Boulevard on the border of Kew Gardens and Forest Hills , Queens , it is served by the E and F trains at all times . Despite the station 's name , Union Turnpike forms the border between Kew Gardens and Forest Hills , and the station straddles that border , with multiple entrances located in each neighborhood . 
 = = History = = 
 The Queens Boulevard Line was one of the first lines built by the city @-@ owned Independent Subway System ( IND ) , and stretches between the IND Eighth Avenue Line in Manhattan and 179th Street and Hillside Avenue in Jamaica , Queens . The Queens Boulevard Line was in part financed by a Public Works Administration ( PWA ) loan and grant of $ 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . One of the proposed stations would have been located at Union Turnpike . A map from June 1925 shows a proposed alternate routing for the Queens Boulevard Line , that would have had the line turn via Kew Gardens Road after the Union Turnpike station instead of continuing via Queens Boulevard . After proceeding via Kew Gardens Road the line would have turned via Hillside Avenue . If this route were used , then Kew Gardens Road would have had to been widened to accommodate the four track line . This alternate routing would have provided for better access to Richmond Hill . In 1930 , in anticipation of growth due to the building of the Queens Boulevard Line , several blocks of land along Queens Boulevard were rezoned so that fifteen @-@ story apartment buildings could be built . 
 On December 31 , 1936 , the IND Queens Boulevard Line was extended by eight stops , and 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) , from its previous terminus at Roosevelt Avenue to Union Turnpike . The construction of the extension to Kew Gardens brought significant growth to Queens , specifically in Forest Hills and Kew Gardens . New apartment buildings were being built as a result of the subway line , and it transformed both Forest Hills and Kew Gardens from quiet residential communities of one @-@ family houses to active population centers . Following the line 's completion , there was an increase in the property values of buildings around Queens Boulevard . On April 24 , 1937 , the IND Queens Boulevard Line was extended four stops to 169th Street , with 169th Street and Parsons Boulevard serving as terminals . 
 On November 23 , 1941 , the <unk> bus operated by Green Bus Lines was extended to the station to provide a transfer to the subway . 
 In the 1970s , when the New York City Subway was at an all @-@ time low , following the general trend of a decrease in ridership , the amount of passengers using the Union Turnpike station decreased by 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 passengers . 
 As part of the MTA 's 1975 – 1981 transit program , station lighting at Kew Gardens was improved . 
 = = Station layout = = 
 This express station has four tracks and two island platforms . The F train stops on the outer local tracks at all times while the E stops on the center express tracks weekdays ( Manhattan @-@ bound from approximately 6 : 00 a.m. to 6 : 00 p.m. , Jamaica @-@ bound from 7 : 30 a.m. to 7 : 45 p.m. ) and on the outer tracks at all other times . During weekdays this is the easternmost transfer point between the E and F trains before they branch off toward their eastern terminals . 
 The platforms have teal blue columns , with yellow and black borders , as well as " Union Turnpike " text posted underneath on the platform walls . 
 The station is near the Queens Borough Hall , the Queens Criminal Court , and the Kew @-@ Forest School . It is also close to the Forest Hills Tower , which has housed Plaza College since 2014 and also contains administrative offices for FEMA ; it formerly housed the headquarters of JetBlue Airways and a public relations office for Con Edison , but the JetBlue office has since moved to the Brewster Building in Long Island City . At the east end of Queens Borough Hall on 82nd Avenue , a retired IRT <unk> , R33 car # <unk> , is on display with its <unk> set as the 7 train 's . The Redbird car was formerly a visitor center for the Queens Borough Hall , but the visitor center closed in 2015 due to low patronage , and the car is now used as a landmark and for movie shoots . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 This station is unusual in that its mezzanine is split in two halves . This is because at this location , Union Turnpike and the Jackie Robinson Parkway cross under Queens Boulevard but over the Queens Boulevard Line tracks ; the mezzanine is at the level of Union Turnpike , one half on either side , with no connection between the two outside of fare control . 
 Previously a grade @-@ level intersection , the underpass was constructed simultaneously with the subway station costing $ 250 @,@ 000 . The construction of the underpass with a subway station underneath was a massive undertaking . Three levels were required in order for the underpass and the subway station to be built . The upper level that was built was Queens Boulevard , which carries traffic east and west . The second level is an underpass that carries four lanes of Union Turnpike ( and now also the Jackie Robinson Parkway ) under the Boulevard . The tunnel is in between the two mezzanines and it would rest atop the roof of the subway station platform . 
 Several stairs lead down from sidewalk level to walkways on either side of the turnpike , which themselves lead to one of the mezzanines . Automobiles and buses were formerly allowed to drop off and pick up passengers along those walkways ( similar to stations on the IND Concourse Line ) , but car access is currently blocked . This was stopped because the cars caused traffic backups . The underpass is graded east to allow for natural drainage . The lower level contains the subway tracks , which are located about 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) below the underpass that carries the turnpike . 
 The eastern ( railroad north ) half of the mezzanine contains the station 's full @-@ time token booth . In the late 2000s , the MTA undertook a $ 13 @.@ 9 million refurbishment of the station , which was completed in July 2008 ; during that time , the station was upgraded with cube @-@ glass walls , as well as an elevator and ramp in this part of the mezzanine , which serves riders of the Q10 and <unk> buses . The elevator and ramp make the station wheelchair @-@ accessible and compliant with the guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . Other improvements that were part of the project included the addition of station agent booths that catered to wheelchair users , as well as new railings , station signs , station payphones , tactile yellow strips along the platforms , and platform fillings to reduce gaps between trains and platforms . 
 However , the western ( railroad south ) half , which serves riders of the heavily used <unk> bus line that runs along Union Turnpike , had its token booth closed and removed ( with signage indicating asbestos condemnation ) . A piece of artwork , Underground Skies @-@ Cloud Forest , that was designed by artist Krystyna <unk> @-@ <unk> and architect Anna <unk> was installed in this half of the station mezzanine . This was a project of the Polish American Artist Society , and it was sponsored by the MTA Arts for Transit / Creative Stations Program . 
 = = Track layout = = 
 A signal and switch tower is located at the north end of the northbound platform and is active only on weekdays . 
 There are two diamond crossovers near this station : one is located at the eastern end , for eastbound trains , and the other is located at the western end , for westbound trains . Each switch allow trains to cross @-@ over between the local and express tracks in the same direction . There is a punch box located at the eastern end of the Jamaica @-@ bound platform , allowing trains to continue along the Queens Boulevard line to 179th Street or to switch to the IND Archer Avenue Line . 
 East of the station there is a flying junction that connects to the Jamaica Yard via a wye that curves east from the yard towards Briarwood . A second side of the wye curves west to become a lower level of the subway just west of the station . The yard itself is situated just north of the station in the southern portion of Flushing Meadows – Corona Park , between the Grand Central Parkway and the Van Wyck Expressway . 
 = Peter Bynoe = 
 Peter Charles Bernard Bynoe ( born March 20 , 1951 ) is a Chicago attorney and businessman , formerly the only African @-@ American equity partner in the Chicago office of DLA Piper . In 1989 , he and his business partner Bertram Lee were the first African @-@ Americans to buy a controlling interest in a National Basketball Association ( NBA ) team , when they purchased a 37 @.@ 5 % share of the Denver Nuggets basketball team , and he is among the most influential minority figures in sports law and management . 
 Bynoe kept the Chicago White Sox from leaving Chicago by developing a New Comiskey Park ( now known as U.S. Cellular Field ) . He has become a negotiator for professional sports teams ' venues . In addition , he was involved in the development of the 1996 and 2012 Summer Olympics . Bynoe serves on several boards of directors . 
 = = Personal Background = = 
 Born in Boston , Massachusetts , Bynoe came from a well @-@ respected family . His father Victor C. Bynoe , had emigrated from his native Barbados at age 13 , and after graduating from Northeastern University with degrees in Civil Engineering and Law , became a successful attorney . ( At one point , he represented Boston Celtics star Bill Russell . ) At a time when few blacks were being promoted to important positions in government , Victor Bynoe was named to Boston Mayor John B. Hynes ' cabinet in 1950 , serving on the Street Commission . He later became commissioner of Veterans ' Services in Boston , and served on the board of the Boston Housing Authority . Peter 's mother Ethel was American ; she was praised by the black newspapers for her community involvement and volunteerism . Peter also had an uncle John Bynoe , who was active in the fight for civil rights , serving as the regional civil rights director for the United States Department of Health , Education and Welfare . 
 Bynoe attended William Lloyd Garrison Elementary School , and graduated from Boston Latin School in 1968 . He credited his parents with instilling high standards and expecting him to achieve in school . He also had a love of sports , growing up as a regular Boston Celtics and Boston Red Sox fan ; but although both teams had black players , racial relations in Boston at that time were still tense , and black fans like Bynoe were hesitant to attend the games . 
 Bynoe 's entire post @-@ secondary education was at Harvard University in Cambridge , Massachusetts . He obtained his bachelor 's degree cum laude at Harvard College in 1972 . He then received his master 's degree , an M.B.A. in 1976 , with an emphasis on finance and marketing , from Harvard Business School . His Juris Doctor from Harvard Law School had a focus on corporate planning and regulation . In addition to being admitted to the practice of law before the Illinois State Bar , Bynoe is a licensed real estate broker in Illinois . 
 In late November 1987 , he married Linda Jean Walker , who was then vice @-@ president of the fixed @-@ income division of Morgan Stanley in New York . 
 = = Business career = = 
 Bynoe began his professional career in 1976 at Citibank . After deciding he didn 't like working for a large corporation , he left New York and moved to Chicago in 1977 . He was hired by James Lowry , a management consultant whom he had met at Harvard . While with Lowry 's firm , Bynoe made a name for himself as someone who could break down racial barriers and get diverse groups to work together . He also became known for his work in minority business development . By 1982 , Bynoe passed the Illinois bar examination . He left Lowry and Associates in 1982 , at which time he founded and managed <unk> Ltd . , a business consulting firm . 
 His career path changed in 1987 when Harold Washington , whose election campaign he had worked for and contributed to , called Bynoe to inform him that the Chicago White Sox were threatening to leave Chicago . From January 1988 to June 1992 , Bynoe served as the Executive Director of the Illinois Sports Facilities Authority , a joint venture of the City of Chicago and State of Illinois , which gave him complete supervisory , planning and executing responsibility for the $ 250 million construction of New Comiskey Park for the Chicago White Sox , which was completed as scheduled and well within its budget . He also became known in Chicago for his business relationships with such influential sports stars as Michael Jordan , a former client with whom he remained friends . 
 In November 1989 , Bynoe and Bertram Lee purchased the Denver Nuggets . Lee and Bynoe had worked together in Boston years earlier , and Bynoe thought of Lee as a mentor . They had kept in touch , and were involved in several real estate dealings together . But the Nuggets deal was problematic from the start . In fact , it almost fell through because Lee did not have the resources everyone , Bynoe among them , thought he had . Media reports depicted Lee as a wealthy and successful businessman who was a financier with offices in two cities , and formerly part owner of Boston 's <unk> @-@ TV . But Lee and Bynoe were unable to meet the deadline to purchase the team from then @-@ owner Sidney <unk> . It would later be revealed that Lee had problems raising the needed capital . It was Bynoe , with the assistance of David Stern , Jay Pritzker , and Jerrold Wexler , who salvaged the transaction over the course of six months . The mainstream media reported that Lee and Bynoe were now the first two blacks to own a major sports team , but several of the black newspapers pointed out that the two men were actually managing general partners rather than owners , because the revised agreement to purchase the team meant they owned only a 37 @.@ 5 % stake in the team . Bynoe sold his interest in the franchise in August 1992 . Communications Satellite Corporation 's ( COMSAT ) Video Enterprises subsidiary put up 62 @.@ 5 % of the $ 65 million needed to purchase the Nuggets . 
 Bynoe was hired in 2008 by Chicago @-@ based Loop Capital Markets LLC . Bynoe serves as Managing Director of Corporate Finance . 
 In August 2013 , Bynoe left his executive role at Loop Capital Markets LLC to become CEO of Rewards Network , a company controlled by investor Sam Zell that offers loyalty programs for restaurants . 
 = = Other Achievements = = 
 Bynoe served as a consultant to the Atlanta @-@ Fulton County Recreation Authority and the Atlanta Committee to Organize the Olympic Games to plan the 85 @,@ 000 seat Centennial Olympic Stadium within a $ 210 million construction budget . The stadium has been converted to the 45 @,@ 000 seat Turner Field baseball stadium for the Atlanta Braves who use it under a lease agreement Bynoe negotiated . Bynoe became a partner at DLA Piper Rudnick Gray Cary LLP ( US ) in 1995 when he joined the firm and remains a member of the firm 's Executive Committee . Bynoe as head of DLA Piper 's Sports Facilities Practice Group negotiated new facilities for the Cincinnati Reds and Bengals , Miami Heat , Washington Redskins , Milwaukee Brewers , and Columbus Blue Jackets . He specialized in infrastructure projects and represented institutional clients such as : The Boeing Company , Sara Lee Corporation , Essence Communications , and CNA Insurance . Bynoe also was involved in the 2012 Summer Olympics , and was a backer of Barack Obama . 
 In addition , Bynoe is a Director of Frontier Communications Corporation [ 1 ] , Covanta Holding Company <unk> and Signature Group Holdings , Inc . [ 2 ] . He is a Trustee of the Goodman Theatre , the Rush University Medical Center and The CORE Center for the Research and Cure of Infectious Diseases . He formerly served as Chairman of the Chicago Plan Commission Chicago Plan Commission , the Chicago Landmarks Commission Chicago Commission Landmarks , and the Illinois Sports Facilities Authority , and was a director of <unk> Communications and Blue Chip Broadcasting . Bynoe has been a director of Covanta since 2004 . In 2007 , Bynoe was announced as a director for Citizens Communications ( which later changed its name to Frontier Communications ) . In the past , Bynoe has been a member of the Harvard Board of Overseers . He has also served as a director for Uniroyal Technology Corporation , <unk> Communications ( acquired by Clear Channel Communications ) , J & G Industries , Huffman @-@ Koos , Inc . , the River Valley Savings Bank , and Blue Chip Broadcasting ( acquired by Radio One , Inc ) . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Bynoe has been designated an Illinois " Super Lawyer " for 2005 and 2006 based on research jointly conducted by Law & Politics and Chicago magazines . 
 = Jamila dan Sang Presiden = 
 Jamila and the President ( Indonesian : Jamila dan Sang Presiden ) is a 2009 Indonesian film directed by Ratna Sarumpaet and starring Atiqah Hasiholan and Christine Hakim . It follows the story of a prostitute sentenced to death for killing a government minister . 
 The film was adapted from a stage play entitled Pelacur dan Sang Presiden ( The Prostitute and the President ) , which Sarumpaet had written after receiving a grant from UNICEF to study child trafficking trends in Indonesia and promote awareness of the problem . In preparing the script , she spent several months interviewing prostitutes in several cities ; the film itself spent three years in production and featured much of the same cast and crew as the original play . 
 Released on 30 April 2009 , the film received mixed to positive reception in Indonesia . Internationally the film featured in several film festivals and won awards in France , Italy , and Taiwan . It was submitted to the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film , but not nominated . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jamila and the President opens with narration from Jamila ( Atiqah Hasiholan ) , a victim of human trafficking , followed by several scenes showing her living a glamorous yet unfulfilling night life . After hearing a news report that a government minister , Nurdin ( Adjie Pangestu ) , has been murdered , Jamila surrenders herself to the police . This surprises her would @-@ be boyfriend , Ibrahim ( Dwi Sasono ) , who feels badly for Jamila and begins working towards freeing her . Under the orders of the president , Jamila is placed in a prison outside Jakarta , where she receives rough treatment at the hands of the guards and warden , Ria ( Christine Hakim ) . 
 In the prison , Ria reads Jamila 's diary and learns her backstory . Jamila was sold by her mother to a middleman , who then sold her to a rich family . While living with the family , Jamila is raped by both the father and son in succession ; Jamila kills the son and runs away , while the mother ( Jajang C. Noer ) , aware of their actions , kills her husband . Jamila becomes a worker at a market , but once again must escape when she learns that some local men plan to rape her . She escapes to a discothèque , and when it is raided by the police she is thought to be a prostitute and arrested . After being released , Jamila is raised by a kind @-@ hearted prostitute named Susi ( Ria Irawan ) , who was also caught in the raid . 
 In the present day , several groups are demanding that Jamila be given the death sentence . One male guard , ( Surya <unk> ) , takes pity on Jamila and tries to help her . However , Jamila ignores him . Ria , although slowly becoming more sympathetic to Jamila , gets into an argument with her over Nurdin 's murder ; this results in Jamila being placed in isolation . 
 Several days later , the court finds Jamila guilty of murder and sentences her to death , a sentence which will be carried out in 36 hours . Ria visits Jamila in her cell to check on her , and Ria explains that she intends to ask the president for a stay . Jamila refuses , then tells Ria about her experience looking for her sister Fatimah in Borneo , how she killed the man who had put Fatimah in a brothel but was unable to find her sister . 
 The day before Jamila 's execution , Ibrahim meets with Susi , who tells him about Jamila 's romantic involvement with Nurdin . Jamila became pregnant with Nurdin 's child and insisted that he take responsibility , but instead Nurdin told her he was marrying someone else and humiliated her in public . When the two met in a hotel , Nurdin threatened Jamila with a pistol ; in self @-@ defence , Jamila killed him with the pistol . In the modern day , Jamila walks towards her execution ; the president has not responded to the request for stay . The screen fades to black as a gunshot goes off , and afterwards , statistics about child trafficking and prostitution are shown . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jamila and the President was directed by Ratna Sarumpaet , a women 's rights activist . The film , Sarumpaet 's directorial debut , was based on a theatrical drama she had previously made entitled Pelacur dan Sang Presiden ( The Prostitute and the President ) , which was put on in 2006 in five cities by Satu Merah Panggung Theatre Troup . She was inspired write the story in 2005 after UNICEF approached her to do a survey of child trafficking in Southeast Asia and promote awareness of the problem . While writing the original script , Sarumpaet interviewed prostitutes in Surabaya , Surakarta , Garut , and Borneo over a period of six months . This research carried over into the film . 
 Sarumpaet cast her daughter , Atiqah Hasiholan , in the lead role . Initially Hasiholan viewed her character as a " regular slutty prostitute " , but after thinking of the character more thoroughly , she considered Jamila a " victim of life " . To better play her character , Hasiholan visited several prostitution districts and spoke with sex workers there , learning their motivations ; she drew the conclusion that poverty was a deciding factor . Senior actress Christine Hakim – a close friend of Sarumpaet 's – was cast as Ria ; it was her first antagonistic role . Sarumpaet 's brother Sam was assistant director , and helped calm his sister when technical glitches occurred . 
 Much of the cast and crew , including star Hasiholan , had previously acted in the stage play . Sarumpaet reported that the film cost <unk> billion ( US $ 800 @,@ 000 ) to produce ; She originally had difficulty finding sponsors . The film spent three years in production . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Sarumpaet described the film as being " about how awful the effect of poverty on human ’ s morality and lives is " ; in an interview with Tempo magazine , she stated that she did not have a political message , but intended to just show the facts . <unk> Yazid , in a review for The Jakarta Post , wrote that the film was of the " women @-@ who @-@ suffer @-@ continuously " genre , common in Indonesian cinema ; he compared the theme to Ponirah Terpidana ( Ponirah is Convicted ; 1984 ) , starring Hakim and Slamet Rahardjo . <unk> S. <unk> , also writing for The Jakarta Post , described the film as depicting " the grim reality of those whose existence [ viewers ] are rarely aware of : victims of child and women trafficking . " 
 = = Style = = 
 The majority of the film takes place inside the prison . A review for the Jakarta Globe notes that the film has a " spartan feel " , as supported by its cinematography . It uses periods of silence to evoke an emotional response from viewers , with flashbacks used to drive the story . The president is never shown ; instead , he is represented by long shots of Merdeka Palace , a presidential residence in Jakarta . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Jamila and the President was originally intended to be released on 10 December 2007 , in commemoration of Human Rights Day . However , due to production difficulties it was delayed for almost two years . The film premiered at FX Plaza in Jakarta on 27 April 2009 , with a wide release three days later . It received mixed reception . Yazid wrote that the film was " easily one of the most noteworthy Indonesian films in recent years " and praised Hakim 's acting ; however , he found Hasiholan 's acting overly theatrical . A review for the Jakarta Globe described the film as " engaging because of its dramatic subject and well @-@ measured pace " , but ultimately leaving the audience with unanswered questions due to the number of characters introduced . Marcel Thee and Armando Siahaan , writing in the same newspaper in December 2009 , selected Jamila and the President as the best Indonesian film of 2009 , noting that the titular character 's struggle " provides an emotional roller @-@ coaster ride . " <unk> <unk> , writing for Tempo , stated the film came across as without a climax , with Hasiholan 's acting at times overly theatrical and Hakim 's coming across flat . Eko <unk> Sofyan , reviewing for Kompas , wrote that the film reminded viewers that poverty and prostitution were still major issues , and had to be dealt with before Indonesia could further develop . 
 In Indonesia , Jamila and the President was nominated for several awards . At the 2009 Indonesian Film Festival , the film received six nominations , for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Editing , Best Sound Arrangement , and Best Artistic Arrangement ; it did not win any . Internationally , Jamila and the President was screened at several film festivals , including in Bangkok , Hong Kong , and Australia ; at the Asiatica Film <unk> in Rome , it won a <unk> Award . It later won an award for best editing at the 53rd Asia Pacific Film Festival in Taipei , Taiwan . Jamila and the President was chosen by the Indonesian Filmmakers and Television Association to represent Indonesia at the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film . However , the film was not nominated . At the Vesoul International Film Festival of Asian Cinema in Vesoul , France , Jamila and the President won two awards , the Prix de Public and Prix Jury <unk> ; according to The Jakarta Post , the film shocked young French audiences unused to child trafficking , a common subject in Southeast Asian cinema . 
 = The Understudy ( Inside No. 9 ) = 
 " The Understudy " is the fifth episode of British dark comedy anthology series Inside No. 9 . It was first broadcast on 5 March 2014 on BBC Two . The episode was written by and starred Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , and guest @-@ starred Lyndsey Marshal , Julia Davis , Rosie Cavaliero , Roger Sloman , Di <unk> , Richard <unk> , Bruce Mackinnon and Jo Stone @-@ Fewings . Pemberton plays actor Tony , who is starring as Macbeth in a West End production of Shakespeare 's Macbeth , and Shearsmith plays Jim , Tony 's understudy . The plot of " The Understudy " partially mirrors the story of Macbeth , exploring the theme of power and the lives of actors . 
 The episode took longer to write than any other in the first series of Inside No. 9 , and was redrafted several times owing to the writers ' uncertainty as to whether the characters should be amateurs or professionals . It is presented in five separate acts , mirroring theatrical norms . Critics responded positively to " The Understudy " , praising it as an improvement upon the previous week 's episode " Last Gasp " . They stressed the links between " The Understudy " and Macbeth , but said that viewers would not need to be familiar with Shakespeare 's work in order to enjoy the episode . On its first showing , " The Understudy " was watched by 720 @,@ 000 viewers ( 4 @.@ 1 % of the market ) ; this was the lowest viewership of the series so far . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writers Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , who had previously worked together on The League of Gentlemen and Psychoville , took inspiration for Inside No. 9 from " David and Maureen " , episode 4 of the first series of Psychoville . This episode , in turn , was inspired by Alfred Hitchcock 's Rope . " David and Maureen " took place entirely in a single room , and was filmed in only two shots . At the same time , the concept of Inside No. 9 was a " reaction " to Psychoville , with Shearsmith saying that " We 'd been so involved with labyrinthine over @-@ arcing , we thought it would be nice to do six different stories with a complete new house of people each week . That 's appealing , because as a viewer you might not like this story , but you 've got a different one next week . " As an anthology series with horror themes , Inside No. 9 also pays homage to Tales of the Unexpected , The Twilight Zone , and Alfred Hitchcock Presents . 
 As the format of Inside No. 9 requires new characters each week , the writers were able to attract actors who may have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . In addition to Pemberton and Shearsmith , who played lead actor Tony and understudy Jim respectively , the episode starred Lyndsey Marshal as Laura , Julia Davis as Felicity , Rosie Cavaliero as Kirstie , Roger Sloman as Bill , Di <unk> as Jean , and Richard <unk> as Nick . In addition , Bruce Mackinnon provided the voice of an actor playing Malcolm in Macbeth , and Jo Stone @-@ Fewings provided the voice of an actor playing Macduff . 
 The episode was written and is presented in a five @-@ act structure to mirror theatrical norms . This allowed for jumps in time within the episode , as well as marking it out from others in the series . The plot is essentially based on Macbeth , leading Pemberton to suggest that the episode might be used " on an O Level syllabus " in the future . Unlike other episodes in the series , " The Understudy " did not take place in a family home , and for this reason , the writers were keen not to alienate viewers . After the initial idea of a group of characters backstage at a production of Macbeth , the writers re @-@ scripted several times , unsure of whether the characters should be amateurs , members of a touring company or professionals . This meant that the script @-@ writing took longer for " The Understudy " than for any other episode of the first series of Inside No. 9 . The script eventually settled on actors at a West End theatre . For Shearsmith , it mattered that the actors had a " real chance " and that there were high stakes . The episode , he suggested , reflected happenings in a real theatre , rather than a television version . Pemberton said that the West End setting allowed for the " agonising " scene of a post @-@ performance visit from audience members . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Act 1 
 Tony Warner is starring in the lead role of Macbeth at the Duke of Cambridge Theatre . Coming back to his dressing room after a performance , he is visited by his understudy Jim . When invited to attend the understudy rehearsal , Tony makes an excuse about having a voiceover job at that time ; and the pair are joined by Tony 's neighbours Jean and Bill , who have just watched Tony 's performance . Tony leaves with them , and Jim puts on Tony 's prop crown , imagining himself in the leading role . 
 Act 2 
 Before the understudy rehearsal , Jim 's fiancée Laura ( the understudy for Lady Macbeth ) helps him learn lines in Tony 's dressing room . Company manager Felicity arrives and scolds them for using the room . While Jim is absent , Felicity flirts with Laura . Laura asks Tony 's dresser , Kirstie , what he earns , before opening Tony 's <unk> to see for herself . She is determined for Jim to appear as Macbeth , which would allow them to save for their wedding . Laura cuts herself on a pin that Kirstie left in the Lady Macbeth dress , and after she and Kirstie leave the room , Jim sees a drop of blood on the floor grow into a large puddle . When he looks again , it has gone . 
 Act 3 
 During a Friday night performance , Tony is drunk as he comes backstage during the interim between his part in Acts IV and V. Felicity is angry that Tony , a recovering alcoholic , got drunk again ; she has had to issue several refunds because of his drunken behaviour on stage . She sends him into the shower to sober up , and summons Jim . He is unsure whether he knows the lines well enough to go onstage in Tony 's place , but Laura encourages him to take the chance . As she hands him a prop dagger , he sees blood all over the dagger and her hands . Tony comes out of the shower and wants to finish the performance , so Jim allows him to go . Laura berates Jim for his lack of ambition . She is left alone in the dressing room and hears noises coming from the shower ; but when she goes to look , it is empty . A scream is then heard from the stage . 
 Act 4 
 Jim has taken over the role of Macbeth . It is mentioned that Tony fell off the battlements on stage , and is in hospital . Felicity has been sacked after she was accused of sexual harassment . Laura arrives to congratulate Jim , and he thanks her for encouraging him . He is distant , eventually asking her to leave him to prepare alone . As he puts on his crown in front of the mirror , he hears the sound of whispering , and sees blood pouring from both his eyes and the mirror . 
 Act 5 
 Nineteen months later , Jim is a famous actor playing the title role in Richard III at the theatre , using the same , now redecorated , dressing room . A paralysed Tony comes backstage to visit him and talks about how far Jim 's career has come . Jim broke up with Laura and has not seen her since his run in Macbeth . After Tony leaves , Kirstie arrives to see Jim . She is now Tony 's full @-@ time carer . She has watched Jim 's performance every day of the week , and says she knew that he just needed " a little push " to achieve greatness . She tells him that Laura committed suicide by slitting her wrists in the dressing room 's shower . Jim did not know about this , because he was overseas filming a role in Game of Thrones at the time . He believes that Laura pushed Tony off the battlements and could not live with her guilt . Kirstie reveals that she herself is the one who pushed Tony , and spiked his juice with alcohol backstage . She also got Felicity sacked because Felicity would not let Jim perform as Macbeth . Kirstie is wearing the engagement ring that she took from Laura 's corpse . She tells Jim that she is waiting for him " in the wings ... like an understudy " . She leaves , and as Jim prepares to go onstage , he sees bloody visions of Laura 's death . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics responded very positively to " The Understudy " , with several drawing attention to the improvement over " Last Gasp " , the previous week 's episode . Bruce Dessau called it a " striking return to form " on his website , and Gerard Gilbert , writing in The Independent , called it " a return to form " after the previous week 's " misfire " . Writers in The Sunday Times called the episode " [ a ] nother exquisite short story " , Ben Lawrence , writing in the Daily Telegraph , called it a " gloriously <unk> tale " , and John Robinson , writing for The Guardian , described it as an " excellent instalment " of the series . He identified the themes of the episode by calling it " a spooky and highly satirical take on actors , Shakespeare and power " . 
 Critics stressed that a knowledge of Macbeth was not necessary to enjoy the episode . " Knowing the text " , suggested Jack Seale of Radio Times , " will take you only halfway and , in any case , the clever plot is really just a vehicle for characters sketched fully in only a few lines , and a torrent of fruity <unk> gags about jealousy , superstition and stage @-@ hogging hams . " Dessau agreed , saying that " [ y ] ou don 't need to be a literary scholar to get the gags " . Critic Jane Simon , writing in the Daily Mirror , suggested that " even a hazy knowledge of the Scottish play will tip you the wink what might lie ahead " . David Chater in The Times and an anonymous reviewer in the Sunday Herald both praised the plot 's divergence from Shakespeare , with the latter saying that " the script cleverly offers parallels with The Scottish Play , just to whip them away again " . Dessau felt that the complex plot meant that the guest stars did " not get quite as much screen time as they deserve " , but that this was no complaint , as it was " very much Pemberton and Shearsmith 's instalment and they are both brilliant " . 
 On its first showing , " The Understudy " was watched by 720 @,@ 000 viewers ( 4 @.@ 1 % of the market ) . This was lower than " Last Gasp " , the previous episode , which in turn had had the lowest viewership of the series on its first airing , with 872 @,@ 000 viewers ( 4 @.@ 9 % of the audience ) . " The Understudy " was immediately preceded in most listings by Line of Duty , which was watched by a series high of 2 @.@ 3 million viewers ( 9 @.@ 9 % of the audience ) . 
 = Henry ( bishop of Finland ) = 
 Henry ( Finnish : Henrik ; Swedish : Henrik ; Latin : Henricus ; died c . 20 January 1156 ) was a medieval English clergyman . He came to Sweden with cardinal Nicholas <unk> in 1153 and was probably designated to be the new Archbishop of Uppsala , but the independent church province of Sweden could be established only in 1164 after the civil war was over , and Henry would have been sent to organize the Church in Finland , where Christians had existed already at least two centuries . According to legend , he entered Finland together with King Eric the Saint of Sweden and died as a martyr , becoming a central figure in the local Roman Catholic Church . However , the authenticity of the accounts of his life , ministry , and death are widely disputed and there are no historical records of his death nor existence . 
 Together with his alleged murderer Lalli , Henry remains one of the most recognized people from the early history of Finland . His feast is celebrated by the majority Lutheran Church of Finland , as well as by the Roman Catholic Church of Finland . He is commemorated in the liturgical calendars of several Protestant and Anglican churches . 
 = = Legend = = 
 = = = Vita and miracula = = = 
 The legend of Bishop Henry 's life , or his Vita , was written at the end of the 13th century . It contains little concrete information about Henry . He is said to have been an English @-@ born bishop in Uppsala at the time of King Eric the Saint of Sweden in the mid @-@ 12th century , ruling the peaceful kingdom with the king in heavenly co @-@ existence . To tackle the perceived threat from the non @-@ Christian Finns , Eric and Henry were forced to battle them . After they had conquered Finland , baptized the people and built many churches , the victorious king returned to Sweden while Henry ( Henricus ) remained with the Finns , more willing to live the life of a preacher than that of a high bishop . 
 The legend draws to a conclusion as Henry attempted to give a canonical punishment to a murderer . The accused man became enraged and killed the bishop , who was thus considered to be a martyr . 
 The legend strongly emphasizes that Henry was a Bishop of Uppsala , not a Bishop of Finland which became a conventional claim later on , also by the church itself . He stayed in Finland out of pity , but was never appointed as a bishop there . The legend does not state whether there had been bishops in Finland before his time or what happened after his death ; it does not even mention his burial in Finland . The vita is so void of any concrete information about Finland that it could have been created anywhere . The Latin is scholastic and the grammar is in general exceptionally good . 
 Henry 's Vita is followed by the more local miracula , a list of eleven miracles that various people were said to have experienced sometime after the bishop 's death . With the exception of a priest in Skara who suffered a stomach ache after mocking Henry , all miracles seem to have taken place in Finland . The other miracles , which usually occurred following prayer to Bishop Henry , were : 
 The murderer lost his scalp when he put the bishop 's hat on his head 
 The Bishop 's finger was found the next Spring 
 A boy was raised from the dead in <unk> 
 A girl was raised from the dead in <unk> 
 A sick woman was healed in <unk> 
 A Franciscan called Erlend had his headache healed 
 A blind woman got back her eyesight in <unk> 
 A man with a paralyzed leg could walk again in <unk> 
 A sick girl was healed 
 A group of fishermen from Kokemäki survived a storm 
 Most versions of Henry 's legend only include a selection of these miracles . 
 = = = Development of the legend = = = 
 Henry and his crusade to Finland were also a part of the legend of King Eric . However , the oldest surviving version of Eric 's legend is from about 1270 , yet there is no information on either Henry or the crusade . The appendix of the early 13th century <unk> , which has a short description of Eric 's memorable deeds , also makes no reference to Henry or the crusade . Henry and the crusade are both fully present only in a version of Eric 's legend that dates to 1344 . Similarities in the factual content and phraseology regarding the common events indicate that either one of the legends has acted as the model for the other . Henry 's legend is commonly considered to have been written during the 1280s or 1290s at the latest , for the consecration of the Cathedral of Turku in 1300 , when his alleged remains were translated there from Nousiainen , a parish not far from Turku . Yet , even as late as in the 1470s , the crusade legend was ignored in the Chronica regni <unk> , a chronicle of the history of Sweden , written by <unk> Olai , the Canon of the Uppsala cathedral . 
 Noteworthy in the development of the legend is that the first canonically elected Bishop of Turku , a certain Johan ( 1286 – 1289 ) of Polish origin , was elected as the Archbishop of Uppsala in 1289 , after three years in office in Turku . The Swedish bishops of Finland before him , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , had apparently been selected by the King of Sweden . Related to the new situation was also the appointment of the king 's brother as the Duke of Finland in 1284 , which challenged the Bishop 's earlier position as the sole authority on all local matters . Johan was followed in Turku by Bishop Magnus ( 1291 – 1308 ) , who had been born in Finland . 
 The first mention of Bishop Henry in historical sources is from 1298 , when he is mentioned along with king Eric in a document from a provincial synod of Uppsala in <unk> . The first mention of Henry of Uppsala being the patron saint of Turku cathedral is from 14 August 1320 , when he is mentioned as the second patron of the cathedral after Virgin Mary . So when he is later addressed by Pope Boniface IX as the patronus of the Cathedral of Turku along with the Virgin Mary , it is actually from the year 1391 . Boniface also called him a " saint " . In 1291 a longish document by the cathedral chapter makes no reference to Henry even though it mentions the cathedral and election of the new bishop many times . A papal letter by Pope Nicholas IV from 1292 has the Virgin Mary as the sole <unk> in Turku . The legend itself is first referred to in a letter by Archbishop of Uppsala in 1298 . Eric and Henry are mentioned together as martyrs who needed to be prayed to for the sake of the situation in Karelia , thus associating their alleged crusade to Finland with the new expeditions against Novgorod . The war between Novgorod and Sweden for the control of Karelia had started in 1293 . The first certain appearance of Henry 's image in the seal of the Bishop of Turku is from 1299 . 
 Thus , Henry 's veneration as a saint and his relation to King Eric seem to have emerged in the historical record at the same time in the mid @-@ 1290s with strong support from the church . This correlates with the start of the war against Novgorod . Sources do not support the popular assumption , that Henry 's cult had developed in Nousiainen and gradually spread among ordinary people before official adoption . Although Nousiainen had Henry as its patronus , that is first mentioned only in 1452 . Still in 1232 , the church in Nousiainen was consecrated to the Virgin Mary only . 
 Some sources claim that Henry was canonized in 1158 , but this information has been traced to a late publication by Johannes <unk> in 1623 and is generally regarded as a fabrication . 
 = = = Veneration = = = 
 Despite the high profile start of Henry 's cultus , it took more than 100 years for the veneration of Saint Henry to gain widespread acceptance throughout Sweden . As of 1344 there were no relics of the bishop in the Cathedral of Uppsala . According to one biographer , Henry 's veneration was rare outside the Diocese of Turku throughout the 14th century . <unk> Abbey near Linköping seems to have played a key role in establishment of Henry 's legend elsewhere in Sweden in the early 15th century . Henry never received the highest totum duplex veneration in Uppsala nor was he made a patronus of the church there , which status he had both in Turku and Nousiainen . 
 At the end of the Roman Catholic era in Sweden , Henry was well established as a local saint . The dioceses in Sweden and elsewhere venerating Henry were as follows , categorized by his local ranking : 
 <unk> duplex : Turku , Linköping , <unk> 
 Duplex : Uppsala , Lund ( Denmark ) , Västerås , Växjö 
 <unk> : Nidaros ( Norway ) 
 Simplex : Skara 
 Henry seems to have been known in northern Germany , but he was largely ignored elsewhere in the Roman Catholic world . 
 In the Bishopric of Turku , the annual feast day of Henry was January 20 ( <unk> , " Winter Henry " ) , according to traditions the day of his death . Elsewhere his memorial was held already on January 19 , since more prominent saints were already commemorated on January 20 . After the Reformation , Henry 's day was moved to the 19th in Finland as well . The existence of the feast day is first mentioned in 1335 , and is known to have been marked in the liturgical calendar from the early 15th century onwards . Another memorial was held on June 18 ( <unk> , " Summer Henry " ) which was the day of the translation of his relics to the Cathedral of Turku . 
 <unk> omnes ( " Let all rejoice " ) , a Gregorian introit for the Mass in honor of Henry has survived within the late 14th or early 15th century <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Political dimensions = = = 
 According to legend , establishment of the church of Finland was entirely the work of the saint @-@ king Eric of Sweden , assisted by the bishop from the most important diocese in the country . The first half of the legend describes how the king and the bishop ruled Sweden like ' two great lights ' with feelings of ' internal love ' toward each other , emphasizing the peaceful coexistence of the secular and ecclesiastical rule during a happy era when ' predatory wolves ' could not hit their ' poisonous teeth against the innocent ' . The reality was quite different – Eric 's predecessor , Eric himself and two of his successors were all murdered almost within a decade , one of the bloodiest times for the Swedish royalty . In the 1150s , the Bishop of Uppsala was also in a bitter fight with the Bishop of Linköping over which see would become archiepiscopal . The crusade itself is described as a brief and bloodless event that was only performed to bring the " blind and evil heathen people of Finland " under Christian order . 
 The writer of the legend seems to have been especially interested in presenting the bishop as a humble martyr . He has fully ignored his place of death and burial and other " domestic " Finnish interests , which were much more apparent in folk traditions . The legend and folk traditions eventually influenced each other , and the church gradually adopted many additional details to its saint bishop . 
 = = Folk traditions = = 
 Among the many folk traditions about Henry , the most prominent is the folk poem " The Death @-@ lay of Bishop Henry " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The poem almost completely ignores Henry 's life and ministry and concentrates on his death . 
 = = = Henry 's origins = = = 
 According to the poem , Henry had grown up in " Cabbage Land " ( <unk> ) , which has puzzled Finnish historians for centuries . The name might be connected to a coastal area in northern Finland Proper called Kaland , which is also mentioned in conjunction with an unrelated early preacher in <unk> , upper Satakunta , whose local name was " Fish of Kaland " ( <unk> kala , also known as <unk> <unk> ) . Bishop Mikael Agricola wrote in his Se <unk> Testamenti in 1548 , that the earliest Swedish settlers in Finland had come from Gotland to the islets on the coast of Kaland , being harassed by Finns and seeking help from their relatives in Sweden . 
 It has also been suggested that the name might be related to Gaelic , which would presumably have referred to the bishop 's Scottish origins , though the legend gives him as a native Englishman . 
 Folk traditions have no information on the crusade whatsoever . King Eric is briefly mentioned in the death @-@ lay 's preface as Henry 's concerned " brother " . Henry appears as a lone preacher who moved around southwestern Finland more or less on his own . Besides the name , he has only little in common with the Henry in the church vita . 
 Kokemäki is often mentioned in traditions as a place where Henry preached . Kokemäki was later one the central parishes in Satakunta . This province was first mentioned in historical documents in 1331 . 
 = = = Death and burial = = = 
 The death @-@ lay 's version of the bishop 's death was different from the vita . The bishop 's killer was called Lalli . Lalli 's wife Kerttu falsely claimed to him that upon leaving the manor , their ungrateful guest Henry , travelling around on his own in the middle of winter , had without permission or recompense , through violence , taken food , cake from the oven and beer from the cellar , for himself and hay for his horse , and left nothing but ashes . This is supposed to have enraged Lalli so that he immediately grabbed his skis and went in pursuit of the thief , finally chasing Henry down on the ice of Lake Köyliönjärvi . There he killed him on the spot with an axe . Lalli then proceeded to steal the late holy man ’ s hat , called a mitre , and place it on his own head . When Lalli ’ s mother questioned him about where he found the hat , he attempted to take it off , but with it came his scalp . Lalli then died a painful death . The 17th century lay version smugly comments that : 
 Now the bishop is in joy , 
 Lalli in evil torture . The bishop sings with the angels , Performs a joyful hymn . Lalli is skiing down in hell . His left ski slides along . Into the thick smoke of torture . With his staff he strikes about : Demons beset him cruelly . In the <unk> of hell They assail his pitiful soul . 
 The 17th century lay version of the tale was intended to be performed during the annual pilgrimage along Henrik ’ s final route . 
 In some versions of the poem , considered older , Lalli 's weapon was a sword . The axe was the murder weapon of Saint Olaf , who was very popular in Finland and may have influenced Henry 's legend . However , since Lalli is not portrayed as a member of the upper class , it is unlikely that he possessed an expensive weapon like a sword , and the axe is a more historically likely choice for Henry 's murder . 
 Before his death , Henry instructed the coachman to gather his remaining body parts in a cloth tied with blue string , place it in a cart drawn by a stallion . When the stallion broke , he was to replace it with an ox , and when the ox stopped , he was to build a church . This is where Henrik ’ s remains were to be buried . 
 Medieval folk traditions enumerate the <unk> and misfortunes which befell Lalli after his slaying of the bishop . His hair and scalp are said to have fallen out as he took off the bishop 's cap , taken as a trophy . Removing the bishop 's ring from his finger , just bones remained . Eventually he ran into a lake and drowned himself . 
 = = = Development of folk traditions = = = 
 Basically the death @-@ lay is a simple story of a short @-@ tempered man who falls victim of his " bad @-@ mouthed wife 's " sharp tongue . The poem has no pity for Lalli , and he is not depicted as a hero in a story whose true antagonist is Kerttu . The depiction of Henry 's death built on an independent tradition that was once in direct competition with that of the legend , which is largely forgotten today . It remains unknown whether the two traditions were built around the same person . 
 The poem , following the traditional Kalevala metre , has survived as several 17th and 18th century <unk> from various parts of Finland . Some of its elements appear in earlier works , but it hardly dates older than the vita . There is debate on whether the original poem was constructed by one or more individuals . The writer has however had superficial understanding of the church legends . 
 Both Lalli ( Laurentius ) and Kerttu ( Gertrud ) are originally German names , which might indicate that the poem was partly constructed on foreign models , whose influence is visible in other aspects , too . The way Lalli is manipulated to commit the crime and what happens to him later seem to be taken from a medieval Judas fable . Extensive borrowing from unrelated Finnish legends from the pre @-@ Christian era has taken place as well , leaving quite little original material left at all . 
 Based on finds from medieval church ruins in the tiny island of <unk> ( " Church Rock " , previously known as the " Island of Saint Henry " ) in Lake Köyliönjärvi , the bishop 's veneration began in the latter half of the 14th century , well after Henry had received his official status as a local saint , and 200 years after his alleged death . A small granary in the nearby Kokemäki , claimed to have been the bishop 's place of rest the night before his death , could not be dated earlier than the late 15th century in dendrochronological examinations . 
 However , the poem 's claim that Henry was buried in Nousiainen was already held to be true around 1300 , when his alleged bones were translated from Nousiainen to the Cathedral of Turku . A mid @-@ 15th century Chronicon <unk> <unk> also confirmed Köyliö as the place of his death . Neither place is mentioned in the vita in any way . The church seems to have gradually complemented its own legends by adopting elements from the folk traditions , especially during the 15th century . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 Today , the legend of Henry is challenged by historians to the point of being labelled as pure imagination . Completely invented saints were not exceptional in Europe , and in the lack of evidence of either the crusade or Henry , that possibility may not be fully denied . 
 The bishop 's violent death itself was nothing exceptional and could well have happened . Many bishops were murdered during the turmoils of the 12th and 13th centuries , although most were not elevated to sainthood . Saxo Grammaticus said of the Battle of <unk> in 1134 that never had so many bishops been killed at the same time . Notable bishops that died violently included the Archbishop of Uppsala in 1187 , Bishop of Estonia in 1219 and Bishop of Linköping in 1220 . 
 = = = Bishop of Uppsala = = = 
 There is no historical record of a Bishop of Uppsala called Henry during the reign of King Eric ( about 1156 – 1160 ) . Early phases of the diocese remain obscure up to the point of Stefan , who was appointed as the archbishop in 1164 . 
 A certain Henry is mentioned in <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> in ecclesia <unk> <unk> , a chronicle of Uppsala archbishops , before <unk> and Stefan , but after <unk> ( probably mentioned in German sources in 1141 / 2 as " <unk> " ) , Nicolaus and <unk> . Besides the name , the chronicle knows that he was martyred and buried in Finland in the Cathedral of Turku . Latest research dates the chronicle to the early 15th century when Henry 's legend was already established in the kingdom , leaving only little significance to its testimony . 
 A late 15th century legenda nova claimed that Henry had come to Sweden in the retinue of papal legate Nicholas Breakspear , the later Pope Adrian IV , and appointed as the Bishop of Uppsala by him . Even though legenda nova states 1150 as the year of the crusade , it is certain from other sources that Nicholas really was in Sweden in 1153 . It is not known whether this was just an inference by the writer , based on the fact that also Nicholas was an Englishman . However , there is no information about anyone called as Henry accompanying the legate in any source describing the visit , nor him appointing a new bishop in Uppsala . Another claim by legenda nova was that Henry was translated to Turku cathedral already in 1154 , which certainly was false since the cathedral was built only in the 1290s . In the late 16th century , Bishop Paulus Juusten claimed that Henry had been the Bishop of Uppsala for two years before the crusade . Based on these postulates , early 20th @-@ century historians assembled 1155 as the year of the crusade and 1156 as the year of Henry 's death . Historians from different centuries have also suggested various other years from 1150 to 1158 . 
 Contradicting these claims , the medieval Annales <unk> <unk> <unk> and the 13th century legend of Saint <unk> mention some Henry as the Bishop of Uppsala ( Henricus <unk> <unk> ) in 1129 , participating in the consecration of the saint 's newly built church . He is apparently the same Bishop Henry who died at the Battle of <unk> in 1134 , fighting along with the Danes after being banished from Sweden . Known from the Chronicon <unk> written soon after his death and from Saxo Grammaticus ' Gesta Danorum from the early 13th century , he had fled to Denmark from <unk> , the see of the early Uppland bishops before it was moved a few kilometers to its later location in Uppsala sometime before 1164 . He is ignored in all Swedish bishop chronicles , unless he is the same Henry who was later redated to the 1150s . That would make the claim about him coming to Finland with King Eric a late innovation , where memory about a killed bishop in Uppsala sometime in the 12th century was reused in a new context . 
 Noteworthy also , is a story written down by Adam of Bremen in his Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum ( Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church ) from 1075 / 6 about a certain foreigner called <unk> , who was slain and martyred while preaching among the <unk> . Adam had heard the story from King Sweyn II of Denmark . According to some historians , resemblance to later legend about an English @-@ born Henricus , who was allegedly slain and martyred in Finland , is too striking to be a coincidence . 
 = = = Bishop of Finland = = = 
 No historical source remains that would confirm the existence of a bishop named Henry in Finland . However , papal letters mentioning an unidentified Bishop of Finland in 1209 , 1221 , 1229 and 1232 have survived . Some copies of another papal letter from 1232 call the bishop as " N. " , but the letter " N " may originally have also been something resembling it . The first certainly known Bishop of Finland is Thomas , who is first mentioned in 1234 . It is however possible , that Fulco , the Bishop of Estonia mentioned in sources from 1165 and 1171 , was the same as Folquinus , a legendary Bishop of Finland at the end of the 12th century , but this remains only a theory . 
 No Bishop or Diocese of Finland is mentioned in a papal letter from 1171 ( or 1172 ) by the seemingly well @-@ informed Pope Alexander III , who otherwise addressed the situation of the church in Finland . The Pope mentions that there were preachers , presumably from Sweden , working in Finland and was worried about their bad treatment by the Finns . The Pope had earlier in 1165 authorized the first missionary Bishop of Estonia to be appointed , and was a close acquaintance of both Eskil , the Archbishop of Lund , and Stefan , the Archbishop of Uppsala , who both had spent time with him in France where he had been exiled in the 1160s . Following the situation in Estonia , the Pope personally interfered in the Estonian mission in 1171 , ordering assistance for the local Bishop Fulco from Norway . 
 No surviving list of bishops or dioceses under the Archbishop of Uppsala from 1164 , 1189 , 1192 , 1233 , 1241 or 1248 contains any reference to Finland , neither factual or propagandist . No claim about a Swedish bishop in Finland is made in any other source from the era prior to the so @-@ called Second Swedish Crusade in 1249 . 
 The first mention of a bishop in Finland is from a papal letter in 1209 . It was sent to Archbishop Anders of Lund by Pope Innocent III as a reply to the Archbishop 's earlier letter which has not survived . According to the Archbishop , the Bishop of the newly established church in Finland was dead , apparently from natural causes since his passing away is mentioned to have been " lawful " , and the see had been vacant for some time . The Archbishop had complained to the Pope how difficult it was to get anyone to be a bishop in Finland and planned to appoint someone without formal adequacy , who was already working in Finland . The Pope approved of Archbishop 's suggestion without questioning his opinions . It is noteworthy that the Archbishop of Uppsala , Valerius ( 1207 – 1219 / 1224 ) , was also in Denmark at the time , temporarily exiled from Sweden after having allied with the deposed King Sverker , yet another exile in Denmark . 
 Whether the appointment of the said preacher ever took place , remains unknown . Note should be taken that the King of Sweden at the time was Eric , a grandson of his better known namesake Eric the Saint . Eric had taken over Sweden in 1208 and was crowned king two years later . The Pope who had strongly sided with Sverker , ignored him at first , but finally recognized him in 1216 , commenting many requests that he had apparently made ever since having taken the office . Based on the papal letter that year , Eric seems to have had a plan to invade some country that allegedly had been " taken from the heathens by his predecessors " and was allowed to install a bishop there . Similar letters were sent to the King of Denmark in 1208 and 1218 , who is known to have meant Estonia both times . Sweden also attacked Estonia in 1220 . Eric died of illness 1216 . Almost nothing is known about his time as the king . 
 Nevertheless , someone was eventually appointed and installed as the new bishop , since Pope Honorius III sent a letter directly to an unnamed Bishop of Finland in 1221 . According to the letter , Archbishop Valerius had followed the situation in Finland and sent a report to the Pope , worried about a threat from unidentified " barbarians " . It is notable that when the Pope quoted Valerius in his letter , he calls the church in Finland to have been established " newly " , the same claim that Anders had made 12 years earlier . The list of Swedish bishops which survives from this era is from king John <unk> 's coronation from the year 1219 and it mentions the bishops which have been present at the coronation . Finland as well as <unk> are not among those five , which so seem to have been all the bishops of the Swedish realm at that time . So the Finnish bishop 's possible position under Uppsala 's primacy is highly improbable . 
 Despite so many high @-@ ranking church representatives being involved in the 1209 / 1221 arrangements , later chronicles are fully ignorant on the situation in Finland at the time , or if there was even a bishop then . The first 13th @-@ century bishop is said to have been Thomas , and his predecessor remains unknown . According to 15th and 16th century chronicles , Henry was followed by bishops <unk> and Folquinus , after whom there was a 25 – 30 @-@ year gap before Thomas . However , according to the papal letter Ex <unk> no such gap has ever existed , since the archbishop of Lund was given the right to anoint a new bishop to Finland in 1209 after the death of the previous . So the logic and datings of the sixteenth @-@ century writers must be esteemed as false . The date 1209 is far too early for a Dominican like Thomas to step into the office , and so <unk> , the first real bishop of Finland and his successor Folquinus must be considered as 13th @-@ century bishops nominated and appointed by the Danish and not by the Swedes . As an extra proof of this the ancient Finnish taxation system of church taxes has its roots in Denmark , not in Sweden . And the same goes to lay taxes especially in the Åland Islands and to the old Finnish monetary system . As J. W. <unk> already nearly a hundred years ago pointed out , Finland was at that time a Danish and not a Swedish mission territory , where the Danes according to the Danish annals made there expeditions in 1191 , 1202 and possible even 1210 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Relics = = = 
 Henry was allegedly buried in Nousiainen , from where his bones — or at least something that was thought to be his bones — were transported to Turku in 1300 . In addition to traditions , the only source connecting Nousiainen to early bishops is a letter signed by Bishop Thomas in Nousiainen in 1234 . Archaeological excavations of pre @-@ Catholic cemeteries in Nousiainen and surrounding parishes show a clear discontinuation of traditions in the early 13th century , but no abrupt changes are apparent in the religious environment among the 12th century finds . 
 Whatever the case , the bishop 's grave seems to have been traced to Nousiainen latest after his elevation to sainthood . A number of medieval documents mention that the bishop 's grave continued to be located in the local church , presumably meaning that all the bones had not been translated to Turku . The church was later adorned with a grandiose 15th century cenotaph , whose replica can be found in the National Museum of Finland in Helsinki . 
 Most of the bones in Turku were still in place in 1720 when they were catalogued for a transfer to Saint Petersburg during the Russian occupation of Finland in the Great Northern War . The man behind the idea was the infamous Swedish Count Gustaf Otto Douglas who had defected to the Russian side during the war and was in charge of the grim occupation of Finland . What happened to the bones after that , remains unknown . According to some sources , the Russian vessel transporting the relics sank on the way . However , it is generally acknowledged that a piece of Henry 's ulna had been placed in Bishop Hemming 's <unk> that was built in 1514 and treasured in the cathedral . Also enclosed was a piece of parchment stating the bone belonged to Henry . During the restoration work of the cathedral , the relic was relocated to the National Board of Antiquities . 
 In the 1990s , the National Board of Antiquities claimed the relic as its own on the basis of the Finnish law on ancient objects , though it was contradicted by the Lutheran Cathedral Parish of Turku . However , the Board ultimately had the relic relocated to the Cathedral of Saint Henry in Helsinki , the oldest church in the modern Catholic Diocese of Finland , because Catholics still actively venerate the relic as sacred . Since then , it has been located inside the altar of the Catholic cathedral . 
 In 1924 , several other bones , including a jawless skull , were found in a sealed closet in the Cathedral of Turku . These are also referred to as Henry 's relics in popular media and even by the church , even though that designation remains speculative and the bones may have belonged to some other saint . The bones are currently stored in the Cathedral of Turku . 
 = = = Henry 's status today = = = 
 Although Henry has never been officially canonized , he has been referred to as a saint since as early as 1296 according to a papal document of the time , and continues to be called as such today as well . On the basis of the traditional accounts of Henry 's death , his recognition as saint took place prior to the founding of the Congregation for the Causes of the Saints and the official canonization process of the Roman Catholic Church . Henry is currently commemorated on January 19 on the calendar of commemorations of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada . January 19 is also Henry 's name day in Sweden and Finland . He continues to be remembered as a local observance in the Catholic Church of Finland , where the cathedral church is dedicated to Henry 's memory . The cathedral was consecrated in 1860 and is headed by fr . Marco <unk> . 
 The <unk> island in Lake Köyliönjärvi remains the only Catholic place of pilgrimage in Finland , with a memorial service held every year on second Sunday in June before the Midsummer festival . Also the medieval 140 km countryside route , the Saint Henry 's Way , from Köyliö to Nousiainen has been marked all the way for people willing to walk through it . Association of " Ecumenical pilgrimage of St. Henry " has been organized around the event . 
 Based on folk traditions about the bishop 's activities , the municipalities of Nousiainen , Köyliö and Kokemäki use images from Henry 's legend in their coats of arms . 
 Today , Henry and his alleged murderer Lalli remain two of the best @-@ known persons from the mediaeval history of Finland . 
 = 1983 – 84 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1983 – 84 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season featured above normal activity and several deadly storms . There was steady storm activity from December through April due to favorable conditions , such as warm sea surface temperatures and an active monsoon . The first named storm – Andry – was tied for the strongest with Bakoly , Jaminy , and Kesiny . Cyclone Andry passed near Agaléga island within Mauritius , damaging or destroying every building there and killing one person . It later struck Madagascar , the first of three storms to strike the nation within two months , which collectively caused $ 25 million in damage and 42 deaths . The third of these storms , Tropical Storm Domoina , caused deadly flooding in southeastern Africa that killed 242 people and caused $ 199 million in damage . The storm destroyed more than 50 small dams in Madagascar and caused the worst flooding in Swaziland in 20 years . In addition three of the first storms affecting Madagascar , Cyclone Bakoly in December left $ 21 million in damage on Mauritius . 
 Less than two weeks after Domoina caused severe flooding in South Africa , Tropical Storm Imboa produced additional rainfall and high seas in the country , killing four people . The final storm of the season was Cyclone Kamisy , which caused $ 250 million in damage and 68 deaths when it made landfalls in northern and northwestern Madagascar . The cities near landfall were largely destroyed , and about 100 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . The penultimate storm , Jaminy , was tied for the strongest storm in the basin after it crossed from the Australian region , where it was named Annette . Cyclone Fanja in January also crossed from the Australian region , where it was named Vivienne . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the season , the Réunion Meteorological Service tracked storms in the basin , using the Dvorak technique to estimate tropical cyclone intensities via satellite imagery . The agency later became Météo @-@ France 's meteorological office at Réunion ( MFR ) . At the time , the basin extended from the east coast of Africa to 80 ° E. Eleven storms were named by the Mauritius Meteorological Service and the Madagascar Meteorological Service . The rest of the naming list was Lalao , Monja , Nora , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Zozo . The 11 named storms were slightly above the normal of 9 , most of which formed in January and February . There were four intense tropical cyclones , which is twice the average . The increased activity of the season was in part due to enhanced easterlies , a strong monsoon trough , and warm water temperatures around 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) which extended to 25 ° S. 
 In addition to the 11 named storms , there were two additional storms in the season , classified by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . The first developed in July in the Australian basin , and briefly crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on July 14 . Soon after it re @-@ entered the Australian basin and dissipated . The other formed just southeast of Diego Garcia on November 20 . It tracked to the southwest , and the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . The storm dissipated on November 25 northeast of Mauritius . In addition , Cyclone Daryl , which formed in the Australian basin on March 6 , crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on March 16 as a weakening storm without being renamed . Two days later it re @-@ entered the Australian basin before dissipating . 
 In December and January , three storms – Andry , Caboto , and Domoina – struck Madagascar in short succession . Collectively they dropped heavy rainfall , and some areas of the country reported precipitation totals that were 220 % above normal . The storms damaged roads , bridges , dams , and croplands , wrecking 10 @,@ 000 tons of rice . Damage from the three storms was estimated at $ 25 million , and 13 @,@ 560 people were left homeless . The storms cumulatively killed 42 people . After seven cyclones struck or affected the country , causing 23 @.@ 9 billion Malagasy francs ( $ 200 million 1984 USD ) in crop damage , the African Development Bank approved a loan of 559 million Malagasy francs ( $ 1 @.@ 35 million 1989 USD ) to rebuild the damaged water infrastructure . The program lasted until December 22 , 1993 , and consisted of repairing irrigation systems and dams . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Andry = = = 
 On December 5 , an area of convection persisted between Agaléga and Diego Garcia , which corresponded to a satellite @-@ derived Dvorak rating of <unk> ; on this basis , MFR assessed the system as a tropical disturbance , and later that day , JTWC also initiated advisories . The Réunion Meteorological Service named the system Andry . On December 7 , the storm intensified into a tropical cyclone , the same day that the JTWC upgraded Andry to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . After having moved to the west , the cyclone turned more to the west @-@ southwest , and while doing so it passed just south of the Agaléga islands , producing wind gusts of 174 km / h ( 108 mph ) . The storm damaged or destroyed every house on the island , leaving the 350 residents without power , food , water , or shelter . Andry also downed most of the coconut trees on the island , which was the source of employment for most residents . High waves flooded wells and contaminated the water supply . The cyclone injured 30 people , and killed one . The Mauritius government later evacuated residents to structures that were not destroyed . Following the storm , various countries donated to the country to assist , including France who sent crews from Réunion to set up shelter and provide care for the residents . The island was largely rebuilt after about two years . 
 Cyclone Andry reached peak winds of December 9 , when MFR estimated winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . The next day , JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Around that time , Andry was passing just north of the northernmost tip of Madagascar at Diego @-@ Suarez , where the storm produced wind gusts of 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) . The cyclone weakened while curving to the southwest and later to the south , making landfall on western Madagascar near Majunga with wind gusts of 198 km / h ( 123 mph ) . While over land and turning to the southeast , Andry rapidly weakened into a tropical depression , which later passed near the capital Antananarivo . The storm emerged back into the Indian Ocean on December 14 , by which time the system was disorganized . That day , MFR estimated that Andry dissipated , although the JTWC assessed that the system re @-@ intensified slightly and turned sharply southwestward before dissipating over Madagascar on December 16 . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Bakoly = = = 
 On December 19 , a tropical disturbance formed near Diego Garcia , which initially tracked to the south @-@ southeast before turning to the southwest . Later that day , the system intensified to moderate tropical storm status , prompting the Mauritius Meteorological Service to name it Bakoly . The storm gradually intensified into an intense tropical cyclone , reaching peak winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) on December 23 . After maintaining that intensity for about 12 hours , Bakoly weakened below cyclone status as it turned to the south @-@ southeast . On December 25 , the storm passed between Réunion and Mauritius , and later resumed its south @-@ southwest trajectory . After executing a small loop , Bakoly turned to the southeast and dissipated on December 30 . 
 On Mauritius , Bakoly produced 197 km / h ( 122 mph ) wind gusts and heavy rainfall , reaching 507 mm ( 20 @.@ 0 in ) at Midlands . The high winds caused roof damage , and eight people were injured on the island . Bakoly caused power outages and damaged 4 % of the telephone network . Damage was estimated at <unk> million ( $ 21 million USD ) . Passing within 100 km ( 60 mi ) of Réunion , Bakoly produced 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) winds and dropped 300 mm ( 12 in ) of rainfall . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Caboto = = = 
 MFR began tracking a tropical disturbance in the Mozambique channel on January 4 . The next day , the agency estimated the system intensified into a moderate tropical storm , prompting the Madagascar Meteorological Service to name it Caboto . The storm moved southward along Madagascar 's western coast , reaching peak winds of about 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Caboto made landfall on January 7 to the north of the mouth of the Mangoky River , and crossed the southern portion of the country , emerging near Farafangana into the Indian Ocean . Winds associated with the storm reached 43 km / h ( 27 mph ) at Morondava on the west coast and 63 km / h ( 39 mph ) at Farafangana on the east coast . A developing ridge caused Caboto to slow after it reached open waters , executing a partial loop southwest of Réunion before turning to the south and dissipating on January 10 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Domoina = = = 
 Domoina developed on January 16 off the northeast coast of Madagascar . With a ridge to the north , the storm tracked generally westward and later southwestward . On January 21 , Domoina struck eastern Madagascar . After crossing the country , Domoina strengthened in the Mozambique channel to peak winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . On January 28 , the storm made landfall in southern Mozambique , and slowly weakened over land . Domoina crossed into Swaziland and later eastern South Africa before dissipating on February 2 . 
 In Mozambique , Domoina dropped heavy rainfall in the capital Maputo that accounted for 40 % of the annual total . Floods in the country destroyed over 50 small dams and left widespread crop damage just before the summer harvest . 
 Later , the rains caused the worst flooding in over 20 years in Swaziland , which damaged or destroyed more than 100 bridges . Disrupted transport left areas isolated for several days . In South Africa , rainfall peaked at 950 mm ( 37 in ) , which flooded 29 river basins , notably the Pongola River which altered its course after the storm . Flooding caused the Pongolapoort Dam to reach 87 % of its capacity ; when waters were released to maintain the structural integrity , additional flooding occurred in Mozambique , forcing thousands to evacuate . Throughout the region , Domoina caused widespread flooding that damaged houses , roads , and crops , leaving about $ 199 million in damage . There were 242 deaths in southeastern Africa . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Edoara = = = 
 A circulation developed south of Diego Garcia on January 20 , and the next was classified as a tropical disturbance by MFR . Given the name Edoara by the Mauritius Meteorological Service , it quickly intensified into a moderate tropical storm , although it never strengthened beyond winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . While maintaining a southwest track , Edoara passed southeast of Rodrigues , Mauritius , and Réunion . On Rodrigues , the storm produced wind gusts of 131 km / h ( 81 mph ) , and heavy rainfall reaching 253 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) at Baie aux <unk> . After moving away from the islands , Edoara dissipated on January 25 . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Vivienne @-@ Fanja = = = 
 The origins of Vivienne @-@ Fanja are unclear as a result of sparseness of data , due to a disruption in satellite imagery coverage . It is estimated that a tropical low formed on January 23 west of Christmas Island in the Australian basin . The Bureau of Meteorology named the storm Vivienne , which gradually intensified while moving to the west . On January 27 , the cyclone crossed 80 ° E into the southwest Indian Ocean , at which time it was renamed Fanja . While in the basin , the storm reached peak winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . It continued moving to the southwest before dissipating on January 30 . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Galy = = = 
 On January 29 , a circulation developed between Agaléga and Tromelin island . Initially the system moved to the southwest , followed by a turn to the southeast . Given the name Galy , the storm attained winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) on January 30 , but weakened into a tropical disturbance the next day . By that time , Galy turned to the west toward the Madagascar coastline , and on February 1 re @-@ intensified into a moderate tropical storm . The next day , Galy made landfall near Mananjary , but soon after recurved to the southeast and emerged into the Indian Ocean near Fort Dauphin . On February 4 , the storm dissipated in a polar trough . While over land , Galy dropped light rainfall of around 44 @.@ 5 mm ( 1 @.@ 75 in ) . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Haja = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on February 7 south of Diego Garcia . For about a week , the system remained weak and changed directions several times ; after an eastward movement , it turned to the northwest , curved to the southeast , and later began a steady track to the southwest . On February 13 , it intensified into a moderate tropical storm , and quickly attained peak winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Given the name Haja , the storm passed southeast of Rodrigues and Réunion . Haja approached the southeast coast of Madagascar , but turned to the southeast and weakened , dissipating on February 19 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Imboa = = = 
 On February 10 , MFR began tracking a tropical disturbance in the Mozambique channel near Juan de Nova Island . The system tracked generally south @-@ southwestward , gradually intensifying . Given the name Imboa , the storm reached peak winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) on February 13 while passing near Europa Island . After executing a small loop , Imboa turned toward the southeastern African coastline and approached the eastern coasts of Mozambique and South Africa as a weakened system . A ridge caused the storm to turn to the east and northeast , dissipating on February 19 . 
 Early in its duration , Imboa produced winds of 111 km / h ( 69 mph ) at Maintirano while passing off the west coast of Madagascar . While offshore South Africa , Imboa dropped heavy rainfall along the coast just weeks after Domoina flooded the region , reaching over 350 mm ( 14 in ) in some locations . The rains caused flooding along the <unk> and <unk> rivers , which destroyed a temporary bridge along the Umfolozi River built after Domoina . Along the coast , Imboa produced high tides that caused beach erosion . There were four deaths in the country . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Annette @-@ Jaminy = = = 
 Cyclone Annette developed simultaneously with Cyclone Willy in the Australian basin and Cyclone Haja in the south @-@ west Indian . On February 3 , a tropical low formed northeast of the Cocos Islands . Steered by a ridge to the south , it moved generally southwestward and intensified into Tropical Cyclone Annette , named by the Bureau of Meteorology . After executing a loop , Annette crossed 80 E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on February 16 . Upon crossing into the basin , the storm was renamed Jaminy by the Mauritius Meteorological Service . Around that time , the cyclone attained peak winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . Jaminy moved generally southwestward and weakened below cyclone status on February 20 . The next day , it turned to the southeast , later dissipating on February 24 . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Kamisy = = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed near Diego Garcia on April 3 and subsequently moved westward , intensifying into a moderate tropical storm two days later . Given the name Kamisy , the storm gradually intensified into an intense tropical cyclone by April 9 . Kamisy reached winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) before making landfall in extreme northern Madagascar near Diego Suarez . It weakened upon entering the Mozambique channel , but briefly re @-@ intensified on April 10 . That day while passing near Mayotte , the cyclone turned to the southeast , striking Madagascar again near Majunga . Kamisy quickly crossed the country and quickly weakened into a tropical disturbance . After emerging into the Indian Ocean off the east coast of Madagascar , the system re @-@ intensified into a moderate tropical storm before dissipating on April 16 . 
 In northern Madagascar , Kamisy produced wind gusts of 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) , which destroyed 80 % of the city of Diego Suarez . About 39 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the area , and there were five deaths . In western Madagascar , the cyclone dropped 232 @.@ 2 mm ( 9 @.@ 14 in ) of rainfall in 24 hours in Majunga , which damaged rice fields in the region after causing widespread river flooding . The storm destroyed about 80 % of Majunga where the storm struck . Throughout the country , Kamisy caused $ 250 million in damage and 68 deaths , with 215 people injured and 100 @,@ 000 left homeless . Kamisy also affected Mayotte with winds of over 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) , which left about 25 @,@ 000 homeless and left widespread damage . One death was reported on the island . 
 = Sierra Leone at the 2004 Summer Olympics = 
 Sierra Leone competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece , from 13 to 29 August 2004 . This was the nation 's eighth appearance at the Summer Olympics since its debut in the 1968 Summer Olympics . The Sierra Leone delegation included two track and field athletes ; Lamin Tucker and Hawanatu Bangura , both of whom were sprinters that were selected via winning an event in Freetown , as the nation had no athletes that met the " A " or " B " standards in any event . Bangura was selected as flag bearer for the opening ceremony . Neither of the two athletes progressed beyond the heats . 
 = = Background = = 
 Sierra Leone participated in eight Summer Olympic games between its debut in the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City , Mexico and the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , with the exception of the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich , and the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , the latter because of a boycott relating to the New Zealand national rugby union team touring South Africa . 
 The Sierra Leone National Olympic Committee ( NOC ) selected two athletes via wildcards . Usually , an NOC would be able to enter up to 3 qualified athletes in each individual event as long as each athlete met the " A " standard , or 1 athlete per event if they met the " B " standard . However , since Sierra Leone had no athletes that met either standard , they were allowed to select two athletes , one of each gender , as wildcards . The Sierra Leone NOC decided to host an event in Freetown , where the fastest man and woman in the event would be selected to compete at the Athens Games . The two athletes that won and therefore were selected to compete in the Athens games were Lamin Tucker and Hawanatu Bangura . They competed in the track and field Men 's 100 meters and in the Women 's 100 meters respectively . Bangura was flag bearer for the opening ceremony . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Making his Summer Olympic debut , Lamin Tucker qualified for the Athens Games via winning an event in Freetown . He competed on 21 August in the Men 's 100 meters against eight other athletes in the seventh heat . He finished the race in 10 @.@ 72 seconds , ranking sixth . He ranked ahead of American Samoa 's Kelsey <unk> ( 11 @.@ 25 seconds ) and behind Canada 's Pierre Browne ( 10 @.@ 32 seconds ) , in a heat led by Jamaica 's Asafa Powell ( 10 @.@ 06 seconds ) . Overall , Tucker placed 61st out of the 84 athletes that competed and was 0 @.@ 38 seconds slower than the slowest athlete that progressed to the next round . Therefore , that was the end of his competition . 
 Competing at her first Summer Olympics , Hawanatu Bangura was notable for holding the Sierra Leone flag at the opening ceremony and for becoming the youngest ever competitor to represent Sierra Leone at the Olympics aged 16 , a record that still stands today . She qualified for the Athens Games via winning an event in Freetown . She competed on 20 August in 100 meters in the seventh heat against seven other athletes . She ran a time of 12 @.@ 11 seconds , finishing seventh . Bangura ranked ahead of Iraq 's Alaa Jassim ( 12 @.@ 70 seconds ) and behind Papua New Guinea 's Mae <unk> ( 12 @.@ 00 seconds ) , in a heat led by France 's Christine Arron and Ghana 's Vida Anim ( 11 @.@ 14 seconds ) . Overall , Bangura was 0 @.@ 68 seconds behind the slowest athlete that progressed to the quarter @-@ finals and therefore she did not advance . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = Einstein – Szilárd letter = 
 The Einstein – Szilárd letter was a letter written by Leó Szilárd and signed by Albert Einstein that was sent to the United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on August 2 , 1939 . Written by Szilárd in consultation with fellow Hungarian physicists Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner , the letter warned that Germany might develop atomic bombs and suggested that the United States should start its own nuclear program . It prompted action by Roosevelt , which eventually resulted in the Manhattan Project developing the first atomic bombs . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The discovery of uranium fission in December 1938 , reported in the January 6 , 1939 issue of Die <unk> by Otto Hahn , and Fritz Strassmann , and its correct identification as nuclear fission by Lise Meitner in the February 11 , 1939 issue of Nature , generated intense interest among physicists . Even before publication , the news was brought to the United States by Danish physicist Niels Bohr , who opened the Fifth Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics with Enrico Fermi on January 26 , 1939 . The results were quickly corroborated by experimental physicists , most notably Fermi and John R. Dunning at Columbia University . 
 The Hungarian physicist Leó Szilárd , who was living in the United States at the time , realized that the neutron @-@ driven fission of heavy atoms could be used to create a nuclear chain reaction that could yield vast amounts of energy for electric power generation or atomic bombs . Such a reaction using neutrons was an idea he had first formulated in 1933 , upon reading Ernest Rutherford 's disparaging remarks about generating power from his team 's 1932 experiment using protons to split lithium . However , Szilárd had not been able to achieve a neutron @-@ driven chain reaction with neutron @-@ rich light atoms . In theory , if in a neutron @-@ driven chain reaction the number of secondary neutrons produced was greater than one , then each such reaction could trigger multiple additional reactions , producing an exponentially increasing number of reactions . 
 Szilárd teamed up with Fermi to build a nuclear reactor from natural uranium at Columbia University , where they were fortunate in having a sympathetic head of the physics department in George B. Pegram . At the time there was disagreement about whether it was uranium @-@ 235 , which made up less than 1 % of natural uranium , or the more abundant uranium @-@ 238 isotope , as Fermi maintained , that was primarily responsible for fission . Fermi and Szilárd conducted a series of experiments , and concluded that a chain reaction in natural uranium could be possible if they could find a suitable neutron moderator . They found that the hydrogen atoms in water slowed neutrons , but tended to capture them . Szilárd then suggested using carbon as a moderator . They now needed large quantities of carbon and uranium to create a reactor . Szilárd was convinced that they would succeed if only they could get the materials . 
 Szilárd was concerned that German scientists might also attempt this experiment . The German nuclear physicist Siegfried Flügge published two influential articles on the exploitation of nuclear energy in 1939 . After discussing this prospect with fellow Hungarian physicist Eugene Wigner , they decided that they should warn the Belgians , as the Belgian Congo was the best source of uranium ore . Wigner suggested that Albert Einstein might be a suitable person to do this , as he knew the Belgian Royal Family . 
 The connection between Einstein and Szilárd pre @-@ dates the letter . They knew each other in Berlin in the early 1920s , and in 1926 jointly invented the Einstein @-@ Szilárd refrigerator . 
 = = The letter = = 
 On July 12 , 1939 , Szilárd and Wigner drove in Wigner 's car to <unk> on New York 's Long Island , where Einstein was staying . When they explained about the possibility of atomic bombs , Einstein replied : Daran habe ich gar nicht <unk> ( I did not even think about that ) . Szilárd dictated a letter in German to the Belgian Ambassador to the United States . Wigner wrote it down , and Einstein signed it . At Wigner 's suggestion , they also prepared a letter for the State Department explaining what they were doing and why , giving it two weeks to respond if it had any objections . 
 This still left the problem of getting government support for uranium research . Another friend of Szilárd 's , the Austrian economist Gustav <unk> , suggested approaching Alexander Sachs , who had access to President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Sachs told Szilárd that he had already spoken to the President about uranium , but that Fermi and Pegram had reported that the prospects for building an atomic bomb were remote . He told Szilárd that he would deliver the letter , but suggested that it come from someone more prestigious . For Szilárd , Einstein was again the obvious choice . Sachs and Szilárd drafted a letter riddled with spelling errors and mailed it to Einstein . 
 Szilárd set out for Long Island again on August 2 . Wigner was unavailable , so this time Szilárd co @-@ opted another Hungarian physicist , Edward Teller , to do the driving . Einstein dictated the letter in German . On returning to Columbia University , Szilárd dictated the letter in English to a young departmental stenographer , Janet <unk> . She later recalled that when Szilárd mentioned extremely powerful bombs , she " was sure she was working for a nut " . Ending the letter with " Yours truly , Albert Einstein " did nothing to alter this impression . Both the letter and a longer explanatory letter were then posted to Einstein . 
 The letter warned that : 
 In the course of the last four months it has been made probable — through the work of Joliot in France as well as Fermi and Szilárd in America — that it may become possible to set up a nuclear chain reaction in a large mass of uranium , by which vast amounts of power and large quantities of new radium @-@ like elements would be generated . Now it appears almost certain that this could be achieved in the immediate future . 
 This new phenomenon would also lead to the construction of bombs , and it is conceivable — though much less certain — that extremely powerful bombs of a new type may thus be constructed . A single bomb of this type , carried by boat and exploded in a port , might very well destroy the whole port together with some of the surrounding territory . However , such bombs might very well prove to be too heavy for transportation by air . 
 It also specifically warned about Germany : 
 I understand that Germany has actually stopped the sale of uranium from the Czechoslovakian mines which she has taken over . That she should have taken such early action might perhaps be understood on the ground that the son of the German Under @-@ Secretary of State , von Weizsäcker , is attached to the Kaiser @-@ Wilhelm @-@ Institut in Berlin where some of the American work on uranium is now being repeated . 
 = = Delivery = = 
 The letter was signed by Einstein and posted back to Szilárd , who received it on August 9 . Szilárd gave both the short and long letters , along with a letter of his own , to Sachs on August 15 . Sachs asked the White House staff for an appointment to see the President , but before one could be set up , the administration became embroiled in a crisis due to Germany 's invasion of Poland , which started World War II . Sachs delayed his appointment until October so that the President would give the letter due attention , securing an appointment on October 11 . On that date he met with the President , the President 's secretary , Brigadier General Edwin " Pa " Watson , and two ordnance experts , Army Lieutenant Colonel Keith F. Adamson and Navy Commander Gilbert C. Hoover . Roosevelt summed up the conversation as : " Alex , what you are after is to see that the Nazis don 't blow us up . " 
 Roosevelt sent a reply thanking Einstein , and informing him that 
 I found this data of such import that I have convened a Board consisting of the head of the Bureau of Standards and a chosen representative of the Army and Navy to thoroughly investigate the possibilities of your suggestion regarding the element of uranium . 
 Einstein sent two more letters to Roosevelt , on March 7 , 1940 , and April 25 , 1940 , calling for action on nuclear research . Szilárd drafted a fourth letter for Einstein 's signature that urged the President to meet with Szilárd to discuss policy on nuclear energy . Dated March 25 , 1945 , it did not reach Roosevelt before his death on April 12 , 1945 . 
 = = Results = = 
 Roosevelt decided that the letter required action , and authorized the creation of the Advisory Committee on Uranium . The committee was chaired by Lyman James Briggs , the Director of the Bureau of Standards , with Adamson and Hoover as its other members . It convened for the first time on October 21 . The meeting was also attended by Fred L. Mohler from the Bureau of Standards , Richard B. Roberts of the Carnegie Institution of Washington , and Szilárd , Teller and Wigner . Adamson was skeptical about the prospect of building an atomic bomb , but was willing to authorize $ 6 @,@ 000 ( <unk> current dollars ) for the purchase of uranium and graphite for Szilárd and Fermi 's experiment . 
 The Advisory Committee on Uranium was the beginning of the US government 's effort to develop an atomic bomb , but it did not vigorously pursue the development of a weapon . It was superseded by the National Defense Research Committee in 1940 , and then the Office of Scientific Research and Development in 1941 . The Frisch – Peierls memorandum and the British Maud Reports eventually prompted Roosevelt to authorize a full @-@ scale development effort in January 1942 . The work of fission research was taken over by the United States Army Corps of Engineers 's Manhattan District in June 1942 . It directed an all @-@ out bomb development program . 
 Einstein did not work on the Manhattan Project . The Army denied him the work clearance needed in July 1940 , saying his pacifist leanings made him a security risk , although he was allowed to work as a consultant to the United States Navy 's Bureau of Ordnance . He had no knowledge of the atomic bomb 's development , and no influence on the decision for the bomb to be dropped . According to Linus Pauling , Einstein later regretted signing the letter because it led to the development and use of the atomic bomb in combat , adding that Einstein had justified his decision because of the greater danger that Nazi Germany would develop the bomb first . In 1947 Einstein told Newsweek magazine that " had I known that the Germans would not succeed in developing an atomic bomb , I would have done nothing . " 
 = Revolver ( song ) = 
 " Revolver " is a song by American recording artist Madonna from her third greatest hits compilation , Celebration ( 2009 ) . It was released on December 14 , 2009 by Warner Bros. Records and marked her final single release with the label , which had been her record company since 1982 . The song features American rapper Lil Wayne and was written by Madonna , Carlos Battey , Steven Battey , Dwayne Carter , Justin Franks and Brandon Kitchen . It was produced by Madonna and DJ Frank E. 
 The single release included remixes by David Guetta and Afrojack , which won the Grammy Award for Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical category at the 53rd Grammy Awards . This version also appears on the deluxe version of Guetta 's album One More Love ( 2010 ) . The single also included mixes by Paul van Dyk , Tracy Young and included remixes of " Celebration " by Akon and <unk> . The original album version does not appear on any formats of the release and some versions are credited as " Madonna vs. David Guetta " . 
 An electropop song , " Revolver " features Madonna singing the whole song , with a guest appearance by Wayne near the end . The lyrics talk about juxtaposing love with weaponry . Contemporary critics gave a mixed review of the song . Some praised the chorus line " My love ’ s a revolver " while others felt that it was underwhelming and not on par with Madonna 's previous songs . The single charted in the lower regions of the official charts of Belgium , Canada , Finland and the United Kingdom while reaching number four on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart of United States . The song was performed on The MDNA Tour in 2012 , where Madonna wielded a Kalashnikov rifle onstage . The use of weapons in front of the audience generated controversy , after the 2012 Aurora shooting . 
 = = Background = = 
 On March 2009 , Madonna 's representative Liz Rosenberg confirmed that Madonna was planning to release a greatest hits album by fall 2009 . She also added that Madonna had plans to go to the studio and record new material for the album . The next day , Madonna 's manager , Guy Oseary , asked fans on his Twitter for input regarding the track listing of the greatest hits album . It was later confirmed that she wrote three new tracks for the album , with Paul Oakenfold being confirmed as producer for two of the new songs . Warner Bros. Records reported the title of the greatest hits to be Celebration through Madonna 's official website . They also reported that the final song on the collection was to be " Revolver " , a collaboration with Lil Wayne and whose demo version was already present in the net . It was present alongside the title track . Before the album was released on September 29 , 2009 , the original version of " Revolver " was released on the internet ; the track had previously appeared in May as a demo recording . In December 2009 , NME confirmed " Revolver " as the second single from Celebration . The song was released digitally in the United Kingdom on December 14 , 2009 by Warner Bros. Records along with a digital maxi single release worldwide on December 29 , 2009 , featuring remixes by David Guetta and Afrojack , Paul van Dyk and Tracy Young . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Revolver " was written by Madonna , Carlos Battey , Steven Battey , Lil Wayne , Justin Franks and Brandon Kitchen , and produced by Madonna and DJ Frank E. In an interview with <unk> , Frank E recalled that he had gone to the recording session two hours before his scheduled meeting with Madonna to set up and give the audio files to the recording engineer , and he said that the ensuing wait was incredibly nerve @-@ racking for him . After Madonna arrived , they recorded her vocals and the song was finished the next day . Reminiscing about the session , he said : " I will never forget the feeling of leaving that session after vocal producing Madonna , and thinking to myself , ' It can ’ t it really get any harder than this . ' I 've taken that mentality into every other session I 've been in , and it 's helped me make the session and song more of a success . Unfortunately , the mix sounded like crap and the song flopped , but hey , you win some and you lose some . " 
 The audio mixing was done by Demacio Castellon while the Pro Tools editing was arranged by Ron Taylor from Warner Bros. Records . The chorus of the song has Madonna singing the line " My love 's a revolver , my sex is a killer , do you wanna die happy ? " Wayne has a verse towards the end of the song , and sings the lines with reference to ammunitions , and Auto @-@ Tune is used in his vocals . According to Houston Chronicle , the song is electropop in its composition style . The song is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . As per the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing Co . , Inc . , the song is composed in the key of B ♭ minor , with Madonna 's voice spanning from the tonal nodes of A ♭ 3 to E ♭ 5 . " Revolver " follows in the basic sequence of B ♭ m – D ♭ – A ♭ – B ♭ m – D ♭ – A ♭ as its chord progression . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Shaheem Reid from MTV called the song a " sugary ditty " and said that " Guest @-@ verse sniper Weezy F. Baby ( Lil Wayne ) comes in later and gives himself loads of big @-@ ups when it comes to the women . " After the original version of " Revolver " leaked onto the net , Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone commented that " this cleaned @-@ up version with its <unk> synths is more befitting of the Queen of Pop . " He also called it the most violent love song ever . Rob Sheffield from the same magazine said that " [ Madonna 's ] hitmaking genius is unmatched and — with the new <unk> blast ' Celebration ' and the Lil Wayne duet ' Revolver ' — undiminished . " 
 Joseph Brannigan Lynch from Entertainment Weekly was disappointed with the track and called it underwhelming . He added : " Anyone hoping this collaboration with Wayne would mean a new direction for [ Madonna ] will be disappointed . ' Revolver ' is pretty standard Top 40 background listening — more of the same electro R & B she played around with on Hard Candy . [ ... ] It ’ s not bad by any stretch , but it certainly won ’ t end up on the next greatest @-@ hits collection she releases ten years from now . " However , he praised the chorus line calling it Madonna 's " <unk> knack for writing charmingly frivolous lyrics . " While reviewing the album , Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called the song " glitched @-@ out dance @-@ floor stomper " and called the chorus a " lyrical come @-@ on " . 
 Joey Guerra of Houston Chronicle said that the track was " more filler than truly fascinating . " Douglas Wolk from Pitchfork Media commented that the presence of " Revolver " on the Celebration compilation disc was pale compared to Madonna 's previous sex @-@ themed songs like " Justify My Love " and " Erotica " ( 1992 ) . Eric Henderson from Slant Magazine called the song a clumsy collaboration . Sarah Crompton from The Daily Telegraph said that " Revolver " shows off Lil Wayne 's skills as a singer better than Madonna 's . The One Love Club mix of the song , by David Guetta , won a Grammy in the Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical category of the 53rd Grammy Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song charted on the Canadian Hot 100 for one week at position 95 on the issue dated October 17 , 2009 , but fell off the chart the next week . On the Billboard issue dated January 16 , 2010 , the song made a re @-@ entry on the chart at a higher position of 47 , and was the highest debut of the chart . It made a top @-@ 20 debut on the official chart of Finland , at position nineteen and moved to 18 after two weeks . In the United Kingdom , the song was initially positioned at number 188 , but after a few weeks it jumped up to a position 130 on the UK Singles Chart . The One Love remix of " Revolver " , featuring David Guetta , debuted on the Belgian Singles Chart at Flanders region at position 37 . After a few weeks , the song reached number 26 on the Flanders chart and 25 on the Wallonia chart . The song debuted at number 41 on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Songs chart on the issue dated January 16 , 2010 as the highest debut of that week , and reached a peak of four , staying for two weeks at the same position . In Italy , the song debuted at number 16 on the singles chart and was certified gold by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The song also charted in Ireland , at position 41 . In Spain the song reached 39 on the chart , for one week only . In the Czech Republic , " Revolver " debuted at number 66 , and reached a peak of number 22 after seven weeks . In Italy , the song reached a peak of 16 . 
 = = Live performance and controversy = = 
 Madonna performed " Revolver " as the second song on The MDNA Tour in 2012 . She performed it while holding a Kalashnikov rifle , a common weapon among many rebels , while one of her dancers held an Israeli Uzi submachine gun . Madonna and four dancers then participated in a faux fight and pretended to shoot their weapons and fire bullets . During the performance Lil Wayne appeared on the backdrop screens to perform his verse . It was noted that during the performance Madonna resembled a gunfighter in the style of Kill Bill . During her concert in Phoenix , Madonna pointed her rifle to their fans , while in Miami , she faked murdering her masked dancers . According to Jane Stevenson from Jam ! , " [ Madonna ] really got our attention as she and her dancers wielded guns " . The wardrobe for the performance consisted of a black outfit fitted with an ample cleavage , gloves of the same color and heeled boots . After the tour was finished , the singer stated she would auction all the outfits she wore on tour to help Hurricane Sandy victims . 
 The use of fake weapons generated controversy . After the concert in Colorado , Madonna was criticised over the use of fake weapons , since the public was sensitized by the 2012 Aurora shooting , which occurred at the premiere of The Dark Knight Rises . Peter Burns , a radio broadcaster in the region , told The Hollywood Reporter that " You could see people kinda looking at each other . I heard the word ' Colorado ' , you know , ' Aurora ' , ' shooting ' . You could hear people talking about it , and it was little bit unsettling . I saw two or three people get up and grab their stuff and actually leave their seats " . Ray Mark Rinaldi from Reverb website said that Madonna was " dancing with guns and shooting up bad guys during ' Revolver ' . It was a bloody scene , particularly tasteless in Colorado these days , but all cartoon ; if folks got upset , they were supposed to " . Daniel <unk> from The Phoenix said : " Madonna took the capacity crowd into a dark place that few were expecting minutes earlier from this queen of ' 80s pop music " . In a review of the concert , Ross Raihala from Twin Cities mentioned that there was " darkness hung over much of the first half of the show " because of the performances of " Revolver " and " Gang Bang . " 
 Meanwhile , Madonna commented on a letter published in Billboard : " I do not condone violence or the use of guns . Rather they are symbols of wanting to appear strong and wanting to find a way to stop feelings that I find hurtful or damaging . In my case , it 's wanting to stop the lies and hypocrisy of the church , the intolerance of many narrow minded cultures and societies I have experienced throughout my life and in some cases the pain I have felt from having my heart broken . " 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the Celebration CD and " Revolver " Remixes Maxi @-@ Single . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Chandramukhi = 
 Chandramukhi ( English : Moon @-@ faced beauty ) is a 2005 Indian Tamil @-@ language horror comedy film written and directed by P. Vasu , and was produced and distributed by Ramkumar Ganesan of Sivaji Productions . The film features Rajinikanth , Prabhu , Jyothika and Nayantara leading an ensemble cast that includes Vadivelu , Nassar , Sheela , Vijayakumar , Vinaya Prasad , Sonu Sood , <unk> , <unk> and K. R. Vijaya . The film is a remake of Vasu 's Kannada film Apthamitra ( 2004 ) , which itself is a remake of the Malayalam film Manichitrathazhu ( 1993 ) . The soundtrack album and background score were composed by Vidyasagar . Cinematography was handled by Sekhar V. Joseph and editing was done by Suresh Urs . Chandramukhi 's plot revolves around a woman who suffers from dissociative identity disorder that affects a family , and a psychiatrist who intends to solve the case while risking his life . 
 The film was made on a budget of ₹ 190 million . Principal photography began on 24 October 2004 and was completed in March 2005 . It was released on 14 April 2005 on the eve of the Tamil New Year . The film received positive reviews and was a major box office success . It was the longest running South Indian film , with a theatrical run of 890 days , until its record was overtaken by the Telugu film Magadheera ( 2009 ) which completed a theatrical run of 1000 days . The film won five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards , four Film Fans ' Association Awards and two Filmfare Awards . Jyothika and Vadivelu were each awarded a Kalaimamani Award for their work on the film . 
 Chandramukhi was dubbed in Telugu and was simultaneously released with the same title as the Tamil version . It was also dubbed and released in Bhojpuri under the title Chandramukhi Ke <unk> . It became the first Tamil film to be dubbed into German . It was released in Germany under the title Der Geisterjäger ( English : The Ghost Hunters ) . The film was also dubbed into Turkish . Chandramukhi was dubbed in Hindi and released on 29 February 2008 by Dilip <unk> , owner of the production house Royal Film Company . The Hindi version was released in collaboration with producer A. M. Rathnam . The other language versions of the film were also successful . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Saravanan ( Rajinikanth ) , a psychiatrist , visits India on vacation . He meets up with his foster brother <unk> , alias Senthil ( Prabhu ) , and his wife Ganga ( Jyothika ) . Senthil 's mother Kasthuri ( K. R. Vijaya ) wanted Senthil to marry Priya ( <unk> ) , the daughter of his father 's cousin Kandaswamy ( Nassar ) , to reunite the two branches of the family after 30 years of separation because Senthil 's father ( Sivaji Ganesan ) chose to marry Kasthuri instead of Kandaswamy 's sister , Akhilandeshwari ( Sheela ) . Saravanan learns that Senthil had bought the Vettaiyapuram mansion , despite attempts by the local village elders to dissuade them , and moves in with them . Akhilandeshwari is jealous of Saravanan and plots to kill him with the help of her assistant Oomaiyan ( Sonu Sood ) . 
 When the family visits a temple , the chief priest reveals the reason everyone fears the Vettaiyapuram mansion . A hundred @-@ and @-@ fifty years ago , a king named Vettaiyan travelled to <unk> in Andhra Pradesh , where he met and fell in love with a dancer named Chandramukhi . However , she did not reciprocate his feelings as she was already in love with a dancer named Gunashekaran . As a result , Vettaiyan took her back to his palace by force . Unknown to him , Chandramukhi made Gunashekaran stay in a house nearby and had meetings with him secretly . When Vettaiyan discovered this , he beheaded Gunashekaran on <unk> and burnt Chandramukhi alive . As a result , Chandramukhi 's ghost tried to take revenge on Vettaiyan , who with the help of various priests and sorcerers from all over the country , tames the ghost by locking it up in a room located in the palace 's south @-@ west corner . Later , Vishwanathan ( <unk> ) , a dance professor , and Priya 's love is supported by Saravanan , who asks Kandaswamy to arrange their marriage . 
 After hearing Chandramukhi 's story , Ganga , who thinks that the story was fabricated to scare thieves from stealing treasures in the room , wants to go there . She gets the room key from the gardener 's granddaughter Durga ( Nayantara ) and opens the door . Subsequently , strange things begin to happen in the household ; a ghost frightens the people in the house , things inexplicably break , and Ganga 's sari catches fire . Suspicion turns towards Durga . Senthil calls Saravanan to solve the case . As soon as Saravanan returns , a mysterious being tries to kill Priya . Attempts to kill Senthil are made with poison and by pushing a fish tank . A mysterious voice sings during the night . Saravanan investigates these incidents . 
 Ganga mysteriously disappears during Priya and Viswanathan 's wedding reception . Saravanan notices her absence and searches for her , but he is almost killed by Oomaiyan — who has been sent by Akhilandeshwari . Saravanan subdues Oomaiyan and with Senthil 's help finds Ganga , who is supposedly being sexually harassed by Viswanathan . Saravanan reveals to Senthil and Viswanathan that Ganga suffers from split personality disorder . Saravanan explains to them how she became affected by it and how she took up Chandramukhi 's identity . He tells them Ganga tried to kill Priya and Senthil , and framed Viswanathan for sexual harassment because from Chandramukhi 's view , Viswanathan is her lover Gunashekaran since he stays at the same place Gunashekaran did . The only way to stop Chandramukhi is to make her believe Vettaiyan is dead since Saravanan impersonated Vettaiyan and disrupted one of the pujas conducted by the exorcist Ramachandra Acharya ( Avinash ) by conversing with the ghost to know its wish . 
 Akhilandeshwari overhears Saravanan 's idea of self @-@ sacrifice and apologises to him . Later , in the dance hall , the family and Ramachandra Acharya allow Chandramukhi to burn Saravanan alive . Ramachandra Acharya blows smoke and ash on Ganga 's face when she is given a torch to burn Saravanan . Senthil then opens a trapdoor to let Saravanan escape , and an effigy of Vettaiyan gets burnt instead . Convinced that Vettaiyan is dead , Chandramukhi leaves Ganga 's body , curing her . The two families are reunited after 30 years ; Saravanan and Durga fall in love , and <unk> ( Suvarna Mathew ) and Murugesan ( Vadivelu ) become parents after eight years of marriage . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Director P. Vasu , producer Ramkumar Ganesan and Raj <unk> make guest appearances in the song " Devuda Devuda " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Chandramukhi was the 50th film produced by Sivaji Productions . During the success meet of Mannan ( 1992 ) , Rajinikanth announced that he would act in Sivaji Productions ' 50th film . In September 2004 , Rajinikanth congratulated P. Vasu on the success of Apthamitra ( 2004 ) and was impressed with the film 's screenplay . Vasu narrated a story of the film to Rajinikanth . Rajinikanth later called Ramkumar Ganesan and asked him to do the film in Tamil under Ramkumar 's home production banner , Sivaji Productions . 
 Ramkumar telephoned Vasu , who was offering worship in a temple in <unk> at that time , informing him of Rajinikanth 's wish to do Apthamitra in Tamil under his direction . Vasu reworked the script he wrote for Apthamitra to suit Rajinikanth 's style of acting . The film dealt mainly with the concept of dissociative identity disorder , commonly known as " multiple personality disorder " ( MPD ) or " split personality syndrome " . Another film titled Anniyan ( 2005 ) , which featured Vikram in the lead role , and was released two months after Chandramukhi , was also based on the same disorder . 
 Thota Tharani was the film 's art director , and also designed the costumes used in the film . Regarding the designing of the Vettaiyapuram palace , he watched both Manichitrathazhu and Apthamitra to get the basic idea of the film 's plot . Manichitrathazhu was shot in a palace in Kochi . Vasu wanted Tharani to make the sets more colourful and grand and did not want the realistic look of the original film . Tharani designed Chandramukhi 's room and placed a corridor in it , which was quite different from the original and its Kannada remake . The corridor resembled those commonly seen in palaces in Kerala . Sidney Sladen did additional costume designing in the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Rajinikanth played the roles of Dr. Saravanan and King Vettaiyan . He sported a wig for his role . Both Rajinikanth and P. Vasu discussed every scene featuring the former and added necessary inputs before they were shot . Rajinikanth appears in the beginning of the film unlike Manichitrathazhu , where the same character , played by Mohanlal , appears in the middle of the film . Rajinikanth requested Vasu to change the dancer 's name from Nagavalli , which was the name of the danseuse in <unk> , to Chandramukhi since the latter sounded more royal . While Vishnuvardhan uttered " <unk> <unk> " in the original , Rajinikanth used " Lakka Lakka " , which was the mannerism of a villain in a Marathi play Rajinikanth watched in his childhood days . Ramkumar 's brother Prabhu played <unk> , a civil engineer and owner of Ganesh Constructions . Prabhu co @-@ produced the film with Ramkumar . 
 For the roles of Ganga and Chandramukhi , Soundarya was initially selected to reprise her role from <unk> , but her death led the director to choose Simran and he shaped the character to suit her . In November 2004 , Simran refused to do the project , as her role required a lot of dancing and cited her pregnancy at that time as another main reason for her refusal . Aishwarya Rai Bachchan was offered the role but she declined the offer due to date problems . Sadha and Reemma Sen were also considered as replacements . The role finally went to Jyothika , who gave 50 days of her schedule for the film . Vasu wanted Jyothika to perform her scenes in a manner different from that of Shobana 's role in Manichitrathazhu , enacting the scenes himself before they were shot featuring Jyothika . Nayantara was selected to portray Rajinikanth 's love interest , Durga , after Vasu was impressed with her performance in her debut film <unk> ( 2003 ) . 
 Vadivelu portrayed the comic role of Murugesan , <unk> 's and Kandaswamy 's younger brother . Rajinikanth , at the film 's 200th day theatrical run celebration function , said that it was he who recommended Vadivelu to Vasu for the role and had asked Ramkumar Ganesan to get Vadivelu 's dates before planning the filming schedules . Nassar played Kandaswamy , Murugesan 's older brother . Sheela , who was known for her role in the Malayalam film , <unk> ( 1965 ) , played <unk> , the intimidating older sister of Kandaswamy and Murugesan . When Sheela was signed on for the role , she was requested by the producers not to divulge details about her role to the media . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography commenced on 24 October 2004 with a puja ceremony for the <unk> shot at Annai <unk> , the residence of Sivaji Ganesan . Ramkumar Ganesan said the filming would be finished by 15 February 2005 , giving the crew two months to complete the post @-@ production work , including visual effects . The first shooting schedule began two days later with a fight scene choreographed by <unk> Dinesh and filmed at <unk> in Chennai . More than 25 Toyota <unk> and 30 stunt artists were involved in the fight sequence that featured Rajinikanth . The Vettaiyapuram mansion was erected in Hyderabad . The song sequences , one picturised on Rajini alone , two songs in which he appears with the other principal cast members , and the climax song , which was picturised on Jyothika , were filmed in Ramoji Film City . Vasu said the film had taken only 78 days to be completed instead of the planned 120 days . 
 The picturisation of the song " Devuda Devuda " focused on a variety of professions , especially janitors , sewage cleaners , farmers and washer folk . According to Ramji , who helped the production unit look for locations for the song " Konjam Neram " , Australia and Russia were the initial choices for filming locations for the song sequence , but Ramkumar Ganesan and Vasu chose Turkey , making Chandramukhi the first Tamil film to be shot there . The production unit flew to Istanbul from Chennai via Dubai on 25 February 2005 . The filming of the song was completed after the audio launch . " Konjam Neram " was shot in segments in Ephesus and Pamukkale . Shooting in Ephesus took six hours . The segment in Pamukkale was filmed in an amphitheatre in the ancient city of Hierapolis , which is located close to Pamukkale . The last segment was shot in the <unk> region , a 10 @-@ hour drive by bus from Istanbul . " Raa Raa " was choreographed by Kala and took four days to be completed instead of the planned seven days . 
 = = Music = = 
 Vidyasagar composed the soundtrack album and the background score of Chandramukhi . The soundtrack album consists of six tracks . Vaali , <unk> , Pa . Vijay , Na . Muthukumar and Bhuvana Chandra wrote the lyrics for the Tamil version . <unk> , <unk> Ashok Teja , <unk> and Vaali wrote the lyrics for the dubbed Telugu version . The track " Raa Raa " was based on the Surya raaga , which is also known as the <unk> raaga . Asha Bhosle was engaged to sing a song for the film and to attend the film 's audio launch . The audio rights for the film were sold to Sanjay <unk> of <unk> audio for ₹ 11 million . Tata Indicom and <unk> Biscuits were the sponsors for the audio launch and marketing . The album cover depicts Rajinikanth in the song " Devuda Devuda " . 
 The album was released on 5 March 2005 at the Taj Connemara hotel in Chennai . An overseas audio launch took place the next day in Malaysia . At the Music World shop in Chennai , 437 cassettes and 227 compact discs were sold on the first day of its stock release . The cassettes were priced at ₹ 45 each and CD 's at ₹ 99 each . The original soundtrack of the film and a video CD titled " The making of Chandramukhi " , were released on 27 September 2005 in Chennai . The film 's background score was released as a separate album . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics . Siddhu Warrier of Rediff said that " Devuda Devuda " " finds S. P. Balasubramanian in top form " . He called " Konjam Neram " " melodious in a forgettable kind of way " , " <unk> " a " soft , melodious song " , " <unk> Para Para " as " insipid " , " Raa Raa " " a rather listenable track " , and said " <unk> <unk> " is " vintage Rajni , and gets your feet tapping . One can almost picture Rajni brandishing his trademark cigarette and sunglasses as he gyrates to the beat . If one is a die @-@ hard Rajni fan , then one is likely to go <unk> dancing to this . " G. Dhananjayan , in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema , said all of the songs became popular and contributed to the success of the film , and also said " Raa Raa " became an evergreen number among music lovers . Singer Charulatha Mani , writing for The Hindu called the song " Konjam Neram " , which was based on the Sriranjani raga , an " attractive take on the raga " and said the song " is contemporary in feel and traditional at the roots " . 
 = = = Track list = = = 
 Original track list 
 Telugu version 
 = = Release = = 
 The length of the film was 4 @,@ 575 metres ( 15 @,@ 010 ft ) . The film was released on 14 April 2005 — Tamil New Year 's Day — alongside Kamal Haasan 's Mumbai Express and Vijay 's Sachein . Chandramukhi was released in 37 theatres in Malaysia , 15 in Europe , nine in Sri Lanka , seven in the United States , four each in Canada and the Gulf countries and two each in Australia and Singapore . The film was released with 23 prints in Coimbatore , 12 more than Rajinikanth 's Padayappa ( 1999 ) . 
 The producers entered into a business dealing with Tata Indicom to promote the film ; ringtones of the songs from the film 's soundtrack and special screensavers were issued . Giant cutouts of Rajinikanth and movie release posters were posted all over the state as a run @-@ up for the release . The promotional campaign started in early March 2005 and continued mid @-@ May that year . The movie was screened in eight city theatres in Chennai . The theatrical rights of the film in the Coimbatore and Nilgiris districts combined were sold to local theatre owners Tirupur Balu and Seenu for ₹ 2 @.@ 25 crore ( US $ 330 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Chandramukhi was screened at the 18th Tokyo International Film Festival in Japan on 23 October 2005 and 28 October 2005 as part of the ' Winds of Asia ' section . It was the first public screening of the film in Japan . It was met with positive response from audiences there . The film opened the 7th IIFA Awards Film Festival held at the Dubai International Convention Centre in Dubai , United Arab Emirates , becoming the first South Indian film to open the Film Festival . In November 2011 , it was screened at the International Tamil Film Festival held in <unk> , Russia alongside Thillana Mohanambal ( 1968 ) , Sivaji ( 2007 ) , Angadi Theru ( 2010 ) , Boss Engira Bhaskaran ( 2010 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 2010 ) and Ko ( 2011 ) . 
 Though the film was a remake , Madhu <unk> , who wrote the story for <unk> , was not mentioned in either the opening or closing credits . Instead , the story was credited to the director P. Vasu . Vasu defended himself by stating the script was not a scene @-@ by @-@ scene remake of the original and that only the basic plot was used . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film 's original negative was damaged because of poor care and ill treatment . AP International started a restoration project , which scanned the film frame @-@ by @-@ frame in a 2K workflow . They were able to remove all wear and tear and retain the natural film grain . This restored version was released on 2 August 2012 on Blu @-@ ray format . The television rights for the film were sold to Sun TV . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . Writing for The Hindu , Malathi Rangarajan said , " As you watch the film you cannot but admire the ingenuity of writer @-@ director P. Vasu in choosing a story that is bound to sell and at the same time helping Rajini maintain his image of an invincible hero " , before concluding that , " The ' Mannan ' team proves a winner again " . Another critic from The Hindu , Sudhish Kamath , said Rajinikanth is " at his vintage best " . 
 A reviewer from The Times of India called the film " Entertaining , stylish , respectful of ritual , and always massively larger than life " . Arun Ram of India Today said , " With Chandramukhi , <unk> revives his fading career and fortunes of Tamil cinema " . G. <unk> , writing for the Deccan Herald praised the chemistry between Rajinikanth and Vadivelu , saying " Rajinikanth is back in full form , comedy comes naturally to him and he finds an able ally in Vadivelu . Some of the best scenes in the movie are when both are together . " 
 Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan said in its review , " Rajni 's films normally revolve around him but in this case , Rajni is in a script which goes around several people ... Rajni as Vettaiyan is the highlight of the film ... After many years , Rajni has shown that he does not confine to his personality cage through this film . " and gave the film 40 marks out of 100 . Dhananjayan in his book , The Best of Tamil Cinema : 1977 to 2010 , said the film was " a family entertainer " . Behindwoods said , " Rajini belies his age on the screen and performs his antics with enthusiasm . His comic interludes with Vadivelu are the highlight of the movie . Shankar <unk> ’ s camera work is impressive . Vidyasagar ’ s music has enriched the songs which are soothing . " 
 Sify wrote , " ... Rajnikanth ’ s Chandramukhi is far better than his last film Baba , yet it leaves you with somewhat mixed feeling . Undoubtedly the plot is nothing but <unk> ’ s Manichitrathazhu from Malayalam . But Chandramukhi is a remake of P. Vasu ’ s Apthamitra from Kannada with some additional songs , fights and comedy scenes thrown in to further boost the superstar ’ s image " . A. Ganesh Nadar of Rediff said the film would become " a certain hit " and , " [ t ] he star will be happy , his fans will be happy and producer Prabhu will giggle all the way to the bank " . 
 V. Gangadhar of The Tribune wrote , " As in all Rajni films , Chandramukhi is a one @-@ star attraction and Rajni plays to the gallery , There are no political messages in the film and that should come as some relief . With Nayan Tara and Jyotika in the female leads , there is plenty of glamour in the film . But the message is clear , King Rajni is back . His legion of fans can not ask for more . " <unk> <unk> writing for Daily News Sri Lanka said , " ... the long anticipated delight Chandramukhi has made itself the box @-@ office hit of the year " . Grady Hendrix of Slate appreciated Rajinikanth 's characterisation in the film , calling the character , Saravanan 's ability to read minds " well @-@ trained " before concluding , " Rajinikanth 's movies are crammed with comedy , action , and musical numbers and they take great delight in kicking narrative logic in the face . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Chandramukhi was a box office success , selling 20 million tickets worldwide and earning ₹ 150 million in salary and profit share for Rajinikanth . The film 's distributors made a 20 per cent profit over the ₹ 25 million for which they bought the rights to the film . Its 365th day was celebrated at Shanthi theatre in Chennai ; the celebrations were organised by Life Insurance Corporation of India . 
 The film 's 804th day celebration function was held at Kamaraj Arangam in Chennai on 25 June 2007 . The then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu , M. Karunanidhi , director K. Balachander , film producer and owner of AVM Productions M. Saravanan , Kamal Haasan and Sridevi attended the function . Karunanidhi presented the " Shivaji " sword to the film 's cast and crew , and awards were given to everyone involved in the film . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 Chandramukhi grossed ₹ 8 @.@ 4 million in 11 days in eight screens in Chennai . In the <unk> screen of Sathyam Cinemas , around 22 @,@ 000 tickets were sold for the first 10 days of its release . The Telugu @-@ dubbed version topped the box office charts in its first week of release . Chandramukhi grossed ₹ 30 million in Coimbatore , beating the ₹ 24 @.@ 5 million record set there by Padayappa . Chandramukhi received ₹ 60 million as Minimum Guarantee ( MG ) from theatres in North Arcot , South Arcot and Chengalpattu districts collectively . It was also a hit in Kerala where it grossed ₹ 711 @,@ 545 in four days , doing better than the Mohanlal starrer <unk> , which also released on 14 April 2005 , but grossed ₹ 523 @,@ 340 during the same period of time . 
 The film 's theatrical run lasted 890 days at Sivaji Ganesan 's family @-@ owned Shanthi theatre , beating the 62 @-@ year record set by the 1944 film Haridas , which ran for 770 days at the Broadway theatre . According to Krishna Gopalan of Business Today , the film grossed ₹ 750 million ( US $ 16 @.@ 6 million in 2005 ) in its lifetime run . The New Indian Express conversely states that it grossed ₹ 650 million ( US $ 14 @.@ 3 million in 2005 ) . The Telugu version ran in theatres for 100 days . In the multiplexes of Mumbai and Delhi , the film was screened with subtitles ; it had a successful theatrical run and attracted the audience there . This was the first Tamil film to exceed the box office record set by <unk> ( 2004 ) , which grossed ₹ 330 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 6 million in 2005 ) . The record was beaten two years later by Sivaji ( 2007 ) . It was the longest running South Indian film , until its record was overtaken the Telugu film Magadheera ( 2009 ) , which completed a theatrical run of 1000 days in April 2012 . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Chandramukhi was screened in Tokyo in October 2005 to packed houses . In the US , it became the highest grossing South Indian film at that time . Chandramukhi completed a 100 @-@ day theatrical run in South Africa . It collectively earned ₹ 43 million in Malaysia , UAE and the US during the first month of its theatrical run . The film collected ₹ 62 @.@ 78 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million in 2005 ) in Malaysia ; it was the only Indian film to feature in that country 's top ten grossing films of the year . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The awards for the film mainly went to Vadivelu and Jyothika for their performances . Rajinikanth won a Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Actor for his dual role . In an interview with The Hindu , Binny <unk> said : 
 I will forever remain indebted to composer Vidyasagar , who gave me the song when I was a nobody in playback singing . I had given a cassette of my songs to Vidyasagar , who knew <unk> . Then , about six months later , Vidyasagar invited me to record " Ra ra ... " . The way that song has helped me in my career — both as a playback and classical singer — has been incredible . I was lucky I got a song in a Rajnikanth film so early in my career and the Filmfare award for my very first song . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In an interview with film journalist Sreedhar Pillai , Rajinikanth attributed the success of the film mainly to Vasu 's script and the performance of his co @-@ artistes . He said his comedy track with Vadivelu went a long way in making the film a successful venture and that their perfect timing clicked , bringing audiences to the theatres to watch the film more than once . He also said female viewers loved the portrayal of the female cast . Behindwoods rated Chandramukhi as " 2005 's summer blockbuster of the decade ( from 2003 to 2013 ) " . 
 Split personality syndrome became better known after the release of the film . <unk> hospital , in a blog description of the syndrome , called it The Chandramukhi syndrome . Film artist , trainer and film @-@ maker L. Satyanand said Chandramukhi is a classic example of the subgenre " horror of the demonic " and of " brilliance " , ranking it alongside The Legend of Sleepy Hollow and Psycho ( 1960 ) . The film became a trendsetter for later comedy horror films such as the Muni series , <unk> <unk> ( 2014 ) , <unk> ( 2014 ) and Darling ( 2015 ) . 
 In a seminar on revisiting psychiatric disorders which centred around Chandramukhi and Anniyan , psychiatrist <unk> noted that there were many logical faults in both films . Responding to this , Vasu said that he did not know anything about psychiatric disorders : " I never had a brush with a ghost . Anyone watching films could come to a conclusion that ghosts have <unk> saree and a pale face . My family saw the Malayalam film <unk> . Next day I saw a shadow moving in front of my bedroom and when I asked who was it , pat came the reply from my 4 @-@ year @-@ old daughter that it was ' Nagavalli ' , the ghostly character in the film . " 
 Sivaji Productions joined Galatta Media and eBay for an online auction of the film 's memorabilia , becoming the first South Indian film to auction film merchandise . Ramkumar Ganesan said the proceeds of the auction would be given to the Sivaji Prabhu Charity Trust and that ₹ 300 @,@ 000 ( US $ 6 @,@ 650 in 2005 ) would be given to <unk> Middle School . Sophie <unk> from France bought Rajinikanth 's sunglasses , which he sported in the film , for ₹ 25 @,@ 000 ( US $ 554 in 2005 ) . According to Girish Ramdas , chief operating officer of Galatta Media , all the items had certificates of authenticity signed by the film 's producers . Bidding for the items ranged between ₹ 10 @,@ 000 ( US $ 222 in 2005 ) and ₹ 20 @,@ 000 ( US $ 444 in 2005 ) . 
 In a statement by eBay , the articles made available for bidding were Rajinikanth 's blue shirt worn in the song " Devuda Devuda " , Jyothika 's saree worn for the climax scenes , the peach @-@ coloured saree worn by Nayantara in the song " <unk> Neram " , and the Vettaiyan Raja costume and ornaments worn on set by Rajinikanth . Rajinikanth 's dress , which he wore in " Devuda Devuda " , was sold for ₹ 25 @,@ 000 ( US $ 554 in 2005 ) . His Vettaiyan costume and ornament set were sold for ₹ 32 @,@ 000 ( US $ 709 in 2005 ) . The saree worn by Nayantara in the song " <unk> Para Para " was also auctioned . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Some scenes , dialogues and expressions from the film , such as the " Lakka Lakka ... " sound that Rajnikanth 's character makes , became very popular , especially with children . Vadivelu 's expressions and scenes — especially those with Rajinikanth — and dialogues including " <unk> ... <unk> <unk> ! ! ! " , which means " Son @-@ in @-@ law ... he has trapped me ! ! ! " , also became popular . A dialogue spoken by Rajinikanth to Prabhu , Naan <unk> <unk> nalla <unk> ... nee <unk> nalla <unk> , which translates into " I won 't look good if I put on weight ... but you won 't look good if you have reduced weight " evoked a lot of laughter among audiences . 
 Prabhu 's dialogue , " Enna <unk> Saravanan <unk> ? " , which means " What atrocity is this , Saravanan ? " became popular . It is usually used to express irony or surprise . The line was often parodied by actor Premgi Amaren , who altered it slightly to " Enna <unk> , Sir Idhu ? " . This altered line was frequently used in Chennai <unk> ( 2007 ) , Goa ( 2010 ) and Mankatha ( 2011 ) . Prabhu said in an interview with Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu , " I hope I get to play light roles . Incidentally , I quite like the way in which these young actors have made a joke of my serious line in Chandramukhi — ' Enna <unk> <unk> Idhu ' " . 
 = = = Parodies = = = 
 Chandramukhi was parodied in various films . In a comedy scene from <unk> ( 2005 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Vadivelu ) invents an idea to frighten <unk> ( Sathyaraj ) but the ruse backfires on him as he witnesses <unk> in a garb similar to that of Chandramukhi 's . Chandramukhi was parodied along with Anniyan in the Telugu film <unk> ( 2006 ) . In a scene from <unk> ( 2006 ) , <unk> ( Vadivelu ) , after entering an old abandoned bungalow , gets frightened when he hears the " Lakka Lakka " sound , and says <unk> <unk> <unk> ! ( English : " Someone is calling in Telugu ! " ) . In <unk> ( 2006 ) , <unk> ( Silambarasan ) is seen singing " <unk> Neram " to Swapna ( Nayantara ) . In Sivaji ( 2007 ) , Thamizhselvi ( Shriya Saran ) would be seen dancing for the song " Raa Raa " , Sivaji ( Rajinikanth ) and Arivu ( Vivek ) are seen uttering the last lines of the song . Livingston who appears as a police inspector , utters the sound " Lakka Lakka " which Rajinikanth makes in Chandramukhi . Rajinikanth and Nayantara 's characters act in a film titled Chandramukhi 2 in a scene from Kuselan ( 2008 ) , which P. Vasu also directed . 
 In Thamizh Padam ( 2010 ) . Shiva ( Shiva ) would be seen imitating the film 's introduction scene by stretching his leg when it is revealed that Siva has a split seam in his pants . Sundar C. ' s role in the film <unk> ( 2014 ) was inspired by Rajinikanth 's role in Chandramukhi . Chandramukhi was parodied in the Star Vijay comedy series Lollu Sabha , in an episode named <unk> . 
 = = Remakes = = 
 Chandramukhi was dubbed in Telugu and was simultaneously released with the same title as the Tamil version . It was also dubbed and released in Bhojpuri under the title Chandramukhi Ke <unk> . It is the first Tamil film to be dubbed into German . It was released in Germany under the title , Der Geisterjäger ( English : The Ghost Hunters ) . The film was also dubbed and released in Turkish . Despite the release of Bhool Bhulaiyaa ( 2007 ) , Chandramukhi was dubbed in Hindi and released on 29 February 2008 by Dilip <unk> , owner of the production house Royal Film Company . The Hindi version was released in collaboration with producer A. M. Rathnam . All the film 's language versions were box @-@ office successes . 
 Below is a character map of the lead characters in the story of <unk> and its remakes . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A stand @-@ alone sequel to Chandramukhi titled Nagavalli was made in Telugu . The sequel was also directed by P. Vasu and stars Daggubati Venkatesh as the male lead , and Anushka Shetty , Richa Gangopadhyay , Shraddha Das , Poonam Kaur , and Kamalinee Mukherjee as the female leads . It was released on 16 December 2010 . 
 = Radon = 
 Radon is a chemical element with symbol Rn and atomic number 86 . It is a radioactive , colorless , odorless , tasteless noble gas , occurring naturally as a decay product of radium . Its most stable isotope , 222Rn , has a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 8 days . Radon is one of the densest substances that remains a gas under normal conditions . It is also the only gas under normal conditions that has no stable isotopes , and is considered a health hazard due to its radioactivity . Intense radioactivity has also hindered chemical studies of radon and only a few compounds are known . 
 Radon is formed as one intermediate step in the normal radioactive decay chains through which thorium and uranium slowly decay into lead . Thorium and uranium are the two most common radioactive elements on earth ; they have been around since the earth was formed . Their naturally occurring isotopes have very long half @-@ lives , on the order of billions of years . Thorium and uranium , their decay product radium , and its decay product radon , will therefore continue to occur for tens of millions of years at almost the same concentrations as they do now . As radon itself decays , it produces other radioactive elements called radon progeny ( also known as radon daughters ) or decay products . Unlike the gaseous radon itself , radon daughters are solids and stick to surfaces , such as dust particles in the air . If such contaminated dust is inhaled , these particles can stick to the airways of the lung and increase the risk of developing lung cancer . 
 Unlike all the other intermediate elements in the aforementioned decay chains , radon is gaseous and easily inhaled . Thus , naturally @-@ occurring radon is responsible for the majority of the public exposure to ionizing radiation . It is often the single largest contributor to an individual 's background radiation dose , and is the most variable from location to location . Despite its short lifetime , some radon gas from natural sources can accumulate to far higher than normal concentrations in buildings , especially in low areas such as basements and crawl spaces due to its density . It can also occur in water where the water comes from a ground source <unk> in some spring waters and hot springs . 
 Epidemiological studies have shown a clear link between breathing high concentrations of radon and incidence of lung cancer . Thus , radon is considered a significant contaminant that affects indoor air quality worldwide . According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency , radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer , after cigarette smoking , causing 21 @,@ 000 lung cancer deaths per year in the United States . About 2 @,@ 900 of these deaths occur among people who have never smoked . While radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer , it is the number one cause among non @-@ smokers , according to EPA estimates . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Radon is a colorless , odorless , and tasteless gas and therefore not detectable by human senses alone . At standard temperature and pressure , radon forms a monatomic gas with a density of 9 @.@ 73 kg / m3 , about 8 times the density of the Earth 's atmosphere at sea level , 1 @.@ 217 kg / m3 . Radon is one of the densest gases at room temperature and is the densest of the noble gases . Although colorless at standard temperature and pressure , when cooled below its freezing point of 202 K ( − 71 ° C ; − 96 ° F ) , radon emits a brilliant radioluminescence that turns from yellow to orange @-@ red as the temperature lowers . Upon condensation , radon glows because of the intense radiation it produces . Radon is sparingly soluble in water , but more soluble than lighter noble gases . Radon is appreciably more soluble in organic liquids than in water . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Being a noble gas , radon is chemically not very reactive . However , the 3 @.@ 8 @-@ day half @-@ life of radon @-@ 222 makes it useful in physical sciences as a natural tracer . 
 Radon is a member of the zero @-@ valence elements that are called noble gases . It is inert to most common chemical reactions , such as combustion , because the outer valence shell contains eight electrons . This produces a stable , minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound . 1037 kJ / mol is required to extract one electron from its shells ( also known as the first ionization energy ) . In accordance with periodic trends , radon has a lower electronegativity than the element one period before it , xenon , and is therefore more reactive . Early studies concluded that the stability of radon hydrate should be of the same order as that of the hydrates of chlorine ( Cl 
 2 ) or sulfur dioxide ( SO 
 2 ) , and significantly higher than the stability of the hydrate of hydrogen sulfide ( H 
 2S ) . 
 Because of its cost and radioactivity , experimental chemical research is seldom performed with radon , and as a result there are very few reported compounds of radon , all either fluorides or oxides . Radon can be oxidized by powerful oxidizing agents such as fluorine , thus forming radon difluoride . It decomposes back to elements at a temperature of above 250 ° C. It has a low volatility and was thought to be RnF 
 2 . Because of the short half @-@ life of radon and the radioactivity of its compounds , it has not been possible to study the compound in any detail . Theoretical studies on this molecule predict that it should have a Rn – F bond distance of 2 @.@ 08 Å , and that the compound is thermodynamically more stable and less volatile than its lighter counterpart XeF 
 2 . The octahedral molecule RnF 
 6 was predicted to have an even lower enthalpy of formation than the difluoride . The higher fluorides <unk> and <unk> have been claimed , and are calculated to be stable , but it is doubtful whether they have yet been synthesized . The [ RnF ] + ion is believed to form by the following reaction : 
 Rn ( g ) + 2 [ O 
 2 ] + [ SbF 
 6 ] − ( s ) → [ RnF ] + [ Sb 
 2F 
 11 ] − ( s ) + 2 O 
 2 ( g ) 
 Radon oxides are among the few other reported compounds of radon ; only the trioxide has been confirmed . Radon carbonyl <unk> has been predicted to be stable and to have a linear molecular geometry . The molecules Rn 
 2 and <unk> were found to be significantly stabilized by spin @-@ orbit coupling . Radon caged inside a fullerene has been proposed as a drug for tumors . Despite the existence of Xe ( VIII ) , no Rn ( VIII ) compounds have been claimed to exist ; <unk> should be highly unstable chemically ( <unk> is thermodynamically unstable ) . It is predicted that the most stable Rn ( VIII ) compound would be barium <unk> ( <unk> ) , analogous to barium perxenate . The instability of Rn ( VIII ) is due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s shell , also known as the inert pair effect . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Radon has no stable isotopes . Thirty @-@ six radioactive isotopes have been characterized , with atomic masses ranging from 193 to 228 . The most stable isotope is 222Rn , which is a decay product of 226Ra , a decay product of 238U . A trace amount of the ( highly unstable ) isotope <unk> is also among the daughters of 222Rn . 
 Three other radon isotopes have a half @-@ life of over an hour : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The 220Rn isotope is a natural decay product of the most stable thorium isotope ( 232Th ) , and is commonly referred to as thoron . It has a half @-@ life of 55 @.@ 6 seconds and also emits alpha radiation . Similarly , <unk> is derived from the most stable isotope of actinium ( 227Ac ) — named " actinon " — and is an alpha emitter with a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 96 seconds . No radon isotopes occur significantly in the neptunium ( 237Np ) decay series , though a trace amount of the ( extremely unstable ) isotope <unk> is produced . 
 = = = = Daughters = = = = 
 222Rn belongs to the radium and uranium @-@ 238 decay chain , and has a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ <unk> days . Its four first products ( excluding marginal decay schemes ) are very short @-@ lived , meaning that the corresponding disintegrations are indicative of the initial radon distribution . Its decay goes through the following sequence : 
 222Rn , 3 @.@ 8 days , alpha decaying to ... 
 218Po , 3 @.@ 10 minutes , alpha decaying to ... 
 214Pb , 26 @.@ 8 minutes , beta decaying to ... 
 214Bi , 19 @.@ 9 minutes , beta decaying to ... 
 214Po , 0 @.@ 1643 ms , alpha decaying to ... 
 210Pb , which has a much longer half @-@ life of 22 @.@ 3 years , beta decaying to ... 
 210Bi , 5 @.@ 013 days , beta decaying to ... 
 210Po , 138 @.@ 376 days , alpha decaying to ... 
 <unk> , stable . 
 The radon equilibrium factor is the ratio between the activity of all short @-@ period radon progenies ( which are responsible for most of radon 's biological effects ) , and the activity that would be at equilibrium with the radon parent . 
 If a closed volume is constantly supplied with radon , the concentration of short @-@ lived isotopes will increase until an equilibrium is reached where the rate of decay of each decay product will equal that of the radon itself . The equilibrium factor is 1 when both activities are equal , meaning that the decay products have stayed close to the radon parent long enough for the equilibrium to be reached , within a couple of hours . Under these conditions each additional pCi / L of radon will increase exposure , by 0 @.@ 01 WL ( Working Level -a measure of radioactivity commonly used in mining . A detailed explanation of WL is given in Concentration Units ) . These conditions are not always met ; in many homes , the equilibrium fraction is typically 40 % ; that is , there will be 0 @.@ 004 WL of daughters for each pCi / L of radon in air . 210Pb takes much longer ( decades ) to come in equilibrium with radon , but , if the environment permits accumulation of dust over extended periods of time , 210Pb and its decay products may contribute to overall radiation levels as well . 
 Because of their electrostatic charge , radon progenies adhere to surfaces or dust particles , whereas gaseous radon does not . Attachment removes them from the air , usually causing the equilibrium factor in the atmosphere to be less than one . The equilibrium factor is also lowered by air circulation or air filtration devices , and is increased by airborne dust particles , including cigarette smoke . In high concentrations , airborne radon isotopes contribute significantly to human health risk . The equilibrium factor found in epidemiological studies is 0 @.@ 4 . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Radon was the fifth radioactive element to be discovered , in 1900 by Friedrich Ernst Dorn , after uranium , thorium , radium and polonium . In 1900 Dorn reported some experiments in which he noticed that radium compounds emanate a radioactive gas he named Radium Emanation ( Ra Em ) . Before that , in 1899 , Pierre and Marie Curie observed that the gas emitted by radium remained radioactive for a month . Later that year , Robert B. Owens and Ernest Rutherford , at McGill University in Montreal , noticed variations when trying to measure radiation from thorium oxide . Rutherford noticed that the compounds of thorium continuously emit a radioactive gas that retains the radioactive powers for several minutes , and called this gas emanation ( from Latin " <unk> " — to elapse and " <unk> " — expiration ) , and later Thorium Emanation ( Th Em ) . In 1901 , he demonstrated that the emanations are radioactive , but credited the Curies for the discovery of the element . In 1903 , similar emanations were observed from actinium by André @-@ Louis Debierne and were called Actinium Emanation ( Ac Em ) . 
 Several names were suggested for these three gases : <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in 1904 ; radon , thoron , and <unk> in 1918 ; <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in 1919 , and eventually radon , thoron , and actinon in 1920 . The likeness of the spectra of these three gases with those of argon , krypton , and xenon , and their observed chemical inertia led Sir William Ramsay to suggest in 1904 that the " emanations " might contain a new element of the noble gas family . 
 In 1910 , Ramsay and Robert <unk> @-@ Gray isolated radon , determined its density , and determined that it was the heaviest known gas . They wrote that " L <unk> de l <unk> du radium est fort <unk> " , ( the expression ' radium emanation ' is very awkward ) and suggested the new name <unk> ( <unk> ) ( from the Latin " nitens " meaning " shining " ) to emphasize the radioluminescence property , and in 1912 it was accepted by the International Commission for Atomic Weights . In 1923 , the International Committee for Chemical Elements and International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) chose among the names radon ( Rn ) , thoron ( <unk> ) , and actinon ( An ) . Later , when isotopes were numbered instead of named , the element took the name of the most stable isotope , radon , while <unk> was renamed 220Rn and An was renamed <unk> . As late as the 1960s , the element was also referred to simply as emanation . The first synthesized compound of radon , radon fluoride , was obtained in 1962 . 
 The danger of high exposure to radon in mines , where exposures reaching 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Bq / m3 can be found , has long been known . In 1530 , Paracelsus described a wasting disease of miners , the mala <unk> , and Georg Agricola recommended ventilation in mines to avoid this mountain sickness ( <unk> ) . In 1879 , this condition was identified as lung cancer by <unk> and Hesse in their investigation of miners from <unk> , Germany . The first major studies with radon and health occurred in the context of uranium mining in the Joachimsthal region of Bohemia . In the US , studies and mitigation only followed decades of health effects on uranium miners of the Southwestern United States employed during the early Cold War ; standards were not implemented until 1971 . 
 The presence of radon in indoor air was documented as early as 1950 . Beginning in the 1970s research was initiated to address sources of indoor radon , determinants of concentration , health effects , and approaches to mitigation . In the United States , the problem of indoor radon received widespread publicity and intensified investigation after a widely publicized incident in 1984 . During routine monitoring at a Pennsylvania nuclear power plant , a worker was found to be contaminated with radioactivity . A high contamination of radon in his home was subsequently identified as responsible for the contamination . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 = = = Concentration units = = = 
 All discussions of radon concentrations in the environment refer to 222Rn . While the average rate of production of 220Rn ( from the thorium decay series ) is about the same as 222Rn , the amount of 220Rn in the environment is much less than that of 222Rn because of the short half @-@ life of 220Rn ( 55 seconds , versus 3 @.@ 8 days respectively ) . 
 Radon concentration in the atmosphere is usually measured in becquerel per cubic meter ( Bq / m3 ) , the SI derived unit . Another unit of measurement common in the US is picocuries per liter ( pCi / L ) ; 1 pCi / L = 37 Bq / m3 . Typical domestic exposures average about 48 Bq / m3 indoors , though this varies widely , and 15 Bq / m3 outdoors . 
 In the mining industry , the exposure is traditionally measured in working level ( WL ) , and the cumulative exposure in working level month ( WLM ) ; 1 WL equals any combination of short @-@ lived 222Rn daughters ( 218Po , 214Pb , 214Bi , and 214Po ) in 1 liter of air that releases 1 @.@ 3 × 105 MeV of potential alpha energy ; one WL is equivalent to 2 @.@ 08 × 10 − 5 joules per cubic meter of air ( J / m3 ) . The SI unit of cumulative exposure is expressed in joule @-@ hours per cubic meter ( J · h / m3 ) . One WLM is equivalent to 3 @.@ 6 × 10 − 3 J · h / m3 . An exposure to 1 WL for 1 working month ( 170 hours ) equals 1 WLM cumulative exposure . A cumulative exposure of 1 WLM is roughly equivalent to living one year in an atmosphere with a radon concentration of 230 Bq / m3 . 
 Radon ( 222Rn ) , decays to 210Pb and other radioisotopes . The levels of 210Pb can be measured . The rate of deposition of this radioisotope is weather @-@ dependent . 
 Radon concentrations found in natural environments are much too low to be detected by chemical means . A 1000 Bq / m3 ( relatively high ) concentration corresponds to 0 @.@ 17 picogram per cubic meter . The average concentration of radon in the atmosphere is about 6 × 10 − 20 atoms of radon for each molecule in the air , or about 150 atoms in each ml of air . The radon activity of the entire Earth 's atmosphere originates from only a few tens of grams of radon , consistently replaced by decay of larger amounts of radium and uranium . 
 = = = Natural = = = 
 Radon is produced by the radioactive decay of radium @-@ 226 , which is found in uranium ores , phosphate rock , shales , igneous and metamorphic rocks such as granite , gneiss , and schist , and to a lesser degree , in common rocks such as limestone . Every square mile of surface soil , to a depth of 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 to a depth of 15 cm ) , contains approximately 1 gram of radium , which releases radon in small amounts to the atmosphere . On a global scale , it is estimated that 2 @,@ 400 million curies ( 90 <unk> ) of radon are released from soil annually . 
 Radon concentration varies widely from place to place . In the open air , it ranges from 1 to 100 Bq / m3 , even less ( 0 @.@ 1 Bq / m3 ) above the ocean . In caves or aerated mines , or ill @-@ aerated houses , its concentration climbs to 20 – 2 @,@ 000 Bq / m3 . 
 Radon concentration can be much higher in mining contexts . Ventilation regulations instruct to maintain radon concentration in uranium mines under the " working level " , with 95th percentile levels ranging up to nearly 3 WL ( 546 pCi 222Rn per liter of air ; 20 @.@ 2 kBq / m3 , measured from 1976 to 1985 ) . The concentration in the air at the ( unventilated ) <unk> Healing Gallery averages 43 kBq / m3 ( 1 @.@ 2 nCi / L ) with maximal value of 160 kBq / m3 ( 4 @.@ 3 nCi / L ) . 
 Radon mostly appears with the decay chain of the radium and uranium series ( 222Rn ) , and marginally with the thorium series ( 220Rn ) . The element emanates naturally from the ground , and some building materials , all over the world , wherever traces of uranium or thorium can be found , and particularly in regions with soils containing granite or shale , which have a higher concentration of uranium . Not all granitic regions are prone to high emissions of radon . Being a rare gas , it usually migrates freely through faults and fragmented soils , and may accumulate in caves or water . Owing to its very short half @-@ life ( four days for 222Rn ) , radon concentration decreases very quickly when the distance from the production area increases . Radon concentration varies greatly with season and atmospheric conditions . For instance , it has been shown to accumulate in the air if there is a meteorological inversion and little wind . 
 High concentrations of radon can be found in some spring waters and hot springs . The towns of Boulder , Montana ; <unk> ; Bad Kreuznach , Germany ; and the country of Japan have radium @-@ rich springs that emit radon . To be classified as a radon mineral water , radon concentration must be above 2 nCi / L ( 74 kBq / m3 ) . The activity of radon mineral water reaches 2 @,@ 000 kBq / m3 in Merano and 4 @,@ 000 kBq / m3 in <unk> ( Italy ) . 
 Natural radon concentrations in the Earth 's atmosphere are so low that radon @-@ rich water in contact with the atmosphere will continually lose radon by volatilization . Hence , ground water has a higher concentration of 222Rn than surface water , because radon is continuously produced by radioactive decay of 226Ra present in rocks . Likewise , the saturated zone of a soil frequently has a higher radon content than the unsaturated zone because of <unk> losses to the atmosphere . 
 In 1971 , Apollo 15 passed 110 km ( 68 mi ) above the Aristarchus plateau on the Moon , and detected a significant rise in alpha particles thought to be caused by the decay of 222Rn . The presence of 222Rn has been inferred later from data obtained from the Lunar Prospector alpha particle spectrometer . 
 Radon is found in some petroleum . Because radon has a similar pressure and temperature curve to propane , and oil refineries separate petrochemicals based on their boiling points , the piping carrying freshly separated propane in oil refineries can become radioactive because of decaying radon and its products . 
 Residues from the petroleum and natural gas industry often contain radium and its daughters . The sulfate scale from an oil well can be radium rich , while the water , oil , and gas from a well often contains radon . Radon decays to form solid radioisotopes that form coatings on the inside of pipework . 
 = = = Accumulation in buildings = = = 
 High concentrations of radon in homes were discovered by chance in 1985 after the stringent radiation testing conducted at a nuclear power plant entrance revealed that Stanley <unk> , an engineer entering the plant , was contaminated by radioactive substances . Typical domestic exposures are of approximately 100 Bq / m3 ( 2 @.@ 7 pCi / L ) indoors . Some level of radon will be found in all buildings . Radon mostly enters a building directly from the soil through the lowest level in the building that is in contact with the ground . High levels of radon in the water supply can also increase indoor radon air levels . Typical entry points of radon into buildings are cracks in solid foundations , construction joints , cracks in walls , gaps in suspended floors , gaps around service pipes , cavities inside walls , and the water supply . Radon concentrations in the same location may differ by a factor of two over a period of 1 hour . Also , the concentration in one room of a building may be significantly different from the concentration in an adjoining room . 
 The distribution of radon concentrations will generally change from room to room , and the readings are averaged according to regulatory protocols . Indoor radon concentration is usually assumed to follow a <unk> distribution on a given territory . Thus , the geometric mean is generally used for estimating the " average " radon concentration in an area . 
 The mean concentration ranges from less than 10 Bq / m3 to over 100 Bq / m3 in some European countries . Typical geometric standard deviations found in studies range between 2 and 3 , meaning ( given the 68 – 95 – 99 @.@ 7 rule ) that the radon concentration is expected to be more than a hundred times the mean concentration for 2 to 3 % of the cases . 
 The highest average radon concentrations in the United States are found in Iowa and in the Appalachian Mountain areas in southeastern Pennsylvania . Some of the highest readings ever have been recorded in the Irish town of Mallow , County Cork , prompting local fears regarding lung cancer . Iowa has the highest average radon concentrations in the United States due to significant glaciation that ground the granitic rocks from the Canadian Shield and deposited it as soils making up the rich Iowa farmland . Many cities within the state , such as Iowa City , have passed requirements for radon @-@ resistant construction in new homes . 
 In a few locations , uranium tailings have been used for landfills and were subsequently built on , resulting in possible increased exposure to radon . 
 Since radon is a colorless , odorless gas the only way to know how much is present in the air or water is to perform tests . In the United States radon test kits are available to the public at retail stores , such as hardware stores , for home use and testing is available through licensed professionals , who are often home inspectors . Efforts to reduce indoor radon levels are called radon mitigation . In the U.S. the Environmental Protection Agency recommends all houses be tested for radon . 
 = = = Industrial production = = = 
 Radon is obtained as a by @-@ product of <unk> ores processing after transferring into 1 % solutions of hydrochloric or hydrobromic acids . The gas mixture extracted from the solutions contains H 
 2 , O 
 2 , He , Rn , CO 
 2 , H 
 2O and hydrocarbons . The mixture is purified by passing it over copper at 720 ° C to remove the H 
 2 and the O 
 2 , and then KOH and P 
 2O 
 5 are used to remove the acids and moisture by <unk> . Radon is condensed by liquid nitrogen and purified from residue gases by sublimation . 
 Radon commercialization is regulated , but it is available in small quantities for the calibration of 222Rn measurement systems , at a price of almost $ 6 @,@ 000 per milliliter of radium solution ( which only contains about 15 picograms of actual radon at a given moment ) . Radon is produced by a solution of radium @-@ 226 ( half @-@ life of 1600 years ) . Radium @-@ 226 decays by alpha @-@ particle emission , producing radon that collects over samples of radium @-@ 226 at a rate of about 1 mm3 / day per gram of radium ; equilibrium is quickly achieved and radon is produced in a steady flow , with an activity equal to that of the radium ( 50 Bq ) . Gaseous 222Rn ( half @-@ life of about four days ) escapes from the capsule through diffusion . 
 = = = Concentration scale = = = 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 An early @-@ 20th @-@ century form of quackery was the treatment of maladies in a <unk> . It was a small , sealed room for patients to be exposed to radon for its " medicinal effects " . The carcinogenic nature of radon due to its ionizing radiation became apparent later on . Radon 's molecule @-@ damaging radioactivity has been used to kill cancerous cells , but it does not increase the health of healthy cells . The ionizing radiation causes the formation of free radicals , which results in genetic and other cell damage , resulting in increased rates of illness , including cancer . 
 Exposure to radon , a process known as radiation <unk> , has been suggested to mitigate auto @-@ immune diseases such as arthritis . As a result , in the late 20th century and early 21st century , " health mines " established in Basin , Montana attracted people seeking relief from health problems such as arthritis through limited exposure to radioactive mine water and radon . The practice is discouraged because of the well @-@ documented ill effects of high @-@ doses of radiation on the body . 
 Radioactive water baths have been applied since 1906 in Jáchymov , Czech Republic , but even before radon discovery they were used in Bad <unk> , Austria . Radium @-@ rich springs are also used in traditional Japanese onsen in <unk> , Tottori Prefecture . Drinking therapy is applied in Bad <unk> , Germany . Inhalation therapy is carried out in <unk> @-@ <unk> , Austria , in <unk> @-@ Zdrój , <unk> @-@ Zdrój , <unk> , <unk> Zdrój , Poland , in <unk> <unk> , Romania , and in Boulder , United States . In the US and Europe there are several " radon spas " , where people sit for minutes or hours in a high @-@ radon atmosphere in the belief that low doses of radiation will invigorate or energize them . 
 Radon has been produced commercially for use in radiation therapy , but for the most part has been replaced by radionuclides made in accelerators and nuclear reactors . Radon has been used in implantable seeds , made of gold or glass , primarily used to treat cancers . The gold seeds were produced by filling a long tube with radon pumped from a radium source , the tube being then divided into short sections by crimping and cutting . The gold layer keeps the radon within , and filters out the alpha and beta radiations , while allowing the gamma rays to escape ( which kill the diseased tissue ) . The activities might range from 0 @.@ 05 to 5 millicuries per seed ( 2 to 200 MBq ) . The gamma rays are produced by radon and the first short @-@ lived elements of its decay chain ( 218Po , 214Pb , 214Bi , 214Po ) . 
 Radon and its first decay products being very short @-@ lived , the seed is left in place . After 12 half @-@ lives ( 43 days ) , radon radioactivity is at 1 / 2000 of its original level . At this stage , the predominant residual activity originates from the radon decay product 210Pb , whose half @-@ life ( 22 @.@ 3 years ) is 2000 times that of radon ( and whose activity is thus 1 / 2000 of radon 's ) , and its descendants 210Bi and 210Po . 
 In the early part of the 20th century in the US , gold contaminated with 210Pb entered the jewelry industry . This was from gold seeds that had held 222Rn that had been melted down after the radon had decayed . 
 = = = Scientific = = = 
 Radon emanation from the soil varies with soil type and with surface uranium content , so outdoor radon concentrations can be used to track air masses to a limited degree . This fact has been put to use by some atmospheric scientists . Because of radon 's rapid loss to air and comparatively rapid decay , radon is used in hydrologic research that studies the interaction between ground water and streams . Any significant concentration of radon in a stream is a good indicator that there are local inputs of ground water . 
 Radon soil @-@ concentration has been used in an experimental way to map buried close @-@ subsurface geological faults because concentrations are generally higher over the faults . Similarly , it has found some limited use in prospecting for geothermal gradients . 
 Some researchers have investigated changes in groundwater radon concentrations for earthquake prediction . Radon has a half @-@ life of approximately 3 @.@ 8 days , which means that it can be found only shortly after it has been produced in the radioactive decay chain . For this reason , it has been hypothesized that increases in radon concentration is due to the generation of new cracks underground , which would allow increased ground water circulation , flushing out radon . The generation of new cracks might not unreasonably be assumed to precede major earthquakes . In the 1970s and 1980s , scientific measurements of radon emissions near faults found that earthquakes often occurred with no radon signal , and radon was often detected with no earthquake to follow . It was then dismissed by many as an unreliable indicator . As of 2009 , it was under investigation as a possible precursor by NASA . 
 Radon is a known pollutant emitted from geothermal power stations because it is present in the material pumped from deep underground . It disperses rapidly , and no radiological hazard has been demonstrated in various investigations . In addition , typical systems re @-@ inject the material deep underground rather that releasing it at the surface , so its environmental impact is minimal . 
 In the 1940s and ' 50s , radon was used for industrial radiography , Other X @-@ ray sources , which became available after World War II , quickly replaced radon for this application , as they were lower in cost and had less hazard of alpha radiation . 
 = = Health risks = = 
 = = = In mines = = = 
 Radon @-@ 222 decay products have been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as being carcinogenic to humans , and as a gas that can be inhaled , lung cancer is a particular concern for people exposed to elevated levels of radon for sustained periods . During the 1940s and ' 50s , when safety standards requiring expensive ventilation in mines were not widely implemented , radon exposure was linked to lung cancer among non @-@ smoking miners of uranium and other hard rock materials in what is now the Czech Republic , and later among miners from the Southwestern United States and South Australia . Despite these hazards being known in the early 1950s , this occupational hazard remained poorly managed in many mines until the 1970s . During this period , several entrepreneurs opened former uranium mines in the USA to the general public and advertised alleged health benefits from breathing radon gas underground . Health benefits claimed including pain , sinus , asthma and arthritis relief but these were proven to be false . 
 Since that time , ventilation and other measures have been used to reduce radon levels in most affected mines that continue to operate . In recent years , the average annual exposure of uranium miners has fallen to levels similar to the concentrations inhaled in some homes . This has reduced the risk of <unk> induced cancer from radon , although health issues may persist for those who are currently employed in affected mines and for those who have been employed in them in the past . As the relative risk for miners has decreased , so has the ability to detect excess risks among that population . 
 In addition to lung cancer , researchers have theorized a possible increased risk of leukemia due to radon exposure . Empirical support from studies of the general population is inconsistent , and a study of uranium miners found a correlation between radon exposure and chronic lymphocytic leukemia . 
 Miners ( as well as milling and ore transportation workers ) who worked in the uranium industry in the United States between the 1940s and 1971 may be eligible for compensation under the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act ( <unk> ) . Surviving relatives may also apply in cases where the formerly employed person is deceased . 
 = = = Domestic @-@ level exposure = = = 
 Radon exposure ( mostly radon daughters ) has been linked to lung cancer in numerous case @-@ control studies performed in the United States , Europe and China . There are approximately 21 @,@ 000 deaths per year in the US due to radon @-@ induced lung cancers . One of the most comprehensive radon studies performed in the United States by Dr. R. William Field and colleagues found a 50 % increased lung cancer risk even at the protracted exposures at the EPA 's action level of 4 pCi / L. North American and European <unk> analyses further support these findings . 
 Most models of residential radon exposure are based on studies of miners , and direct estimates of the risks posed to homeowners would be more desirable . Because of the difficulties of measuring the risk of radon relative to smoking , models of their effect have often made use of them . 
 Radon has been considered the second leading cause of lung cancer and leading environmental cause of cancer mortality by the United States Environmental Protection Agency . Others have reached similar conclusions for the United Kingdom and France . Radon exposure in homes and offices may arise from certain subsurface rock formations , and also from certain building materials ( e.g. , some granites ) . The greatest risk of radon exposure arises in buildings that are airtight , insufficiently ventilated , and have foundation leaks that allow air from the soil into basements and dwelling rooms . 
 = = = Action and reference level = = = 
 WHO presented in 2009 a recommended reference level ( the national reference level ) , 100 Bq / m3 , for radon in dwellings . The recommendation also says that where this is not possible , 300 Bq / m3 should be selected as the highest level . A national reference level should not be a limit , but should represent the maximum acceptable annual average radon concentration in a dwelling . 
 The actionable concentration of radon in a home varies depending on the organization doing the recommendation , for example , the United States Environmental Protection Agency encourages that action be taken at concentrations as low as 74 Bq / m3 ( 2 pCi / L ) , and the European Union recommends action be taken when concentrations reach 400 Bq / m3 ( 11 pCi / L ) for old houses and 200 Bq / m3 ( 5 pCi / L ) for new ones . On 8 July 2010 the UK 's Health Protection Agency issued new advice setting a " Target Level " of 100 Bq / m3 whilst retaining an " Action Level " of 200 Bq / m3 . The same levels ( as UK ) apply to Norway from 2010 ; in all new housings preventative measures should be taken against radon accumulation . 
 = = = Relationship to smoking = = = 
 Results from epidemiological studies indicate that the risk of lung cancer increases with exposure to residential radon . A well @-@ known example of source of error is smoking . In addition , smoking is the most important risk factor for lung cancer . In the West , tobacco smoke is estimated to cause about 90 % of all lung cancers . There is a tendency for other hypothetical lung cancer risks to drown in the risk of smoking . Results from epidemiological studies must always be interpreted with caution . 
 According to the EPA , the risk of lung cancer for smokers is significant due to synergistic effects of radon and smoking . For this population about 62 people in a total of 1 @,@ 000 will die of lung cancer compared to 7 people in a total of 1 @,@ 000 for people who have never smoked . It can not be excluded that the risk of non @-@ smokers should be primarily explained by a combination effect of radon and passive smoking ( see below ) . 
 Radon , like other known or suspected external risk factors for lung cancer , is a threat for smokers and former smokers . This was demonstrated by the European pooling study . A commentary to the pooling study stated : " it is not appropriate to talk simply of a risk from radon in homes . The risk is from smoking , compounded by a synergistic effect of radon for smokers . Without smoking , the effect seems to be so small as to be insignificant . " 
 According to the European pooling study , there is a difference in risk from radon between histological types . Small cell lung carcinoma , which practically only affects smokers have high risk from radon . For other histological types such as adenocarcinoma , the type that primarily affects never smokers , the risk from radon appears to be lower . 
 A study of radiation from post mastectomy radiotherapy shows that the simple models previously used to assess the combined and separate risks from radiation and smoking need to be developed . This is also supported by new discussion about the calculation method , LNT , which routinely has been used . 
 = = = Relationship to passive smoking = = = 
 An important question is if also passive smoking can cause a similar synergy effect with residential radon . This has been insufficiently studied . The basic data for the European pooling study makes it impossible to exclude that such synergy effect is an explanation for the ( very limited ) increase in the risk from radon that was stated for non @-@ smokers . 
 A study from 2001 , which included 436 cases ( never smokers who had lung cancer ) , and a control group ( 1649 never smokers ) showed that exposure to radon increased the risk of lung cancer in never smokers . But the group that had been exposed to passive smoking at home appeared to bear the entire risk increase , while those who were not exposed to passive smoking did not show any increased risk with increasing radon level . 
 = = = In drinking water = = = 
 The effects of radon if ingested are similarly unknown , although studies have found that its biological half @-@ life ranges from 30 – 70 minutes , with 90 percent removal at 100 minutes . In 1999 National Research Council investigated the issue of radon in drinking water . The risks associated with ingestion was considered almost negligible . Water from underground sources may contain significant amounts of radon depending on the surrounding rock and soil conditions , whereas surface sources generally do not . 
 As well as being ingested through drinking water , radon is also released from water when temperature is increased , pressure is decreased and when water is aerated . Optimum conditions for radon release and exposure occur during showering . Water with a radon concentration of 104 pCi / L can increase the indoor airborne radon concentration by 1 pCi / L under normal conditions . 
 = = = Testing and mitigation = = = 
 There are relatively simple tests for radon gas . In some countries these tests are methodically done in areas of known systematic hazards . Radon detection devices are commercially available . Digital radon detectors provide ongoing measurements giving both daily , weekly , short @-@ term and long @-@ term average readouts via a digital display . Short @-@ term radon test devices used for initial screening purposes are inexpensive , in some cases free . There are very important protocols for taking short @-@ term radon tests and it is imperative that they be strictly followed . The kit includes a collector that the user hangs in the lowest habitable floor of the house for 2 to 7 days . The user then sends the collector to a laboratory for analysis . Long term kits , taking collections for up to one year or more , are also available . An open @-@ land test kit can test radon emissions from the land before construction begins . Radon concentrations can vary daily , and accurate radon exposure estimates require long @-@ term average radon measurements in the spaces where an individual spends a significant amount of time . 
 Radon levels fluctuate naturally , due to factors like transient weather conditions , so an initial test might not be an accurate assessment of a home 's average radon level . Radon levels are at a maximum during the coolest part of the day when pressure differentials are greatest . Therefore , a high result ( over 4 pCi / L ) justifies repeating the test before undertaking more expensive abatement projects . Measurements between 4 and 10 pCi / L warrant a long term radon test . Measurements over 10 pCi / L warrant only another short term test so that abatement measures are not unduly delayed . Purchasers of real estate are advised to delay or decline a purchase if the seller has not successfully abated radon to 4 pCi / L or less . 
 Because the half @-@ life of radon is only 3 @.@ 8 days , removing or isolating the source will greatly reduce the hazard within a few weeks . Another method of reducing radon levels is to modify the building 's ventilation . Generally , the indoor radon concentrations increase as ventilation rates decrease . In a well ventilated place , the radon concentration tends to align with outdoor values ( typically 10 Bq / m3 , ranging from 1 to 100 Bq / m3 ) . 
 The four principal ways of reducing the amount of radon accumulating in a house are : 
 Sub @-@ slab depressurization ( soil suction ) by increasing under @-@ floor ventilation ; 
 Improving the ventilation of the house and avoiding the transport of radon from the basement into living rooms ; 
 Installing a radon sump system in the basement ; 
 Installing a positive pressurization or positive supply ventilation system . 
 According to the EPA the method to reduce radon " ... primarily used is a vent pipe system and fan , which pulls radon from beneath the house and vents it to the outside " , which is also called sub @-@ slab depressurization , active soil depressurization , or soil suction . Generally indoor radon can be mitigated by sub @-@ slab depressurization and exhausting such radon @-@ laden air to the outdoors , away from windows and other building openings . " EPA generally recommends methods which prevent the entry of radon . Soil suction , for example , prevents radon from entering your home by drawing the radon from below the home and venting it through a pipe , or pipes , to the air above the home where it is quickly diluted " and " EPA does not recommend the use of sealing alone to reduce radon because , by itself , sealing has not been shown to lower radon levels significantly or consistently " . 
 Positive @-@ pressure ventilation systems can be combined with a heat exchanger to recover energy in the process of exchanging air with the outside , and simply exhausting basement air to the outside is not necessarily a viable solution as this can actually draw radon gas into a dwelling . Homes built on a crawl space may benefit from a radon collector installed under a " radon barrier " ( a sheet of plastic that covers the crawl space ) . For <unk> , the EPA states " An effective method to reduce radon levels in crawlspace homes involves covering the earth floor with a high @-@ density plastic sheet . A vent pipe and fan are used to draw the radon from under the sheet and vent it to the outdoors . This form of soil suction is called <unk> suction , and when properly applied is the most effective way to reduce radon levels in crawlspace homes . " 
 = Otis Redding = 
 Otis Ray Redding , Jr . ( September 9 , 1941 – December 10 , 1967 ) was an American singer , songwriter , record producer , arranger , and talent scout . He is considered one of the greatest singers in the history of American popular music and a seminal artist in soul music and rhythm and blues . His singing style influenced many other soul artists of the 1960s . During his lifetime , his recordings were produced by Stax Records , based in Memphis , Tennessee , and exemplify the sound of Stax . 
 Born and raised in the US state of Georgia , Redding quit school at age 15 to support his family , working with Little Richard 's backing band , the Upsetters , and performing at talent shows for prize money . In 1958 , he joined Johnny Jenkins 's band , the Pinetoppers , with whom he toured the Southern states as a singer and driver . An unscheduled appearance on a Stax recording session led to a contract and his first single , " These Arms of Mine , " in 1962 . Stax released Redding 's debut album , Pain in My Heart , two years later . 
 Initially popular mainly with African @-@ Americans , Redding later reached a wider American pop music audience . Along with his group , he first played small gigs in the American South . He later performed at the popular Los Angeles night club Whisky a Go Go and toured Europe , performing in London , Paris and other major cities . He also performed at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 . 
 Shortly before his death in a plane crash , Redding wrote and recorded his iconic " ( Sittin ' on ) The Dock of the Bay " with Steve Cropper . The song became the first posthumous number @-@ one record on both the Billboard Hot 100 and R & B charts . The album The Dock of the Bay was the first posthumous album to reach number one on the UK Albums Chart . 
 Redding 's premature death devastated Stax . Already on the verge of bankruptcy , the label soon discovered that Atlantic Records owned the rights to his entire song catalog . 
 Redding received many posthumous accolades , including the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame . In addition to " ( Sittin ' on ) The Dock of the Bay , " " Respect " and " Try a Little Tenderness " are among his best @-@ known songs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Redding was born in Dawson , Georgia , the fourth of six children , and the first son , of Otis Redding , Sr. , and Fannie Mae Redding . Redding senior was a sharecropper and then worked at Robins Air Force Base , near Macon , and occasionally preached in local churches . When Otis was three the family moved to Tindall Heights , a predominantly African @-@ American public housing project in Macon . At an early age , Redding sang in the Vineville Baptist Church choir and learned guitar and piano . From age 10 , he took drum and singing lessons . At Ballard @-@ Hudson High School , he sang in the school band . Every Sunday he earned $ 6 by performing gospel songs for Macon radio station <unk> . His passion was singing , and he often cited Little Richard and Sam Cooke as influences . Redding said that he " would not be here " without Little Richard and that he " entered the music business because of Richard – he is my inspiration . I used to sing like Little Richard , his Rock ' n ' Roll stuff ... My present music has a lot of him in it . " 
 At age 15 , Redding left school to help financially support his family ; his father had contracted tuberculosis and was often hospitalized , leaving his mother as the family 's primary income earner . He worked as a well digger , as a filling ( gas ) station attendant and occasionally as a musician . Pianist Gladys Williams , a locally well @-@ known musician in Macon and another who inspired Redding , often performed at the Hillview Springs Social Club , and Redding sometimes played piano with her band there . Williams hosted Sunday talent shows , which Redding attended with two friends , singers Little Willie Jones and Eddie Ross . 
 Redding 's breakthrough came in 1958 on disc jockey Hamp Swain 's " The Teenage Party , " a talent contest at the local Roxy and Douglass Theatres . Johnny Jenkins , a locally prominent guitarist , was in the audience and , finding Redding 's backing band lacking in musical skills , offered to accompany him . Redding sang Little Richard 's " <unk> <unk> . " The combination enabled Redding to win Swain 's talent contest for fifteen consecutive weeks ; the cash prize was $ 5 . Jenkins later worked as lead guitarist and played with Redding during several later gigs . Redding was soon invited to replace Willie Jones as frontman of Pat T. Cake and the Mighty Panthers , featuring Johnny Jenkins . Redding was then hired by the Upsetters when Little Richard abandoned rock and roll in favor of gospel music . Redding was well paid , making about $ 25 per gig , but did not stay long . 
 At age 19 , Redding met 15 @-@ year @-@ old Zelma Atwood at " The Teenage Party . " She gave birth to their son Dexter in the summer of 1960 and married Redding in August 1961 . In mid @-@ 1960 , Otis moved to Los Angeles with his sister , Deborah , where he wrote his first songs , including " She 's <unk> , " " Tuff Enuff , " " I 'm Gettin ' Hip " and " Gamma Lamma " ( which he recorded as a single in 1962 , under the title " Shout Bamalama " ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 A member of Pat T. Cake and the Mighty Panthers , Redding toured the Southern United States on the chitlin ' circuit , a string of venues that were hospitable to African @-@ American entertainers during the era of racial segregation , which lasted into the early 1960s . Johnny Jenkins left the band to become the featured artist with the Pinetoppers . Around this time , Redding met Phil Walden , the future founder of the recording company Phil Walden and Associates , and later Bobby Smith , who ran the small label Confederate Records . He signed with Confederate and recorded his second single , " Shout Bamalama " ( a rewrite of " Gamma Lamma " ) and " Fat Girl " , together with his band Otis and the Shooters . Around this time he and the Pinetoppers attended a " Battle of the Bands " show in Lakeside Park . Wayne Cochran , the only solo artist signed to Confederate , became the Pinetoppers ' bassist . 
 When Walden started to look for a record label for Jenkins , Atlantic Records representative Joe Galkin showed interest and around 1962 sent him to the Stax studio in Memphis . Redding drove Jenkins to the session , as the latter did not have a driver 's license . The session with Jenkins , backed by Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , was unproductive and ended early ; Redding was allowed to perform two songs . The first was " Hey Hey Baby " , which studio chief Jim Stewart thought sounded too much like Little Richard . The second was " These Arms of Mine " , featuring Jenkins on piano and Steve Cropper on guitar . Stewart later praised Redding 's performance , saying , " Everybody was fixin ' to go home , but Joe Galkin insisted we give Otis a listen . There was something different about [ the ballad ] . He really poured his soul into it . " Stewart signed Redding and released " These Arms of Mine " , with " Hey Hey Baby " on the B @-@ side . The single was released by Volt in October 1962 and charted in March the following year . It became one of his most successful songs , selling more than 800 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Apollo Theater and Otis Blue = = = 
 " These Arms of Mine " and other songs from the 1962 – 1963 sessions were included on Redding 's debut album , Pain in My Heart . " That 's What My Heart Needs " and " Mary 's Little Lamb " were recorded in June 1963 . The latter is the only Redding track with both background singing and brass . It became his worst @-@ selling single . The title track , recorded in September 1963 , sparked copyright issues , as it sounded like Irma Thomas 's " Ruler of My Heart " . Despite this , Pain in My Heart was released on January 1 , 1964 , and peaked at number 20 on the R & B chart and at number 85 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 In November 1963 , Redding , accompanied by his brother Rodgers and an associate , former boxer Sylvester Huckaby ( a childhood friend of Redding 's ) , traveled to New York to perform at the Apollo Theater for the recording of a live album for Atlantic Records . Redding and his band were paid $ 400 per week , but had to pay $ 450 for sheet music for the house band , led by King Curtis , which left them in financial difficulty . The trio asked Walden for money . Huckaby 's description of their circumstances living in the " big old raggedy " Hotel Theresa is quoted by Peter Guralnick in his book Sweet Soul Music . He noted meeting Muhammad Ali and other celebrities . Ben E. King , who was the headliner at the Apollo when Redding performed there , gave him $ 100 when he learned about Redding 's financial situation . The resulting album featured King , the Coasters , Doris Troy , Rufus Thomas , the Falcons and Redding . Around this time Walden and Rodgers were drafted by the army ; Walden 's younger brother Alan joined Redding on tour , while Earl " Speedo " Simms replaced Rodgers as Redding 's road manager . 
 Most of Redding 's songs after " Security " , from his first album , had a slow tempo . Disc jockey A. C. <unk> Williams accordingly labeled him " Mr. Pitiful " , and subsequently Cropper and Redding wrote the eponymous song . That and top 100 singles " Chained and Bound " , " Come to Me " and " That 's How Strong My Love Is " were included on Redding 's second studio album , The Great Otis Redding Sings Soul Ballads , released in March 1965 . Jenkins began working independently from the group out of fear Galkin , Walden and Cropper would plagiarize his playing style , and so Cropper became Redding 's leading guitarist . Around 1965 , Redding co @-@ wrote " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " with Jerry Butler , the lead singer of the Impressions . That summer , Redding and the studio crew arranged new songs for his next album . Ten of the eleven songs were written in a 24 @-@ hour period on July 9 and 10 in Memphis . Two songs , " Ole Man Trouble " and " Respect " , had been finished earlier , during the Otis Blue session . " Respect " and " I 've Been Loving You " were later recut in stereo . The album , entitled Otis Blue : Otis Redding Sings Soul , was released in September 1965 . Redding also released his much @-@ loved cover of " A Change Is Gonna Come " in 1965 . 
 = = = Whisky a Go Go and " Try a Little Tenderness " = = = 
 Redding 's success allowed him to buy a 300 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) ranch in Georgia , which he called the " Big O Ranch . " Stax was also doing well . Walden signed more musicians , including Percy Sledge , Johnnie Taylor , Clarence Carter and Eddie Floyd , and together with Redding they founded two production companies . " <unk> Records " ( derived from Joe Galkin and Otis ) released four recordings , two by Arthur Conley and one by Billy Young and Loretta Williams . The other was named <unk> Music ( derived from Redding and Walden ) , which was shut down shortly after its creation . Since Afro @-@ Americans still formed the majority of fans , Redding chose to perform at Whisky a Go Go on the Sunset Strip in Los Angeles . Redding was one of the first soul artists to perform for rock audiences in the western United States . His performance received critical acclaim , including positive press in the Los Angeles Times , and he penetrated mainstream popular culture . Bob Dylan attended the performance and offered Redding an altered version of one of his songs , " Just Like a Woman " . 
 In late 1966 , Redding returned to the Stax studio and recorded several tracks , including " Try a Little Tenderness " , written by Jimmy Campbell , Reg Connelly and Harry M. Woods in 1932 . This song had previously been covered by Bing Crosby and Frank Sinatra , and the publishers unsuccessfully tried to stop Redding from recording the song from a " negro perspective " . Today often considered his signature song , Jim Stewart reckoned , " If there 's one song , one performance that really sort of sums up Otis and what he 's about , it 's ' Try a Little Tenderness ' . That one performance is so special and so unique that it expresses who he is . " On this version Redding was backed by Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , while staff producer Isaac Hayes worked on the arrangement . " Try a Little Tenderness " was included on his next album , Complete & Unbelievable : The Otis Redding Dictionary of Soul . The song and the album were critically and commercially successful — the former peaked at number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number 4 on the R & B chart . 
 The spring of 1966 marked the first time that Stax booked concerts for its artists . The majority of the group arrived in London on March 13 , but Redding had flown in days earlier for interviews , such as at " The Eamonn Andrews Show " . When the crew arrived in London , the Beatles sent a limousine to pick them up . Booking agent Bill Graham proposed that Redding play at the Fillmore Auditorium in late 1966 . The gig was commercially and critically successful , paying Redding around $ 800 to $ 1000 a night . It prompted Graham to remark afterwards , " That was the best gig I ever put on in my entire life . " Redding began touring Europe six months later . 
 = = = Carla Thomas = = = 
 In March 1967 , Stax released King & Queen , an album of duets between Redding and Carla Thomas , which became a certified gold record . It was Jim Stewart 's idea to produce a duet album , as he expected that " [ Redding 's ] rawness and [ Thomas 's ] sophistication would work " . The album was recorded in January 1967 , while Thomas was earning her M.A. in English at Howard University . Six out of ten songs were cut during their joint session ; the rest were overdubbed by Redding in the days following , because of his concert obligations . Three singles were lifted from the album : " Tramp " was released in April , followed by " Knock on Wood " and " Lovey Dovey " . All three reached at least the top 60 on both the R & B and Pop charts . The album charted at number 5 and 36 on the Billboard Pop and R & B charts , respectively . 
 Redding returned to Europe to perform at the Paris Olympia . The live album Otis Redding : Live in Europe was released three months later , featuring this and other live performances in London and Stockholm , Sweden . His decision to take his protege Conley ( whom Redding and Walden had contracted directly to Atco / Atlantic Records rather than to Stax / Volt ) on the tour , instead of more established Stax / Volt artists such as Rufus Thomas and William Bell , produced negative reactions . 
 = = = Monterey Pop = = = 
 In 1967 , Redding performed at the influential Monterey Pop Festival as the closing act on Saturday night , the second day of the festival . He was invited through the efforts of promoter Jerry Wexler . Until that point , Redding was still performing mainly for black audiences . His act , which included his own song " Respect " and a version of the Rolling Stones ' " Satisfaction " , was well received by the audience . Redding and his backing band ( Booker T. & the M.G. ' s with the Mar @-@ Keys horn section ) opened with Cooke 's " Shake " , after which he delivered an impulsive speech , asking the audience if they were the " love crowd " and looking for a big response . The ballad " I 've Been Loving You " followed . The last song was " Try a Little Tenderness " , including an additional chorus . " I got to go , y 'all , I don 't wanna go " , said Redding and left the stage of his last major concert . According to Booker T. Jones , " I think we did one of our best shows , Otis and the MG 's . That we were included in that was also something of a phenomenon . That we were there ? With those people ? They were accepting us and that was one of the things that really moved Otis . He was happy to be included and it brought him a new audience . It was greatly expanded in Monterey . " According to Sweet Soul Music , musicians such as Brian Jones and Jimi Hendrix were captivated by his performance ; Robert Christgau wrote in Esquire , " The Love Crowd screamed one 's mind to the heavens . " 
 Before Monterey , Redding wanted to record with Conley , but Stax was against the idea . The two moved from Memphis to Macon to continue writing . The result was " Sweet Soul Music " ( based on Cooke 's " Yeah Man " ) , which peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 . By that time Redding had developed polyps on his larynx , which he tried to treat with tea and lemon or honey . He was hospitalized in September 1967 at Mt . Sinai Hospital in New York to undergo surgery . 
 = = = " Dock of the Bay " = = = 
 In early December 1967 , Redding again recorded at Stax . One new song was " ( Sittin ' on ) The Dock of the Bay " , which was written with Cropper while they were staying with their friend , Earl " Speedo " Simms , on a houseboat in Sausalito . Redding was inspired by the Beatles album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band and tried to create a similar sound , against the label 's wishes . His wife Zelma disliked its atypical melody . The Stax crew were also dissatisfied with the new sound ; Stewart thought that it was not R & B , while bassist Donald " Duck " Dunn feared it would damage Stax 's reputation . However , Redding wanted to expand his musical style and thought it was his best song , correctly believing it would top the charts . He whistled at the end , either forgetting Cropper 's " fadeout rap " or paraphrasing it intentionally . 
 = = Death = = 
 By 1967 the band was traveling to performances in Redding 's Beechcraft <unk> . On December 9 , 1967 , they appeared on the Upbeat television show produced in Cleveland . They played three concerts in two nights at a club called Leo 's Casino . After a phone call with Zelma and their children , Redding 's next stop was Madison , Wisconsin ; the next day they were to play at the Factory nightclub , near the University of Wisconsin . 
 Although the weather was poor , with heavy rain and fog , and despite warnings , the plane took off . Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from their destination at Truax Field in Madison , the pilot radioed for permission to land . Shortly thereafter , the plane crashed into Lake <unk> . Bar @-@ Kays member Ben Cauley , the accident 's only survivor , was sleeping shortly before the accident . He woke just before impact to see bandmate Phalon Jones look out a window and exclaim , " Oh , no ! " Cauley said the last thing he remembered before the crash was <unk> his seat belt . He then found himself in frigid water , grasping a seat cushion to keep afloat . A non @-@ swimmer , he was unable to rescue the others . The cause of the crash was never determined . James Brown claimed in his autobiography The Godfather of Soul that he had warned Redding not to fly in the plane . 
 Aretha Franklin stated , " I heard it on the TV . My sister Caroline and I stopped everything and stayed glued to the TV and radio . It was a tragedy . Shocking . " 
