 " Can I Have It Like That " is a song performed by rapper Pharrell Williams featuring Gwen Stefani . It was written and produced by Williams for his 2006 debut album In My Mind , and the song is the opening track . The song 's hook comes from a one @-@ line contribution from Stefani , used as part of a call and response in the chorus . The song received generally negative reviews from music critics . It was later put as one of the songs in NBA 2K15 . 
 " Can I Have It Like That " was released as the album 's lead single in October 2005 ( see 2005 in music ) . It was commercially unsuccessful in the United States , but fared somewhat better worldwide . A rock remix of the song featured Travis Barker playing the drums and Pharrell playing the guitar . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 P. Diddy was originally designated to use the track that Williams created . Several other artists were also interested in using it , but Williams changed his mind and decided to use the song himself . In mid @-@ 2005 , he worked with Stefani in Miami , Florida on her second solo album The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . While she was in the booth recording " Breakin ' Up " , he told her that he had a song he thought would be his first single . Stefani asked to hear it , and he said that he wanted to record her for the track after the two finished working on " Breakin ' Up " . Stefani , however , insisted that they work on " Can I Have It Like That " then , and Williams recorded her performing the song 's hook . She contributed one line , which she performed twice , to the song . 
 Williams ' rap is in a throaty baritone , described as a " honey @-@ coated version " of the styles of Snoop Dogg and Dr. Dre . He raps about his current lifestyle as well as his life and achievements . The rap is set over a rhythm section consisting of an irregular beat and a grinding bass . The track reflects Williams ' minimalist style , and it is inflected with jazz music , including a trumpet part during the bridge . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Can I Have It Like That " received generally negative reviews from music critics . Josh Tyrangiel of Entertainment Weekly called it an " odd opener " to In My Mind and remarked that Williams " never commits to putting his hips into it " , leaving the track without any climax . The Observer 's Luke Bainbridge , however , referred to the song as " a grinding instant smash " . For IGN , Spence Abbott described Williams ' rapping as " a little sticky , but … ruggedly appealing in a manner of speaking " , and commented that " it 's the shuffling and infectious beat … that will have you swerving and slinking like a cobra with epilepsy . " In his review for Slant Magazine , Preston Jones characterized the song as " curiously inert " , adding that it sounded better as a sample on Girl Talk 's 2006 mashup album Night Ripper . 
 Stefani 's presence as a featured artist on the song received negative reviews from music critics . About.com 's Ivan <unk> commented that the song 's funk @-@ influenced sound " definitely knocks " , but was disappointed in Stefani 's contribution , finding its repetition tedious . Evan McGarvey of Stylus Magazine also found it repetitive , and described " Can I Have It Like That " as " a brief distillation of everything calamitous about [ Williams ' ] and Chad Hugo 's production style " . The Guardian stated that Stefani 's part was the only catchy hook on In My Mind , but added that it " seems to be built around a one @-@ line cast @-@ off found on the Love . Angel . Music . Baby. factory floor . " Finding " Can I Have It Like That " a " slow burner " that offered a " promising hint at what else is to come " on In My Mind , Claire Simpson stated in her musicOMH review that Stefani 's contribution was " purely cosmetic and clearly a transparent means of getting her name on the single to not only boost her own credentials but to help draw Pharrell to the attention of her increasingly mainstream following . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Can I Have It Like That " was commercially unsuccessful in the United States . It debuted at number 97 on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at number 49 three weeks later . It exited the chart after eight weeks . It was somewhat more successful in urban contemporary and rhythmic contemporary markets , reaching number 20 on the Hot Rap Tracks , number 31 on the Rhythmic Top 40 , and number 32 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . It had some crossover success in mainstream music and reached number 51 on the Billboard Pop 100 . 
 The single was more successful in Europe , where it reached number 11 on the Billboard European Hot 100 Singles chart . In the United Kingdom , " Can I Have It Like That " debuted and peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart , behind Arctic Monkeys ' " I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor " and Westlife 's cover of You Raise Me Up . It left the chart after 11 weeks . The single remained Williams ' highest @-@ charting release in Britain until 2013 when he topped the charts three times with Robin Thicke 's " Blurred Lines " , Daft Punk 's " Get Lucky " , and as the solo artist in " Happy " . The song was less successful throughout the rest of Europe and reached the top 20 in Finland , Ireland , and Norway ; the top 40 in Belgium , Germany , the Netherlands , and Switzerland ; and the top 80 in Austria and France . 
 " Can I Have It Like That " was somewhat successful elsewhere . It debuted at number 21 on the ARIA Singles Chart and after gradually descending the chart , reached a second peak at number 31 seven weeks later . It remained on the chart for a total of 12 weeks . After debuting at number 20 , the song peaked at number 18 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Paul Hunter . It depicts Williams being watched by a secret organization . Aware that he is being watched , he talks to a woman , revealed to be Stefani , on the phone . He makes appearances at an exclusive boat party and at another party in his penthouse . There are intercut sequences of people including Williams and Stefani dancing in front of a large equalizer , Williams standing in front of explosions , and people skateboarding . And the video also shows Pharrell 's Enzo Ferrari . 
 The music video was filmed in late September 2005 . The cinematography is designed so that the music video becomes the secret organization 's surveillance of Williams . It uses shifting camera angles to create tension . The scenes in front of the equalizer were filmed in front of a greenscreen , and the explosion sequences were shot live on the streets of Los Angeles , California . In the penthouse scene , he is accompanied by two naked women with leopard @-@ pattern body paint and a baby cougar . Hunter came up with the idea of showing body @-@ painted women , and Williams suggested sitting with the cougar because he " wanted to exude power . " 
 The video had little success on video chart programs . To date , it is Williams ' only video as a main artist to debut on MTV 's Total Request Live . It was on the program 's countdown for three days , reaching number nine . The video was unable to make MuchMusic 's Countdown . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Wells , Somerset = 
 Wells ( / <unk> / ) is a cathedral city and civil parish in the Mendip district of Somerset , on the southern edge of the Mendip Hills . Although the population recorded in the 2011 census was only 10 @,@ 536 , it has had city status since medieval times , because of the presence of Wells Cathedral . Often described as England 's smallest city , it is second only to the City of London in area and population , though not part of a larger urban agglomeration . 
 The name Wells comes from three wells dedicated to Saint Andrew , one in the market place and two within the grounds of the Bishop 's Palace and cathedral . A small Roman settlement surrounded them , which grew in importance and size under the Anglo @-@ Saxons when King Ine of Wessex founded a minster church there in 704 . The community became a trading centre based on cloth making and Wells is notable for its 17th century involvement in both the English Civil War and Monmouth Rebellion . In the 19th century , transport infrastructure improved with stations on three different railway lines . However , since 1964 the city has been without a railway link . 
 The cathedral and the associated religious and architectural history have made Wells a tourist destination , which provides much of the employment . The city has a variety of sporting and cultural activities and houses several schools including The Blue School , a state coeducational comprehensive school originally founded in 1641 and the independent Wells Cathedral School , which was founded possibly as early as 909 and is one of the five established musical schools for school @-@ age children in the United Kingdom . The historic architecture of the city has also been used as a location for several films and television programmes . 
 = = History = = 
 The city was a Roman settlement but only became an important centre under the Anglo @-@ Saxons when King Ine of Wessex founded a minster church in 704 . Two hundred years later , in 909 , this became the seat of the newly formed bishopric of Wells ; but in 1090 , this had been removed to Bath . This caused severe arguments between the canons of Wells and the monks of Bath until 1245 when the bishopric was renamed as the Diocese of Bath and Wells , to be elected by both religious houses . With the construction of the current cathedral and the bishop 's palace in the first half of the 13th century , under the direction of Bishop Reginald and later Bishop Jocelin , a native of the city , Wells became the principal seat of the diocese . 
 Wells was listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as Welle , from the Old English <unk> , which was not listed as a town , but included four manors with a population of 132 , which implies a population of 500 – 600 . Earlier names for the settlement have been identified which include <unk> , in a charter of 725 granted by King Ina to Glastonbury and <unk> Ecclesia . <unk> or <unk> <unk> relates to the area east of the bishops garden in 1245 . Wells was part of , and gave its name to , the hundred of Wells Forum . 
 Wells had been granted charters to hold markets by Bishop Robert ( 1136 – 66 ) and free burgage tenure was granted by Bishop Reginald ( 1174 @-@ 1191 ) . Wells was recognised as a free borough by a Royal charter of King John in 1201 . The city remained under episcopal control until its charter of incorporation from Queen Elizabeth I in 1589 . City status was most recently confirmed by Queen Elizabeth II by letters patent issued under the Great Seal dated 1 April 1974 , which granted city status specifically to the civil parish ; on that date major local government reorganisation came into effect , which involved the abolition of the municipal borough of Wells . 
 During the English Civil War ( 1642 – 1651 ) , at what became known as the " Siege of Wells " , the city found itself surrounded by Parliamentarian guns on the Bristol , Glastonbury and Shepton Mallet sides . Col. William Strode had 2 @,@ 000 men and 150 horse . The Royalists evacuated the city . Parliamentarian troops then used the cathedral to stable their horses and damaged much of the ornate sculpture by using it for firing practice . 
 William Penn stayed in Wells shortly before leaving for America ( 1682 ) , spending a night at The Crown Inn . Here he was briefly arrested for addressing a large crowd in the market place , but released on the intervention of the Bishop of Bath and Wells . During the Monmouth Rebellion ( 1685 ) the rebel army attacked the cathedral in an outburst against the established church and damaged the west front . Lead from the roof was used to make bullets , windows were broken , the organ smashed and horses stabled in the nave . Wells was the final location of the Bloody Assizes on 23 September 1685 . In a makeshift court lasting only one day , over 500 men were tried and the majority sentenced to death . 
 There was a port at Bleadney on the River Axe in the 8th century that enabled goods to be brought to within 3 miles ( 5 km ) of Wells . In the Middle Ages overseas trade was carried out from the port of Rackley . In the 14th century a French ship sailed up the river and by 1388 Thomas Tanner from Wells used Rackley to export cloth and corn to Portugal , and received iron and salt in exchange . Wells had been a centre for cloth making , however in the 16th and 17th centuries this diminished , but the city retained its important market focus . Wells in the 19th century had the largest cheese market in the west of England . 
 Wells has had three railway stations . The first station , Priory Road , opened in 1859 and was on the Somerset Central Railway ( later the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway ) as the terminus of a short branch from Glastonbury . A second railway , the East Somerset , opened a branch line from Witham in 1862 and built a station to the east of Priory Road . In 1870 , a third railway , the Cheddar Valley line branch of the Bristol and Exeter Railway from Yatton , reached Wells and built yet another station , later called Tucker Street . Matters were somewhat simplified when the Great Western Railway acquired both the Cheddar Valley and the East Somerset lines and built a link between the two that ran through the S & DJR 's Priory Road station . In 1878 , when through trains began running between Yatton and Witham , the East Somerset station closed , but through trains did not stop at Priory Road until 1934 . Priory Road closed to passenger traffic in 1951 when the S & DJR branch line from Glastonbury was shut , though it remained the city 's main goods depot . Tucker Street closed in 1963 under the Beeching Axe , which closed the Yatton to Witham line to passengers . Goods traffic to Wells ceased in 1964 . A Pacific SR West Country , West Country Class steam locomotive no 34092 built by the British Railways Board was named City of Wells following a ceremony in the city 's Priory Road station in 1949 . It was used to draw the Golden Arrow service between London and the Continent . It was withdrawn from service in 1964 , and rescued from a scrapyard in 1971 . It is now undergoing a complete restoration on the Keighley and Worth Valley Railway in Yorkshire . 
 During World War II , <unk> Park in Wells was the location of a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp , housing Italian prisoners from the Western Desert Campaign , and later German prisoners after the Battle of Normandy . <unk> Camp on the Wookey Hole Road was a German working camp . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Wells City Council is a parish council , with a membership of sixteen councillors , elected from three parish wards . They are ( with the number of parish councillors each elects , in brackets ) : Central ( four ) , St. Thomas ' ( six ) and St. Cuthbert 's ( six ) . 
 The civil parish of Wells was formed in 1933 upon the merger of Wells St Cuthbert In and Wells St Andrew ( the latter being the historic liberty of the cathedral , the bishop 's palace , etc . , amounting to just 52 acres ( 21 ha ) ) . Wells is the successor parish for Wells Municipal Borough , which existed from the creation of municipal boroughs in 1835 to their abolition in 1974 . The parish has held the city status of Wells since 1 April 1974 ( previously held by the municipal borough ) and the member of the City Council who chairs the council holds the historic office of Mayor of Wells , typically for one year . The current mayor ( for the 2014 @-@ 15 municipal year ) is Councillor Chris Briton , who is the <unk> Mayor of Wells . Another historic position is that of the Town Crier . 
 The City Council has responsibility for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council 's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . They also evaluate local planning applications and work with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . This includes city centre management including CCTV , an alcohol ban and regulating street trading permissions including the two funfairs held in the Market Place in May and November each year and the Wells In Bloom competition . The city council 's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of city facilities , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . They are involved in the management of the Community Sports Development Centre at the Blue School , the skateboard park and allotments in the grounds of the Bishop 's Palace , <unk> Road and Barnes Close . Conservation matters ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council . 
 The Town Hall was built in 1778 , with the porch and arcade being added in 1861 and the balcony and round windows in 1932 . It is a Grade II listed building . It replaced the former on the site of the Market and Assize Hall in the Market Place , and a Canonical House also known as ' The Exchequer ' , on the authority of an Act of Parliament dated 1779 . The building also houses the magistrates courts and other offices . The Assize court last sat here in October 1970 . 
 Wells elects five councillors to Mendip District Council from the same three wards as are used for the City Council ( two are returned from St Cuthbert 's , two from St Thomas ' and one from Central ) . The Mendip district was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 and the district council is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . 
 Wells is an electoral division ( with the same boundaries as the civil parish ) of Somerset and returns one councillor to Somerset County Council , which is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , libraries , main roads , public transport , policing and fire services , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning . Wells is part of the UK Parliament constituency of Wells . Since 2015 the Member of Parliament for Wells is James Heappey of the Conservatives . Wells is within the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six Members of the European Parliament using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = = Coat of Arms = = = 
 The Wells city arms show an ash tree surrounded by three water wells , crested with a gold mural crown , with the Latin motto Hoc <unk> <unk> copia ( translated : " the fullness that springs from this well " ) . 
 = = = Freedom of the City = = = 
 HMS Somerset , Mary <unk> @-@ Rand , Danny Nightingale , The Rifles and the late Harry Patch have the Freedom of the City . The Somerset Light Infantry received the freedom of the City of Wells following their return from Cyprus in 1956 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Wells lies at the foot of the southern escarpment of the Mendip Hills where they meet the Somerset Levels . The hills are largely made of carboniferous limestone , which is quarried at several nearby sites . In the 1960s , the tallest mast in the region , the Mendip UHF television transmitter , was installed on Pen Hill above Wells , approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the centre the city . 
 Streams passing through caves on the Mendip Hills , including Thrupe Lane Swallet and Viaduct Sink ( approximately 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of the city ) , emerge at Saint Andrew 's Well in the garden of the Bishop 's Palace , from where the water fills the moat around the Place and then flows into Keward Brook , which carries it for approximately a mile west to the point where the brook joins the River Sheppey in the village of Coxley . 
 Along with the rest of South West England , the Mendip Hills have a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but due to the modifying effect of the sea , the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months in the region with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . The south west of England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest . The predominant wind direction is from the south west . 
 The civil parish of Wells is entirely surrounded by the parish of St Cuthbert Out . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The population of the civil parish , recorded in the 2011 census , is 10 @,@ 536 . Of this number 97 @.@ 5 % are ethnically White ( with the more specific White British category recorded at 93 @.@ 5 % ) and 66 @.@ 5 % described themselves as Christian . The mean average age in 2011 was 41 @.@ 9 years ( the median age being 43 ) . The population recorded for the Wells civil parish in the 2001 census was 10 @,@ 406 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Following construction of the A39 / A371 bypass , the centre of the city has returned to being that of a quiet market town . It has all the modern conveniences plus shops , hotels and restaurants . Wells is a popular tourist destination , due to its historical sites , its proximity to Bath , Stonehenge and Glastonbury and its closeness to the Somerset coast . Also nearby are Wookey Hole Caves , the Mendip Hills and the Somerset Levels . Somerset cheese , including Cheddar , is made locally . Wells is part of the Wells & Shepton Mallet Travel to Work Area which also includes Glastonbury , Cheddar and surrounding areas . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Wells is situated at the junction of three numbered routes . The A39 goes north @-@ east to Bath and south @-@ west to Glastonbury and Bridgwater . The A371 goes north @-@ west to Cheddar and east to Shepton Mallet . The <unk> goes west to Highbridge and north @-@ east to Radstock . Wells is served by FirstGroup bus services to Bristol , Bristol Temple Meads , Bath , Frome , Shepton Mallet , Yeovil , Street , Bridgwater , Taunton , Burnham on Sea and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , as well as providing some local service . Some National Express coach services call at Wells . The bus station is in Princes Road . The Mendip Way and Monarch 's Way long @-@ distance footpaths pass through the city , as does National Cycle Route 3 . 
 Webberbus connects Wells to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , Highbridge and Bridgwater . 
 = = Railways = = 
 Wells had two stations which were closed by the Beeching Axe in the 1960s such as Wells ( Tucker Street ) railway station and Wells ( Priory Road ) railway station . The nearest head of steel is located on the East Somerset Railway at Mendip Vale . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Blue School , founded in 1654 , is a state coeducational comprehensive school and has been awarded Specialist science college status . It has 1 @,@ 453 students aged 11 – 18 of both sexes and all ability levels . 
 Wells Cathedral School , founded in 909 , is an independent school that has a Christian emphasis and is one of the five established musical schools for school @-@ age children in Britain . The school teaches over 700 pupils between the ages of 3 and 18 . The school 's boarding houses line the northern parts of the city and the music school retains close links with Wells Cathedral . The primary schools in Wells are <unk> Park School , St Cuthbert 's Church of England Infants School , St Cuthbert 's Church of England Junior School and St Joseph and St Teresa Catholic Primary School . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Wells and Mendip Museum includes many historical artefacts from the city and surrounding Mendip Hills . Wells is part of the West Country Carnival circuit . 
 Wells Film Centre shows current releases and , in conjunction with the Wells Film Society shows less well known and historical films . The previous cinema , The Regal in Priory Road , closed in 1993 and is now Kudos Nightclub . It was built in 1935 by ES Roberts from Flemish bond brickwork with Art Deco features . It is a Grade II listed building , and was on the Buildings at Risk Register until its restoration which included the restoration and repair of the stained glass façade . Wells Little Theatre is operated by a voluntary society which started in 1902 . In 1989 they took over the old boy 's building of Wells Blue School , where they put on a variety of operatic and other productions . 
 Milton Lodge is a house overlooking the city . It has a terraced garden , which was laid out in the early 20th century , is listed as Grade II on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 = = = Town twinning = = = 
 Wells is twinned with : 
 Paray @-@ le @-@ <unk> , Burgundy , France 
 Bad Dürkheim , Rhineland @-@ Palatinate , Germany 
 <unk> , Emilia @-@ Romagna , Italy 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 A walled precinct , the Liberty of St Andrew , encloses the twelfth century Cathedral , the Bishop 's Palace , Vicar 's Close and the residences of the clergy who serve the cathedral . Entrances include the Penniless Porch , The Bishop 's Eye and Brown 's Gatehouse which were all built around 1450 . 
 The cathedral is the seat of the Church of England Diocese of Bath and Wells . Wells has been an ecclesiastical city of importance since at least the early 8th century . Parts of the building date back to the tenth century , and it is a grade I listed building . It is known for its fine fan vaulted ceilings , Lady Chapel and windows , and the scissor arches which support the central tower . The west front is said to be the finest collection of statuary in Europe , retaining almost 300 of its original medieval statues , carved from the cathedral 's warm , yellow Doulting stone . The Chapter House , at the top of a flight of stone stairs , leading out from the north transept is an octagonal building with a fan @-@ vaulted ceiling . It is here that the business of running the cathedral is still conducted by the members of the Chapter , the cathedral 's ruling body . Wells Cathedral clock is famous for its 24 @-@ hour astronomical dial and set of jousting knights that perform every quarter @-@ hour . The cathedral has the heaviest ring of ten bells in the world . The tenor bell weighs just over 56 <unk> ( 6 @,@ 272 lb , 2 @,@ 844 kg ) . 
 The Bishop 's Palace has been the home of the bishops of the Diocese of Bath and Wells for 800 years . The hall and chapel date from the 14th century . There are 14 acres ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) of gardens including the springs from which the city takes its name . Visitors can also see the Bishop 's private chapel , ruined great hall and the gatehouse with portcullis and drawbridge beside which mute swans ring a bell for food . The Bishop 's Barn was built in the 15th century . 
 The Vicars ' Close is the oldest residential street in Europe . The Close is tapered by 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to make it look longer when viewed from the bottom . When viewed from the top , however , it looks shorter . The Old Deanery dates from the 12th century , and St John 's Priory from the 14th . 
 The Church of St Cuthbert ( which tourists often mistake for the cathedral ) has a fine Somerset stone tower and a superb carved roof . Originally an Early English building ( 13th century ) , it was much altered in the Perpendicular period ( 15th century ) . The nave 's coloured ceiling was repainted in 1963 at the instigation of the then Vicar 's wife , Mrs Barnett . Until 1561 the church had a central tower which either collapsed or was removed , and has been replaced with the current tower over the west door . Bells were cast for the tower by Roger Purdy . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The city has two football clubs , one being Wells City F.C. , past winners of the Western League . <unk> FC play their football in the Mid @-@ Somerset Football League at <unk> Park . Wells Cricket Club runs eight sides across senior , junior and women 's cricket ; they are based at South <unk> . Wells Wanderers Cricket Club are based in Meare . <unk> Road Cricket Ground was a first @-@ class venue , no longer a cricket ground , now occupied in part by Wells FC . 
 Mid Somerset Hockey Club and Wells City Acorns Hockey Club both play on the Astroturf pitches at the Blue School , where several other sports clubs are based . Wells Leisure Centre has a 25 metres ( 82 ft ) swimming pool , gymnasium , sports hall , sauna , steam room , relaxation area and solarium . The 18 hole Wells Golf Club is on the outskirts of the city and also has a 24 bay driving range with optional grass tees . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Elizabeth Goudge used Wells as a basis for the fictional cathedral city of <unk> , in her book A City of Bells . 
 Wells has been used as the setting for several films including : The Canterbury Tales ( 1973 ) , A Fistful of Fingers ( 1994 ) , The Gathering ( 2003 ) , The Libertine ( 2004 ) , The Golden Age ( 2007 ) , and Hot Fuzz ( 2007 , as Sandford ) . The cathedral interior stood in for Southwark Cathedral during filming for the Doctor Who episode The Lazarus Experiment , and was also used as an interior location in the film Jack the Giant Slayer ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Hugh of Wells – native of Wells , Bishop , elder brother of Jocelin of Wells . 
 Jocelin of Wells – native of Wells , Bishop , aided in creation of Magna Carta and largely responsible for the construction of the cathedral . 
 Mary Hamilton – 18th century fraudster and cross @-@ dresser 
 Herbert E. Balch – cave explorer and founder of Wells Museum . His name was given to Balch Road , a council estate that was built in the 1950s . 
 Mary <unk> @-@ Rand – Gold medalist and world record breaker in the long jump at the 1964 Summer Olympics . 
 Harry George Crandon – awarded the Victoria Cross during the Boer War . 
 Sir Chris Clarke – county councillor for Wells from 1985 to 2005 . 
 Alexander Davie – born in Wells 1847 , became 7th Premier of British Columbia . 
 Elizabeth Goudge – author of novels , short stories and children 's books , was born in Wells in 1900 . 
 Roger Hollis – Director General of MI5 . 
 John Holloway – Governor of Newfoundland ( 1807 – 1809 ) and Admiral of the Blue . 
 John Keate – born in Wells 1773 , went on to become headmaster at Eton where he restored discipline with the birch , and once flogged 80 boys in one day . 
 Julia Somerville OBE – born in Wells 1947 , newsreader and journalist who is working with BBC and ITN and co @-@ presenter of Rip Off Britain 
 James Keene – professional footballer formerly of Portsmouth F.C. , playing for IF Elfsborg in Sweden . 
 Harry Patch – last trench veteran of World War I , and at 111 , briefly the oldest man in Europe and 3rd oldest man in the world . He was born in the nearby village of Combe Down and at the time of his death in July 2009 he was living in local care home Fletcher House . 
 Kris Marshall – actor , raised in the city and currently lives nearby . 
 Edgar Wright – film and television director . Directed Hot Fuzz , which was filmed in the city . 
 = 2003 Cricket World Cup Final = 
 The 2003 Cricket World Cup Final was a One Day International match played between Australia and India on 23 March 2003 at the Wanderers Stadium , Johannesburg , South Africa . It marked the culmination of the 2003 Cricket World Cup , the eighth edition of the tournament . It was the first time that these two teams had met at this stage of a World Cup . Australia won the match by 125 runs to claim the title for the third time , and second in succession . 
 After winning the toss , India captain Sourav Ganguly elected to field first . Australia captain Ricky Ponting ( 140 not out ) and Damien Martyn ( 88 not out ) were involved in a record partnership of 234 runs in the team total of 359 runs . India 's Harbhajan Singh took all two wickets of Australia , conceding 49 runs . In response , India lost their wickets at regular intervals and were eventually bowled out for 234 runs in 39 @.@ 2 overs . Ponting was adjudged " Man of the match " , while India 's Sachin Tendulkar , the tournament 's leading run @-@ scorer , was awarded the " Man of the Series " title . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 2003 Cricket World Cup was the eighth World Cup , organized by the International Cricket Council ( ICC ) . The competition took place between 9 February and 23 March 2003 , lasting 43 days . The matches were restricted to 50 overs per side . Co @-@ hosted by South Africa , Zimbabwe and Kenya , the World Cup was the first to be played in Africa . The competition had 14 teams , the largest number of participants in a World Cup until then . Apart from the 10 Test @-@ playing teams , four associate teams were qualified to participate in the competition . Kenya , by virtue of its ODI status , automatically qualified for the tournament while Canada , Namibia and Netherlands , the top three teams of the 2001 ICC Trophy , formed the rest . 
 The structure of the tournament was similar to the 1999 World Cup . The 14 teams were assigned to two different groups of seven each . The top three contestants from each group qualified for the Super Sixes stage , a format which was introduced in the 1999 tournament . The teams carried forward their results in their group stage , where each qualifier from either of the groups played each qualifier of the other group exactly once . The top four teams of the Super Sixes qualified for the semi @-@ finals , and the winners of those matches contested the final . All in all , there were a total of 54 matches played in the tournament . 
 Having won 15 out of their 18 ODIs prior to the start of the tournament , the defending champion Australia was called the " favourite " to win the title . Several critics and analysts unanimously favoured Australia 's win . They had previously won the World Cup in 1987 and 1992 . India had won the competition once , in 1983 . Prior to the World Cup , India lost an ODI series against West Indies at home , and were defeated heavily in a tour of New Zealand . 
 A day before the start of the tournament , Australia 's key player Shane Warne , who won the " man of the match " awards in the semi @-@ final and final of the 1999 tournament , was sent home after he was found positive in a drug test ; Warne was found guilty of using a banned diuretic drug during an ODI series , which was held prior to the World Cup in Australia . He was banned by the Australian Cricket Board from playing cricket for one year . Australia 's fast bowler Jason Gillespie was ruled out from the tournament following a tendon injury . 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Australia and India were both grouped under " Pool A " of the competition . Australia won all their matches in the group stage . Except for the win against England , where they had to recover from 135 for 8 to reach the target of 205 runs , they won all the matches comfortably . 
 India had a " shaky " start to the tournament . In their opening match , against the Netherlands , they were bowled out for 204 runs . Sachin Tendulkar scored India 's only half @-@ century . In reply , Indian bowlers Javagal Srinath and Anil Kumble took four wickets each to dismiss the Netherlands for 136 runs . Despite winning the game , their batting received severe criticism as their batting order collapsed before the completion of 50 overs . Following that , in their next match against Australia , they were dismissed for 125 runs and lost the match by eight wickets . This led to angered fans in India burning the effigies of Indian players . Mohammad Kaif 's house and Rahul Dravid 's car were vandalised . Following the incident , Tendulkar issued a press statement requesting calm and patience from the fans . India won their next games against Zimbabwe , Pakistan , Namibia and England . India found a new opening pair in Tendulkar and Sehwag in the match against Zimbabwe . 
 Australia , India and Zimbabwe finished the group as the top three teams and qualified for the " Super Sixes " from Pool A. In " Pool B " , Sri Lanka , Kenya and New Zealand qualified for the next stage . 
 = = = Super Sixes = = = 
 In the first match of the Super Sixes , Australia played against Sri Lanka . Batting first , Australia made 319 for 5 . Ricky Ponting and Adam Gilchrist scored 114 not out and 99 respectively . Sri Lanka in reply managed 223 runs in 47 @.@ 4 overs . <unk> de Silva top @-@ scored with 92 while Brett Lee took three wickets for Australia . Australia played New Zealand in their next match . Shane Bond 's spell of six wickets for 23 runs reduced Australia to 84 for 7 . However , Michael Bevan and Andrew Bichel took the total to 208 runs . In reply , New Zealand were bowled out for 112 runs . Lee claimed five wickets for 42 runs as Australia won the match by 96 runs . Australia won their final game by five wickets after bowling Kenya out for 174 runs . 
 India faced Kenya in their first match . The latter had won the toss and made 225 for 6 in the first innings . India lost three wickets for 24 runs when Dravid joined Sourav Ganguly . The two added 84 runs before the Dravid was dismissed , leaving the score at 108 runs for the loss of four wickets . Ganguly then partnered with Yuvraj Singh and the pair took India to victory in 47 @.@ 5 overs . They made 107 not out and 58 not out respectively . In the next game against Sri Lanka , India won by a huge margin of 183 runs . In their final match of the stage , India played New Zealand . After winning the toss , India elected to bowl first . New Zealand were dismissed for 146 runs . Zaheer Khan took career @-@ best figures of 4 wickets for 42 runs . Though India lost 3 wickets for 21 runs , the 129 @-@ run partnership between Dravid and Kaif ensured a seven @-@ wicket win . The match marked the seventh consecutive victory for India in the tournament . 
 = = = Semi @-@ finals = = = 
 = = = = First semi @-@ final = = = = 
 The first semi @-@ final was played between Australia and Sri Lanka on 18 March at St. George 's Park , Port Elizabeth . Australia won the toss and opted to bat first . They managed 212 runs for the loss of 7 wickets at the end of 50 overs . Symonds top @-@ scored for Australia with 91 not out , while <unk> Vaas picked up 3 wickets for 34 runs . With 213 runs needed for victory , Sri Lanka lost both the openers after which the play was interrupted by rain . The target was revised to 172 runs from 38 @.@ 1 overs using the Duckworth – Lewis method . Sri Lanka managed to score only 123 runs in the allotted overs . Kumar Sangakkara and Vaas made 47 runs together for the eighth wicket , the highest partnership of the innings . Australia progressed into the final as Sri Lanka fell 48 runs short of the target . 
 = = = = Second semi @-@ final = = = = 
 The second semi @-@ final was played between India and Kenya on 20 March 2003 at Kingsmead , Durban . Kenya became the first non @-@ Test team to play in a World Cup semi @-@ final . India won the toss and made 270 runs for 4 wickets . Ganguly and Tendulkar made 111 not out and 83 respectively . In reply , Kenya were bowled out for 179 in 46 @.@ 2 overs . Steve <unk> , their captain , top @-@ scored with 56 runs . Zaheer ended with bowling figures of 3 wickets for 14 runs . Ganguly was adjudged the Man of the match . 
 = = Build up = = 
 Prior to this game , the two teams had faced each other eight times in World Cups ; Australia had won six of these matches . In the tournament , Australia had won all their matches up until this point while India managed to win all their matches except the one against Australia in the group stage . A day before the final , Ponting had told the press that on crucial matches his team " tries to reach another level " . The Indian fans had high expectations on Tendulkar , the tournament 's top @-@ scorer . 
 = = Final = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The final was played on 23 March 2003 at the Wanderers Stadium , Johannesburg . Ganguly won the toss and elected to field first . India played seven batsmen and excluded leg spinner Kumble from the playing XI . Zaheer opened the bowling for India along with Srinath . The Australian openers started scoring aggressively right from the beginning of the innings as Khan conceded 15 runs in the first over . Gilchrist in particular hit both Khan and Srinath for a lot of runs . As soon as he reached his 50 ( off 40 balls ) , Ganguly turned to his spin bowlers as early as the tenth over . Gilchrist slowed down his scoring rate as the innings progressed . In the fourteenth over Harbhajan Singh was brought back into the attack . With just two fielders outside the circle , Gilchrist tried hitting him through mid @-@ wicket , but was beaten by the extra @-@ bounce and was caught in the deep by Virender Sehwag . Gilchrist ( 57 off 48 balls ) along with Matthew Hayden scored 105 runs for the first wicket . Hayden was dismissed by Harbhajan soon afterwards , having made 37 runs off 54 balls . The score was 125 runs for 2 wickets in the twentieth over . Ponting was accompanied by Damien Martyn after Hayden 's departure . Martyn scored at about a run @-@ a @-@ ball rate and completed his half @-@ century in 46 balls . Ponting on the other hand scored at a slow rate reaching his 50 off 74 balls with one four . After that he started attacking the Indian bowlers . He started off by hitting Harbhajan Singh for two sixes , and Ashish Nehra for a " one @-@ handed " six . The pair added 100 runs off 109 balls for the third wicket . He completed his century in quick time as his second fifty came off 29 balls . At the end of the innings , Australia scored 359 runs for 2 wickets ; Ponting and Martyn made 140 not out ( off 121 balls ; four fours and eight sixes ) and 88 not out ( off 84 balls ; seven fours and <unk> six ) respectively . Ponting 's innings is the highest individual score by a captain in a World Cup final , while Australia 's total is the highest by a team in a World Cup final as of the 2015 competition . The 234 @-@ run stand between Ponting and <unk> was a record partnership for Australia in ODIs at that point . The Indian bowlers conceded 37 extras . Srinath conceded 87 runs without taking a wicket , in what was ultimately his last international game . 
 India came out to bat with Tendulkar and Sehwag . Glenn McGrath opened the bowling for Australia . Tendulkar hit a boundary off the fourth ball of the over but was dismissed off the next delivery . Ganguly joined Sehwag and the pair scored at a run @-@ a @-@ ball rate before the former was dismissed by Lee in the tenth over . Kaif , the next man , was dismissed in the same over with the score reading 59 runs for 3 wickets . Dravid and Sehwag scored steadily from then on until the seventeenth over , when rain interrupted play with the score at 103 runs . After the play resumed , Ponting brought in Australia 's spinners , Brad Hogg and Darren Lehmann . Sehwag was more aggressive against both , hitting Lehmann for three consecutive fours and Hogg for a four and six . Dravid on the other hand played second fiddle to Sehwag pushing for singles often . However , both were dismissed in quick succession after making 82 ( off 81 balls ) and 47 ( off 57 balls ) respectively . Following that , India began to lose wickets at regular intervals . Except for Yuvraj Singh ( 24 ) and Dinesh Mongia ( 12 ) , the rest of the players got out for single @-@ digit scores . India were bowled out for 234 runs in 39 @.@ 2 overs . Australia won the match by 125 runs , the largest margin of victory by runs in a World Cup final . It was their second successive World Cup trophy and their third overall . Ponting was given the " Man of the match " honour for his 140 not out . 
 = = = Scorecard = = = 
 1st innings 
 Fall of wickets : 1 – 105 ( Gilchrist , 13 @.@ 6 ov ) , 2 – 125 ( Hayden , 19 @.@ 5 ov ) 
 2nd innings 
 Fall of wickets : 1 – 4 ( Tendulkar , 0 @.@ 5 ov ) , 2 – 58 ( Ganguly , 9 @.@ 5 ov ) , 3 – 59 ( Kaif , 10 @.@ 3 ov ) , 4 – 147 ( Sehwag 23 @.@ 5 ov ) , 5 – 187 ( Dravid 31 @.@ 5 ov ) , 6 – 208 ( Yuvraj Singh 34 @.@ 5 ov ) , 7 – 209 ( Mongia ( 35 @.@ 2 ov ) , 8 – 223 ( Harbhajan Singh 37 @.@ 1 ov ) , 9 – 226 ( Srinath 38 @.@ 2 ov ) , 10 – 234 ( Khan 39 @.@ 2 ov ) 
 Match officials 
 On @-@ field umpires : Steve <unk> ( West Indies ) and David Shepherd ( England ) 
 Third umpire : Rudi <unk> ( South Africa ) 
 Match referee : Ranjan <unk> ( Sri Lanka ) 
 Reserve umpire : Billy Bowden ( New Zealand ) 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At the post @-@ match press conference , Ponting said the Indians showed no signs of winning the match at any point in time . On Australia 's win , he said " It 's not that we think we are ahead of the others . It 's just the way we play . " Further , he added that India and Australia were the best two teams in the tournament and complimented the Indian players by saying that they " deserved to be in the final " . 
 Ganguly 's decision to bowl first was criticized by the media ; The New York Times , for instance , said it " backfired horribly " . Former Pakistan captain Imran Khan while denouncing Ganguly 's decision , also criticized his idea of going into the match with an unchanged side . He further stated that India should have played Kumble as the ball was " gripping [ in ] the surface " . Meanwhile , Ganguly defended his decision saying that the pitch looked favourable to the bowlers , but they failed to utilize it properly . However , he credited the Australian batting and further added that they had played like " real champions " . On the other hand , Ponting said that he would have opted to bat first had they won the toss . His team @-@ mate Symonds , in an interview later , recalled that India 's decision to bowl first gave them an impression that they were not " confident enough to take the fight " . 
 Australia were rewarded with a prize money of US $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , while India received US $ 800 @,@ 000 . Tendulkar 's aggregate of 673 runs in the tournament fetched him the " Man of the series " accolade . Ponting 's 140 was placed among the " Best Innings " of the tournament by Rediff . Tendulkar and Hayden were included among the " highest impact World XI " , a World Cup team released by the India edition of Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack . Srinath , who conceded 87 runs in the match and who was India 's leading wicket @-@ taker in ODIs , retired a few months after the competition . The match also marked the end of India coach John Wright 's contract . However , on his request the Board of Control for Cricket in India retained his position which he continued to serve until 2005 . 
 = Joan of Arc = 
 Joan of Arc ( French : Jeanne d 'Arc , IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 6 January c . 1412 – 30 May 1431 ) , nicknamed " The Maid of Orléans " ( French : La Pucelle d 'Orléans ) , is considered a heroine of France for her role during the Lancastrian phase of the Hundred Years ' War , and was canonized as a Roman Catholic saint . Joan of Arc was born to Jacques d 'Arc and Isabelle Romée , a peasant family , at <unk> in north @-@ east France . Joan said she received visions of the Archangel Michael , Saint Margaret , and Saint Catherine of Alexandria instructing her to support Charles VII and recover France from English domination late in the Hundred Years ' War . The uncrowned King Charles VII sent Joan to the siege of Orléans as part of a relief mission . She gained prominence after the siege was lifted only nine days later . Several additional swift victories led to Charles VII 's coronation at Reims . This long @-@ awaited event boosted French morale and paved the way for the final French victory . 
 On 23 May 1430 , she was captured at Compiègne by the Burgundian faction , which was allied with the English . She was later handed over to the English and put on trial by the pro @-@ English Bishop of Beauvais Pierre Cauchon on a variety of charges . After Cauchon declared her guilty she was burned at the stake on 30 May 1431 , dying at about nineteen years of age . 
 In 1456 , an inquisitorial court authorized by Pope Callixtus III examined the trial , debunked the charges against her , pronounced her innocent , and declared her a martyr . In the 16th century she became a symbol of the Catholic League , and in 1803 she was declared a national symbol of France by the decision of Napoleon Bonaparte . She was beatified in 1909 and canonized in 1920 . Joan of Arc is one of the nine secondary patron saints of France , along with St. Denis , St. Martin of Tours , St. Louis , St. Michael , St. Rémi , St. Petronilla , St. Radegund and Ste . Thérèse of Lisieux . 
 Joan of Arc has remained a popular figure in literature , painting , sculpture , and other cultural works since the time of her death , and many famous writers , filmmakers and composers have created works about her . Cultural depictions of her have continued in films , theater , television , video games , music , and performances to this day . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Hundred Years ' War had begun in 1337 as an inheritance dispute over the French throne , interspersed with occasional periods of relative peace . Nearly all the fighting had taken place in France , and the English army 's use of chevauchée tactics ( destructive " scorched earth " raids ) had devastated the economy . The French population had not recovered to its size previous to the Black Death of the mid @-@ 14th century , and its merchants were isolated from foreign markets . Prior to the appearance of Joan of Arc , the English had nearly achieved their goal of a dual monarchy under English control and the French army had not achieved any major victories for a generation . In the words of DeVries , " The kingdom of France was not even a shadow of its thirteenth @-@ century prototype . " 
 The French king at the time of Joan 's birth , Charles VI , suffered from bouts of insanity and was often unable to rule . The king 's brother Louis , Duke of Orléans , and the king 's cousin John the Fearless , Duke of Burgundy , quarreled over the regency of France and the guardianship of the royal children . This dispute included accusations that Louis was having an extramarital affair with the queen , Isabeau of Bavaria , and allegations that John the Fearless kidnapped the royal children . The conflict climaxed with the assassination of the Duke of Orléans in 1407 on the orders of the Duke of Burgundy . 
 The young Charles of Orléans succeeded his father as duke and was placed in the custody of his father @-@ in @-@ law , the Count of Armagnac . Their faction became known as the " Armagnac " faction , and the opposing party led by the Duke of Burgundy was called the " Burgundian faction " . Henry V of England took advantage of these internal divisions when he invaded the kingdom in 1415 , winning a dramatic victory at Agincourt on 25 October and subsequently capturing many northern French towns . In 1418 Paris was taken by the Burgundians , who massacred the Count of Armagnac and about 2 @,@ 500 of his followers . The future French king , Charles VII , assumed the title of Dauphin — the heir to the throne — at the age of fourteen , after all four of his older brothers had died in succession . His first significant official act was to conclude a peace treaty with the Duke of Burgundy in 1419 . This ended in disaster when Armagnac partisans assassinated John the Fearless during a meeting under Charles 's guarantee of protection . The new duke of Burgundy , Philip the Good , blamed Charles for the murder and entered into an alliance with the English . The allied forces conquered large sections of France . 
 In 1420 the queen of France , Isabeau of Bavaria , signed the Treaty of Troyes , which granted the succession of the French throne to Henry V and his heirs instead of her son Charles . This agreement revived suspicions that the Dauphin may have been the illegitimate product of Isabeau 's rumored affair with the late duke of Orléans rather than the son of King Charles VI . Henry V and Charles VI died within two months of each other in 1422 , leaving an infant , Henry VI of England , the nominal monarch of both kingdoms . Henry V 's brother , John of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Bedford , acted as regent . 
 By the time Joan of Arc began to influence events in 1429 , nearly all of northern France and some parts of the southwest were under Anglo @-@ Burgundian control . The English controlled Paris and Rouen while the Burgundian faction controlled Reims , which had served as the traditional coronation site for French kings since 816 . This was an important consideration since neither claimant to the throne of France had been officially crowned yet . In 1428 the English had begun the siege of Orléans , one of the few remaining cities still loyal to Charles VII and an important objective since it held a strategic position along the Loire River , which made it the last obstacle to an assault on the remainder of the French heartland . In the words of one modern historian , " On the fate of Orléans hung that of the entire kingdom . " No one was optimistic that the city could long withstand the siege . 
 = = Life = = 
 Joan was the daughter of Jacques d 'Arc and Isabelle Romée in <unk> , a village which was then in the French part of the duchy of Bar . Joan 's parents owned about 50 acres ( 20 hectares ) of land and her father supplemented his farming work with a minor position as a village official , collecting taxes and heading the local watch . They lived in an isolated patch of eastern France that remained loyal to the French crown despite being surrounded by pro @-@ Burgundian lands . Several local raids occurred during her childhood and on one occasion her village was burned . 
 At her trial , Joan stated that she was about nineteen years old , which implies she thought she was born around 1412 . She later testified that she experienced her first vision in 1425 at the age of 13 , when she was in her " father 's garden " and saw visions of figures she identified as Saint Michael , Saint Catherine , and Saint Margaret , who told her to drive out the English and bring the Dauphin to Reims for his coronation . She said she cried when they left , as they were so beautiful . 
 At the age of sixteen , she asked a relative named Durand <unk> to take her to the nearby town of Vaucouleurs , where she petitioned the garrison commander , Robert de Baudricourt , for permission to visit the French Royal Court at Chinon . Baudricourt 's sarcastic response did not deter her . She returned the following January and gained support from two of Baudricourt 's soldiers : Jean de Metz and Bertrand de <unk> . According to Jean de Metz , she told him that " I must be at the King 's side ... there will be no help ( for the kingdom ) if not from me . Although I would rather have remained spinning [ wool ] at my mother 's side ... yet must I go and must I do this thing , for my Lord wills that I do so . " Under the auspices of Metz and <unk> , she was given a second meeting , where she made a prediction about a military reversal at the Battle of Rouvray near Orléans several days before messengers arrived to report it . Given the distance of the battle 's location , Baudricourt felt Joan could only have known about the French defeat by Divine revelation , and this convinced him to take her seriously . 
 = = = Rise = = = 
 Robert de Baudricourt granted Joan an escort to visit Chinon after news from Orleans confirmed her assertion of the defeat . She made the journey through hostile Burgundian territory disguised as a male soldier , a fact which would later lead to charges of " cross @-@ dressing " against her , although her escort viewed it as a normal precaution . Two of the members of her escort said they and the people of Vaucouleurs provided her with this clothing , and had suggested it to her . 
 After arriving at the Royal Court she impressed Charles VII during a private conference . During this time Charles ' mother @-@ in @-@ law Yolande of Aragon was planning to finance a relief expedition to Orléans . Joan asked for permission to travel with the army and wear protective armor , which was provided by the Royal government . She depended on donated items for her armor , horse , sword , banner , and other items utilized by her entourage . Historian Stephen W. Richey explains her attraction to the royal court by pointing out that they may have viewed her as the only source of hope for a regime that was near collapse : 
 After years of one humiliating defeat after another , both the military and civil leadership of France were demoralized and discredited . When the Dauphin Charles granted Joan 's urgent request to be equipped for war and placed at the head of his army , his decision must have been based in large part on the knowledge that every orthodox , every rational option had been tried and had failed . Only a regime in the final straits of desperation would pay any heed to an illiterate farm girl who claimed that the voice of God was instructing her to take charge of her country 's army and lead it to victory . 
 Upon her arrival , Joan effectively turned the longstanding Anglo @-@ French conflict into a religious war , a course of action that was not without risk . Charles ' advisers were worried that unless Joan 's orthodoxy could be established beyond doubt — that she was not a heretic or a sorceress — Charles ' enemies could easily make the allegation that his crown was a gift from the devil . To circumvent this possibility , the Dauphin ordered background inquiries and a theological examination at Poitiers to verify her morality . In April 1429 , the commission of inquiry " declared her to be of irreproachable life , a good Christian , possessed of the virtues of humility , honesty and simplicity . " The theologians at Poitiers did not render a decision on the issue of divine inspiration ; rather , they informed the Dauphin that there was a " favorable presumption " to be made on the divine nature of her mission . This was enough for Charles , but they also stated that he had an obligation to put Joan to the test . " To doubt or abandon her without suspicion of evil would be to repudiate the Holy Spirit and to become unworthy of God 's aid " , they declared . They recommended that her claims should be put to the test by seeing if she could lift the siege of Orléans as she had predicted . 
 She arrived at the besieged city of Orléans on 29 April 1429 . Jean d 'Orléans , the acting head of the ducal family of Orléans on behalf of his captive half @-@ brother , initially excluded her from war councils and failed to inform her when the army engaged the enemy . However , his decision to exclude her did not prevent her presence at most councils and battles . 
 The extent of her actual military participation and leadership is a subject of debate among historians . On the one hand , Joan stated that she carried her banner in battle and had never killed anyone , preferring her banner " forty times " better than a sword ; and the army was always directly commanded by a nobleman , such as the Duke of Alençon for example . On the other hand , many of these same noblemen stated that Joan had a profound effect on their decisions since they often accepted the advice she gave them , believing her advice was Divinely inspired . In either case , historians agree that the army enjoyed remarkable success during her brief time with it . 
 = = = Military campaigns = = = 
 The appearance of Joan of Arc at Orléans coincided with a sudden change in the pattern of the siege . During the five months before her arrival , the defenders had attempted only one offensive assault , which had ended in defeat . On 4 May , however , the Armagnacs attacked and captured the outlying fortress of Saint Loup ( bastille de Saint @-@ Loup ) , followed on 5 May by a march to a second fortress called Saint @-@ Jean @-@ le @-@ Blanc , which was found deserted . When English troops came out to oppose the advance , a rapid cavalry charge drove them back into their fortresses , apparently without a fight . The Armagnacs then attacked and captured an English fortress built around a monastery called Les <unk> . That night , Armagnac troops maintained positions on the south bank of the river before attacking the main English stronghold , called " les Tourelles " , on the morning of 7 May . Contemporaries acknowledged Joan as the heroine of the engagement . She was wounded by an arrow between the neck and shoulder while holding her banner in the trench outside les Tourelles , but later returned to encourage a final assault that succeeded in taking the fortress . The English retreated from Orléans the next day , and the siege was over . 
 At Chinon and Poitiers , Joan had declared that she would provide a sign at Orléans . The lifting of the siege was interpreted by many people to be that sign , and it gained her the support of prominent clergy such as the Archbishop of Embrun and the theologian Jean Gerson , both of whom wrote supportive treatises immediately following this event . 
 The sudden victory at Orléans also led to many proposals for further offensive action . Joan persuaded Charles VII to allow her to accompany the army with Duke John II of Alençon , and she gained royal permission for her plan to recapture nearby bridges along the Loire as a prelude to an advance on Reims and the coronation of Charles VII . This was a bold proposal because Reims was roughly twice as far away as Paris and deep within enemy territory . The English expected an attempt to recapture Paris or an attack on Normandy . 
 The Duke of Alençon accepted Joan 's advice concerning strategy . Other commanders including Jean d 'Orléans had been impressed with her performance at Orléans and became her supporters . Alençon credited her with saving his life at Jargeau , where she warned him that a cannon on the walls was about to fire at him . During the same siege she withstood a blow from a stone that hit her helmet while she was near the base of the town 's wall . The army took Jargeau on 12 June , <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Loire on 15 June , and <unk> on 17 June . 
 The English army withdrew from the Loire Valley and headed north on 18 June , joining with an expected unit of reinforcements under the command of Sir John Fastolf . Joan urged the Armagnacs to pursue , and the two armies clashed southwest of the village of Patay . The battle at Patay might be compared to Agincourt in reverse . The French vanguard attacked a unit of English archers who had been placed to block the road . A rout ensued that decimated the main body of the English army and killed or captured most of its commanders . Fastolf escaped with a small band of soldiers and became the scapegoat for the humiliating English defeat . The French suffered minimal losses . 
 The French army left <unk> on 29 June on the march toward Reims and accepted the conditional surrender of the Burgundian @-@ held city of Auxerre on 3 July . Other towns in the army 's path returned to French allegiance without resistance . Troyes , the site of the treaty that tried to disinherit Charles VII , was the only one to put up even brief opposition . The army was in short supply of food by the time it reached Troyes . But the army was in luck : a wandering friar named Brother Richard had been preaching about the end of the world at Troyes and convinced local residents to plant beans , a crop with an early harvest . The hungry army arrived as the beans ripened . Troyes capitulated after a bloodless four @-@ day siege . 
 Reims opened its gates to the army on 16 July 1429 . The coronation took place the following morning . Although Joan and the Duke of Alençon urged a prompt march on Paris , the royal court preferred to negotiate a truce with Duke Philip of Burgundy . The duke violated the purpose of the agreement by using it as a stalling tactic to reinforce the defense of Paris . The French army marched through towns near Paris during the interim and accepted several peaceful surrenders . The Duke of Bedford led an English force and confronted the French army in a standoff at the battle of <unk> on 15 August . The French assault at Paris ensued on 8 September . Despite a wound to the leg from a crossbow bolt , Joan remained in the inner trench of Paris until she was carried back to safety by one of the commanders . The following morning the army received a royal order to withdraw . Most historians blame French Grand Chamberlain Georges de la Trémoille for the political blunders that followed the coronation . In October , Joan was with the royal army when it took Saint @-@ Pierre @-@ le @-@ <unk> , followed by an unsuccessful attempt to take La @-@ <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Loire in November and December . On 29 December , Joan and her family were ennobled by Charles VII as a reward for her actions . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 A truce with England during the following few months left Joan with little to do . On 23 March 1430 , she dictated a threatening letter to the Hussites , a dissident group which had broken with the Catholic Church on a number of doctrinal points and had defeated several previous crusades sent against them . Joan 's letter promises to " remove your madness and foul superstition , taking away either your heresy or your lives . " 
 The truce with England quickly came to an end . Joan traveled to Compiègne the following May to help defend the city against an English and Burgundian siege . On 23 May 1430 she was with a force that attempted to attack the Burgundian camp at <unk> north of Compiègne , but was ambushed and captured . When the troops began to withdraw toward the nearby fortifications of Compiègne after the advance of an additional force of 6 @,@ 000 Burgundians , Joan stayed with the rear guard . Burgundian troops surrounded the rear guard , and she was pulled off her horse by an archer . She agreed to surrender to a pro @-@ Burgundian nobleman named Lionel of <unk> , a member of Jean de Luxembourg 's unit . 
 Joan was imprisoned by the Burgundians at Beaurevoir Castle . She made several escape attempts , on one occasion jumping from her 70 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) tower , landing on the soft earth of a dry moat , after which she was moved to the Burgundian town of Arras . The English negotiated with their Burgundian allies to transfer her to their custody , with Bishop Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais , an English partisan , assuming a prominent role in these negotiations and her later trial . The final agreement called for the English to pay the sum of 10 @,@ 000 livres <unk> to obtain her from Jean de Luxembourg , a member of the Council of Duke Philip of Burgundy . 
 The English moved Joan to the city of Rouen , which served as their main headquarters in France . Historian Pierre Champion notes that the Armagnacs attempted to rescue her several times by launching military campaigns toward Rouen while she was held there . One campaign occurred during the winter of 1430 – 1431 , another in March 1431 , and one in late May shortly before her execution . These attempts were beaten back . Champion also quotes 15th @-@ century sources that say Charles VII threatened to " exact vengeance " upon Burgundian troops whom his forces had captured and upon " the English and women of England " in retaliation for their treatment of Joan . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 The trial for heresy was politically motivated . The tribunal was composed entirely of pro @-@ English and Burgundian clerics , and overseen by English commanders including the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Warwick . Legal proceedings commenced on 9 January 1431 at Rouen , the seat of the English occupation government . The procedure was suspect on a number of points , which would later provoke criticism of the tribunal by the chief inquisitor who investigated the trial after the war . 
 Under ecclesiastical law , Bishop Cauchon lacked jurisdiction over the case . Cauchon owed his appointment to his partisan support of the English government , which financed the trial . The low standard of evidence used in the trial also violated inquisitorial rules . Clerical notary Nicolas Bailly , who was commissioned to collect testimony against Joan , could find no adverse evidence . Without such evidence the court lacked grounds to initiate a trial . Opening a trial anyway , the court also violated ecclesiastical law by denying Joan the right to a legal adviser . In addition , stacking the tribunal entirely with pro @-@ English clergy violated the medieval Church 's requirement that heresy trials be judged by an impartial or balanced group of clerics . Upon the opening of the first public examination , Joan complained that those present were all partisans against her and asked for " ecclesiastics of the French side " to be invited in order to provide balance . This request was denied . 
 The Vice @-@ Inquisitor of Northern France ( Jean Lemaitre ) objected to the trial at its outset , and several eyewitnesses later said he was forced to cooperate after the English threatened his life . Some of the other clergy at the trial were also threatened when they refused to cooperate , including a Dominican friar named <unk> de la Pierre . These threats , and the domination of the trial by a secular government , were violations of the Church 's rules and undermined the right of the Church to conduct heresy trials without secular interference . 
 The trial record contains statements from Joan that the eyewitnesses later said astonished the court , since she was an illiterate peasant and yet was able to evade the theological pitfalls the tribunal had set up to entrap her . The transcript 's most famous exchange is an exercise in subtlety : " Asked if she knew she was in God 's grace , she answered , ' If I am not , may God put me there ; and if I am , may God so keep me . ' " The question is a scholarly trap . Church doctrine held that no one could be certain of being in God 's grace . If she had answered yes , then she would have been charged with heresy . If she had answered no , then she would have confessed her own guilt . The court notary <unk> later testified that at the moment the court heard her reply , " Those who were interrogating her were stupefied . " 
 Several members of the tribunal later testified that important portions of the transcript were falsified by being altered in her disfavor . Under Inquisitorial guidelines , Joan should have been confined in an ecclesiastical prison under the supervision of female guards ( i.e. , nuns ) . Instead , the English kept her in a secular prison guarded by their own soldiers . Bishop Cauchon denied Joan 's appeals to the Council of Basel and the Pope , which should have stopped his proceeding . 
 The twelve articles of accusation which summarized the court 's findings contradicted the already doctored court record . The illiterate defendant signed an abjuration document that she did not understand under threat of immediate execution . The court substituted a different abjuration in the official record . 
 = = = Cross @-@ dressing charge = = = 
 Heresy was a capital crime only for a repeat offense , therefore a repeat offense of " cross @-@ dressing " was now arranged by the court , according to the eyewitnesses . Joan agreed to wear feminine clothing when she abjured , which created a problem . According to the later descriptions of some of the tribunal members , she had previously been wearing male ( i.e. military ) clothing in prison because it gave her the ability to fasten her hosen , boots and tunic together into one piece , which deterred rape by making it difficult to pull her hosen off . She was evidently afraid to give up this outfit even temporarily because it was likely to be confiscated by the judge and she would thereby be left without protection . A woman 's dress offered no such protection . A few days after her abjuration , when she was forced to wear a dress , she told a tribunal member that " a great English lord had entered her prison and tried to take her by force . " She resumed male attire either as a defense against molestation or , in the testimony of Jean <unk> , because her dress had been taken by the guards and she was left with nothing else to wear . 
 Her resumption of male military clothing was labeled a relapse into heresy for cross @-@ dressing , although this would later be disputed by the inquisitor who presided over the appeals court that examined the case after the war . Medieval Catholic doctrine held that cross @-@ dressing should be evaluated based on context , as stated in the Summa Theologica by St. Thomas Aquinas , which says that necessity would be a permissible reason for cross @-@ dressing . This would include the use of clothing as protection against rape if the clothing would offer protection . In terms of doctrine , she had been justified in disguising herself as a pageboy during her journey through enemy territory , and she was justified in wearing armor during battle and protective clothing in camp and then in prison . The Chronique de la Pucelle states that it deterred molestation while she was camped in the field . When her soldiers ' clothing wasn 't needed while on campaign , she was said to have gone back to wearing a dress . Clergy who later testified at the posthumous appellate trial affirmed that she continued to wear male clothing in prison to deter molestation and rape . 
 Joan referred the court to the Poitiers inquiry when questioned on the matter . The Poitiers record no longer survives , but circumstances indicate the Poitiers clerics had approved her practice . She also kept her hair cut short through her military campaigns and while in prison . Her supporters , such as the theologian Jean Gerson , defended her hairstyle for practical reasons , as did Inquisitor <unk> later during the appellate trial . Nonetheless , at the trial in 1431 she was condemned and sentenced to die . 
 = = = Execution = = = 
 Eyewitnesses described the scene of the execution by burning on 30 May 1431 . Tied to a tall pillar at the Vieux @-@ Marché in Rouen , she asked two of the clergy , Fr Martin <unk> and Fr <unk> de la Pierre , to hold a crucifix before her . An English soldier also constructed a small cross that she put in the front of her dress . After she died , the English raked back the coals to expose her charred body so that no one could claim she had escaped alive . They then burned the body twice more , to reduce it to ashes and prevent any collection of relics , and cast her remains into the Seine River . The executioner , Geoffroy <unk> , later stated that he " greatly feared to be damned . " 
 = = Posthumous events = = 
 The Hundred Years ' War continued for twenty @-@ two years after her death . Charles VII succeeded in retaining legitimacy as the king of France in spite of a rival coronation held for Henry VI at Notre @-@ Dame cathedral in Paris on 16 December 1431 , the boy 's tenth birthday . Before England could rebuild its military leadership and force of longbowmen lost in 1429 , the country lost its alliance with Burgundy when the Treaty of Arras was signed in 1435 . The Duke of Bedford died the same year and Henry VI became the youngest king of England to rule without a regent . His weak leadership was probably the most important factor in ending the conflict . Kelly DeVries argues that Joan of Arc 's aggressive use of artillery and frontal assaults influenced French tactics for the rest of the war . 
 In 1452 , during the posthumous investigation into her execution , the Church declared that a religious play in her honor at Orléans would allow attendees to gain an indulgence ( remission of temporal punishment for sin ) by making a pilgrimage to the event . 
 = = = Retrial = = = 
 A posthumous retrial opened after the war ended . Pope Callixtus III authorized this proceeding , also known as the " nullification trial " , at the request of Inquisitor @-@ General Jean Bréhal and Joan 's mother Isabelle Romée . The purpose of the trial was to investigate whether the trial of condemnation and its verdict had been handled justly and according to canon law . Investigations started with an inquest by Guillaume Bouillé , a theologian and former rector of the University of Paris ( Sorbonne ) . Bréhal conducted an investigation in 1452 . A formal appeal followed in November 1455 . The appellate process involved clergy from throughout Europe and observed standard court procedure . A panel of theologians analyzed testimony from 115 witnesses . Bréhal drew up his final summary in June 1456 , which describes Joan as a martyr and implicated the late Pierre Cauchon with heresy for having convicted an innocent woman in pursuit of a secular vendetta . The technical reason for her execution had been a Biblical clothing law . The nullification trial reversed the conviction in part because the condemnation proceeding had failed to consider the doctrinal exceptions to that stricture . The appellate court declared her innocent on 7 July 1456 . 
 = = Canonization = = 
 Joan of Arc became a symbol of the Catholic League during the 16th century . When Félix <unk> was made bishop of Orléans in 1849 , he pronounced a fervid panegyric on Joan of Arc , which attracted attention in England as well as France , and he led the efforts which culminated in Joan of Arc 's beatification in 1909 . Pope Benedict XV canonized Joan on 16 May 1920 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Joan of Arc became a semi @-@ legendary figure for the four centuries after her death . The main sources of information about her were chronicles . Five original manuscripts of her condemnation trial surfaced in old archives during the 19th century . Soon , historians also located the complete records of her rehabilitation trial , which contained sworn testimony from 115 witnesses , and the original French notes for the Latin condemnation trial transcript . Various contemporary letters also emerged , three of which carry the signature Jehanne in the unsteady hand of a person learning to write . This unusual wealth of primary source material is one reason DeVries declares , " No person of the Middle Ages , male or female , has been the subject of more study . " 
 Joan of Arc came from an obscure village and rose to prominence when she was a teenager , and she did so as an uneducated peasant . The French and English kings had justified the ongoing war through competing interpretations of inheritance law , first concerning Edward III 's claim to the French throne and then Henry VI 's . The conflict had been a legalistic feud between two related royal families , but Joan transformed it along religious lines and gave meaning to appeals such as that of squire Jean de Metz when he asked , " Must the king be driven from the kingdom ; and are we to be English ? " In the words of Stephen Richey , " She turned what had been a dry dynastic squabble that left the common people unmoved except for their own suffering into a passionately popular war of national liberation . " Richey also expresses the breadth of her subsequent appeal : 
 The people who came after her in the five centuries since her death tried to make everything of her : demonic fanatic , spiritual mystic , naive and tragically ill @-@ used tool of the powerful , creator and icon of modern popular nationalism , adored heroine , saint . She insisted , even when threatened with torture and faced with death by fire , that she was guided by voices from God . Voices or no voices , her achievements leave anyone who knows her story shaking his head in amazed wonder . 
 From Christine de Pizan to the present , women have looked to Joan as a positive example of a brave and active woman . She operated within a religious tradition that believed an exceptional person from any level of society might receive a divine calling . Some of her most significant aid came from women . King Charles VII 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Yolande of Aragon , confirmed Joan 's virginity and financed her departure to Orléans . Joan of Luxembourg , aunt to the count of Luxembourg who held custody of her after Compiègne , alleviated her conditions of captivity and may have delayed her sale to the English . Finally , Anne of Burgundy , the duchess of Bedford and wife to the regent of England , declared Joan a virgin during pretrial inquiries . 
 Three separate vessels of the French Navy have been named after her , including a helicopter carrier that was retired from active service on 7 June 2010 . At present , the French far @-@ right political party Front National holds rallies at her statues , reproduces her image in the party 's publications , and uses a tricolor flame partly symbolic of her martyrdom as its emblem . This party 's opponents sometimes satirize its appropriation of her image . The French civic holiday in her honour is the second Sunday of May . 
 During World War I , she was frequently used as an icon in musical works . Some notable songs include " Joan of Arc " , " Joan of Arc , They Are Calling You " , and " Joan of Arc 's Answer Song " . 
 = = Visions = = 
 Joan of Arc 's religious visions have remained an ongoing topic of interest . She identified Saint Margaret , Saint Catherine , and Saint Michael as the source of her revelations , although there is some ambiguity as to which of several identically named saints she intended . 
 Analysis of her visions is problematic since the main source of information on this topic is the condemnation trial transcript in which she defied customary courtroom procedure about a witness ' oath and specifically refused to answer every question about her visions . She complained that a standard witness oath would conflict with an oath she had previously sworn to maintain confidentiality about meetings with her king . It remains unknown to what extent the surviving record may represent the fabrications of corrupt court officials or her own possible fabrications to protect state secrets . Some historians sidestep speculation about the visions by asserting that her belief in her calling is more relevant than questions about the visions ' ultimate origin . 
 A number of more recent scholars attempted to explain her visions in psychiatric or neurological terms . Potential diagnoses have included epilepsy , migraine , tuberculosis , and schizophrenia . None of the putative diagnoses have gained consensus support , and many scholars have argued that she didn 't display any of the objective symptoms that can accompany the mental illnesses which have been suggested , such as schizophrenia . Dr. Philip <unk> dismissed the possibility of schizophrenia and several other disorders ( Temporal Lobe Epilepsy and ergot poisoning ) in a chapter on Joan of Arc in his book " Post @-@ Mortem " in 2007 . 
 Dr. John Hughes rejected the idea that Joan of Arc suffered from epilepsy in an article in the academic journal ' Epilepsy & Behavior ' . 
 Two experts who analysed the hypothesis of temporal lobe <unk> in the medical journal <unk> expressed their misgivings about this claim in the following statement : 
 It is difficult to draw final conclusions , but it would seem unlikely that widespread tuberculosis , a serious disease , was present in this " patient " whose life @-@ style and activities would surely have been impossible had such a serious disease been present . 
 In response to another such theory alleging that her visions were caused by bovine tuberculosis as a result of drinking unpasteurized milk , historian Régine <unk> wrote that if drinking unpasteurized milk could produce such potential benefits for the nation , then the French government should stop mandating the pasteurization of milk . 
 Joan of Arc gained favor in the court of King Charles VII , who accepted her as sane . He would have been familiar with the signs of madness because his own father , Charles VI , had suffered from it . Charles VI was popularly known as " Charles the Mad " , and much of France 's political and military decline during his reign could be attributed to the power vacuum that his episodes of insanity had produced . The previous king had believed he was made of glass , a delusion no courtier had mistaken for a religious awakening . Fears that King Charles VII would manifest the same insanity may have factored into the attempt to disinherit him at Troyes . This stigma was so persistent that contemporaries of the next generation would attribute to inherited madness the breakdown that England 's King Henry VI was to suffer in 1453 : Henry VI was nephew to Charles VII and grandson to Charles VI . The court of Charles VII was shrewd and skeptical on the subject of mental health . Upon Joan 's arrival at Chinon the royal counselor Jacques <unk> cautioned , 
 One should not lightly alter any policy because of conversation with a girl , a peasant ... so susceptible to illusions ; one should not make oneself ridiculous in the sight of foreign nations . 
 She remained astute to the end of her life and the rehabilitation trial testimony frequently marvels at her astuteness : 
 Often they [ the judges ] turned from one question to another , changing about , but , notwithstanding this , she answered prudently , and evinced a wonderful memory . 
 Her subtle replies under interrogation even forced the court to stop holding public sessions . 
 Some psychiatrists have also urged that a distinction should be made between different types of experiences . Ralph Hoffman , professor of psychology at Yale University , argues that visionary and creative states , including " hearing voices " , are not necessarily signs of mental illness . 
 = = Alleged relics = = 
 In 1867 , a jar was found in a Paris pharmacy with the inscription " Remains found under the stake of Joan of Arc , virgin of Orleans . " They consisted of a charred human rib , carbonized wood , a piece of linen and a cat femur — explained as the practice of throwing black cats onto the pyre of witches . They are now in the Museum of Art and History in Chinon . In 2006 , Philippe Charlier , a forensic scientist at Raymond Poincaré Hospital ( <unk> ) was authorized to study the relics . Carbon @-@ 14 tests and various spectroscopic analyses were performed , and the results determined that the remains come from an Egyptian mummy from the sixth to the third century BC . The charred appearance was the result of the embalming substances , not from combustion . Large amounts of pine pollen were also found , consistent with the presence of resin used in mummification and some unburned linen was found and was determined to be similar to that used to wrap mummies . The noted perfumers Guerlain and Jean <unk> said that they could smell vanilla in the remains , also consistent with mummification . Apparently the mummy was part of the ingredients of medieval pharmacopoeia and it was relabeled in a time of French nationalism . 
 In March 2016 a ring believed to have been worn by Joan , which has passed through the hands of a cardinal , a king , an aristocrat and the daughter of a British physician , was sold at auction to the Puy du Fou , a historical theme park , for £ 300 @,@ 000 . There is no conclusive proof that she owned the ring , but its unusual design closely matches Joan 's own words about her ring at her trial . 
 = = Revisionist theories = = 
 The accuracy of the standard accounts of the life of Joan of Arc has been questioned by revisionist authors . 
 = X @-@ ray crystallography = 
 X @-@ ray crystallography is a tool used for identifying the atomic and molecular structure of a crystal , in which the crystalline atoms cause a beam of incident X @-@ rays to diffract into many specific directions . By measuring the angles and intensities of these diffracted beams , a crystallographer can produce a three @-@ dimensional picture of the density of electrons within the crystal . From this electron density , the mean positions of the atoms in the crystal can be determined , as well as their chemical bonds , their disorder and various other information . 
 Since many materials can form crystals — such as salts , metals , minerals , semiconductors , as well as various inorganic , organic and biological molecules — X @-@ ray crystallography has been fundamental in the development of many scientific fields . In its first decades of use , this method determined the size of atoms , the lengths and types of chemical bonds , and the atomic @-@ scale differences among various materials , especially minerals and alloys . The method also revealed the structure and function of many biological molecules , including vitamins , drugs , proteins and nucleic acids such as DNA . X @-@ ray crystallography is still the chief method for characterizing the atomic structure of new materials and in discerning materials that appear similar by other experiments . X @-@ ray crystal structures can also account for unusual electronic or elastic properties of a material , shed light on chemical interactions and processes , or serve as the basis for designing pharmaceuticals against diseases . 
 In a single @-@ crystal X @-@ ray diffraction measurement , a crystal is mounted on a goniometer . The goniometer is used to position the crystal at selected orientations . The crystal is illuminated with a finely focused monochromatic beam of X @-@ rays , producing a diffraction pattern of regularly spaced spots known as reflections . The two @-@ dimensional images taken at different orientations are converted into a three @-@ dimensional model of the density of electrons within the crystal using the mathematical method of Fourier transforms , combined with chemical data known for the sample . Poor resolution ( fuzziness ) or even errors may result if the crystals are too small , or not uniform enough in their internal makeup . 
 X @-@ ray crystallography is related to several other methods for determining atomic structures . Similar diffraction patterns can be produced by scattering electrons or neutrons , which are likewise interpreted by Fourier transformation . If single crystals of sufficient size cannot be obtained , various other X @-@ ray methods can be applied to obtain less detailed information ; such methods include fiber diffraction , powder diffraction and ( if the sample is not crystallized ) small @-@ angle X @-@ ray scattering ( SAXS ) . If the material under investigation is only available in the form of nanocrystalline powders or suffers from poor <unk> , the methods of electron crystallography can be applied for determining the atomic structure . 
 For all above mentioned X @-@ ray diffraction methods , the scattering is elastic ; the scattered X @-@ rays have the same wavelength as the incoming X @-@ ray . By contrast , inelastic X @-@ ray scattering methods are useful in studying excitations of the sample , rather than the distribution of its atoms . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early scientific history of crystals and X @-@ rays = = = 
 Crystals , though long admired for their regularity and symmetry , were not investigated scientifically until the 17th century . Johannes Kepler hypothesized in his work <unk> seu de Nive <unk> ( A New Year 's Gift of Hexagonal Snow ) ( 1611 ) that the hexagonal symmetry of snowflake crystals was due to a regular packing of spherical water particles . 
 The Danish scientist Nicolas Steno ( 1669 ) pioneered experimental investigations of crystal symmetry . Steno showed that the angles between the faces are the same in every exemplar of a particular type of crystal , and René Just Haüy ( 1784 ) discovered that every face of a crystal can be described by simple stacking patterns of blocks of the same shape and size . Hence , William <unk> Miller in 1839 was able to give each face a unique label of three small integers , the Miller indices which remain in use today for identifying crystal faces . Haüy 's study led to the correct idea that crystals are a regular three @-@ dimensional array ( a Bravais lattice ) of atoms and molecules ; a single unit cell is repeated indefinitely along three principal directions that are not necessarily perpendicular . In the 19th century , a complete catalog of the possible symmetries of a crystal was worked out by Johan Hessel , Auguste Bravais , <unk> Fedorov , Arthur <unk> and ( belatedly ) William Barlow ( 1894 ) . From the available data and physical reasoning , Barlow proposed several crystal structures in the 1880s that were validated later by X @-@ ray crystallography ; however , the available data were too scarce in the 1880s to accept his models as conclusive . 
 Wilhelm Röntgen discovered X @-@ rays in 1895 , just as the studies of crystal symmetry were being concluded . Physicists were initially uncertain of the nature of X @-@ rays , but soon suspected ( correctly ) that they were waves of electromagnetic radiation , in other words , another form of light . At that time , the wave model of light — specifically , the Maxwell theory of electromagnetic radiation — was well accepted among scientists , and experiments by Charles Glover Barkla showed that X @-@ rays exhibited phenomena associated with electromagnetic waves , including transverse polarization and spectral lines akin to those observed in the visible wavelengths . Single @-@ slit experiments in the laboratory of Arnold Sommerfeld suggested that X @-@ rays had a wavelength of about 1 angstrom . However , X @-@ rays are composed of photons , and thus are not only waves of electromagnetic radiation but also exhibit particle @-@ like properties . Albert Einstein introduced the photon concept in 1905 , but it was not broadly accepted until 1922 , when Arthur Compton confirmed it by the scattering of X @-@ rays from electrons . Therefore , these particle @-@ like properties of X @-@ rays , such as their ionization of gases , caused William Henry Bragg to argue in 1907 that X @-@ rays were not electromagnetic radiation . Nevertheless , Bragg 's view was not broadly accepted and the observation of X @-@ ray diffraction by Max von Laue in 1912 confirmed for most scientists that X @-@ rays were a form of electromagnetic radiation . 
 = = = X @-@ ray diffraction = = = 
 Crystals are regular arrays of atoms , and X @-@ rays can be considered waves of electromagnetic radiation . Atoms scatter X @-@ ray waves , primarily through the atoms ' electrons . Just as an ocean wave striking a lighthouse produces secondary circular waves emanating from the lighthouse , so an X @-@ ray striking an electron produces secondary spherical waves emanating from the electron . This phenomenon is known as elastic scattering , and the electron ( or lighthouse ) is known as the <unk> . A regular array of scatterers produces a regular array of spherical waves . Although these waves cancel one another out in most directions through destructive interference , they add constructively in a few specific directions , determined by Bragg 's law : 
 <formula> 
 Here d is the spacing between diffracting planes , <formula> is the incident angle , n is any integer , and λ is the wavelength of the beam . These specific directions appear as spots on the diffraction pattern called reflections . Thus , X @-@ ray diffraction results from an electromagnetic wave ( the X @-@ ray ) impinging on a regular array of scatterers ( the repeating arrangement of atoms within the crystal ) . 
 X @-@ rays are used to produce the diffraction pattern because their wavelength λ is typically the same order of magnitude ( 1 – 100 angstroms ) as the spacing d between planes in the crystal . In principle , any wave impinging on a regular array of scatterers produces diffraction , as predicted first by Francesco Maria Grimaldi in 1665 . To produce significant diffraction , the spacing between the scatterers and the wavelength of the impinging wave should be similar in size . For illustration , the diffraction of sunlight through a bird 's feather was first reported by James Gregory in the later 17th century . The first artificial diffraction gratings for visible light were constructed by David Rittenhouse in 1787 , and Joseph von Fraunhofer in 1821 . However , visible light has too long a wavelength ( typically , 5500 angstroms ) to observe diffraction from crystals . Prior to the first X @-@ ray diffraction experiments , the spacings between lattice planes in a crystal were not known with certainty . 
 The idea that crystals could be used as a diffraction grating for X @-@ rays arose in 1912 in a conversation between Paul Peter Ewald and Max von Laue in the English Garden in Munich . Ewald had proposed a resonator model of crystals for his thesis , but this model could not be validated using visible light , since the wavelength was much larger than the spacing between the resonators . Von Laue realized that electromagnetic radiation of a shorter wavelength was needed to observe such small spacings , and suggested that X @-@ rays might have a wavelength comparable to the unit @-@ cell spacing in crystals . Von Laue worked with two technicians , Walter Friedrich and his assistant Paul Knipping , to shine a beam of X @-@ rays through a copper sulfate crystal and record its diffraction on a photographic plate . After being developed , the plate showed a large number of well @-@ defined spots arranged in a pattern of intersecting circles around the spot produced by the central beam . Von Laue developed a law that connects the scattering angles and the size and orientation of the unit @-@ cell spacings in the crystal , for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1914 . 
 = = = Scattering = = = 
 As described in the mathematical derivation below , the X @-@ ray scattering is determined by the density of electrons within the crystal . Since the energy of an X @-@ ray is much greater than that of a valence electron , the scattering may be modeled as Thomson scattering , the interaction of an electromagnetic ray with a free electron . This model is generally adopted to describe the polarization of the scattered radiation . 
 The intensity of Thomson scattering for one particle with mass m and charge q is : 
 <formula> 
 Hence the atomic nuclei , which are much heavier than an electron , contribute negligibly to the scattered X @-@ rays . 
 = = = Development from 1912 to 1920 = = = 
 After Von Laue 's pioneering research , the field developed rapidly , most notably by physicists William Lawrence Bragg and his father William Henry Bragg . In 1912 – 1913 , the younger Bragg developed Bragg 's law , which connects the observed scattering with reflections from evenly spaced planes within the crystal . The Braggs , father and son , shared the 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work in crystallography . The earliest structures were generally simple and marked by one @-@ dimensional symmetry . However , as computational and experimental methods improved over the next decades , it became feasible to deduce reliable atomic positions for more complicated two- and three @-@ dimensional arrangements of atoms in the unit @-@ cell . 
 The potential of X @-@ ray crystallography for determining the structure of molecules and minerals — then only known vaguely from chemical and hydrodynamic experiments — was realized immediately . The earliest structures were simple inorganic crystals and minerals , but even these revealed fundamental laws of physics and chemistry . The first atomic @-@ resolution structure to be " solved " ( i.e. , determined ) in 1914 was that of table salt . The distribution of electrons in the table @-@ salt structure showed that crystals are not necessarily composed of covalently bonded molecules , and proved the existence of ionic compounds . The structure of diamond was solved in the same year , proving the tetrahedral arrangement of its chemical bonds and showing that the length of C – C single bond was 1 @.@ 52 angstroms . Other early structures included copper , calcium fluoride ( CaF2 , also known as fluorite ) , calcite ( CaCO3 ) and pyrite ( FeS2 ) in 1914 ; spinel ( <unk> ) in 1915 ; the rutile and anatase forms of titanium dioxide ( TiO2 ) in 1916 ; <unk> Mn ( OH ) 2 and , by extension , <unk> Mg ( OH ) 2 in 1919 ; . Also in 1919 sodium nitrate ( <unk> ) and caesium <unk> ( <unk> ) were determined by Ralph Walter Graystone Wyckoff , and the wurtzite ( hexagonal ZnS ) structure became known in 1920 . 
 The structure of graphite was solved in 1916 by the related method of powder diffraction , which was developed by Peter Debye and Paul Scherrer and , independently , by Albert Hull in 1917 . The structure of graphite was determined from single @-@ crystal diffraction in 1924 by two groups independently . Hull also used the powder method to determine the structures of various metals , such as iron and magnesium . 
 = = = Cultural and aesthetic importance of X @-@ ray crystallography = = = 
 In what has been called his scientific autobiography , The Development of X @-@ ray Analysis , Sir William Lawrence Bragg mentioned that he believed the field of crystallography was particularly welcoming to women because the techno @-@ aesthetics of the molecular structures resembled textiles and household objects . Bragg was known to compare crystal formation to " curtains , wallpapers , mosaics , and roses . " 
 In 1951 , the Festival Pattern Group at the Festival of Britain hosted a collaborative group of textile manufacturers and experienced crystallographers to design lace and prints based on the X @-@ ray crystallography of insulin , china clay , and hemoglobin . One of the leading scientists of the project was Dr. Helen Megaw ( 1907 – 2002 ) , the Assistant Director of Research at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge at the time . Megaw is credited as one of the central figures who took inspiration from crystal diagrams and saw their potential in design . In 2008 , the Wellcome Collection in London curated an exhibition on the Festival Pattern Group called " From Atom to Patterns . " 
 = = Contributions to chemistry and material science = = 
 X @-@ ray crystallography has led to a better understanding of chemical bonds and non @-@ covalent interactions . The initial studies revealed the typical radii of atoms , and confirmed many theoretical models of chemical bonding , such as the tetrahedral bonding of carbon in the diamond structure , the octahedral bonding of metals observed in ammonium hexachloroplatinate ( IV ) , and the resonance observed in the planar carbonate group and in aromatic molecules . Kathleen Lonsdale 's 1928 structure of <unk> established the hexagonal symmetry of benzene and showed a clear difference in bond length between the aliphatic C – C bonds and aromatic C – C bonds ; this finding led to the idea of resonance between chemical bonds , which had profound consequences for the development of chemistry . Her conclusions were anticipated by William Henry Bragg , who published models of naphthalene and <unk> in 1921 based on other molecules , an early form of molecular replacement . 
 Also in the 1920s , Victor Moritz Goldschmidt and later Linus Pauling developed rules for eliminating chemically unlikely structures and for determining the relative sizes of atoms . These rules led to the structure of brookite ( 1928 ) and an understanding of the relative stability of the rutile , brookite and anatase forms of titanium dioxide . 
 The distance between two bonded atoms is a sensitive measure of the bond strength and its bond order ; thus , X @-@ ray crystallographic studies have led to the discovery of even more exotic types of bonding in inorganic chemistry , such as metal @-@ metal double bonds , metal @-@ metal quadruple bonds , and three @-@ center , two @-@ electron bonds . X @-@ ray crystallography — or , strictly speaking , an inelastic Compton scattering experiment — has also provided evidence for the partly covalent character of hydrogen bonds . In the field of organometallic chemistry , the X @-@ ray structure of ferrocene initiated scientific studies of sandwich compounds , while that of Zeise 's salt stimulated research into " back bonding " and metal @-@ pi complexes . Finally , X @-@ ray crystallography had a pioneering role in the development of supramolecular chemistry , particularly in clarifying the structures of the crown ethers and the principles of host @-@ guest chemistry . 
 In material sciences , many complicated inorganic and organometallic systems have been analyzed using single @-@ crystal methods , such as fullerenes , <unk> , and other complicated compounds . Single @-@ crystal diffraction is also used in the pharmaceutical industry , due to recent problems with polymorphs . The major factors affecting the quality of single @-@ crystal structures are the crystal 's size and regularity ; recrystallization is a commonly used technique to improve these factors in small @-@ molecule crystals . The Cambridge Structural Database contains over 500 @,@ 000 structures ; over 99 % of these structures were determined by X @-@ ray diffraction . 
 = = = Mineralogy and metallurgy = = = 
 Since the 1920s , X @-@ ray diffraction has been the principal method for determining the arrangement of atoms in minerals and metals . The application of X @-@ ray crystallography to mineralogy began with the structure of garnet , which was determined in 1924 by <unk> . A systematic X @-@ ray crystallographic study of the silicates was undertaken in the 1920s . This study showed that , as the Si / O ratio is altered , the silicate crystals exhibit significant changes in their atomic arrangements . <unk> extended these insights to minerals in which aluminium substitutes for the silicon atoms of the silicates . The first application of X @-@ ray crystallography to metallurgy likewise occurred in the mid @-@ 1920s . Most notably , Linus Pauling 's structure of the alloy <unk> led to his theory of the stability and structure of complex ionic crystals . 
 On October 17 , 2012 , the Curiosity rover on the planet Mars at " <unk> " performed the first X @-@ ray diffraction analysis of Martian soil . The results from the rover 's CheMin analyzer revealed the presence of several minerals , including feldspar , <unk> and olivine , and suggested that the Martian soil in the sample was similar to the " weathered basaltic soils " of Hawaiian volcanoes . 
 = = = Early organic and small biological molecules = = = 
 The first structure of an organic compound , <unk> , was solved in 1923 . This was followed by several studies of long @-@ chain fatty acids , which are an important component of biological membranes . In the 1930s , the structures of much larger molecules with two @-@ dimensional complexity began to be solved . A significant advance was the structure of <unk> , a large planar molecule that is closely related to porphyrin molecules important in biology , such as heme , corrin and chlorophyll . 
 X @-@ ray crystallography of biological molecules took off with Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin , who solved the structures of cholesterol ( 1937 ) , penicillin ( 1946 ) and vitamin B12 ( 1956 ) , for which she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964 . In 1969 , she succeeded in solving the structure of insulin , on which she worked for over thirty years . 
 = = = Biological macromolecular crystallography = = = 
 Crystal structures of proteins ( which are irregular and hundreds of times larger than cholesterol ) began to be solved in the late 1950s , beginning with the structure of sperm whale myoglobin by Sir John Cowdery Kendrew , for which he shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Max Perutz in 1962 . Since that success , over <unk> X @-@ ray crystal structures of proteins , nucleic acids and other biological molecules have been determined . For comparison , the nearest competing method in terms of structures analyzed is nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy , which has resolved <unk> chemical structures . Moreover , crystallography can solve structures of arbitrarily large molecules , whereas solution @-@ state NMR is restricted to relatively small ones ( less than 70 kDa ) . X @-@ ray crystallography is now used routinely by scientists to determine how a pharmaceutical drug interacts with its protein target and what changes might improve it . However , intrinsic membrane proteins remain challenging to crystallize because they require detergents or other means to <unk> them in isolation , and such detergents often interfere with crystallization . Such membrane proteins are a large component of the genome , and include many proteins of great physiological importance , such as ion channels and receptors . Helium cryogenics are used to prevent radiation damage in protein crystals . 
 On the other end of the size scale , relative small molecules are able to lure the resolving power of X @-@ ray crystallography . The structure assigned in 1991 to the antibiotic isolated from a marina organism , <unk> A - <unk> with M = 765 @.@ 65 - proved to be incorrect by the classical proof of structure : a synthetic sample was not identical to the natural product . The mistake was possible because of the inability of X @-@ ray crystallography to distinguish between the correct <unk> / > NH and the interchanged -NH2 / -O- groups in the incorrect structure . 
 = = Relationship to other scattering techniques = = 
 = = = Elastic vs. inelastic scattering = = = 
 X @-@ ray crystallography is a form of elastic scattering ; the outgoing X @-@ rays have the same energy , and thus same wavelength , as the incoming X @-@ rays , only with altered direction . By contrast , inelastic scattering occurs when energy is transferred from the incoming X @-@ ray to the crystal , e.g. , by exciting an inner @-@ shell electron to a higher energy level . Such inelastic scattering reduces the energy ( or increases the wavelength ) of the outgoing beam . <unk> scattering is useful for probing such excitations of matter , but not in determining the distribution of scatterers within the matter , which is the goal of X @-@ ray crystallography . 
 X @-@ rays range in wavelength from 10 to 0 @.@ 01 nanometers ; a typical wavelength used for crystallography is 1 Å ( 0 @.@ 1 nm ) , which is on the scale of covalent chemical bonds and the radius of a single atom . Longer @-@ wavelength photons ( such as ultraviolet radiation ) would not have sufficient resolution to determine the atomic positions . At the other extreme , shorter @-@ wavelength photons such as gamma rays are difficult to produce in large numbers , difficult to focus , and interact too strongly with matter , producing particle @-@ antiparticle pairs . Therefore , X @-@ rays are the " <unk> " for wavelength when determining atomic @-@ resolution structures from the scattering of electromagnetic radiation . 
 = = = Other X @-@ ray techniques = = = 
 Other forms of elastic X @-@ ray scattering include powder diffraction , Small @-@ Angle X @-@ ray Scattering ( SAXS ) and several types of X @-@ ray fiber diffraction , which was used by Rosalind Franklin in determining the double @-@ helix structure of DNA . In general , single @-@ crystal X @-@ ray diffraction offers more structural information than these other techniques ; however , it requires a sufficiently large and regular crystal , which is not always available . 
 These scattering methods generally use monochromatic X @-@ rays , which are restricted to a single wavelength with minor deviations . A broad spectrum of X @-@ rays ( that is , a blend of X @-@ rays with different wavelengths ) can also be used to carry out X @-@ ray diffraction , a technique known as the Laue method . This is the method used in the original discovery of X @-@ ray diffraction . Laue scattering provides much structural information with only a short exposure to the X @-@ ray beam , and is therefore used in structural studies of very rapid events ( Time resolved crystallography ) . However , it is not as well @-@ suited as monochromatic scattering for determining the full atomic structure of a crystal and therefore works better with crystals with relatively simple atomic arrangements . 
 The Laue back reflection mode records X @-@ rays scattered backwards from a broad spectrum source . This is useful if the sample is too thick for X @-@ rays to transmit through it . The diffracting planes in the crystal are determined by knowing that the normal to the diffracting plane bisects the angle between the incident beam and the diffracted beam . A <unk> chart can be used to interpret the back reflection Laue photograph . 
 = = = Electron and neutron diffraction = = = 
 Other particles , such as electrons and neutrons , may be used to produce a diffraction pattern . Although electron , neutron , and X @-@ ray scattering are based on different physical processes , the resulting diffraction patterns are analyzed using the same coherent diffraction imaging techniques . 
 As derived below , the electron density within the crystal and the diffraction patterns are related by a simple mathematical method , the Fourier transform , which allows the density to be calculated relatively easily from the patterns . However , this works only if the scattering is weak , i.e. , if the scattered beams are much less intense than the incoming beam . Weakly scattered beams pass through the remainder of the crystal without undergoing a second scattering event . Such re @-@ scattered waves are called " secondary scattering " and hinder the analysis . Any sufficiently thick crystal will produce secondary scattering , but since X @-@ rays interact relatively weakly with the electrons , this is generally not a significant concern . By contrast , electron beams may produce strong secondary scattering even for relatively thin crystals ( > 100 nm ) . Since this thickness corresponds to the diameter of many viruses , a promising direction is the electron diffraction of isolated macromolecular assemblies , such as viral capsids and molecular machines , which may be carried out with a cryo @-@ electron microscope . Moreover , the strong interaction of electrons with matter ( about 1000 times stronger than for X @-@ rays ) allows determination of the atomic structure of extremely small volumes . The field of applications for electron crystallography ranges from bio molecules like membrane proteins over organic thin films to the complex structures of ( nanocrystalline ) intermetallic compounds and zeolites . 
 Neutron diffraction is an excellent method for structure determination , although it has been difficult to obtain intense , monochromatic beams of neutrons in sufficient quantities . Traditionally , nuclear reactors have been used , although sources producing neutrons by spallation are becoming increasingly available . Being uncharged , neutrons scatter much more readily from the atomic nuclei rather than from the electrons . Therefore , neutron scattering is very useful for observing the positions of light atoms with few electrons , especially hydrogen , which is essentially invisible in the X @-@ ray diffraction . Neutron scattering also has the remarkable property that the solvent can be made invisible by adjusting the ratio of normal water , H2O , and heavy water , <unk> . 
 = = Methods = = 
 = = = Overview of single @-@ crystal X @-@ ray diffraction = = = 
 The oldest and most precise method of X @-@ ray crystallography is single @-@ crystal X @-@ ray diffraction , in which a beam of X @-@ rays strikes a single crystal , producing scattered beams . When they land on a piece of film or other detector , these beams make a diffraction pattern of spots ; the strengths and angles of these beams are recorded as the crystal is gradually rotated . Each spot is called a reflection , since it corresponds to the reflection of the X @-@ rays from one set of evenly spaced planes within the crystal . For single crystals of sufficient purity and regularity , X @-@ ray diffraction data can determine the mean chemical bond lengths and angles to within a few thousandths of an angstrom and to within a few tenths of a degree , respectively . The atoms in a crystal are not static , but oscillate about their mean positions , usually by less than a few tenths of an angstrom . X @-@ ray crystallography allows measuring the size of these oscillations . 
 = = = = Procedure = = = = 
 The technique of single @-@ crystal X @-@ ray crystallography has three basic steps . The first — and often most difficult — step is to obtain an adequate crystal of the material under study . The crystal should be sufficiently large ( typically larger than 0 @.@ 1 mm in all dimensions ) , pure in composition and regular in structure , with no significant internal imperfections such as cracks or twinning . 
 In the second step , the crystal is placed in an intense beam of X @-@ rays , usually of a single wavelength ( monochromatic X @-@ rays ) , producing the regular pattern of reflections . As the crystal is gradually rotated , previous reflections disappear and new ones appear ; the intensity of every spot is recorded at every orientation of the crystal . Multiple data sets may have to be collected , with each set covering slightly more than half a full rotation of the crystal and typically containing tens of thousands of reflections . 
 In the third step , these data are combined computationally with complementary chemical information to produce and refine a model of the arrangement of atoms within the crystal . The final , refined model of the atomic arrangement — now called a crystal structure — is usually stored in a public database . 
 = = = = Limitations = = = = 
 As the crystal 's repeating unit , its unit cell , becomes larger and more complex , the atomic @-@ level picture provided by X @-@ ray crystallography becomes less well @-@ resolved ( more " fuzzy " ) for a given number of observed reflections . Two limiting cases of X @-@ ray crystallography — " small @-@ molecule " and " macromolecular " crystallography — are often discerned . Small @-@ molecule crystallography typically involves crystals with fewer than 100 atoms in their asymmetric unit ; such crystal structures are usually so well resolved that the atoms can be discerned as isolated " blobs " of electron density . By contrast , macromolecular crystallography often involves tens of thousands of atoms in the unit cell . Such crystal structures are generally less well @-@ resolved ( more " smeared out " ) ; the atoms and chemical bonds appear as tubes of electron density , rather than as isolated atoms . In general , small molecules are also easier to crystallize than macromolecules ; however , X @-@ ray crystallography has proven possible even for viruses with hundreds of thousands of atoms . Though normally x @-@ ray crystallography can only be performed if the sample is in crystal form , new research has been done into sampling non @-@ crystalline forms of samples . 
 = = = Crystallization = = = 
 Although crystallography can be used to characterize the disorder in an impure or irregular crystal , crystallography generally requires a pure crystal of high regularity to solve the structure of a complicated arrangement of atoms . Pure , regular crystals can sometimes be obtained from natural or synthetic materials , such as samples of metals , minerals or other macroscopic materials . The regularity of such crystals can sometimes be improved with macromolecular crystal annealing and other methods . However , in many cases , obtaining a diffraction @-@ quality crystal is the chief barrier to solving its atomic @-@ resolution structure . 
 Small @-@ molecule and macromolecular crystallography differ in the range of possible techniques used to produce diffraction @-@ quality crystals . Small molecules generally have few degrees of conformational freedom , and may be crystallized by a wide range of methods , such as chemical vapor deposition and recrystallization . By contrast , macromolecules generally have many degrees of freedom and their crystallization must be carried out to maintain a stable structure . For example , proteins and larger RNA molecules cannot be crystallized if their tertiary structure has been unfolded ; therefore , the range of crystallization conditions is restricted to solution conditions in which such molecules remain folded . 
 Protein crystals are almost always grown in solution . The most common approach is to lower the solubility of its component molecules very gradually ; if this is done too quickly , the molecules will precipitate from solution , forming a useless dust or amorphous gel on the bottom of the container . Crystal growth in solution is characterized by two steps : nucleation of a microscopic <unk> ( possibly having only 100 molecules ) , followed by growth of that <unk> , ideally to a diffraction @-@ quality crystal . The solution conditions that favor the first step ( nucleation ) are not always the same conditions that favor the second step ( subsequent growth ) . The crystallographer 's goal is to identify solution conditions that favor the development of a single , large crystal , since larger crystals offer improved resolution of the molecule . Consequently , the solution conditions should disfavor the first step ( nucleation ) but favor the second ( growth ) , so that only one large crystal forms per droplet . If nucleation is favored too much , a shower of small crystallites will form in the droplet , rather than one large crystal ; if favored too little , no crystal will form whatsoever . Other approaches involves , crystallizing proteins under oil , where aqueous protein solutions are dispensed under liquid oil , and water evaporates through the layer of oil . Different oils have different evaporation <unk> , therefore yielding changes in concentration rates from different <unk> / protein mixture . The technique relies on bringing the protein directly into the nucleation zone by mixing protein with the appropriate amount of <unk> to prevent the diffusion of water out of the drop . 
 It is extremely difficult to predict good conditions for nucleation or growth of well @-@ ordered crystals . In practice , favorable conditions are identified by screening ; a very large batch of the molecules is prepared , and a wide variety of crystallization solutions are tested . Hundreds , even thousands , of solution conditions are generally tried before finding the successful one . The various conditions can use one or more physical mechanisms to lower the solubility of the molecule ; for example , some may change the pH , some contain salts of the Hofmeister series or chemicals that lower the dielectric constant of the solution , and still others contain large polymers such as polyethylene glycol that drive the molecule out of solution by <unk> effects . It is also common to try several temperatures for encouraging crystallization , or to gradually lower the temperature so that the solution becomes supersaturated . These methods require large amounts of the target molecule , as they use high concentration of the molecule ( s ) to be crystallized . Due to the difficulty in obtaining such large quantities ( milligrams ) of crystallization @-@ grade protein , robots have been developed that are capable of accurately dispensing crystallization trial drops that are in the order of 100 <unk> in volume . This means that 10 @-@ fold less protein is used per experiment when compared to crystallization trials set up by hand ( in the order of 1 microliter ) . 
 Several factors are known to inhibit or mar crystallization . The growing crystals are generally held at a constant temperature and protected from shocks or vibrations that might disturb their crystallization . Impurities in the molecules or in the crystallization solutions are often inimical to crystallization . Conformational flexibility in the molecule also tends to make crystallization less likely , due to entropy . Ironically , molecules that tend to self @-@ assemble into regular helices are often unwilling to assemble into crystals . Crystals can be marred by twinning , which can occur when a unit cell can pack equally favorably in multiple orientations ; although recent advances in computational methods may allow solving the structure of some twinned crystals . Having failed to crystallize a target molecule , a crystallographer may try again with a slightly modified version of the molecule ; even small changes in molecular properties can lead to large differences in crystallization behavior . 
 = = = Data collection = = = 
 = = = = Mounting the crystal = = = = 
 The crystal is mounted for measurements so that it may be held in the X @-@ ray beam and rotated . There are several methods of mounting . In the past , crystals were loaded into glass capillaries with the crystallization solution ( the mother liquor ) . Nowadays , crystals of small molecules are typically attached with oil or glue to a glass fiber or a loop , which is made of nylon or plastic and attached to a solid rod . Protein crystals are scooped up by a loop , then flash @-@ frozen with liquid nitrogen . This freezing reduces the radiation damage of the X @-@ rays , as well as the noise in the Bragg peaks due to thermal motion ( the Debye @-@ Waller effect ) . However , untreated protein crystals often crack if flash @-@ frozen ; therefore , they are generally pre @-@ soaked in a cryoprotectant solution before freezing . Unfortunately , this pre @-@ soak may itself cause the crystal to crack , ruining it for crystallography . Generally , successful cryo @-@ conditions are identified by trial and error . 
 The capillary or loop is mounted on a goniometer , which allows it to be positioned accurately within the X @-@ ray beam and rotated . Since both the crystal and the beam are often very small , the crystal must be centered within the beam to within ~ 25 micrometers accuracy , which is aided by a camera focused on the crystal . The most common type of goniometer is the " kappa goniometer " , which offers three angles of rotation : the ω angle , which rotates about an axis perpendicular to the beam ; the κ angle , about an axis at ~ 50 ° to the ω axis ; and , finally , the φ angle about the loop / capillary axis . When the κ angle is zero , the ω and φ axes are aligned . The κ rotation allows for convenient mounting of the crystal , since the arm in which the crystal is mounted may be swung out towards the crystallographer . The oscillations carried out during data collection ( mentioned below ) involve the ω axis only . An older type of goniometer is the four @-@ circle goniometer , and its relatives such as the six @-@ circle goniometer . 
 = = = = = Rotating Anode = = = = = 
 Small scale can be done on a local X @-@ ray tube source , typically coupled with an image plate detector . These have the advantage of being ( relatively ) inexpensive and easy to maintain , and allow for quick screening and collection of samples . However , the wavelength light produced is limited by anode material , typically copper . Further , intensity is limited by the power applied and cooling capacity available to avoid melting the anode . In such systems , electrons are boiled off of a cathode and accelerated through a strong electric potential of ~ 50 kV ; having reached a high speed , the electrons collide with a metal plate , emitting bremsstrahlung and some strong spectral lines corresponding to the excitation of inner @-@ shell electrons of the metal . The most common metal used is copper , which can be kept cool easily , due to its high thermal conductivity , and which produces strong <unk> and <unk> lines . The <unk> line is sometimes suppressed with a thin ( ~ 10 µm ) nickel foil . The simplest and cheapest variety of sealed X @-@ ray tube has a stationary anode ( the Crookes tube ) and run with ~ 2 kW of electron beam power . The more expensive variety has a rotating @-@ anode type source that run with ~ 14 kW of e @-@ beam power . 
 X @-@ rays are generally filtered ( by use of X @-@ Ray Filters ) to a single wavelength ( made monochromatic ) and collimated to a single direction before they are allowed to strike the crystal . The filtering not only simplifies the data analysis , but also removes radiation that degrades the crystal without contributing useful information . <unk> is done either with a collimator ( basically , a long tube ) or with a clever arrangement of gently curved mirrors . Mirror systems are preferred for small crystals ( under 0 @.@ 3 mm ) or with large unit cells ( over 150 Å ) 
 = = = = = Synchrotron Radiation = = = = = 
 Synchrotron radiation are some of the brightest lights on earth . It is the single most powerful tool available to X @-@ ray crystallographers . It is made of X @-@ ray beams generated in large machines called synchrotrons . These machines accelerate electrically charged particles , often electrons , to nearly the speed of light and confine them in a ( roughly ) circular loop using magnetic fields . 
 Synchrotrons are generally national facilities , each with several dedicated <unk> where data is collected without interruption . Synchrotrons were originally designed for use by high @-@ energy physicists studying subatomic particles and cosmic phenomena . The largest component of each synchrotron is its electron storage ring . This ring is actually not a perfect circle , but a many @-@ sided polygon . At each corner of the polygon , or sector , precisely aligned magnets bend the electron stream . As the electrons ’ path is bent , they emit bursts of energy in the form of X @-@ rays . 
 Using synchrotron radiation frequently has specific requirements for X @-@ ray crystallography . The intense ionizing radiation can cause radiation damage to samples , particularly macromolecular crystals . <unk> crystallography protects the sample from radiation damage , by freezing the crystal at liquid nitrogen temperatures ( ~ 100 K ) . However , synchrotron radiation frequently has the advantage of user selectable wavelengths , allowing for anomalous scattering experiments which maximizes anomalous signal . This is critical in experiments such as SAD and MAD . 
 = = = = = Free Electron Laser = = = = = 
 Recently , free electron lasers have been developed for use in X @-@ ray crystallography . These are the brightest X @-@ ray sources currently available ; with the X @-@ rays coming in <unk> bursts . The intensity of the source is such that atomic resolution diffraction patterns can be resolved for crystals otherwise too small for collection . However , the intense light source also destroys the sample , requiring multiple crystals to be shot . As each crystal is randomly oriented in the beam , hundreds of thousands of individual diffraction images must be collected in order to get a complete data @-@ set . This method , serial <unk> crystallography , has been used in solving the structure of a number of protein crystal structures , sometimes noting differences with equivalent structures collected from synchrotron sources . 
 = = = = Recording the reflections = = = = 
 When a crystal is mounted and exposed to an intense beam of X @-@ rays , it scatters the X @-@ rays into a pattern of spots or reflections that can be observed on a screen behind the crystal . A similar pattern may be seen by shining a laser pointer at a compact disc . The relative intensities of these spots provide the information to determine the arrangement of molecules within the crystal in atomic detail . The intensities of these reflections may be recorded with photographic film , an area detector or with a charge @-@ coupled device ( CCD ) image sensor . The peaks at small angles correspond to low @-@ resolution data , whereas those at high angles represent high @-@ resolution data ; thus , an upper limit on the eventual resolution of the structure can be determined from the first few images . Some measures of diffraction quality can be determined at this point , such as the <unk> of the crystal and its overall disorder , as observed in the peak widths . Some pathologies of the crystal that would render it unfit for solving the structure can also be diagnosed quickly at this point . 
 One image of spots is insufficient to reconstruct the whole crystal ; it represents only a small slice of the full Fourier transform . To collect all the necessary information , the crystal must be rotated step @-@ by @-@ step through 180 ° , with an image recorded at every step ; actually , slightly more than 180 ° is required to cover reciprocal space , due to the curvature of the Ewald sphere . However , if the crystal has a higher symmetry , a smaller angular range such as 90 ° or 45 ° may be recorded . The rotation axis should be changed at least once , to avoid developing a " blind spot " in reciprocal space close to the rotation axis . It is customary to rock the crystal slightly ( by 0 @.@ 5 – 2 ° ) to catch a broader region of reciprocal space . 
 Multiple data sets may be necessary for certain phasing methods . For example , MAD phasing requires that the scattering be recorded at least three ( and usually four , for redundancy ) wavelengths of the incoming X @-@ ray radiation . A single crystal may degrade too much during the collection of one data set , owing to radiation damage ; in such cases , data sets on multiple crystals must be taken . 
 = = = Data analysis = = = 
 = = = = Crystal symmetry , unit cell , and image scaling = = = = 
 The recorded series of two @-@ dimensional diffraction patterns , each corresponding to a different crystal orientation , is converted into a three @-@ dimensional model of the electron density ; the conversion uses the mathematical technique of Fourier transforms , which is explained below . Each spot corresponds to a different type of variation in the electron density ; the crystallographer must determine which variation corresponds to which spot ( indexing ) , the relative strengths of the spots in different images ( merging and scaling ) and how the variations should be combined to yield the total electron density ( phasing ) . 
 Data processing begins with indexing the reflections . This means identifying the dimensions of the unit cell and which image peak corresponds to which position in reciprocal space . A byproduct of indexing is to determine the symmetry of the crystal , i.e. , its space group . Some space groups can be eliminated from the beginning . For example , reflection symmetries cannot be observed in chiral molecules ; thus , only 65 space groups of 230 possible are allowed for protein molecules which are almost always chiral . Indexing is generally accomplished using an <unk> routine . Having assigned symmetry , the data is then integrated . This converts the hundreds of images containing the thousands of reflections into a single file , consisting of ( at the very least ) records of the Miller index of each reflection , and an intensity for each reflection ( at this state the file often also includes error estimates and measures of partiality ( what part of a given reflection was recorded on that image ) ) . 
 A full data set may consist of hundreds of separate images taken at different orientations of the crystal . The first step is to merge and scale these various images , that is , to identify which peaks appear in two or more images ( merging ) and to scale the relative images so that they have a consistent intensity scale . Optimizing the intensity scale is critical because the relative intensity of the peaks is the key information from which the structure is determined . The repetitive technique of crystallographic data collection and the often high symmetry of crystalline materials cause the <unk> to record many symmetry @-@ equivalent reflections multiple times . This allows calculating the symmetry @-@ related R @-@ factor , a reliability index based upon how similar are the measured intensities of symmetry @-@ equivalent reflections , thus assessing the quality of the data . 
 = = = = Initial phasing = = = = 
 The data collected from a diffraction experiment is a reciprocal space representation of the crystal lattice . The position of each diffraction ' spot ' is governed by the size and shape of the unit cell , and the inherent symmetry within the crystal . The intensity of each diffraction ' spot ' is recorded , and this intensity is proportional to the square of the structure factor amplitude . The structure factor is a complex number containing information relating to both the amplitude and phase of a wave . In order to obtain an interpretable electron density map , both amplitude and phase must be known ( an electron density map allows a crystallographer to build a starting model of the molecule ) . The phase cannot be directly recorded during a diffraction experiment : this is known as the phase problem . Initial phase estimates can be obtained in a variety of ways : 
 Ab initio phasing or direct methods – This is usually the method of choice for small molecules ( < 1000 non @-@ hydrogen atoms ) , and has been used successfully to solve the phase problems for small proteins . If the resolution of the data is better than 1 @.@ 4 Å ( 140 pm ) , direct methods can be used to obtain phase information , by exploiting known phase relationships between certain groups of reflections . 
 Molecular replacement – if a related structure is known , it can be used as a search model in molecular replacement to determine the orientation and position of the molecules within the unit cell . The phases obtained this way can be used to generate electron density maps . 
 Anomalous X @-@ ray scattering ( MAD or SAD phasing ) – the X @-@ ray wavelength may be scanned past an absorption edge of an atom , which changes the scattering in a known way . By recording full sets of reflections at three different wavelengths ( far below , far above and in the middle of the absorption edge ) one can solve for the substructure of the anomalously diffracting atoms and hence the structure of the whole molecule . The most popular method of incorporating anomalous scattering atoms into proteins is to express the protein in a methionine <unk> ( a host incapable of synthesizing methionine ) in a media rich in <unk> @-@ methionine , which contains selenium atoms . A MAD experiment can then be conducted around the absorption edge , which should then yield the position of any methionine residues within the protein , providing initial phases . 
 Heavy atom methods ( multiple isomorphous replacement ) – If electron @-@ dense metal atoms can be introduced into the crystal , direct methods or Patterson @-@ space methods can be used to determine their location and to obtain initial phases . Such heavy atoms can be introduced either by soaking the crystal in a heavy atom @-@ containing solution , or by co @-@ crystallization ( growing the crystals in the presence of a heavy atom ) . As in MAD phasing , the changes in the scattering amplitudes can be interpreted to yield the phases . Although this is the original method by which protein crystal structures were solved , it has largely been superseded by MAD phasing with selenomethionine . 
 = = = = Model building and phase refinement = = = = 
 Having obtained initial phases , an initial model can be built . This model can be used to refine the phases , leading to an improved model , and so on . Given a model of some atomic positions , these positions and their respective Debye @-@ Waller factors ( or B @-@ factors , accounting for the thermal motion of the atom ) can be refined to fit the observed diffraction data , ideally yielding a better set of phases . A new model can then be fit to the new electron density map and a further round of refinement is carried out . This continues until the correlation between the diffraction data and the model is maximized . The agreement is measured by an R @-@ factor defined as 
 <formula> 
 where F is the structure factor . A similar quality criterion is Rfree , which is calculated from a subset ( ~ 10 % ) of reflections that were not included in the structure refinement . Both R factors depend on the resolution of the data . As a rule of thumb , Rfree should be approximately the resolution in angstroms divided by 10 ; thus , a data @-@ set with 2 Å resolution should yield a final Rfree ~ 0 @.@ 2 . Chemical bonding features such as stereochemistry , hydrogen bonding and distribution of bond lengths and angles are complementary measures of the model quality . Phase bias is a serious problem in such iterative model building . <unk> maps are a common technique used to check for this . 
 It may not be possible to observe every atom of the crystallized molecule – it must be remembered that the resulting electron density is an average of all the molecules within the crystal . In some cases , there is too much residual disorder in those atoms , and the resulting electron density for atoms existing in many conformations is smeared to such an extent that it is no longer detectable in the electron density map . Weakly scattering atoms such as hydrogen are routinely invisible . It is also possible for a single atom to appear multiple times in an electron density map , e.g. , if a protein <unk> has multiple ( < 4 ) allowed conformations . In still other cases , the crystallographer may detect that the covalent structure deduced for the molecule was incorrect , or changed . For example , proteins may be cleaved or undergo post @-@ translational modifications that were not detected prior to the crystallization . 
 = = = Deposition of the structure = = = 
 Once the model of a molecule 's structure has been finalized , it is often deposited in a crystallographic database such as the Cambridge Structural Database ( for small molecules ) , the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database ( ICSD ) ( for inorganic compounds ) or the Protein Data Bank ( for protein structures ) . Many structures obtained in private commercial ventures to crystallize medicinally relevant proteins are not deposited in public crystallographic databases . 
 = = Diffraction theory = = 
 The main goal of X @-@ ray crystallography is to determine the density of electrons f ( r ) throughout the crystal , where r represents the three @-@ dimensional position vector within the crystal . To do this , X @-@ ray scattering is used to collect data about its Fourier transform F ( q ) , which is inverted mathematically to obtain the density defined in real space , using the formula 
 <formula> 
 where the integral is taken over all values of q . The three @-@ dimensional real vector q represents a point in reciprocal space , that is , to a particular oscillation in the electron density as one moves in the direction in which q points . The length of q corresponds to 2 <formula> divided by the wavelength of the oscillation . The corresponding formula for a Fourier transform will be used below 
 <formula> 
 where the integral is summed over all possible values of the position vector r within the crystal . 
 The Fourier transform F ( q ) is generally a complex number , and therefore has a magnitude | F ( q ) | and a phase φ ( q ) related by the equation 
 <formula> 
 The intensities of the reflections observed in X @-@ ray diffraction give us the magnitudes | F ( q ) | but not the phases φ ( q ) . To obtain the phases , full sets of reflections are collected with known alterations to the scattering , either by modulating the wavelength past a certain absorption edge or by adding strongly scattering ( i.e. , electron @-@ dense ) metal atoms such as mercury . Combining the magnitudes and phases yields the full Fourier transform F ( q ) , which may be inverted to obtain the electron density f ( r ) . 
 Crystals are often idealized as being perfectly periodic . In that ideal case , the atoms are positioned on a perfect lattice , the electron density is perfectly periodic , and the Fourier transform F ( q ) is zero except when q belongs to the reciprocal lattice ( the so @-@ called Bragg peaks ) . In reality , however , crystals are not perfectly periodic ; atoms vibrate about their mean position , and there may be disorder of various types , such as <unk> , dislocations , various point defects , and heterogeneity in the conformation of crystallized molecules . Therefore , the Bragg peaks have a finite width and there may be significant diffuse scattering , a continuum of scattered X @-@ rays that fall between the Bragg peaks . 
 = = = Intuitive understanding by Bragg 's law = = = 
 An intuitive understanding of X @-@ ray diffraction can be obtained from the Bragg model of diffraction . In this model , a given reflection is associated with a set of evenly spaced sheets running through the crystal , usually passing through the centers of the atoms of the crystal lattice . The orientation of a particular set of sheets is identified by its three Miller indices ( h , k , l ) , and let their spacing be noted by d . William Lawrence Bragg proposed a model in which the incoming X @-@ rays are scattered <unk> ( mirror @-@ like ) from each plane ; from that assumption , X @-@ rays scattered from adjacent planes will combine constructively ( constructive interference ) when the angle θ between the plane and the X @-@ ray results in a path @-@ length difference that is an integer multiple n of the X @-@ ray wavelength λ . 
 <formula> 
 A reflection is said to be indexed when its Miller indices ( or , more correctly , its reciprocal lattice vector components ) have been identified from the known wavelength and the scattering angle <unk> . Such indexing gives the unit @-@ cell parameters , the lengths and angles of the unit @-@ cell , as well as its space group . Since Bragg 's law does not interpret the relative intensities of the reflections , however , it is generally inadequate to solve for the arrangement of atoms within the unit @-@ cell ; for that , a Fourier transform method must be carried out . 
 = = = Scattering as a Fourier transform = = = 
 The incoming X @-@ ray beam has a polarization and should be represented as a vector wave ; however , for simplicity , let it be represented here as a scalar wave . We also ignore the complication of the time dependence of the wave and just concentrate on the wave 's spatial dependence . Plane waves can be represented by a wave vector kin , and so the strength of the incoming wave at time t = 0 is given by 
 <formula> 
 At position r within the sample , let there be a density of scatterers f ( r ) ; these scatterers should produce a scattered spherical wave of amplitude proportional to the local amplitude of the incoming wave times the number of scatterers in a small volume dV about r 
 <formula> 
 where S is the proportionality constant . 
 Let 's consider the fraction of scattered waves that leave with an outgoing wave @-@ vector of kout and strike the screen at rscreen . Since no energy is lost ( elastic , not inelastic scattering ) , the wavelengths are the same as are the magnitudes of the wave @-@ vectors | kin | = | kout | . From the time that the photon is scattered at r until it is absorbed at rscreen , the photon undergoes a change in phase 
 <formula> 
 The net radiation arriving at rscreen is the sum of all the scattered waves throughout the crystal 
 <formula> 
 which may be written as a Fourier transform 
 <formula> 
 where q = kout – kin . The measured intensity of the reflection will be square of this amplitude 
 <formula> 
 = = = Friedel and Bijvoet mates = = = 
 For every reflection corresponding to a point q in the reciprocal space , there is another reflection of the same intensity at the opposite point <unk> . This opposite reflection is known as the Friedel mate of the original reflection . This symmetry results from the mathematical fact that the density of electrons f ( r ) at a position r is always a real number . As noted above , f ( r ) is the inverse transform of its Fourier transform F ( q ) ; however , such an inverse transform is a complex number in general . To ensure that f ( r ) is real , the Fourier transform F ( q ) must be such that the Friedel mates F ( − q ) and F ( q ) are complex conjugates of one another . Thus , F ( − q ) has the same magnitude as F ( q ) but they have the opposite phase , i.e. , φ ( q ) 
 = − φ ( q ) 
 <formula> 
 The equality of their magnitudes ensures that the Friedel mates have the same intensity | F | 2 . This symmetry allows one to measure the full Fourier transform from only half the reciprocal space , e.g. , by rotating the crystal slightly more than 180 ° instead of a full 360 ° revolution . In crystals with significant symmetry , even more reflections may have the same intensity ( Bijvoet mates ) ; in such cases , even less of the reciprocal space may need to be measured . In favorable cases of high symmetry , sometimes only 90 ° or even only 45 ° of data are required to completely explore the reciprocal space . 
 The Friedel @-@ mate constraint can be derived from the definition of the inverse Fourier transform 
 <formula> 
 Since Euler 's formula states that <unk> = 
 cos ( x ) + i sin ( x ) , the inverse Fourier transform can be separated into a sum of a purely real part and a purely imaginary part 
 <formula> 
 The function f ( r ) is real if and only if the second integral Isin is zero for all values of r . In turn , this is true if and only if the above constraint is satisfied 
 <formula> 
 since Isin = − Isin implies that Isin = 0 . 
 = = = Ewald 's sphere = = = 
 Each X @-@ ray diffraction image represents only a slice , a spherical slice of reciprocal space , as may be seen by the Ewald sphere construction . Both kout and kin have the same length , due to the elastic scattering , since the wavelength has not changed . Therefore , they may be represented as two radial vectors in a sphere in reciprocal space , which shows the values of q that are sampled in a given diffraction image . Since there is a slight spread in the incoming wavelengths of the incoming X @-@ ray beam , the values of | F ( q ) | can be measured only for q vectors located between the two spheres corresponding to those radii . Therefore , to obtain a full set of Fourier transform data , it is necessary to rotate the crystal through slightly more than 180 ° , or sometimes less if sufficient symmetry is present . A full 360 ° rotation is not needed because of a symmetry intrinsic to the Fourier transforms of real functions ( such as the electron density ) , but " slightly more " than 180 ° is needed to cover all of reciprocal space within a given resolution because of the curvature of the Ewald sphere . In practice , the crystal is rocked by a small amount ( 0 @.@ 25 @-@ 1 ° ) to incorporate reflections near the boundaries of the spherical Ewald 's shells . 
 = = = Patterson function = = = 
 A well @-@ known result of Fourier transforms is the autocorrelation theorem , which states that the autocorrelation c ( r ) of a function f ( r ) 
 <formula> 
 has a Fourier transform C ( q ) that is the squared magnitude of F ( q ) 
 <formula> 
 Therefore , the autocorrelation function c ( r ) of the electron density ( also known as the Patterson function ) can be computed directly from the reflection intensities , without computing the phases . In principle , this could be used to determine the crystal structure directly ; however , it is difficult to realize in practice . The autocorrelation function corresponds to the distribution of vectors between atoms in the crystal ; thus , a crystal of N atoms in its unit cell may have N ( N @-@ 1 ) peaks in its Patterson function . Given the inevitable errors in measuring the intensities , and the mathematical difficulties of reconstructing atomic positions from the interatomic vectors , this technique is rarely used to solve structures , except for the simplest crystals . 
 = = = Advantages of a crystal = = = 
 In principle , an atomic structure could be determined from applying X @-@ ray scattering to non @-@ crystalline samples , even to a single molecule . However , crystals offer a much stronger signal due to their periodicity . A crystalline sample is by definition periodic ; a crystal is composed of many unit cells repeated indefinitely in three independent directions . Such periodic systems have a Fourier transform that is concentrated at periodically repeating points in reciprocal space known as Bragg peaks ; the Bragg peaks correspond to the reflection spots observed in the diffraction image . Since the amplitude at these reflections grows linearly with the number N of scatterers , the observed intensity of these spots should grow quadratically , like N2 . In other words , using a crystal concentrates the weak scattering of the individual unit cells into a much more powerful , coherent reflection that can be observed above the noise . This is an example of constructive interference . 
 In a liquid , powder or amorphous sample , molecules within that sample are in random orientations . Such samples have a continuous Fourier spectrum that uniformly spreads its amplitude thereby reducing the measured signal intensity , as is observed in SAXS . More importantly , the orientational information is lost . Although theoretically possible , it is experimentally difficult to obtain atomic @-@ resolution structures of complicated , asymmetric molecules from such rotationally averaged data . An intermediate case is fiber diffraction in which the subunits are arranged periodically in at least one dimension . 
 = = Nobel Prizes for X @-@ ray Crystallography = = 
 = = = International Tables for Crystallography = = = 
 Theo Hahn , ed . ( 2002 ) . International Tables for Crystallography . Volume A , Space @-@ group Symmetry ( 5th ed . ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , for the International Union of Crystallography . ISBN 0 @-@ 7923 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Michael G. Rossmann ; Eddy Arnold , eds . ( 2001 ) . International Tables for Crystallography . Volume F , Crystallography of biological molecules . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , for the International Union of Crystallography . ISBN 0 @-@ 7923 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Theo Hahn , ed . ( 1996 ) . International Tables for Crystallography . Brief Teaching Edition of Volume A , Space @-@ group Symmetry ( 4th ed . ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , for the International Union of Crystallography . ISBN 0 @-@ 7923 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Bound collections of articles = = = 
 Charles W. Carter ; Robert M. Sweet . , eds . ( 1997 ) . Macromolecular Crystallography , Part A ( Methods in <unk> , v. 276 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Charles W. Carter Jr . ; Robert M. Sweet . , eds . ( 1997 ) . Macromolecular Crystallography , Part B ( Methods in <unk> , v. 277 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 A. <unk> ; R. <unk> , eds . ( 1999 ) . Crystallization of Nucleic Acids and Proteins : A Practical Approach ( 2nd ed . ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Textbooks = = = 
 B.E. Warren ( 1969 ) . X @-@ ray Diffraction . New York . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Blow D ( 2002 ) . Outline of Crystallography for Biologists . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Burns G. ; Glazer A M ( 1990 ) . Space Groups for Scientists and Engineers ( 2nd ed . ) . Boston : Academic Press , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Clegg W ( 1998 ) . Crystal Structure Determination ( Oxford Chemistry Primer ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> B.D. ( 1978 ) . Elements of X @-@ Ray Diffraction ( 2nd ed . ) . Reading , Massachusetts : Addison @-@ Wesley Publishing Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 534 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Drenth J ( 1999 ) . Principles of Protein X @-@ Ray Crystallography . New York : Springer @-@ Verlag . ISBN 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> C ( 1992 ) . Fundamentals of Crystallography . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 <unk> JP ; Lewis M ; Rossi M ( 1994 ) . Crystal Structure Analysis for Chemists and Biologists . New York : VCH Publishers . ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Massa W ( 2004 ) . Crystal Structure Determination . Berlin : Springer . ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 McPherson A ( 1999 ) . Crystallization of Biological Macromolecules . Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 617 @-@ 6 . 
 McPherson A ( 2003 ) . Introduction to Macromolecular Crystallography . John Wiley & Sons . ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 <unk> DE ( 1993 ) . Practical Protein Crystallography . San Diego : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 O 'Keeffe M ; Hyde B G ( 1996 ) . Crystal Structures ; I. Patterns and Symmetry . Washington , DC : Mineralogical Society of America , Monograph Series . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 40 @-@ 5 . 
 Rhodes G ( 2000 ) . Crystallography Made Crystal Clear . San Diego : Academic Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . , PDF copy of select chapters 
 Rupp B ( 2009 ) . Biomolecular Crystallography : Principles , Practice and Application to Structural Biology . New York : Garland Science . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4081 @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> WH ( 1945 ) . Theory of X @-@ ray Diffraction in Crystals . New York : Dover Publications . LCCN <unk> . 
 = = = Applied computational data analysis = = = 
 Young , R.A. , ed . ( 1993 ) . The Rietveld Method . Oxford : Oxford University Press & International Union of Crystallography . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 Bijvoet JM , Burgers WG , Hägg G , eds . ( 1969 ) . Early Papers on Diffraction of X @-@ rays by Crystals I. Utrecht : published for the International Union of Crystallography by A. Oosthoek 's Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V. 
 Bijvoet JM ; Burgers WG ; Hägg G , eds . ( 1972 ) . Early Papers on Diffraction of X @-@ rays by Crystals II . Utrecht : published for the International Union of Crystallography by A. Oosthoek 's Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V. 
 Bragg W L ; Phillips D C & Lipson H ( 1992 ) . The Development of X @-@ ray Analysis . New York : Dover . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Ewald , PP , and numerous crystallographers , eds . ( 1962 ) . Fifty Years of X @-@ ray Diffraction . Utrecht : published for the International Union of Crystallography by A. Oosthoek 's Uitgeversmaatschappij N.V. doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4615 @-@ 9961 @-@ 6 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4615 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Ewald , P. P. , editor 50 Years of X @-@ Ray Diffraction ( Reprinted in pdf format for the <unk> XVIII Congress , Glasgow , Scotland , International Union of Crystallography ) . 
 Friedrich W ( 1922 ) . " Die Geschichte der <unk> der <unk> " . Die <unk> 10 ( 16 ) : 363 . Bibcode : <unk> ..... 10 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Lonsdale , K ( 1949 ) . Crystals and X @-@ rays . New York : D. van Nostrand . 
 " The Structures of Life " . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services . 2007 . 
 = = = Tutorials = = = 
 Learning Crystallography 
 Simple , non technical introduction 
 The Crystallography Collection , video series from the Royal Institution 
 " Small Molecule <unk> " ( PDF ) at Illinois Institute of Technology website 
 International Union of Crystallography 
 Crystallography 101 
 Interactive structure factor tutorial , demonstrating properties of the diffraction pattern of a 2D crystal . 
 <unk> of Fourier <unk> , illustrating the relationship between crystal and diffraction pattern in 2D . 
 Lecture notes on X @-@ ray crystallography and structure determination 
 Online lecture on Modern X @-@ ray Scattering Methods for <unk> Materials Analysis by Richard J. <unk> 
 Interactive Crystallography Timeline from the Royal Institution 
 = = = Primary databases = = = 
 Crystallography Open Database ( COD ) 
 Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) 
 Nucleic Acid Databank ( NDB ) 
 Cambridge Structural Database ( CSD ) 
 Inorganic Crystal Structure Database ( ICSD ) 
 Biological <unk> Crystallization Database ( <unk> ) 
 = = = Derivative databases = = = 
 <unk> 
 Proteopedia – the collaborative , 3D encyclopedia of proteins and other molecules 
 <unk> 
 HIC @-@ Up database of PDB ligands 
 Structural Classification of Proteins database 
 CATH Protein Structure Classification 
 List of transmembrane proteins with known 3D structure 
 Orientations of Proteins in Membranes database 
 = = = Structural validation = = = 
 <unk> structural validation suite 
 <unk> @-@ web 
 <unk> @-@ Flipper ( check for unfavorable <unk> of <unk> and <unk> residues ) 
 DALI server ( identifies proteins similar to a given protein ) 
 = Friedrich Foertsch = 
 Friedrich Albert Foertsch ( 19 May 1900 – 14 December 1976 ) was a German general serving during World War II and from 1961 to 1963 the second Inspector General of the Bundeswehr ( Generalinspekteur der Bundeswehr ) . 
 Foertsch was born in 1900 and joined the military service in the Imperial German Army in 1918 . Serving in the infantry in the final battles of World War I , Foertsch earned the Iron Cross second class before the end of hostilities . He joined the Freikorps after the war , and later was accepted into the Reichswehr in 1920 . During World War II , he held several senior staff positions , including chief of the general staff of the 18 . Armee . Foertsch was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 5 September 1944 for his leadership in the defensive battles at the Leningrad Front . He was taken prisoner of war in the Courland Pocket by the Soviet Army . At a post @-@ war trial he initially received a death sentence , which was later commuted to 25 years of hard labor . The intervention of Bundeskanzler Konrad Adenauer , caused his release , in 1955 and Foertsch joined the newly formed Bundeswehr of the Federal Republic of Germany . He again served in many senior positions , including an assignment to the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe ( SHAPE ) of Nato in Paris . In 1961 he was appointed Inspector General of the Bundeswehr , a position he held until his retirement in 1963 . Friedrich Foertsch died on 14 December 1976 in Goslar . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Friedrich Foertsch born 19 May 1900 in <unk> in the district Deutsch @-@ Krone in West Prussia . His father was a government employee for the Prussian Settlement Commission in Posen and West Prussia ( <unk> Verwaltung der <unk> <unk> für Posen und <unk> ) . Foertsch attended the Gymnasium ( secondary school ) in <unk> and Graudenz and received his Abitur in May 1918 . He then volunteered for the military service in the Imperial German Army on 21 May 1918 . He was assigned to the 8 . <unk> Infanterie @-@ Regiment Nr. 175 in Graudenz . Foertsch military career thus took the same path as his older brother 's , the later General der Infanterie Hermann Foertsch . Shortly before the end of World War I he participated in the battles of the <unk> at the <unk> und Hermann positions northeast of Lille and was awarded the Iron Cross 2nd class . 
 With his brother , Foertsch joined the Freikorps " Feldmarschall Hindenburg " after the war and was accepted by the Reichswehr at the end of 1920 , serving as a Fähnrich ( ensign ) in the 17 . Infanterie @-@ Regiment . He was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 April 1922 and to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) on 1 February 1927 . He became adjutant of the III . ( Jäger ) Bataillon ( 3rd light infantry battalion ) of the 17 . Infanterie Regiment ( 17th infantry regiment ) on 1 October 1927 . In 1932 he served with the 12 . ( MG ) Kompanie ( 12th machine gun company ) of the regiment . Transferred to the <unk> ( war academy ) in the fall of 1932 he was promoted to Hauptmann on 1 April 1934 . 
 The treaty of Versailles had imposed severe restrictions on Germany 's military strength . The Weimar Republic largely obeyed the Versailles restrictions , but with Adolf Hitler 's rise to power the remilitarisation began . The Reichswehr , renamed the Wehrmacht , expanded . Foertsch at this time served in the military headquarters in Königsberg . He was appointed company chief in the Infanterie @-@ Regiment 81 on 12 October 1937 and was promoted to Major on 1 August 1938 . He was transferred to the Generalstab ( General Staff ) of the III . Armeekorps ( 3rd Army Corps ) on 10 November 1938 , a position he held at the outbreak of World War II . In the fall of 1939 he became the first officer of the general staff ( Ia ) of the 60 . Infanterie @-@ Division ( 60th infantry division ) and participated in the Battle of France . 
 After the invasion of France he was relieved of his position and was transferred to the chief of staff of the <unk> and Ersatzheer ( Army Equipment and Replacement Army ) and attained the rank of Oberstleutnant on 1 November 1940 . On 1 June 1942 he was promoted to Oberst im Generalstab and at the same time appointed first officer of the general staff of the 18 . Armee ( 18th Army ) . Foertsch earned the German Cross in Gold on 10 May 1943 for his support in the heavy fighting in the northern sector of the eastern front . He was appointed chief of the general staff of 18 . Armee on 1 December 1943 and promoted to Generalmajor on 1 June 1944 . Three months later he received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) . He was appointed chief of the general staff of the Heeresgruppe Kurland at the end of January 1945 . His promotion to Generalleutnant followed on 1 March 1945 . After the capitulation of all German forces he was taken prisoner of war by the Red Army of the Soviet Union . He was sentenced to 25 years imprisonment for war crime charges against the destruction of cities and art on 29 June 1950 . According to the court , Foertsch permitted the destruction of cities of <unk> , Novgorod and Leningrad by his troops , and the destruction of historical art and memorials in <unk> , <unk> , Pavlovsk and <unk> . 
 Friedrich Foertsch was released from captivity on 9 October 1955 . Bundeskanzler Konrad Adenauer had helped secure the release of the last German prisoners of war in 1955 , a decade after the end of the war . He joined the Bundeswehr after the remilitarisation of the Federal Republic of Germany holding the rank of Generalmajor . His initial task was the leadership of the II . Korps and he was appointed commanding officer of the 2 . Grenadier @-@ Division in April 1957 . He was then posted to the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe ( SHAPE ) of Nato in Paris as deputy chief of the fundamental planning office . He succeeded Adolf Heusinger as the second Generalinspekteur der Bundeswehr on 1 April 1961 . Under his command the compulsory military service in the Bundeswehr was extended from 12 to 18 months . He was also in command during the political Spiegel scandal , which led to the resignation of Federal Ministry of Defence Franz Josef Strauß . Der Spiegel , a widely read German periodical , had published the article " <unk> <unk> " ( " <unk> prepared for defense " ) about a NATO maneuver called <unk> 62 , Fall Exercise 1962 , in which the NATO forces were to demonstrate their preparedness to resist possible attack by the Soviet Union and / or other Eastern Block forces . The maneuvers themselves had demonstrated the Bundeswehr 's incapacity to repel attack , and the article exposed the sorry state of Bundeswehr preparedness . 
 He retired as a four @-@ star general on 31 December 1963 . After his retirement he and his wife , together with their four children , lived in Goslar . Friedrich Foertsch died there on 14 December 1976 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1914 ) 2nd Class 
 Clasp to the Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 2nd Class 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 1st Class 
 German Cross in Gold ( 10 May 1943 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 5 September 1944 as Generalmajor and chief of the general staff of the 18 . Armee 
 Grand Officer of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic 
 Grand Merit Cross with Star and Sash of the Federal Republic of Germany 
 Sudetenland Medal 
 Wehrmacht Long Service Award , 4th to 1st class 
 Kurland Cuffband 
 Commander 's Cross of the Order of the Crown of Romania 
 Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour ( France ) 
 Legion of Merit ( USA ) 
 = Zoloti Vorota ( Kiev Metro ) = 
 Zoloti Vorota ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> ) is the 29th station of the Kiev Metro system that serves the Ukrainian capital Kiev . The station was opened as part of the first segment of the Syretsko @-@ Pecherska Line on 31 December 1989 . It serves as a transfer station to the Teatralna station of the Sviatoshynsko @-@ Brovarska Line . It is located near the city 's Golden Gate , from which the station takes its name . 
 The original design plans for the station called for a clean utilitarian structure typical of metro stations of that period . Due to the efforts of the city 's chief architect Mykola Zharikov , the design was scrapped in favor of one that resembles an ancient Kievan Rus ' temple by Borys Zhezherin , Vadym Zhezherin , and Zharikov himself . Such a design was a particularly risky feat , since Ukraine was a part of the secular Soviet Union at the time of the station 's construction . Vadym Zhezherin and Mykola Zharikov , among the other artists and architects of the station , were bestowed the State Prize of Ukraine in the Field of Architecture for their work in 1991 . 
 The Zoloti Vorota features 80 distinct mosaic pieces and images depicting the history of Kievan Rus ' . In 2011 , the station 's mosaics were listed as " newly discovered objects of cultural heritage " by the city 's Department of Cultural Heritage . The station is regarded as one of the most impressive metro stations in Europe , being placed on a list compiled by The Daily Telegraph in 2013 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The initial plans for the future Syretsko @-@ Pecherska Line called for a transfer station ( named " <unk> " ) to connect with the Sviatoshynsko @-@ Brovarska Line at Universytet station . However , the short central hall at Universytet was inadequate for the high volume of passengers that a transfer station would be subject to , thus the station 's future location was moved a few city blocks to coincide with a newly proposed station of the Sviatoshynsko @-@ Brovarska Line . This new station , called Teatralna , would be located in between the <unk> and Universytet stations , and would serve as a transfer to the future Zoloti Vorota station . Although the <unk> station was never built , some of its architectural designs were preserved and used in the creation of the Teatralna station . 
 Construction for the Syretsko @-@ Pecherska Line , the Kiev Metro system 's third line , began on 23 February 1983 . It had a projected date of completion in 1986 , although the line 's opening was delayed until the end of 1989 due to the economic state of the Soviet Union at the time . The line 's first segment was officially opened on 31 December 1989 , and consisted of three stations ; Zoloti Vorota – <unk> <unk> – <unk> ( named <unk> today ) . 
 Since its entrance is located on a hillside , two separate escalator tunnels had to be created , connected by an underground station vestibule . The upper tunnel is 35 m ( 115 ft ) long , while the lower tunnel is 56 m ( 184 ft ) long . The vestibule was built in the same way as with other stations of the Kiev Metro system ; it was first completed at ground level , and then lowered to its final location underground . The vestibule is a 20 m ( 66 ft ) tall monolithic dome with an approximately similar diameter . 
 The installation began in November 1987 and was completed by 1988 , lowered at a pace of half a meter a day . Since the construction took place in water @-@ saturated soils , over 200 frozen wells had to be formed so it could be lowered to its proper location . In addition , over 250 m2 ( 300 sq yd ) of rock had to be removed to make way for the vestibule . After it was finally installed , construction work began on the lower escalator tunnel . Due to a difficult <unk> , the tunnel was not completed by the station 's grand opening and until 1 May 1990 , it could only be reached with a transfer from the Teatralna station . 
 For several years , the Zoloti Vorota station served as the line 's northern terminus . Continued construction extended the line northwards to the <unk> station . In between the two stations , the <unk> Brama station was built during the late 1990s ; however , it has not been completed to this day . 
 = = Design = = 
 From an engineering standpoint , Zoloti Vorota was built as a deep column station , at a depth of 96 @.@ 5 m ( 317 ft ) underground . It consists of three distinct vaulted halls , featuring one central hall , and two side platform halls , each separated by a row of columns . The central hall is connected to the only above @-@ ground vestibule through two escalator tunnels , separated by an underground vestibule , which was needed because of the depth at which the station is located . Its design and formation is nearly similar to the Maidan <unk> station of the system 's <unk> @-@ <unk> Line . 
 The station 's original plans were designed by a team of Moscow architects from <unk> ; their design was strictly utilitarian , architecturally similar to the other metro stations of that period . However , due to the socio @-@ economic changes taking place in the country at the time , the original design was scrapped because it was considered " too weak " for one of the city 's main metro stations in a historically significant location . 
 The city 's chief architect Mykola Zharikov approached Vadym Zhezherin to create a new design for the station . Zhezherin enlisted the help of his father , Borys in completing the design . Vadym previously worked on the reconstruction of the city 's Leo Tolstoy Square and similarly named metro station , while his father , who was awarded the title of Distinguished Architect of Ukraine , was responsible for the reconstruction of the nearby National Opera House . 
 They were supported by architects Anatoliy <unk> , Tamara <unk> , and <unk> Zaremba , who were responsible for designing the underground vestibule . While the redesign was taking place , construction on the station 's original utilitarian design continued . The new design was based on the form of a Kievan Rus ' temple , featuring unique mosaics situated throughout the station . The central hall 's height was increased , and the original design 's pylons were replaced with much lower columns , finished off with white marble and matte polish . In particular , the white ceiling was divided with <unk> mosaic stripes with brick grouting on the sides , completed by artists Hryhoriy Korin and Volodymyr Fedko . 
 The station is illuminated by two @-@ <unk> bronze chandeliers , each featuring 12 distinct lighting groups holding candle @-@ like bulbs . The chandeliers , designed by Stanislav <unk> and Mariya <unk> , were installed between the mosaic stripes . Both the station halls and the underground vestibule feature similar light fixtures , although they are significantly smaller than the main chandeliers . The redesign also called for a gold smalt @-@ covered ceiling , although this was rejected as it was too expensive . To finish it off , gray granite was used on the floor . 
 = = Mosaics = = 
 The Zoloti Vorota station features a number of distinct mosaic decorations , which were completed by artists Hryhoriy Korin and Volodymyr Fedko . There are a total of 80 large mosaic pieces ; they run in a clockwise direction around the station , depicting the history of Kievan Rus . The two artists , accompanied by the station 's lead architect Vadym Zhezherin , concluded that the station should be decorated with mosaic pieces of historical significance of the period leading up to the Mongol invasion of Rus ' . Korin completed the mosaics in either ends of the station and the large ceiling arches , while Fedko was completed the unique images relating to Kievan Rus ' and the smaller arches in between each of the station 's pillars . 
 Four large mosaic panels are installed on either ends of the station hall and the two escalator tunnels . On the side that leads to the exit to the city , a panel was installed depicting the patron saint of Kiev , Michael the Archangel . Meanwhile , at the very end of the station , Saint George is depicted , symbolizing Moscow , the Soviet Union 's capital at the time . One of the mosaic panels at the end of the station near the escalators includes an inscription featuring a Ukrainian nationalist slogan , stating <unk> <unk> , which is translated as Glory to Ukraine . 
 A large portion of the station 's mosaics depict the various Grand Princes of Kievan Rus ' , of which 27 are depicted . The mosaic pieces themselves incorporate the princes ' years of reigning and their names : 
 The station also has nine mosaics depicting various other important personalities of the Kievan Rus ' era featuring Anthony , Theodosius , Anne , Hilarion , Agapetus , <unk> , Nestor the Chronicler , Petro <unk> , and Sylvester . Eight of the mosaic pieces depict Kiev 's ancient Rus ' churches including the Church of the Tithes , the Saint Sophia Cathedral , <unk> Church , St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Cathedral , Church of the Saviour at <unk> , Dormition Cathedral , Church of the Mother of God <unk> , and the St. Cyril 's Monastery . Lastly , there are 32 mosaic pieces featuring <unk> , which are mythical creatures in East Slavic mythology , often depicted as a winged lion or dog . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Zoloti Vorota station has only two street entrances , one of which is located on <unk> Street , and the other on Zoloti Vorota Passage . Each of the entrances are connected by a single vestibule in the city center near the Golden Gate , and Ukraine 's National Opera building . As of 2008 , the Zoloti Vorota station has a daily ridership of 20 @,@ 000 . The station itself is operational every day from 05 : 39 to 00 : 06 , while the transfer tunnel which connects Zoloti Vorota to Teatralna is open from 05 : 45 to 00 : 32 . The station features six escalators , with the upper and lower vestibules both having two operating escalators , with an additional backup escalator . 
 The commute from Zoloti Vorota to the line 's terminus at <unk> takes approximately 9 minutes and 5 seconds , while it takes 30 minutes and 55 seconds to commute to the <unk> <unk> terminus . The train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 2 – 13 minutes in either direction . The morning 's first eastbound train departs from the station at 05 : 48 , while the westbound train departs at 06 : 01 . The evening 's last eastbound departs at 00 : 15 , while the westbound train departs at 00 : 30 . 
 The entire Kiev Metro system uses the same methods of payment for transit via each station ; plastic tokens , temporary paper contactless cards , and reloadable plastic contactless cards . In June 2015 , the station was outfitted with <unk> functionality , a contactless payment service from MasterCard . It is one of seventeen strategic stations of the metro system to use this technology , making Kiev the fifth rapid transit system in the world to incorporate this technology . 
 = New Jersey Devils = 
 The New Jersey Devils are a professional ice hockey team based in Newark , New Jersey , that competes in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . The team is a member of the league 's Metropolitan Division of the Eastern Conference . The club was founded as the Kansas City Scouts in Kansas City , Missouri , in 1974 . The Scouts moved to Denver , Colorado in 1976 and became the Colorado Rockies . In 1982 , they moved to East Rutherford , New Jersey and took their current name . For their first 25 seasons in New Jersey , the Devils were based at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford and played their home games at Brendan Byrne Arena ( later renamed to Continental Airlines Arena ) . Beginning with the 2007 – 08 season , the Devils relocated to Newark and now play their home games at the Prudential Center . 
 The franchise was poor to mediocre in the eight years before moving to New Jersey , a pattern that continued during the first five years in New Jersey as they failed to make the Stanley Cup playoffs and never finished higher than fifth in their division . Their fortunes began to turn around following the hiring of president and general manager Lou Lamoriello in 1987 . Under Lamoriello 's stewardship , the Devils made the playoffs all but three times between 1988 and 2012 , including 13 berths in a row from 1997 to 2010 , and finished with a winning record every season from 1992 – 93 to 2009 – 10 . They have won the Atlantic Division regular season title nine times , most recently in 2009 – 10 , before transferring to the newly created Metropolitan Division as part of the NHL 's realignment in 2013 . The Devils have reached the Stanley Cup Finals five times , winning in 1994 – 95 , 1999 – 00 and 2002 – 03 . The Devils were known for their defense @-@ first approach throughout their years of Cup contention , but have since moved towards a more offensive style . 
 The Devils have a rivalry with their cross @-@ Hudson River neighbor , the New York Rangers , as well as a rivalry with the Philadelphia Flyers . The Devils are one of three NHL teams in the New York metropolitan area ; the other two teams are the New York Islanders and New York Rangers . The franchise is the only major league team in any sport that explicitly identifies itself as a New Jersey team . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Kansas City and Colorado = = = 
 In 1972 , the NHL announced plans to add two expansion teams , including one in Kansas City , Missouri . Edwin G. Thompson led the group that purchased ownership of the team , which was nicknamed the Scouts in reference to " a statue in a Kansas City park that was represented in their final logo . " In the team 's inaugural season , 1974 – 75 , the Scouts were forced to wait until the ninth game to play in Kansas City 's Kemper Arena , and did not post a win until beating the Washington Capitals , their expansion brethren , in their tenth contest . With 41 points in their inaugural season , the Scouts finished last in the Smythe Division ; only the Capitals had fewer points in the NHL . Kansas City fell to 36 points the following season , and had a 27 @-@ game losing streak . The Scouts had difficulty drawing fans to home games , and National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) leader Alan Eagleson publicly expressed concerns about whether Scouts players would be paid . 
 After two seasons in Kansas City , the franchise moved to Denver and was renamed the Colorado Rockies it played at the McNichols Sports Arena . The team won its first game as the Rockies , 4 – 2 , against the Toronto Maple Leafs . The Rockies were in position to qualify for the playoffs 60 games into the 1976 – 77 season , but a streak of 18 games without a win caused them to fall from contention . The Rockies ended the campaign last in the division with a 20 – 46 – 14 record and 54 points , and improved to 59 points the next season . Despite having the sixth @-@ worst record in the League , the Rockies beat @-@ out the Vancouver Canucks for second in the Division by two points and gained a playoff berth . The Philadelphia Flyers eliminated the Rockies from the playoffs in the preliminary rounds . 
 A lack of stability continually plagued the team . The franchise never won more than 22 games and did not return to the playoffs after 1977 – 78 in its six seasons in Colorado . Prior to the 1978 – 79 season , the team was sold to New Jersey trucking tycoon Arthur <unk> , who intended to move the team to his home state . The plan was criticized due to the existence of three other NHL teams in the region , and the proposed New Jersey arena was still under construction ; the franchise ultimately stayed in Denver . In 1979 , the team hired Don Cherry as head coach and featured forward Lanny McDonald . The Rockies still posted the worst record in the NHL , and Cherry was subsequently fired after the season . After two more years in Denver , the Rockies were sold to a group headed by John McMullen ( who also owned Major League Baseball 's Houston Astros ) on May 27 , 1982 , and the franchise moved to New Jersey . As part of the relocation deal , the Devils had to compensate the three existing teams in the region – the New York Islanders , New York Rangers and Flyers – for encroaching on their territory . 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 = = = = 1982 – 1993 : Building the foundation = = = = 
 On June 30 , 1982 , the team was renamed the New Jersey Devils , after the legend of the Jersey Devil , a creature that allegedly inhabited the Pine Barrens of South Jersey . Over 10 @,@ 000 people voted in a contest held to select the name . The team began play in East Rutherford , New Jersey at the Brendan Byrne Arena , later renamed the Continental Airlines Arena and then the Izod Center , where they called home through the 2006 – 07 season . The Devils were initially placed in the Patrick Division . Their first game ended in a 3 – 3 tie against the Pittsburgh Penguins , with their first goal scored by Don Lever . Their first win , a 3 – 2 victory , came in New Jersey at the expense of the Rangers . The team finished with a 17 – 49 – 14 record , putting them three points above last place in the Patrick Division . 
 In the following season , the Devils were criticized by Wayne Gretzky after a 13 – 4 loss to the Edmonton Oilers . In a post @-@ game interview , Gretzky said that the Devils were " putting a Mickey Mouse operation on the ice . " Later , Gretzky said that his comment was " blown out of proportion . " In response , many Devils fans wore Mickey Mouse apparel when the Oilers returned to New Jersey . Also in the 1983 – 84 season , the Devils hosted the annual NHL All @-@ Star Game . New Jersey 's Chico Resch was the winning goaltender , and Devils defenseman Joe <unk> tallied a goal as the Wales Conference beat the Campbell Conference 7 – 6 . Overall , the team did not achieve much success . Head Coach Bill MacMillan was fired 20 games into the season , whereupon Tom McVie was named the new coach . The Devils won only 17 games and after the season , Doug Carpenter succeeded McVie . 
 The Devils assembled a core of players that included John MacLean , Bruce Driver , Ken Daneyko , Kirk Muller and Pat Verbeek , with Resch as their goaltender . Their record improved each season between 1983 – 84 and 1986 – 87 . However , they were unable to reach the playoffs . Despite their improvement , the Devils remained last in the Patrick Division in 1985 – 86 and 1986 – 87 . McMullen hired Providence College athletic director Lou Lamoriello as team president in April 1987 . To gain greater control over franchise operations , Lamoriello appointed himself general manager before the 1987 – 88 season . 
 The 1987 – 88 Devils garnered the franchise 's first winning record . On the final day of the regular season , they were tied with their rivals , the Rangers , for the final playoff spot in the Patrick Division . After New York defeated the Quebec Nordiques 3 – 0 , the Devils needed to defeat the Chicago Blackhawks for a post @-@ season berth . The Devils were trailing 3 – 2 midway through the third period when John MacLean tied the game , and with 2 : 39 left in overtime , he added the winning goal . Although the Rangers and Devils both finished with 82 points , the Devils had two more wins , sending them to the playoffs for the first time in franchise history as the New Jersey Devils . The team made it all the way to the Wales Conference Finals in the 1988 Stanley Cup playoffs , but lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games . In that series , Head Coach Jim Schoenfeld verbally abused referee Don Koharski after the third game , screaming at him . During the exchange , Koharski fell and Schoenfeld said to him " Have another doughnut , you fat pig ! " Schoenfeld was given a suspension by the NHL , but due to a favorable court order , he was able to coach in the fourth game of the series . In protest , referee Dave Newell and linesmen Gord <unk> and Ray <unk> refused to work the game . Three off @-@ ice officials – Paul McInnis , Jim Sullivan and Vin <unk> – were tracked down to work the game . 
 The next season , the Devils once again slipped below .500 and missed the playoffs . Among the post @-@ season player changes Lamoriello made in the off @-@ season was the signing of two Soviet stars – Viacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov . The Devils drafted Fetisov years earlier in the 1983 Entry Draft , but the Soviet Government did not allow Fetisov , who was a member of the national team , to leave the country . Shortly after , the Devils signed Fetisov 's defense partner , Alexei Kasatonov . 
 The team changed coaches midway through each of the next two seasons . Schoenfeld was replaced with John <unk> in 1989 – 90 , and Tom McVie was hired midway through the 1990 – 91 season and helmed the team through its third @-@ straight first @-@ round elimination in 1991 – 92 . Herb Brooks , who coached the 1980 U.S. Olympic " Miracle on Ice " team , was brought in for the 1992 – 93 season , but when the team yet again was eliminated in the first round , he was fired and replaced by former Montreal Canadiens Head Coach Jacques Lemaire . 
 = = = = 1993 – 2000 : Championship franchise = = = = 
 Under Lemaire , the team played during the 1993 – 94 regular season with a lineup that included defensemen Scott Stevens , Scott Niedermayer and Ken Daneyko ; forwards Stephane Richer , John MacLean , Bobby Holik and Claude Lemieux ; and goaltenders Chris Terreri and Martin Brodeur , the latter goaltender was honored as the NHL 's top rookie with the Calder Memorial Trophy . The Devils scored 330 times in the regular season and set a franchise record with 106 points , second behind the New York Rangers in the Atlantic Division . The Devils and Rangers met in an Eastern Conference Finals match @-@ up , which went seven games . Going into Game 6 in New Jersey , the Devils led the series three games to two . Before the game , Rangers captain Mark Messier guaranteed that the Rangers would win Game 6 . Messier led his team back , netting a hat @-@ trick to help the Rangers overcome an early 2 – 0 Devils lead and force a decisive content . In Game 7 , the Devils ' Valeri <unk> tied the score at 1 – 1 with 7 @.@ 7 seconds remaining , but the Devils were defeated in double overtime on a goal by Stéphane <unk> . 
 Despite the setback , the team returned to the Eastern Conference Finals during the lockout @-@ shortened 1994 – 95 season and defeated the Philadelphia Flyers four games to two . They swept the heavily favored Detroit Red Wings to win New Jersey 's first @-@ ever Stanley Cup , as they brought the Cup across the Hudson River from New York , after the Rangers had won it the year before . The 1995 Devils team became the first to give the players a day with the Stanley Cup , a tradition that lives on with each Cup winner . Claude Lemieux was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoffs MVP . The success came amid constant rumors that the team would move for the third time in its history to Nashville . Staring at the prospect of losing the team , the state agreed to fund a renovation of the Devils ' arena . 
 The Devils missed the playoffs by two points the following season , with a 37 – 33 – 12 record . They were beaten by the Tampa Bay Lightning for the last playoff spot in the East on the last day of the season , after a 5 – 2 loss to the Ottawa Senators in a must @-@ win game . It marked the first time in 26 years that a defending Cup champion failed to reach the playoffs . For the remainder of the decade , the Devils won at least 45 games every season , but were unable to make a deep playoff run . Despite posting 104 points in the 1996 – 97 season and 107 in 1997 – 98 , they were ousted by the Rangers four games to one in the second round of the 1997 playoffs and in the first round by the Senators four games to two a year later . Lemaire resigned after that season and was replaced by assistant Robbie Ftorek . However , the next season ended as the previous one , with a first @-@ round loss , this time to the Pittsburgh Penguins . 
 Late in the 1999 – 2000 season , Lamoriello made the decision to fire Ftorek and replace him with Assistant Coach Larry Robinson , which the New York Post 's Mark Everson described as " pure panic " at the prospect of another early @-@ round playoff elimination . The Devils were in position to reach the playoffs , but Lamoriello reacted to a stretch of 17 games in which the team went 5 – 10 – 2 . New Jersey followed the move by defeating the Florida Panthers , the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Philadelphia Flyers during the post @-@ season to make the Finals . In the Finals , the Devils reached the top again , defeating the defending champion Dallas Stars in six games to win the Stanley Cup for the second time . Veterans such as Stevens , Holik , Niedermayer and Brodeur were joined by new players acquired in the intervening five years , including Patrik Elias , Petr Sykora , Jason Arnott , Alexander Mogilny and Calder Trophy recipient Scott Gomez . The Devils ' second championship run included a come @-@ from @-@ behind victory in the Conference Finals . They trailed the Flyers three games to one , but rebounded to win three @-@ straight games and the series . This was the first time in NHL Conference Finals history that a 3 – 1 series deficit was surmounted . This series featured a hit that captain Scott Stevens laid on Flyers center Eric Lindros in the seventh game , which effectively ended Lindros ' career in Philadelphia . Stevens was named the winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy , as the Devils clinched the Stanley Cup on Arnott 's goal in double @-@ overtime of Game 6 in Dallas . 
 In 2000 , McMullen sold the team to Puck Holdings , an affiliate of <unk> , for $ 176 million . The owners wanted to program Devils games on what eventually became the YES Network and move the team to a new arena in Newark . Neither of these proposals became reality under Puck Holdings ' ownership . For the start of the next season , Lamoriello was appointed CEO of both the Devils and the New Jersey Nets National Basketball Association team . He remained at the helm of the basketball team until it was sold with the intention of moving it to Brooklyn in 2004 . 
 = = = = 2001 – 2007 : Third Cup and lockout = = = = 
 Led by the Elias @-@ Arnott @-@ Sykora line ( The A Line ) on offense and the goaltending of Brodeur ( who appeared in a record 97 games between the regular season and playoffs ) , the Devils reached the Stanley Cup Finals for the second @-@ straight year in 2001 . They lost the series to the Colorado Avalanche despite leading 3 – 2 . John Madden became the first player in franchise history to win the Frank J. Selke Trophy for top defensive forward . In the 2001 – 02 season , they were expected to be contenders once again , and they finished the season as the third @-@ best team in the Atlantic Division , with 95 points . The Devils entered the playoffs as a sixth seed , but lost in the first round to the third @-@ seeded Carolina Hurricanes . 
 In 2003 , the Devils finished first in the Atlantic Division with 108 points . Their playoff run included a seven @-@ game Conference Final series victory , decided in the final three minutes on a goal by forward Jeff Friesen , over the Ottawa Senators . In the Stanley Cup Finals , the Devils and Mighty Ducks of Anaheim had a back @-@ and @-@ forth battle , as both teams won all of their home games . The Devils brought the Stanley Cup to New Jersey for a third time , defeating the Mighty Ducks in the seventh game of the Finals in New Jersey . After the series , Daneyko , a long @-@ time fan favorite , announced his retirement . Brodeur was awarded the Vezina Trophy as outstanding goaltender in the regular season for the first time in his career , having won 41 games in the regular season to top the NHL . 
 In the 2003 – 04 season , Brodeur took home the Vezina Trophy again . Despite losing team captain Scott Stevens in the 38th game of the season to a concussion , the Devils finished second in the Atlantic Division with 100 points . With the sixth seed in the Stanley Cup playoffs , the Devils lost to the Philadelphia Flyers four games to one . In March 2004 , near the end of the season , Lehman Brothers executive Jeff Vanderbeek purchased a controlling interest from Puck Holdings and resigned from Lehman Brothers to assume full @-@ time ownership . He had been a minority owner since the 2000 sale . Like Puck Holdings / <unk> , Vanderbeek largely left the Devils in Lamoriello 's hands . 
 Vanderbeek was a strong proponent of the proposed arena in Newark , which first received funding from the city council during Puck Holdings ' ownership in 2002 . After legal battles over both eminent domain and the city 's financial participation in the arena project , the final deal was approved by council in October 2004 , during the early months of the lockout , and the groundbreaking occurred almost exactly a year later . Nonetheless , in January 2006 , financial issues threatened to halt the deal , as the Devils did not provide the city with a required letter of credit until the last possible day . 
 Though construction was well underway , in late summer 2006 , new Mayor of Newark Cory Booker promised to reevaluate the deal and considered backing out . In October , Booker conceded there would be " a first @-@ class arena built in the city of Newark , whether we like it or not , " and soon after the Devils struck a deal including both property and monetary <unk> that appeased city officials . The arena , which was named the Prudential Center when Newark @-@ based Prudential Financial purchased naming rights in early 2007 , opened shortly after the start of the 2007 – 08 season . 
 The 2004 – 05 season was canceled due to the lockout ; many Devils players played in European leagues and in the hockey world championships . Patrik Elias , who was playing in the Russian Superleague , contracted hepatitis A. Faced with Elias ' indefinite recovery timetable , plus the loss of defensive stalwarts Scott Niedermayer to free agency and Scott Stevens to retirement , Lamoriello signed veteran defenseman Dan McGillis and two former Devils , winger Alexander Mogilny and defenseman Vladimir Malakhov , none of whom finished the season on the ice . In July 2005 , the team announced that Head Coach Pat Burns would not return for the 2005 – 06 season after being diagnosed with cancer for the second time in little more than a year . Assistant Coach Larry Robinson , the team 's head coach from 2000 to 2002 , was promoted to start the season . 
 The Devils struggled early in the 2005 – 06 season , ending the 2005 calendar year with a 16 – 18 – 5 record . Robinson resigned as head coach on December 19 , and Lamoriello moved down to the bench . Once Elias returned from his bout with hepatitis , the team quickly turned around , finishing 46 – 27 – 9 after a season @-@ ending 11 @-@ game winning streak capped with a 4 – 3 win over the Montreal Canadiens . During that final victory , which clinched the Devils ' sixth division title , Brian Gionta set a new team record for goals in a season with 48 , topping Pat Verbeek 's 46 . The win streak to close the year was also an NHL record . The Devils won their first round Stanley Cup playoff series against the Rangers four games to none , but were eliminated by the Carolina Hurricanes in the next round . 
 In the off @-@ season , the Devils hired former Montreal Canadiens head coach Claude Julien to replace Lamoriello behind the bench . However , in the last week of the 2006 – 07 Devils season , with just three games left , Julien was fired , and Lamoriello once again reprised his coaching role . The Devils went on to win their seventh Atlantic Division title and earn the second seed in the Eastern Conference after finishing ahead of the Pittsburgh Penguins by two points . They then defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in six games in the first round , but fell to the Ottawa Senators in the Eastern Conference Semi @-@ finals in five . The conclusion of the series marked the end of the Devils ' time at the Continental Airlines Arena . 
 = = = = 2007 – 2013 : Move to Newark and return to Finals = = = = 
 Before the move to Newark , the Devils hired their 14th coach in a 26 @-@ season span , Brent Sutter . As the Devils ' pre @-@ season came to an end , prospects Nicklas <unk> and David Clarkson made the final roster . The Devils opened their new arena , the Prudential Center , on October 27 , 2007 , against Ottawa after opening the season with a nine @-@ game road trip . The game ended with a 4 – 1 win for Ottawa . In the last game of the 2007 – 08 season against the Rangers , the Devils won in a shootout , giving them home ice advantage over the Rangers in the playoffs . The Devils lost the series against the Rangers 4 – 1 , losing all three games at home . Brodeur won the Vezina Trophy for the fourth time in five years for his performance in the regular season . 
 For the 2008 – 09 season , the Devils signed Brian Rolston and Bobby Holik , both making their second stints with the team . The Devils were forced to play without Brodeur for over three months after he tore a biceps tendon in November , but strong play by backup goalie Scott Clemmensen kept the Devils atop the Atlantic Division . After his return , Brodeur broke Patrick Roy 's record for regular season wins on March 17 , 2009 , with his 552nd victory , while Patrik Elias became the franchise 's all @-@ time leading scorer with his 702nd point . The season also served as a break @-@ out year for 24 @-@ year old Zach Parise , who led the team with an impressive 45 goals and 94 points . In the opening round of the 2009 playoffs , the Devils were eliminated in a Game 7 loss in which the Hurricanes scored two goals in the last minute and twenty seconds to erase a 3 – 2 Devils lead . 
 In the off @-@ season , the Devils announced that Sutter was stepping down from his position , citing personal and family reasons ; he became the coach of the Calgary Flames shortly afterward . Jacques Lemaire returned to the head coach position . During the 2009 – 10 season , the Devils made a trade to acquire star left wing Ilya Kovalchuk from the Atlanta Thrashers . The Devils had their 12th 100 @-@ point season in their last 15 attempts . They finished the season in first place in the Atlantic Division , second in the Eastern Conference , and played in the post @-@ season for the 13th @-@ straight time . Their seeding matched them up against Philadelphia in the first round , and they were eliminated four games to one . 
 After Lemaire retired from coaching , the Devils announced that the team 's all @-@ time leading scorer , John MacLean , would become their new head coach . During the off @-@ season , the Devils signed Kovalchuk to a 15 @-@ year , $ 100 million contract , keeping him in New Jersey until the conclusion of the 2024 – 25 season ; the move came after the NHL had rejected a 17 @-@ year contract for allegedly circumventing the NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement ( CBA ) . The League still penalized the Devils for trying to circumvent the NHL salary cap with a money fine , a third @-@ round draft pick in 2011 and one future first @-@ round pick within the next four seasons . MacLean led the team to a record of 9 – 22 – 2 , and after sitting in last place in the NHL on December 23 , he was removed in favor of Lemaire , coming out of retirement for his third stint as head coach of the Devils and second in less than two seasons . Just a few days later , struggling captain Jamie Langenbrunner was traded back to Dallas after nine seasons with New Jersey . With the injured Parise missing most of the regular season , the team struggled offensively , finishing last in goals scored . Despite this , the Devils managed a mid @-@ season turnaround , winning 22 out of the next 25 games . However , the Devils still failed to qualify for the playoffs for the first time since 1996 , ending their 13 @-@ year streak . 
 In the 2011 off @-@ season , Lemaire once again retired and was replaced by former Florida Panthers head coach Peter DeBoer . DeBoer 's new system helped develop a strong offense , which had seven 40 @-@ point scorers by the season 's end and broke an NHL record for the best regular season penalty kill since before the Expansion Era . Four players – Kovalchuk , Elias , David Clarkson and newly named captain Zach Parise – scored 30 or more goals , with Kovalchuk and Elias also finishing the season among the NHL 's top ten @-@ point scorers . Rookie forward Adam Henrique totaled 51 points and earned a Calder Trophy nomination for rookie of the year . As the sixth seed in the Eastern Conference , the Devils defeated Southeast champions Florida before overcoming both divisional rivals , the Flyers and Rangers , to win the Conference and return to the Finals after nine years . Facing the Los Angeles Kings in the Finals , the Devils managed to not be swept after losing the first three games in the series , but still lost the Cup in six games . 
 During the 2012 off @-@ season , Zach Parise signed a 13 @-@ year , $ 98 million contract with the Minnesota Wild , leaving the Devils after one season as team captain . The Devils entered the lockout @-@ shortened season with Bryce Salvador as their new captain . However , the Devils failed to repeat the performance of the prior year , finishing 19 – 19 – 10 in 48 games and missed the playoffs . 
 = = = = 2013 – present : Harris – Blitzer era = = = = 
 The Devils ' longtime financial struggles worsened during the 2012 – 13 season , and at one point the team needed to borrow $ 30 million to meet their payroll . This prompted owner Jeff Vanderbeek to sell the team . Andrew <unk> , the attorney who loaned the team the $ 30 million , was one potential buyer . Ultimately , the team was sold to Josh Harris , owner of the NBA 's Philadelphia 76ers , and David S. Blitzer , for over $ 320 million . The sale was formally announced on August 15 , 2013 . During the offseason , Kovalchuk announced he would retire from the NHL , expressing a desire to return home to Russia along with his family . In addition , 30 @-@ goal scorer David Clarkson also left the Devils , signing a 7 @-@ year deal with Toronto . With the departures of Parise and now Kovalchuk and Clarkson , the Devils were in desperate need of offensive help . In an effort to full the void , the Devils signed veteran Jaromir Jagr , who despite being 41 years old , led the team scoring in the 2013 – 14 season . During the 2013 NHL Entry Draft , hosted in Newark , the Devils acquired goaltender Cory Schneider from Vancouver in exchange for the Devils ' first round draft pick . Schneider split goaltending duties with the 41 @-@ year @-@ old Brodeur , which led to some controversy over who should be the starting goalie for the Devils . Despite Schneider 's 1 @.@ 97 goals against average leading the NHL , the Devils missed the playoffs by five points due to lagging offensive production . In the 2014 offseason , the Devils saw the departure of NHL all @-@ time wins leader Martin Brodeur , who was not re @-@ signed and subsequently joined the St. Louis Blues . Brodeur , who had spent his entire 21 @-@ year career with the Devils , played only seven games with St. Louis before announcing his retirement . 
 The 2014 – 15 season opened with the Devils ' roster suffering with injuries , and consequently the team accumulated losses . On December 26 , Peter DeBoer was fired from the head coach position . To replace him , Lamoriello invested in two head coaches , former Devils player Scott Stevens ( who had been DeBoer 's assistant for two years ) and Adam Oates , with Lamoriello himself supervising the team during the first months . The Devils finished the season as the sixth @-@ worst team in the League , 20 points away from a playoff spot and with just one victory in the last 11 games . 
 During the 2015 offseason , Ray Shero was named the Devils ' new general manager , and John Hynes was named as the new head coach . Lou Lamoriello resigned as team president and became the general manager of the Toronto Maple Leafs , replacing Dave Nonis , who was fired at the end of the season . 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season record = = 
 This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Devils . For the full season @-@ by @-@ season history , see List of New Jersey Devils seasons 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played , W = 
 Wins , L 
 = Losses , T = 
 Ties , OTL 
 = Overtime Losses , Pts = 
 Points , GF 
 = Goals for , GA = 
 Goals against 
 = = Team identity = = 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 The Devils ' logo is a monogram of the letters " N " , and " J " , rendered with devil horns at the top of the " J " and a pointed tail at the bottom . The monogram was red with a green outline when the team began playing in New Jersey , but the outline color was changed to black in 1992 , due to difficulties in making the green color consistent between its logo and jerseys . The logo sits inside an open black circle , and lies on a field of white in the middle of the chest on both uniforms . Before the Devils ' move from Colorado in 1982 , then @-@ owner John McMullen 's wife designed a prototype logo , which was then modified by a professional graphic design and marketing firm , and became the green @-@ and @-@ red logo used by the team for the first ten years in New Jersey . 
 = = = Jerseys = = = 
 The team colors are red , black and white , and they can be seen on both the home and road jerseys . The home jersey , which was the team 's road jersey until the NHL swapped home and road colors in 2003 , is dominantly red in color . There are three black and white stripes , one across each arm and one across the waist . The road jersey ( the team 's former home jersey ) is white in color with a similar design , except that the three stripes are black and red . The shoulders are draped with black on both uniforms . Before the 1992 – 93 season , the uniforms were green and red with slightly different striping , leading some fans to affectionately refer to them as " Christmas colors . " The Devils have yet to introduce a third jersey and are one of only two NHL teams ( Detroit is the other ) never to have worn one . Lamoriello had stated that he did not ever intend to introduce a third jersey for the Devils , saying , " I don 't believe in it " , Lamoriello said . " I strongly believe that you have to have one identity as a team . We want to create a feeling that our home and away jerseys are special and that it means something special to wear one . " Unlike most teams , the Devils kept the same uniform design when the NHL switched to the Rbk Edge jerseys by Reebok for the 2007 – 08 season . 
 On August 20 , 2009 , Lamoriello announced that the Devils would wear their classic red , white and green jerseys on their Saint Patrick 's Day 2010 game against the Pittsburgh Penguins . Lamoriello stated , " The original red , green and white jerseys are a part of our history here in New Jersey . We have always been an organization that takes great pride in its tradition . This is something we believe our fans will enjoy for that one special night . " Martin Brodeur wore a special replica helmet of the one from his first NHL game , as the Devils defeated the Penguins , 5 – 2 . The throwback jerseys were used seven more times , three of which took place on St. Patrick 's Day . In 2014 , they were used twice : January 26 against the Rangers in the 2014 NHL Stadium Series , and March 18 against the Bruins . 
 = = = Mascot = = = 
 The mascot is " NJ Devil " , a 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall devil who plays into the myth of the Jersey Devil . NJ Devil keeps the crowd excited , signs autographs , participates in entertainment during the intermissions , skates across the ice , throws T @-@ shirts and runs throughout the aisles of the arena to high five fans . Prior to 1993 , the mascot was " Slapshot " , a large Devils hockey puck that interacted with the fans . The man inside the costume resigned after he was accused of touching three women inappropriately while in costume . The lawsuit and all charges were dropped as nothing could be proven . To remove the stigma of the lawsuit , Slapshot was retired and has not returned since . 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 The Devils have been known as a defense @-@ first team since Head Coach Jacques Lemaire 's first tenure , although the Devils have twice led the Eastern Conference in goals scored , once leading the NHL in goals scored ( 295 goals for in 2000 – 01 ) . Lemaire gave the Devils their defensive mantra when he implemented a system commonly called the " neutral zone trap . " This system is designed to force teams to turn over the puck in the neutral zone leading to a counterattack . This style of play led the team to be chastised by the media and hockey purists for " making the NHL boring . " Nevertheless , the Devils were successful using this style of play , and Devils Head Coach Larry Robinson asserted that the Montreal Canadiens teams he played on in the 1970s ( who also won the Cup many times ) used a form of the trap , though it did not have a name . 
 Under Head Coach Brent Sutter , the team adopted less of a trap and more of a transitional , aggressive forechecking style of play which also emphasized puck possession and instilled the cycle to start the 2007 – 08 season . This led to many high scoring games early in the season for New Jersey . The Devils went on to score 244 goals in the 2008 – 09 season , the most the team had scored in eight seasons . However , with the return of Lemaire as head coach , the Devils resumed a more defense @-@ oriented playing style , scoring just 222 goals and allowing only 191 , an NHL best in the 2009 – 10 season , earning Martin Brodeur his fifth William M. Jennings Trophy . 
 Lemaire has since re @-@ entered retirement , and was replaced by former Florida Head Coach Peter DeBoer on July 19 , 2011 . The team showed greater offensive prowess during the 2011 – 12 season , employing a more aggressive forecheck centered on Ilya Kovalchuk . Under DeBoer 's system , according to Lamoriello , the Devils ' defenseman were often sent into the offensive zone to apply pressure on the opposing team 's defense . After DeBoer 's dismissal , Adam Oates had a similar approach improving the Devils ' offense , investing on the versatility of the forwards . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 The Devils developed strong rivalries with two teams out of geographical proximity and frequent playoff confrontations . The " Battle of the Hudson River " with the New York Rangers is so @-@ called as the Devils ' arenas in the New York metropolitan area were always less than ten miles and across the Hudson River from Madison Square Garden . New Jersey 's proximity with Pennsylvania also led to a rivalry with the Philadelphia Flyers , the " Battle of the Jersey Turnpike . " The Flyers have a large following in South Jersey and train in Voorhees Township . Both teams had the most titles of the Atlantic Division prior to the 2013 realignment , with nine to the Devils and six to the Flyers . 
 = = Players and personnel = = 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 Updated July 6 , 2016 . 
 = = = Honored members = = = 
 = = = = Retired numbers = = = = 
 The Devils have retired four numbers , all representing key players on their three Stanley Cup @-@ winning teams in the late 1990s and early 2000s . 
 Notes 
 1 Daneyko holds the record for most games played in a Devils uniform with 1 @,@ 283 ( and spent his entire career with the team ) . 
 2 Stevens spent 13 seasons with the Devils , captaining the team for 12 of those seasons ( 1992 – 2004 ) . 
 3 Niedermayer spent the first 13 seasons of his career with the Devils , winning the James Norris Memorial Trophy in 2004 . 
 = = = = Hall of Fame honorees = = = = 
 Eight Devils players have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Peter Šťastný , who played for the Devils from 1989 – 93 , was inducted in 1998 . A center who defected from Czechoslovakia , Šťastný was one of the NHL 's top goal scorers in the 1980s . In 2001 , Šťastný was joined in the Hall of Fame by Devils defenseman Viacheslav Fetisov , who was one of the first Soviet players in the NHL . Fetisov played for the team in the 1989 – 90 season and again from 1990 to 1995 . Scott Stevens , a Devils defenseman from 1991 to 2004 and long @-@ time team captain , was inducted in 2007 in his first year of eligibility . In December 2014 , Stevens returned as head coach for the Devils ' defense . Igor Larionov , a forward with a 15 @-@ year career in the NHL who spent the 2003 – 04 season with the Devils , was inducted in 2008 . Two Devils centers were inducted in 2011 : Doug Gilmour , who had played for the team from 1996 to 1998 , and Joe Nieuwendyk , a member of the club from 2001 to 2003 . In 2013 , the Hall of Fame again inducted two former Devils players : left wing Brendan Shanahan , who had played for the team from 1987 to 1991 and again for the 2008 – 09 season , and defenseman Scott Niedermayer , who was a Devil from 1992 to 2004 . 
 In 2009 , Lou Lamoriello , Devils president and general manager from 1987 to 2015 , was inducted into the Hall as a Builder . Two Devils head coaches have also been inducted in the category . Herb Brooks , who coached the 1980 U.S. Olympic team to victory in the " Miracle on Ice " and served as Devils head coach in the 1992 – 93 season , was inducted in 2006 . Pat Burns , head coach from 2002 to 2004 , was inducted posthumously in 2014 . Longtime Devils broadcaster Mike Emrick was the 2008 recipient of the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award . 
 Three Devils head coaches had been inducted as players prior to joining the Devils organization . Jacques Lemaire , a 12 @-@ season NHL veteran forward who played primarily for the Canadiens , was inducted in 1984 and served as Devils head coach from 1993 to 1998 and 2009 to 2011 . Larry Robinson , who spent most of his 20 @-@ season career with the Canadiens , was inducted in 1995 and subsequently served as Devils head coach from 2000 – 02 and in 2005 . Adam Oates , a center with 19 seasons in the NHL who was inducted in 2012 , began serving as the Devils head coach for offense in December 2014 . 
 = = = Team captains = = = 
 This list does not include the former captains of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies . 
 = = = General managers = = = 
 = 1959 National League tie @-@ breaker series = 
 The 1959 National League tie @-@ breaker series was a best @-@ of @-@ three playoff series at the conclusion of Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1959 regular season to decide the winner of the National League ( NL ) pennant . The games were played on September 28 and 29 , 1959 , between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Milwaukee Braves . The first game was played at Milwaukee County Stadium and the second took place at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum . The playoff series was necessary after both teams finished the season with identical win – loss records of 86 – 68 . The Dodgers won a coin flip late in the season that gave them home field advantage for the series , although the series did not reach a third game . 
 Following a rain @-@ delayed start , the Dodgers won Game 1 by a close 3 – 2 score , with a home run by John Roseboro providing the margin of victory . The Dodgers then won the series and the pennant with another close victory in Game 2 ; they came back from a three @-@ run deficit to tie the game in the ninth and then ultimately defeated the Braves , 6 – 5 , in extra innings . This victory advanced the Dodgers to the 1959 World Series , in which they defeated the Chicago White Sox , four games to two . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker series counted as the 155th and 156th regular @-@ season games for both teams , with all events in the series added to regular @-@ season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Dodgers had a poor 1958 season , posting a 71 – 83 win @-@ loss record , finishing in seventh place ( out of eight teams ) in the NL , and never holding the league lead . By contrast the Braves won the NL that year with a 92 – 62 record and advanced to the 1958 World Series where the New York Yankees defeated them in seven games . Despite their success the Braves made several changes leading into the 1959 season . First , they selected Jim <unk> in the Rule 5 draft from the Yankees in December 1958 , although he returned to the Yankees by May 1959 . The Braves then traded with the Philadelphia Phillies for Ted <unk> , Stan Lopata , and Johnny O 'Brien just prior to the season . Finally , the Braves traded for Mickey Vernon from the Cleveland Indians and selected Bobby Ávila , Ray Boone , and Enos Slaughter off of waivers during the 1959 season . The Dodgers traded for Rip <unk> and Wally Moon during the offseason and then acquired Chuck Churn , Solly Drake , and Chuck <unk> during the year . 
 The NL race was tight throughout the 1959 season between the Braves , Dodgers , and San Francisco Giants . Neither the Giants nor the Braves ever fell five or more games back of the league leader , and the Dodgers never faced a deficit of six or more . The Dodgers had the best record in games played amongst the three , posting a combined 26 – 18 record against the other two before the tie @-@ breaker . However , the Dodgers spent just 21 days with at least a share of the lead while the Braves and Giants each led the league for 86 days . 
 The Giants led the National League by two games on September 17 , 1959 over the Dodgers and Braves who were tied . However , the Giants were swept by the Dodgers over their next three games , including a doubleheader which the Los Angeles Times described as a " breeze " for Los Angeles . Giants ' starting pitcher Sam Jones threw a no @-@ hitter on September 26 , 1959 which was cut short by rain in the eighth inning for his 21st win of the season . The Giants had considered pitching Jack Sanford in that game due to Jones ' recent heavy pitching workload . Because the game was shortened to less than nine innings it is no longer considered an official no @-@ hitter . The rain also forced the second game of the Giants ' scheduled doubleheader that day to be moved , leaving them with two games to play on the final day of the season . The Giants needed to win both games and have the Braves and Dodgers both lose to tie for the lead , but the Giants lost both . Jones ' no @-@ hitter was the Giants ' only win for the season after September 17 as the team went 1 – 7 over that span , going from a two @-@ game lead to a three @-@ game deficit by season 's end . The Braves and Dodgers went 6 – 4 over that period to maintain their tie . This included a five @-@ hit complete game by Warren Spahn to win the Braves ' final game of the season 3 – 2 . This was Spahn 's 21st win of the season and 267th of his career , breaking Eppa Rixey 's record for most wins by a left @-@ handed pitcher . 
 Both the Dodgers and Braves finished the regularly scheduled 154 @-@ game season tied with records of 86 – 68 , forcing a tie @-@ breaker to decide the pennant winner . The two team 's managers flipped a coin to decide home field advantage and Dodgers ' manager Walt Alston won . The Dodgers opted to play the second and third ( if necessary ) games at home , choosing to play Game 1 in Milwaukee . The tie @-@ breaker was scheduled for the 28th , 29th , and the 30th if necessary , which required moving the start of the World Series from the 30th to October 1 . The Giants falling out of the pennant race avoided a potentially disruptive situation involving their home field . Candlestick Park was under construction during the 1959 season and the Giants would not begin play there until 1960 . However , Giants vice president Chub Feeney had said earlier in the season that if the Giants won the pennant they would play their World Series home games in Candlestick . Several potential problems were suggested with this move including a lack of seating , lack of toilet facilities , and insufficient access roads to the stadium . 
 The Dodgers were 12 – 10 against the Braves overall for the season , though the Braves actually outscored them by a single run ( 96 to 95 ) in those games . The Braves were a 5 – 8 betting favorite in Las Vegas on September 25 to win the pennant while the Dodgers had 6 – 5 odds . The World Series odds were evenly split , with 11 – 10 odds available at that time for either the Chicago White Sox ( the American League champion ) or the eventual NL pennant winner . 
 = = Series summary = = 
 = = = Game 1 = = = 
 Box score for Monday September 28 , 1959 – 2 : 17 pm ( CST ) at Milwaukee County Stadium in Milwaukee 
 Chicago White Sox manager Al Lopez watched the game along with his pitching coach to scout their potential NL opponents for the World Series . The start of Game 1 was delayed 45 minutes due to rain , leaving only 18 @,@ 297 fans in the stadium once the game was underway . The Dodgers opened the game quickly as Charlie Neal singled with one out , advanced to second base on a ground out , and scored on a single by Norm Larker to give the Dodgers an early 1 – 0 lead . Dodgers starter Danny McDevitt held the Braves scoreless in the first inning , but was driven from the game in the second . After a line out to open the inning Johnny Logan walked , Del Crandall singled , and Bill Bruton singled to bring home Logan and tie the game at 1 . Larry Sherry entered in relief of McDevitt , who pitched just 11 ⁄ 3 innings . Carl Willey , the Braves ' pitcher , reached base on an error to load the bases . Crandall then scored on a ground out by Bobby Ávila to give the Braves a 2 – 1 lead before Sherry finished out the second . 
 The Dodgers re @-@ tied the game the next inning , however . Neal singled with one out and Wally Moon grounded into a force out at second base . Moon then advanced to second on a Larker single and scored on a Gil Hodges single to make the score 2 – 2 . Don Demeter hit a single , the third consecutive and fourth of the inning , to load the bases but John Roseboro flew out to end the inning without further scoring . Sherry held the Braves scoreless in the bottom of the third , opening the inning with a walk but then inducing a double play and a foul out to quickly close it . Sherry and Willey traded scoreless innings in the fourth and fifth although the Braves threatened against Sherry in both innings , allowing two base @-@ runners each time but escaping with no runs . Roseboro led off the top of the sixth inning with a home run to give the Dodgers a 3 – 2 lead . Roseboro had also hit a home run the day before against the Chicago Cubs , a game the Dodgers won to force the tie @-@ breaker . Willey put out the next three batters to quickly end the inning , but the damage had been done . 
 Sherry pitched a perfect top of the sixth and Don McMahon relieved Willey in the bottom of the frame . The Dodgers could not add to their lead in facing McMahon , he held their run total at three . Sherry , however , was nearly perfect for the remainder of the game , allowing just one single to the Braves over the final three innings . The Los Angeles Times labeled Sherry and Roseboro the " heroes " of the game . Sherry 's only " horrible moment " , according to the Times , was a long fly ball by Bill Bruton to the deepest part of center field which Demeter managed to haul in for the first out of the bottom of the ninth . 
 = = = Game 2 = = = 
 Box score for Tuesday September 29 , 1959 – 2 : 00 pm ( PST ) at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in Los Angeles , California 
 The Dodgers had proposed playing Game 2 at night to allow a longer rest period following the travel from Milwaukee to Los Angeles . The Braves took issue with this prior to the start of the series , however , and NL president Warren Giles insisted the game be played during the day . The afternoon crowd was 36 @,@ 528 , short of the over @-@ 90 @,@ 000 seating capacity of the Coliseum . 
 The Braves opened the scoring in the top of the first inning . Eddie Mathews drew a one out walk and Hank Aaron followed that with a double . Aaron 's double drew some argument , however , as outfielder Duke Snider recovered Aaron 's ball quickly and threw to second . Dodgers ' second baseman Charlie Neal believed he had easily tagged out Aaron , but umpire Augie <unk> said Neal had missed the tag entirely . Frank Torre then singled to score the two runners and give the Braves the early 2 – 0 lead . The Dodgers responded in their half of the inning , however . Neal hit a deep fly ball to right center field with one out , reaching third base " easily " for a triple as outfielder Bill Bruton missed catching the ball on a difficult play . Wally Moon then singled to score Neal , but was caught stealing for the second out and Snider struck out to end the first inning . Johnny Logan led off the second for the Braves with a single . Then , after two outs , Logan scored on an odd error charged to Snider in center field . The Braves ' starting pitcher Lew Burdette hit a single up the middle and Logan had attempted to advance from first to third base on the play . Snider threw the ball in from center to third baseman Jim Gilliam , but Gilliam 's vision was " obstructed " and the throw " escaped " him , allowing Logan to score and Burdette to advance to third . Bruton grounded out to end the inning with the Braves in a 3 – 1 lead . 
 The game went scoreless in the third inning , but Neal led off the bottom of the fourth with a home run to make the score 3 – 2 . The Dodgers threatened further that inning , getting runners on first and second base , though did not score additional runs . Dodgers ' starter Don Drysdale recorded the first out of the top of the fifth but then gave up a solo home run to Mathews and walked Aaron before being relieved by Johnny Podres . Podres escaped without further scoring , putting out Torre and Andy Pafko who pinch hit for Lee <unk> . The sixth inning was uneventful , though the Braves then threatened in the top of the seventh . After the first out Mathews singled to start the offense . Aaron followed that with a single , Mathews was put out trying to advance to third base on a " brilliant throw " by Moon , and Aaron moved to second on the throw . Then Podres threw a wild pitch as Torre batted , allowing Aaron to move to third . Finally , Podres walked Torre and was replaced by Chuck Churn . Enos Slaughter pinch hit for Pafko but hit a <unk> to end the threat and the inning . John DeMerit then replaced Slaughter defensively in the bottom of the seventh and Norm Larker singled leading off . However , John Roseboro hit into a ground ball double play to end that threat . Roseboro crashed into Logan , the Braves ' shortstop , trying to break up the double play and Logan had to be carried from the field on a stretcher . Félix Mantilla , the second baseman , moved to play shortstop and Red Schoendienst entered to play second . Finally Churn struck out Burdette to end the seventh . 
 The Braves scored their fifth run in the eighth as Del Crandall hit a one @-@ out triple and then scored on a sacrifice fly by Mantilla . Don Demeter pinch hit for Churn , the pitcher , in the bottom half of the inning but the Dodgers were put out in order . Sandy Koufax pitched the top of the ninth for the Dodgers and though he loaded the bases with three successive walks to Aaron , Torre , and DeMerit he did not allow any runs . Moon and Snider led off the bottom of the frame with successive singles . Bob Lillis pinch ran for Snider and Gil Hodges hit another single to load the bases . Don McMahon relieved Burdette , but allowed a fourth consecutive single to Norm Larker which scored Moon , Lillis , and advanced Hodges to third leaving the score 5 – 4 . Warren Spahn relieved McMahon , Carl Furillo pinch hit for Roseboro , and Joe Pignatano pinch ran for Larker . Furillo tied the game , hitting a sacrifice fly which scored Hodges . Spahn allowed a single to Wills and was pulled in favor of Joey Jay . Ron Fairly grounded out as a pinch hitter and Gilliam flew out , leaving the game tied at five runs apiece and forcing extra innings . 
 Following the heavy substitutions in the bottom of the ninth the Dodgers made several defensive moves in the top of the tenth . Stan Williams entered as the pitcher , Pignatano came in as the catcher , Moon moved from right to left field , and Fairly and Furillo took over center and right field respectively . The tenth went by quickly with only a single baserunner , but both teams threatened in the eleventh . Mathews was walked with one out in the top half . Aaron grounded into a force out at second , then advanced to second on a passed ball to Torre . The Braves intentionally walked Torre and Al Spangler then drew a pinch hit walk to load the bases , but Joe Adcock ground out to end the half @-@ inning . Pignatano was hit by a pitch and Furillo walked to open the bottom half . After two flyball outs Joey Jay walked Gilliam , loading the bases , but Bob Rush relieved him and got Neal to ground out ending the inning . The Braves went quickly again in the twelfth , retired in order . Rush recorded the first two outs of the twelfth , but then walked Hodges . Hodges then advanced to second on a Pignatano single . Finally he scored on a single by Furillo followed by a throwing error by the shortstop Mantilla to give the Dodgers a 6 – 5 walk @-@ off victory and the National League pennant . 
 The Chicago Tribune noted the impact of Johnny Logan 's seventh inning injury as it was his replacement , Mantilla , who made the costly final error . Mantilla was " close to tears " after the game , saying he made the error because the ball " took a crazy bounce ... before I got it . " However , Braves ' manager Fred Haney insisted Mantilla " didn 't make a bad play , " that he was " lucky to stop the ball at all , " and that the run would have scored even if Mantilla had delivered a perfect throw . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Dodgers ' win earned the franchise its 10th playoff berth , the first since the team moved to Los Angeles the previous year . In the playoffs they faced the Chicago White Sox in the 1959 World Series which they won in six games . The Dodgers faced another tie @-@ breaker in 1962 , but lost to the Giants , who would lose to the New York Yankees in the 1962 World Series in seven games . The Dodgers have appeared in five of the eight NL tie @-@ breakers , more tie @-@ breaker appearances than any franchise in either league . The Dodgers ' most recent playoff appearance came in 2009 where they lost in the League Championship Series to the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 The Braves ' high @-@ water mark while in Milwaukee had been their World Series win in 1957 . They had also appeared in the 1958 Series , losing to the Yankees . After failing to win the pennant in 1959 , the Braves would not play for a championship again until they moved to Atlanta . They next returned to post @-@ season play in 1969 , their fourth season in Atlanta , where they were swept in the League Championship Series . The Braves returned to the World Series again in the 1990s , losing the 1991 , 1992 , 1996 , and 1999 World Series but winning in 1995 . 
 In baseball statistics tie @-@ breakers count as regular season games , with all events in them added to regular season statistics . For example , Eddie Mathews overtook Ernie Banks of the Chicago Cubs for the league lead in home runs , hitting his 46th of the season in Game 2 . Banks won the NL Most Valuable Player Award but Mathews , Hank Aaron , and Wally Moon finished 2nd , 3rd , and 4th respectively in the voting . Aaron , Del Crandall , Gil Hodges , and Charlie Neal all won Gold Gloves for their fielding ability . MLB played two All @-@ Star Games in 1959 . Five Braves and two Dodgers were named to the first while six Braves and four Dodgers played in the second . Five future Hall of Famers were on the Braves roster in 1959 ( Aaron , Mathews , Schoendienst , Slaughter , Spahn ) while the Dodgers had three ( Drysdale , Koufax , Snider ) . Dodgers ' manager Walt Alston was also inducted to the Hall as a manager in 1983 . 
 = Major League Soccer = 
 Major League Soccer ( MLS ) is a men 's professional soccer league , sanctioned by U.S. Soccer , that represents the sport 's highest level in both the United States and Canada . MLS constitutes one of the major professional sports leagues of the United States and Canada . The league is composed of 20 teams — 17 in the U.S. and 3 in Canada . The MLS regular season runs from March to October , with each team playing 34 games ; the team with the best record is awarded the Supporters ' Shield . The post season includes twelve teams competing in the MLS Cup Playoffs through November and December , culminating in the championship game , the MLS Cup . MLS teams also play in other domestic competitions against teams from other divisions in the U.S. Open Cup and in the Canadian Championship . MLS teams also compete against continental rivals in the CONCACAF Champions League . 
 Major League Soccer was founded in 1993 as part of the United States ' successful bid to host the 1994 FIFA World Cup . The first season took place in 1996 with ten teams . MLS experienced financial and operational struggles in its first few years : The league lost millions of dollars , teams played in mostly empty American football stadiums , and two teams folded in 2002 . Since then , MLS has expanded to 20 teams , owners built soccer @-@ specific stadiums , average MLS attendance exceeds that of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , MLS secured national TV contracts , and the league is now profitable . 
 Instead of operating as an association of independently owned teams , MLS is a single entity in which each team is owned and controlled by the league 's investors . The investor @-@ operators control their teams as owners control teams in other leagues , and are commonly ( but inaccurately ) referred to as the team 's owners . The league has a fixed membership , like most sports leagues in the United States and Canada , which makes it one of the world 's few soccer leagues that does not use promotion and relegation , a practice that is uncommon in the two countries . MLS headquarters is located in New York City . 
 = = Competition format = = 
 Major League Soccer 's regular season runs from March to October . Teams are divided into the Eastern and Western Conferences . Teams play 34 games in an unbalanced schedule : 24 matches against teams within their conference , plus 10 matches against teams from the other conference . Midway through the season , teams break for the annual All @-@ Star Game , a friendly game between the league 's finest players and a major club from a different league . At the end of the regular season , the team with the highest point total is awarded the Supporters ' Shield . 
 Unlike some soccer leagues around the world , but similar to other leagues in the Americas , the MLS regular season is followed by the 12 @-@ team MLS Cup Playoffs in November , ending with the MLS Cup championship final in early December . Although some commentators have argued that playoffs reduce the importance of the regular season , Commissioner Don Garber has explained " Our purpose is to have a valuable competition , and that includes having playoffs that are more meaningful . " 
 Major League Soccer 's spring @-@ to @-@ autumn schedule results in scheduling conflicts with the FIFA calendar and with summertime international tournaments such as the World Cup and the Gold Cup , causing several players to miss some MLS matches . While MLS has looked into changing to an autumn @-@ to @-@ spring format , there are no current plans to do so . If the league were to change its schedule , a winter break would be needed , especially with several teams in colder climates , which some believe would lead to a disadvantage . It would also have to compete with the more popular National Football League ( NFL ) , National Hockey League ( NHL ) , and National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . 
 = = = Other competitions = = = 
 MLS teams also play in other competitions . Every year , up to five MLS teams play in the CONCACAF Champions League against other clubs from the CONCACAF region ( Mexico , Central America , and the Caribbean ) . Two U.S.-based MLS teams qualify based on MLS regular @-@ season results : the winner of the Supporters ' Shield and the winner of the other conference . The third U.S. team to qualify is the winner of the MLS Cup . A fourth U.S.-based MLS team can qualify via the U.S. Open Cup , where U.S. based teams compete against lower division U.S. clubs . Canadian MLS clubs play against lower division Canadian clubs in the Canadian Championship for the one Champions League spot allocated to Canada . No MLS club has won the Champions League since it began its current format in 2008 , with Mexican clubs dominating the competition , but MLS teams have twice reached the final : Real Salt Lake in 2011 and the Montreal Impact in 2015 . 
 = = Teams = = 
 MLS 's 20 teams are divided between the Eastern and Western Conference . Each club is allowed up to 30 players on its first team roster . All 30 players are eligible for selection to each 18 @-@ player game @-@ day squad during the regular season and playoffs . 
 Since the 2005 season , MLS has added many new clubs . During this period of expansion , Los Angeles became the first two @-@ team market , and the league pushed into Canada in 2007 . The league will expand from 20 teams today to 22 teams in 2017 with the additions of Atlanta and either Los Angeles or Minnesota , and then to 23 teams in 2018 with the addition of Minnesota or Los Angeles , depending which team joins the league the preceding year . The league plans to have 24 teams by 2020 . 
 In the history of MLS , twenty @-@ three different clubs have competed in the league , with ten having won at least one MLS Cup , and ten winning at least one Supporters ' Shield . The same club has won both trophies six times . 
 Several teams compete annually for secondary MLS rivalry cups that are typically contested by two teams , usually geographic rivals ( e.g. , Portland vs. Seattle vs. Vancouver ) . Each cup is awarded to the team with the better regular @-@ season record in games played between the two teams . The concept is comparable to minor trophies played for by American college football teams . 
 Beginning with the 2015 season , teams are aligned as follows : 
 = = History = = 
 Major League Soccer is the most recent of a series of men 's premier professional national soccer leagues established in the United States and Canada . The predecessor of MLS was the North American Soccer League ( NASL ) , which played from 1968 until 1984 . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 In 1988 , in exchange for FIFA awarding the right to host the 1994 World Cup , U.S. Soccer promised to establish a Division 1 professional soccer league . In 1993 , U.S. Soccer selected Major League Professional Soccer ( the precursor to MLS ) as the exclusive Division 1 professional soccer league . Major League Soccer was officially formed in February 1995 as a limited liability company . 
 MLS began play in 1996 with ten teams . The first game was held on April 6 , 1996 , as the San Jose Clash defeated D.C. United before 31 @,@ 000 fans at Spartan Stadium in San Jose in a game broadcast on ESPN . The league had generated some buzz by managing to lure some marquee players from the 1994 World Cup to play in MLS — including U.S. stars such as Alexi Lalas , Tony Meola and Eric Wynalda , and foreign players such as Mexico 's Jorge Campos and Colombia 's Carlos Valderrama . D.C. United won the MLS Cup in three of the league 's first four seasons . The league added its first two expansion teams in 1998 — the Miami Fusion and the Chicago Fire ; the Chicago Fire won its first title in its inaugural season . 
 After its first season , MLS suffered from a decline in attendance . The league 's low attendance was all the more apparent in light of the fact that eight of the original ten teams played in large American football stadiums . One aspect that had alienated fans was that MLS experimented with rules deviations in its early years in an attempt to " Americanize " the sport . The league implemented the use of shootouts to resolve tie games . MLS also used a countdown clock and halves ended when the clock reached 0 : 00 . The league realized that the rule changes had alienated some traditional soccer fans while failing to draw new American sports fans , and the shootout and countdown clock were eliminated after the 1999 season . The league 's quality was cast into doubt when the U.S. men 's national team , which was made up largely of MLS players , finished in last place at the 1998 World Cup . 
 Major League Soccer lost an estimated $ 250 million during its first five years , and more than $ 350 million between its founding and 2004 . The league 's financial problems led to Commissioner Doug Logan being replaced by Garber , a former NFL executive , in August 1999 . MLS announced in January 2002 that it had decided to contract the Tampa Bay Mutiny and Miami Fusion , leaving the league with ten teams . 
 Despite the financial problems , though , MLS did have some accomplishments that would set the stage for the league 's resurgence . Columbus Crew Stadium was built in 1999 , becoming MLS 's first soccer @-@ specific stadium . This began a trend among MLS teams to construct their own venues instead of leasing American football stadiums . In 2000 , the league won an antitrust lawsuit , Fraser v. Major League Soccer , that the players had filed in 1996 . The court ruled that MLS 's policy of centrally contracting players and limiting player salaries through a salary cap and other restrictions were a legal method for the league to maintain solvency and competitive parity . 
 = = = Resurgence = = = 
 The 2002 FIFA World Cup , in which the United States unexpectedly made the quarterfinals , coincided with a resurgence in American soccer and MLS . MLS Cup 2002 drew 61 @,@ 316 spectators to Gillette Stadium , the largest attendance in an MLS Cup final . MLS limited teams to three substitutions per game in 2003 , and adopted International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) rules in 2005 . 
 MLS underwent a transition in the years leading up to the 2006 World Cup . After marketing itself on the talents of American players , the league lost some of its homegrown stars to prominent European leagues . For example , Tim Howard was transferred to Manchester United for $ 4 million in one of the most lucrative contract deals in league history . Many more American players did make an impact in MLS . In 2005 , Jason Kreis became the first player to score 100 career MLS goals . 
 The league 's financial stabilization plan included teams moving out of large American football stadiums and into soccer @-@ specific stadiums . From 2003 to 2008 , the league oversaw the construction of six additional soccer @-@ specific stadiums , largely funded by owners such as Lamar Hunt and Phil Anschutz , so that by the end of 2008 , a majority of teams were now in soccer @-@ specific stadiums . 
 It was also in this era that MLS expanded for the first time since 1998 . Real Salt Lake and Chivas USA began play in 2005 , with Chivas USA becoming the second club in Los Angeles . By 2006 the San Jose Earthquakes owners , players and a few coaches moved to Texas to become the expansion Houston Dynamo , after failing to build a stadium in San Jose . The Dynamo became an expansion team , leaving their history behind for a new San Jose ownership group that formed in 2007 . 
 = = = Arrival of Designated Players = = = 
 In 2007 the league expanded beyond the United States ' borders into Canada with the Toronto FC expansion team . Major League Soccer took steps to further raise the level of play by adopting the Designated Player Rule , which helped bring international stars into the league . The 2007 season witnessed the MLS debut of David Beckham . Beckham 's signing had been seen as a coup for American soccer , and was made possible by the Designated Player Rule . Players such as Cuauhtémoc Blanco ( Chicago Fire ) and Juan Pablo Ángel ( New York Red Bulls ) , are some of the first Designated Players who made major contributions to their clubs . The departures of Clint Dempsey and Jozy Altidore , coupled with the return of former U.S. national team stars Claudio Reyna and Brian McBride , highlighted the exchange of top prospects to Europe for experienced veterans to MLS . 
 By 2008 , San Jose had returned to the league under new ownership , and in 2009 , the expansion side Seattle Sounders FC began play in MLS . The 2010 season ushered in an expansion franchise in the Philadelphia Union and their new PPL Park stadium . The 2010 season also brought the opening of the New York Red Bulls ' soccer @-@ specific stadium , Red Bull Arena , and the debut of French striker Thierry Henry . 
 The 2011 season brought further expansion with the addition of the Vancouver Whitecaps FC , the second Canadian MLS franchise , and the Portland Timbers . Real Salt Lake reached the finals of the 2010 – 11 CONCACAF Champions League . During the 2011 season , the Galaxy signed another international star in Republic of Ireland all @-@ time leading goalscorer Robbie Keane . MLS drew an average attendance of 17 @,@ 872 in 2011 , higher than the average attendances of the NBA and NHL . In 2012 , the Montreal Impact became the league 's 19th franchise and the third in Canada , and made their home debut in front of a crowd of 58 @,@ 912 , while the New York Red Bulls added Australian all @-@ time leading goalscorer Tim Cahill . 
 = = = 2013 – present = = = 
 In 2013 , MLS introduced New York City FC as its 20th team , and Orlando City Soccer Club as its 21st team , both of which would begin playing in 2015 . In 2013 , the league implemented its " Core Players " initiative , allowing teams to retain key players using retention funds instead of losing the players to foreign leagues . Among the first high @-@ profile players re @-@ signed in 2013 using retention funds were U.S. national team regulars Graham Zusi and Matt Besler . Beginning in summer of 2013 and continuing in the run up to the 2014 World Cup , MLS began signing U.S. stars based abroad , including Clint Dempsey from the English Premier League to Seattle , <unk> Beasley from the Liga MX to Houston , Jermaine Jones from the German Bundesliga to New England and Michael Bradley who returned from Italy to join Toronto who also signed England International Striker Jermain Defoe . By the 2014 season , fifteen of the nineteen MLS head coaches had previously played in MLS . By 2013 , the league 's popularity had increased to the point where MLS was as popular as Major League Baseball among 12- to 17 @-@ year @-@ olds , as reported by the 2013 Luker on Trends ESPN poll , having jumped in popularity since the 2010 World Cup . 
 In 2014 , the league announced Atlanta United FC as the 22nd team to start playing in 2017 . Even though New York City FC and Orlando City were not set to begin play until 2015 , each team made headlines during the summer 2014 transfer window by announcing their first Designated Players – Spain 's leading scorer David Villa and Chelsea 's leading scorer Frank Lampard to New York , and Ballon d 'Or winner Kaká to Orlando . The 2014 World Cup featured 21 MLS players on World Cup rosters and a record 11 MLS players playing for foreign teams – including players from traditional powerhouses Brazil ( Júlio César ) , playing for Toronto FC on loan from Queens Park Rangers FC , and Spain ( David Villa ) , on loan to Melbourne City FC from New York City FC ; in the U.S. v. Germany match the U.S. fielded a team with seven MLS starters . 
 On September 18 , 2014 , MLS unveiled their new logo as part of the " MLS Next " branding initiative . In addition to the new crest logo , MLS teams display versions in their own colors that are displayed on their jerseys at every game . This change represents the first time that the MLS logo has been changed since the league 's inception . Chivas USA folded following the 2014 season , while New York City FC and Orlando City SC joined the league in 2015 as the 19th and 20th teams . Sporting Kansas City and the Houston Dynamo moved from the Eastern Conference to the Western Conference in 2015 to make two 10 @-@ team conferences . 
 In early 2015 , the league announced that two teams — Los Angeles FC and Minnesota United — would join MLS in either 2017 or 2018 . The 20th season of MLS saw the arrivals of several players who have starred at the highest levels of European club soccer and in international soccer : Giovanni Dos Santos , Kaká , Andrea Pirlo , Frank Lampard , Steven Gerrard , Didier Drogba , David Villa , and Sebastian Giovinco . On December 6 , 2015 , MLS announced its intent to expand to 28 teams . 
 = = League championships = = 
 MLS Cup titles and Supporters ' Shield Wins 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Ownership = = = 
 Major League Soccer operates under a single @-@ entity structure in which teams and player contracts are centrally owned by the league . Each team has an investor @-@ operator that is a shareholder in the league . In order to control costs , MLS shares revenues and holds players contracts instead of players contracting with individual teams . In Fraser v. Major League Soccer , a lawsuit filed in 1996 and decided in 2002 , the league won a legal battle with its players in which the court ruled that MLS was a single entity that can lawfully centrally contract for player services . The court also ruled that even absent their collective bargaining agreement , players could opt to play in other leagues if they were unsatisfied . 
 Having multiple clubs owned by a single owner was a necessity in the league 's first ten years . At one time Phil Anschutz 's AEG owned six MLS clubs and Lamar Hunt 's Hunt Sports owned three franchises . In order to attract additional investors , in 2002 the league announced changes to the operating agreement between the league and its teams to improve team revenues and increase the incentives to be an individual club owner . These changes included granting owners the rights to a certain number of players they develop through their club 's academy system each year , sharing the profits of Soccer United Marketing , and being able to sell individual club jersey sponsorships . 
 As MLS appeared to be on the brink of overall profitability in 2006 and developed significant expansion plans , MLS announced that it wanted each club to have a distinct operator . The league has attracted new ownership that have injected more money into the league . Examples include Red Bull 's purchase of the <unk> from AEG in 2006 for over $ 100 million . 
 The league now has 20 investor @-@ operators for its 20 clubs . Hunt Sports owns only one team ( FC Dallas ) . AEG owns the LA Galaxy and retained a 50 % interest in the Houston Dynamo until December 2015 . For the 2014 season , the league owned the former Chivas USA club , which had suffered from mismanagement and poor financial results under its individual operator relationship . The league eventually dissolved the team , in favor of awarding rights to a second soccer club in the Los Angeles area to a new ownership group on October 30 , 2014 . 
 = = = Player acquisition and salaries = = = 
 The average salary for MLS players is $ 316 @,@ 777 , lower than the average salaries in England 's second @-@ tier Football League Championship ( $ 420 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , Holland 's Eredivisie ( $ 445 @,@ 000 ) , or Mexico 's Liga MX ( $ 418 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The league 's minimum player salary will increase in 2016 from $ 60 @,@ 000 to $ 62 @,@ 500 for most players , and roster players # 25 – 28 will see their minimum salary increase from $ 50 @,@ 000 to $ 51 @,@ 500 . 
 MLS salaries are limited by a salary cap , which MLS has had in place since the league 's inception in 1996 . The purpose of the salary cap is to prevent the team 's owners from unsustainable spending on player salaries — a practice that had doomed the North American Soccer League during the 1980s — and to prevent a competitive imbalance among teams . The salary cap survived a legal challenge by the players in the Fraser v. Major League Soccer lawsuit . The 2016 salary cap is increasing from $ 3 @.@ 49 million to $ 3 @.@ 66 million per team . 
 Teams may augment their squads by signing players from other leagues . MLS has two transfer windows — the primary pre @-@ season transfer window lasts three months from mid February until mid May , and the secondary mid season transfer window runs one month from early July to early August . All MLS teams have a limited number of international roster slots that they can use to sign non @-@ domestic players . However MLS teams regularly obtain green cards for their non @-@ domestic players in order to qualify them for domestic status and free up international roster slots . In 2015 48 @.@ 97 % of MLS players were born outside of the U.S. and Canada , with players from 58 countries represented . 
 MLS has also introduced various initiatives and rules intended to improve quality of players while still maintaining the salary cap . Rules concerning Designated Players , Generation Adidas players , home grown players , and allocation money all allow for additional wage spending that is exempt from the salary cap . These initiatives have brought about an increase in on @-@ field competition . 
 The designated player ( DP ) rule allows teams to sign a limited number of players whose salary exceeds the maximum cap , each DP player only counts as $ 457 @,@ 500 ( the maximum non @-@ DP salary ) against the cap in 2016 . Instituted in 2007 , England 's David Beckham was the first signing under the DP rule . The DP rule has led to large income inequality in MLS with top DPs earning as much as 180 times more than a player earning the league minimum . In the 2013 season 21 % of the league 's wage spending went to just 5 players , this stretched to 29 % on the top 6 players in the 2014 season . 
 The league 's " Core Players " initiative allows teams to re @-@ sign players using retention funds that do not count against the salary cap . Retention funds were implemented in 2013 as a mechanism for MLS to retain key players ; among the first high @-@ profile players re @-@ signed using retention funds were U.S. national team regulars Graham Zusi and Matt Besler . MLS teams can also obtain allocation money , which is money that the team can use on player salaries that does not count against the cap , and teams can earn allocation money in several ways , such as from the transfer fees earned by selling players to teams in other leagues . MLS teams can also use Targeted Allocation Money ( often referred to as TAM ) , an initiative announced in 2015 . Teams can use TAM funds to attract high @-@ profile players by " buying down " contracts of players to below the Designated Player level . High @-@ profile players for which TAM funds were used include Omar Gonzalez . 
 The league operates a Generation Adidas program , which is a joint venture between MLS and U.S. Soccer that encourages young American players to enter MLS . The Generation Adidas program has been in place since 1997 , and has introduced players such as Landon Donovan , Clint Dempsey , Tim Howard and Michael Bradley into MLS . Players under the Home Grown Player rule are signed to Generation Adidas contracts , all players on Generation Adidas contracts are " off budget players " and their salaries do not count against the cap . 
 MLS has required all of its teams to operate youth development programs since 2008 . MLS roster rules allow teams to sign an unlimited number players straight from their academies and bypassing the draft process . There is also supplementary salary budget made by MLS only for homegrown players that are registered using senior roster slots called homegrown player funds . One of the most prominent and lucrative examples of success in " home @-@ grown " development was Jozy Altidore , who rose to prominence as a teenager in MLS before his record transfer fee $ 10 million move to Villarreal in Spain in 2008 . The various MLS teams ' development academies play matches in a U.S. Soccer developmental league against youth academies from other leagues such as the Division II North American Soccer League ( NASL ) and Division III USL Pro , the latter of which has now rebranded itself as the United Soccer League . 
 MLS formerly operated a reserve league which gave playing time to players who were not starters for their MLS teams . The Reserve League was formed in 2005 , and operated through 2014 ( with the exception of the 2009 & 2010 seasons ) . MLS began integrating its Reserve League with the league then known as USL Pro in 2013 , and after the 2014 season folded the Reserve League , with MLS now requiring all teams to either affiliate with a USL team or field their own reserve side in that league . 
 = = = Stadiums = = = 
 Since 1999 , the league has overseen the construction of twelve stadiums specifically designed for soccer . The development of soccer @-@ specific stadiums owned by the teams has generated a better gameday experience for the fans . The soccer @-@ specific stadiums have yielded positive financial results as teams were no longer required to pay to rent out facilities and gained control over revenue streams such as concessions , parking , naming rights , and the ability to host non MLS events . Several teams have doubled their season @-@ tickets following the team 's move into a soccer @-@ specific stadium . The establishment of soccer @-@ specific stadiums is considered the key to the league and the ability of teams to turn a profit . In 2006 , Tim Leiweke , then CEO of Anschutz Entertainment Group , described the proliferation of soccer @-@ specific stadiums as the turning point for MLS . 
 Columbus Crew owner Lamar Hunt started this trend in 1999 by constructing Columbus Crew Stadium , now known as <unk> Stadium , as MLS 's first soccer @-@ specific stadium . The Los Angeles Galaxy followed four years later with the opening of The Home Depot Center , now StubHub Center , in 2003 . FC Dallas opened Pizza Hut Park , now Toyota Stadium , in 2005 , and the Chicago Fire began playing their home games in Toyota Park in 2006 . The 2007 season brought the opening of Dick 's Sporting Goods Park for the Colorado Rapids and BMO Field for Toronto FC . 
 Near the end of the 2008 season , Rio Tinto Stadium became the home of Real Salt Lake , which meant that for the first time in MLS history a majority of MLS 's teams ( 8 out of 14 ) played in soccer @-@ specific stadiums . Red Bull Arena , the new home of the New York Red Bulls opened for the start of the 2010 season , and the Philadelphia Union opened PPL Park , since renamed <unk> Energy Stadium , in June 2010 , midway through their inaugural season . The following season , in 2011 , the Portland Timbers made their MLS debut in a newly renovated <unk> @-@ Wen Field , now renamed Providence Park , which was originally a multi @-@ purpose venue but turned into a soccer @-@ specific facility . Also in 2011 , Sporting Kansas City moved to new Livestrong Sporting Park , now Children 's Mercy Park . The Houston Dynamo relocated to their new home at BBVA Compass Stadium in 2012 . In the same year , the Montreal Impact joined the league in an expanded Stade Saputo , which reopened June 2012 , when renovations pushed the seating capacity to over 20 @,@ 000 . The Impact has used Olympic Stadium for early season matches and for games that require a larger capacity . The San Jose Earthquakes , who had played at Buck Shaw Stadium from 2008 until 2014 , opened their new <unk> Stadium before the 2015 season . 
 The development of additional MLS stadiums is in progress . The Orlando City SC expansion team intended to begin constructing Orlando City Stadium , a soccer @-@ specific stadium , in 2014 to be completed in 2015 . Delays caused by changes to the stadium plans pushed back the new venue 's opening , first to late in the 2016 season and finally to the start of the 2017 season . Orlando City have been playing at the Florida Citrus Bowl Stadium , now Camping World Stadium , while awaiting the opening of their new venue . 
 Three teams have announced their desire to build a soccer @-@ specific stadium , although these teams have not finalized the stadium site and received all necessary government approvals . D.C. United plays home games at a former NFL and Major League Baseball venue , RFK Stadium ; in 2013 , D.C. United announced the signing of a public @-@ private partnership term sheet to build a 25 @,@ 000 @-@ seat new soccer stadium in Washington , D.C. , and a final deal was reached in late 2014 . The New York City FC expansion team will play their games at Yankee Stadium , a Major League Baseball venue , although they intend to move into a soccer specific stadium in the future . The New England Revolution play home games at a National Football League venue , Gillette Stadium , but are currently in discussion with the City of Boston regarding a potential soccer @-@ specific stadium in South Boston . 
 Several remaining clubs play in stadiums not originally built for MLS and have not announced plans to move . The Seattle Sounders play at CenturyLink Field , a dual @-@ purpose facility used for both American football and soccer . The Vancouver Whitecaps FC joined the league with Portland in 2011 and temporarily held matches at Empire Field before moving into the refurbished BC Place in October 2011 , a retractable @-@ roof stadium that hosts Canadian football as well as soccer . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 As of the 2015 season , MLS matches are broadcast nationally by ESPN networks and Fox Sports in English , and Univision networks in Spanish under an eight @-@ year contract . Each broadcaster has a window for national regular season matches , with <unk> airing a game on Friday nights in Spanish and additional matches on Univision Deportes Network , and ESPN and Fox Sports 1 airing games on Sunday evenings in English . ESPN , FS1 , and Univision will share in coverage of the playoffs , while ESPN and FS1 will alternate broadcasting the MLS Cup final in English . In total , at least 125 matches will be aired per @-@ season across all three networks , and the three contracts have an average estimated value of $ 90 million per season — five times larger than the average $ 18 million value of the previous contracts with ESPN , Univision , and NBC Sports . 7 . Matches not televised nationally are broadcast regionally , often by regional sports networks , such as the LA Galaxy and Time Warner Cable SportsNet . 
 From 2012 to 2014 , MLS matches were previously broadcast by NBC Sports , with 40 matches per year — primarily on NBCSN , and select matches broadcast on the NBC network . The move from Fox Soccer to the more widely distributed NBCSN proved successful , with viewership numbers doubling for the 2012 season over those of Fox Soccer . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 Coverage of MLS expanded into Canada in 2007 with the addition of Toronto FC . Currently , English @-@ language national MLS broadcast rights in Canada are through the TSN networks with a six @-@ year deal for the 2011 – 2016 seasons . TSN and TSN2 broadcast a minimum of 30 games during each season , all featuring at least one Canadian team . French @-@ language sister networks RDS and <unk> have similar broadcast rights . The networks also carry additional games not involving Canadian teams . GolTV Canada carries selected all @-@ U.S. MLS matchups . 
 As in the United States , the individual Canadian teams also have separate broadcast deals for games not aired under the TSN / RDS national contract . TSN and Sportsnet split coverage of Toronto FC non @-@ national games ( TSN and Sportsnet 's parent companies own a joint majority stake in the team through Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment ) , TVA Sports airs Montreal Impact games , and TSN broadcasts the Vancouver Whitecaps in a separate deal . 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 MLS signed an international television contract in 2008 through 2013 with sports media company MP & Silva . The figure is reportedly an " eight @-@ figure deal . " MP & Silva explained that high @-@ profile , international players who were lured to MLS by the Designated Player Rule have raised the popularity of MLS in international markets . ESPN International purchased the rights to broadcast MLS in the U.K. in 2009 , and other ESPN networks around the world also broadcast games . MLS also entered into a four @-@ year contract with Sky Sports to broadcast two MLS matches per week in the UK from 2015 – 2019 . Eurosport will also broadcast MLS between 2015 and 2019 , with four matches per week being screened live to its continental audience . 
 = = = = Video games = = = = 
 Major League Soccer is a playable league in both the FIFA and the Football Manager series . The league made its video game debut in 1999 with FIFA 2000 . In 2001 , Konami released ESPN MLS <unk> 2002 , which , to date , is the only soccer title to be based solely on MLS . The league made its first appearance in the management series Football Manager 2005 in 2004 . 
