 = = = Special One : The Signal = = = 
 Continuing from the end of the main game , Alan finds himself in a surreal version of Bright Falls , and realizes he is being held under Cauldron Lake . Zane directs Alan to follow a signal through a cell phone to focus and guide himself out of " the Dark Place " , the realm where the Dark Presence came from and where the written word can become reality . As Alan continues to avoid and defeat various Taken , he encounters several television screens that show a more maniacal version of Alan , ranting about upcoming events , forewarning Alan of what is to come . He also encounters an ethereal version of Barry , a figment of his <unk> , who also helps to guide Alan safely across the abstract landscape . 
 Zane 's signal leads Alan to a sawmill , but as he explores it , he finds himself back in a setting of his city apartment . Zane appears , and tells Alan that it is himself — the maniacal figure on the televisions — that is keeping him in the Dark Place . Alan refuses to believe that he is trapping himself , but soon faces a monstrosity of several televisions , with the irrational Alan on them that tries to kill him . Alan is able to defeat the crazed version of himself , waking up back at the cabin in the lake , and realizes that he is still trapped . 
 = = = Special Two : The Writer = = = 
 Still trapped in the Dark Place , Alan regains consciousness to find his memories of Bright Falls emerging ; after leaving an amalgamation of the Cauldron Lake Lodge and the Andersons ' farm , Zane tells Alan he must make his way back to the cabin via a lighthouse . The environments start to become exceedingly surreal and Alan follows Zane 's path , avoiding increasing numbers of Taken . Zane warns Alan that the " irrational Alan " is still inside the cabin , controlling the Dark Place , while he himself represents the rational part of Alan ; the rational Alan must regain control of the dream for any chance of Alan to escape the Dark Place . The irrational side of Alan attempts to stop him by creating delusions of Alice , extinguishing the lighthouse 's light , and sending armies of Taken after him , but with Zane 's help , Alan eventually reaches his goal , passing through the lighthouse to reach the cabin . 
 As he nears the cabin , the imaginary Barry appears and tells Alan that he will have to reject all the illusions before he can face off against the insane version of Alan , including the apparition of Barry . Alan is ready to accept that , forcing Alan to fight Taken illusions of Dr. Hartman , Barry , and the Andersons , defeating them all before he is able to reenter the cabin . His crazed side is in a paranoid state on the cabin floor , and when Alan touches him , the two are made whole again . Alan realizes that he cannot let himself fall into a delusional state again for fear of never being able to escape , and returns to the typewriter to start a new story — " Return " . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Finnish studio Remedy Entertainment is known for creating the critically acclaimed Max Payne ( 2001 ) , and its sequel , Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne ( 2003 ) . After shipping Max Payne 2 , Remedy Entertainment spent some time " recovering from the crunch " , and started coming up with different concepts for a new project . Among these was the concept for Alan Wake . 
 The game was announced at the 2005 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) for " the next generation of consoles and PCs " , and was shown to the press behind closed doors in the form of a tech demo . In 2006 , Remedy partnered with Microsoft Game Studios to publish the game exclusively for Microsoft 's Xbox 360 video game console and then @-@ current Windows Vista PC operating system . The first screenshots depicted the character of Alan Wake in much different attire , as well as a different layout for the town of Bright Falls , compared to the released game . 
 All the characters featured in Alan Wake were based on real life models . Ilkka <unk> and Jonna Järvenpää , the models for Alan and Alice Wake , respectively , are the only Finnish models in the game ; all other models were American . Voice overs were provided by native actors from Japan and America for their respective regions . 
 After four years of having repeatedly demonstrated the Microsoft Windows version , in 2009 , Remedy confirmed that at that point the game was being developed exclusively for the Xbox 360 and the decision to make a PC version was in Microsoft 's hands . After the game 's release in 2010 , Remedy said that bringing the game to the PC was " not on the cards at the moment . " However , nearly two years after its release , Remedy was able to secure the rights to publish a PC version . 
 The game was announced as " done " and undergoing final polishing in August 2009 . The game eventually went gold on 7 April 2010 , and was released in May . 
 Originally , Remedy planned Bright Falls as a free @-@ roaming , sandbox @-@ style open world city , similar to those seen in the Grand Theft Auto series . After trying this idea for six months , the team decided to scrap it , because it interfered with the pacing and storytelling they intended to deliver in a thriller game . 
 The game 's enemies were designed by drawing concept art and then pouring water over them to make them feel " Just a bit off " . For the character of Alan Wake himself , Remedy used " concept photos " as opposed to more traditional concept artwork . To research the Pacific Northwest setting for the game , a Remedy team travelled to the area , and produced a large amount of photographs and videos . 
 = = = Influences and allusions = = = 
 Alan Wake was influenced by and often alludes to certain films , TV shows , and books , as well as paying homage to a number of artists and works . Remedy has explained the shared themes and ideas between the game and other existing works of popular culture as " taking something familiar to people as an element , and building something of your own , and hopefully something [ that is ] unique in games , but still familiar from other forms of entertainment . " 
 Bestselling author Stephen King was a major inspiration for Alan Wake . The main character as a writer whose work is coming true is a theme that has been explored by King in a number of his works . Wake 's narration directly alludes to King on several occasions , including the game 's opening line , in which he quotes a Stephen King essay . The game also pays homage to the film The Shining ( based on King 's novel of the same name ) with a hedge maze area similar to the iconic maze in the film , among other references . King himself was asked for permission to use his quote . He also received copies of the game as a " thank you " , but was unable to try them out because he does not own an Xbox . In addition to King 's work , Lake has cited the stories of Bret Easton Ellis and Neil Gaiman as influences , as well as Mark Z. <unk> 's House of Leaves . 
 The game 's setting , Bright Falls , draws inspiration from the early 1990s TV show Twin Peaks , which was set in the titular town ; both fictional small towns in the state of Washington . Alfred Hitchcock is also cited as an inspiration , with the flocks of birds that often attack the protagonist being influenced by his classic horror film The Birds . 
 In the game there are a number of television sets that can be found around the town in different places . They can be switched on and a short episode of the fictional series Night Springs will be played , which is influenced by the television series The Twilight Zone , created by Rod Serling in the late 1950s . 
 The game includes several small allusions to the previous famous title by Remedy , and predecessor to Alan Wake , Max Payne . Throughout the game the player can locate Manuscript Pages , pages from a book which describes the game 's events . However , two of them , found in the beginning of Episode 2 , are not connected to the rest , and they are voiced not by Matthew Porretta , Alan Wake 's voice artist , but by James McCaffrey , the voice artist for Max Payne . The text and style of the pages themselves are also a reference to the famous monologues given by that character . 
 Alan Wake also continues the themes of the Max Payne series in that it features references to Norse mythology in the form of the Anderson brothers . 
 = = = Episodic format = = = 
 In its structure , the story of Alan Wake plays out similarly to a mystery television program , where each episode brings another piece of the puzzle to the main ongoing story , yet have a distinct plot of their own . As such , Alan Wake is organised into episodes , which include narrative and plot devices normally used in TV , such as cliffhangers at the end of the episodes . A prominent borrowing from television is the " Previously on Alan Wake ... " recap sequence that opens each episode , and serve to " refresh the player 's memory and point to things that will become relevant shortly . " A different song plays at the end of every episode , imitating certain TV shows that feature different music during each episode 's closing credits . 
 The main game itself is divided up into six episodes . Additionally , two " special features " , titled " The Signal " and " The Writer " , have been released as downloadable content ( DLC ) . Together , Alan Wake and its DLCs constitute the " first season " of a bigger story . The main game is designed to have a satisfactory ending with the main character reaching his goal , while the DLCs form a two @-@ part special that further expands on the game 's story by " [ continuing ] the fiction and [ serving ] as a bridge between seasons . " While the game 's developers have expressed interest in following Alan Wake up with a season two ( i.e. , a sequel ) , no plans have been announced about this . 
 Remedy Entertainment chose the TV series storytelling format to establish a certain stylisation and pacing . The developers felt that watching episodes of certain TV shows – such as the heavily serialised series Lost – in the form of released box sets , at the viewers ' pace , was a " natural way of ' consuming media ' " , and that this episodic format was a better fit for a long game . Remedy lauded Lost for its pacing as a thriller TV show . 
 = = = Product placement = = = 
 A number of real @-@ life brands and products appear in Alan Wake . The game 's developers have expressed that they tried to " be very conservative and attentive towards gamers " with their use of product placement , and that they aimed " to make the world feel more real rather than put ads in @-@ your @-@ face . " 
 Examples of such marketing include collectable Energizer batteries and lithium batteries to insert into the player 's hand @-@ held lights . The phone service provider Verizon Wireless is another prominent brand in Alan Wake : besides Verizon branded mobile phones appearing on screen , there is a 30 @-@ second Verizon commercial viewable on one of the game 's interactive TVs , as well as an allusion to the company 's famous advertising line " Can you hear me now ? " during a phone conversation in " The Signal " DLC . Additionally , billboards around Bright Falls advertise both Energizer and Verizon . Ford and Lincoln automobiles are also featured in the game . 
 Several Microsoft related brands also appear in the game . Alan and Alice Wake 's car shows that it has the Microsoft @-@ powered Ford Sync in @-@ vehicle entertainment system . An Xbox 360 console can be seen in one section of the game , with the box of the fictional Night Springs video game next to it , which are collectibles in " The Writer " DLC episode . In multiple sections of the game , Microsoft Tag bar codes can be seen ; these can be scanned in real life by the user with the appropriate software on their mobile device . When scanned , these tags redirect players to a phone number with the voicemail from one of the game 's character , or to a Verizon @-@ sponsored web site where users gain access to exclusive Alan Wake extras for their console . This functionality is only available in the United States . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The game 's score is composed by Petri <unk> . The soundtrack features the song " War " by Poets of the Fall , from the band 's fourth studio album , Twilight Theater . Sam Lake said that the song " ... is a prominent part of the Alan Wake soundtrack and the theme also links strongly to the game 's storyline . " Poets of the Fall also perform two original songs , " Children of the Elder God " and " The Poet and the Muse " , under the name Old Gods of Asgard . The band wrote the ending theme to Remedy 's previous game , Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne , called " Late Goodbye " , which is based on a poem written by Lake . " War " , however , was not written specifically for Alan Wake . " Haunted " by Poe plays at the end of the second episode . " Space Oddity " by David Bowie plays over the end credits . <unk> Belle 's " How Can I Be Sure " is featured in the third episode . " Coconut " by Harry Nilsson is played several times during game . On 20 July 2010 an official soundtrack consisting of 18 tracks was released . 
 = = = = Episode ending songs = = = = 
 During production , " Lovely Head " by Goldfrapp , " Dear Darkness " by PJ Harvey and " Lilac Wine " by Jeff Buckley were also considered for episode 2 . For episode 3 , " Sea of Love " and " Don 't Go into That Barn " by Tom Waits , as well as The Verve 's " Sit and Wonder " and " Wake Up " by Arcade Fire were possible choices . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 = = = Bright Falls web series = = = 
 A promotional live @-@ action tie @-@ in web series / miniseries titled Bright Falls was made available a few weeks before the game 's release on the web and the Xbox Live service . The six episodes of Bright Falls were co @-@ written and directed by Phillip Van , and they serve as a prequel to the game , set in the eponymous town before Alan Wake arrives there . The main character in the series is Jake Fischer ( played by Christopher Forsyth ) , a newspaper reporter who visits the town on business . 
 A number of characters are shared between Bright Falls and Alan Wake , including diner waitress Rose , Dr. Emil Hartman , radio host Pat Maine and Alan Wake himself , who appears briefly in the final episode . The actors who play these characters also serve as voice actors and physical models for the characters in the game . 
 The web series begins as Jake Fischer arrives in Bright Falls to interview Dr. Hartman on his new book , an assignment from his publication agency . After a series of encounters with local townspeople , Jake soon finds himself the victim of long periods of lost time and black outs . He finds himself waking up in the middle of a forest and other locations where he had not been previously . He also develops an aversion towards lights and daytime . The longer he stays in Bright Falls , the more violent his behaviour becomes . When he realises this , he tries to duct @-@ tape himself to a refrigerator and recording videotape himself in his sleep to see what might be causing the behaviour . It is implied that he is being completely taken over by the Dark Presence , to the point of murdering several people . He then vanishes , just before the arrival of Alan and Alice Wake . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Alan Wake was first released exclusively for the Xbox 360 video game console . The game was scheduled to be released on 18 May 2010 in North America , and on 21 May in Europe . When the game went gold on 7 April 2010 , the European release date was moved up a week . Therefore , the game was released in Europe first , on 14 May 2010 , and then in North America on 18 May , as originally scheduled . On 23 November 2010 , Alan Wake was released on the Games on Demand service of Xbox Live . On 16 February 2012 , a version of the game for Microsoft Windows was released . 
 Alan Wake was also released in a limited collector 's edition , packaged in a case resembling a hardcover book . The collector 's edition contains the game , a book titled The Alan Wake Files , and an exclusive soundtrack CD . It also features a developer commentary , and lends access to virtual items for Xbox 360 , such as themes and Avatar clothes . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 During 2010 , two " special feature " episodes of Alan Wake were developed and released as downloadable content ( DLC ) on the Xbox Live service , which serve to bridge the gap between the game 's ending , and a possible sequel . 
 The first of the two , titled " The Signal " , was released on 27 July 2010 . David Houghton of Games Radar said it was one of the best segments of the game , but worried that it made the main game feel comparatively less impressive . 
 The second episode , " The Writer " , was released on 12 October 2010 . Erik Brudvig of IGN called it a must @-@ buy for anyone that already purchased " The Signal " , and said it satisfyingly closed out the game 's story . He did feel that both DLCs were pricey for the amount of content they provided . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 The limited collector 's edition of the game includes a 144 @-@ page book called The Alan Wake Files , which expands on the fiction of the game . A novelisation of Alan Wake was written by Rick Burroughs . An art / making of book , entitled Alan Wake : Illuminated is also available . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Alan Wake received positive reviews . Michael Plant from The Independent gave the game a score of 5 / 5 . He praised Alan Wake for its " flawless pacing " , which " ensures a compulsive experience " . The editing and plot were also received very positively , making the game " the kind of experience the current console generation was made for . " 
 The Daily Telegraph rated the game 9 / 10 with editor Nick Cowen being impressed by its " stunning " look , stating the town of Bright Falls and its surrounding environment to be " authentic " in terms of architecture , vegetation , weather and lighting . He described the atmosphere as being able to " ... turn on a dime from feeling safe and serene to one of choking menace and foreboding ... " . Combat mechanics and plot were also praised with the first making " the player feel constantly under threat . " and the latter being described as one of the game 's " strongest assets " . Criticism included the quality of the facial animation and the relatively short length of the game . 
 Dirk Lammers said the game kept " players on the edge of their seats " , giving a final score of 4 out of 4 in his review for the Associated Press . Matt <unk> from The New Zealand Herald rated the game 5 / 5 and praised the game 's " excellent pace " due to its episodic format . He also praised the " chilling " storyline , " brilliant environments " and concluded the game to be " one of the most innovative and entertaining titles so far this year . " William <unk> from the New York Post graded it B + , praising the game for its " scary atmosphere " , music , graphics and " surprising level of complexity " in combat , but commented negatively on the game 's animation and storyline . 
 Brian Crecente , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Kotaku , praised the general use of light as a gameplay @-@ mechanic . He commented on the episodic structure , saying it made the player feel satisfied even after short gameplay sessions . He also praised the overall storyline , having played the final episode thrice in a row , saying : " For the first time in my life , I have experienced something that plays like a game but has the impact of a movie ... Alan Wake is a powerful ride , an experience bound to leave you thinking about it and wanting more for days after its completion . " He criticised the game for not providing enough information about Wake and his wife , despite being " packed with memorable people " , but concluded that the game " redefines interactive storytelling " . 
 Tom McShea criticised the game for lacking " surprising , memorable gameplay moments " in his review for GameSpot , but hailed it for its " fresh " story @-@ telling , great original as well as licensed music , " subtle " lighting effects , which , along with the soundtrack , " create a disturbing atmosphere " , " satisfying " combat system and " clever " inclusion of collectibles , giving a final score of 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . 
 IGN 's Charles Onyett scored the game 9 / 10 , providing it with the " Editors ' Choice Award " . He described it as " hard to put down once you have started " , and appreciated the game for its episodic structure , " interesting " story @-@ telling mechanic , lighting effects , soundtrack and combat system , which he described as " fast and responsive " , but criticised the writing as " uneven " . The game received high marks for its " strong atmosphere " , " fun gameplay " , and " great visuals " , but lost some due to its " weak ending " . 
 Tom Orry from VideoGamer.com also awarded a score of 9 / 10 , praising the game for its " clever narrative " , " incredible atmosphere " and soundtrack which he described as " one of the best and most memorable I 've ever heard in a video game " . GameTrailers gave the game an 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . The review praised the game 's presentation for " selling you completely on its twisted nightmare " , and providing a " genuine sense of dread " . Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson awarded a score of 7 / 10 , stating that although she did not consider the game to be very original , she found it accessible and undemanding , with a " neat combat mechanic " . 
 Chris Kohler from Wired magazine was more critical and gave it 6 / 10 , saying " when presented with an infinite number of possible resolutions , any answer is going to feel arbitrary . Alan Wake starts strong but finishes weak . Neither the gameplay nor the story deliver on their potential by the time the credits roll " . Kohler , however , praised main character , certain gameplay decisions and " unique story " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Alan Wake has received a number of nominations and awards for its achievements in video gaming in 2010 . Editors of Time magazine rendered Alan Wake the best video game of 2010 . In its Best Xbox 360 Games of 2010 list , IGN awarded Alan Wake " Best Horror Game " , and also nominated it for " Best Story , " " Coolest Atmosphere , " " Most Innovative Gameplay , " and " Best Character " ( for the character of Alan Wake ) . The game was nominated in the " Best Xbox 360 Game " category at the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , and received three nominations at the 2nd Annual Inside Gaming Awards in the categories " Best Narrative , " " Best Sound Design " and " Most Compelling Character " ( for Alan Wake ) . Gamespot 's Best Games of 2010 Awards featured seven nominations for the game , including " Best Story " and " Best Writing / Dialogue , " and won the reader 's choice award for " Best Original IP . " IGN ranked it No. 61 in their " Top Modern Games " ranking . 
 The game 's soundtrack has won Best Score – European at the 2010 Annual Game Music Awards , with the panel stating " Breaking composer Petri <unk> 's expansive score for the critically acclaimed Alan Wake captured the hearts of gamers and stand @-@ alone listeners alike with its intimate orchestrations and psychological explorations . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 NPD Group stated sales for the first two weeks reached 145 @,@ 000 units . According to a report , Alan Wake is the second most illegally copied Xbox 360 game of 2010 , with more than 1 @.@ 1 million downloads . It includes an amusing feature where if " pirated " , the character wears an eye patch during the game . According to a report by <unk> , sales of Alan Wake would be much higher than previously estimated , at around 1 @.@ 4 million , as of December 2011 . This includes the digital sales of the game during the Xbox 360 2011 Holiday bundle , which included a token to download Alan Wake , as well as a retail copy of Forza Motorsport 3 . 
 On March 13 , 2012 Remedy Entertainment announced that the game has passed 2 million copies sold , including Xbox 360 and PC . On May 23 , 2013 Remedy creative director Sam Lake announced that the game and its standalone follow up had sold 3 million copies . On March 25 , 2015 Remedy 's CEO Matias <unk> tweeted that the franchise had sold over 4 @.@ 5 million units . The following month a Polygon story on the game 's prototype for a sequel mentioned that Alan Wake had sold more than 3 @.@ 2 million copies . 
 = = Microsoft Windows version = = 
 Despite the cancellation of the PC version at the same time as the Xbox 360 release as a result of Microsoft 's decision , Remedy 's Oskari Häkkinen stated that " PC gaming is part of Remedy 's heritage " and that the developers still wanted to release a PC version of the game . Remedy continued pressing Microsoft to allow the creation of a PC version , eventually gaining it in mid @-@ 2011 ; Häkkinen attributed Microsoft 's agreement partially to their repeated requests , but as well as Remedy 's good standing with Microsoft , and the time factor , having the PC version be available ahead of American Nightmare . Development of the PC version began in earnest , with a small team from Remedy working with Finnish independent developer Nitro Games . Instead of starting from the scrapped PC version , the team worked from the Xbox 360 code and added in new features to take advantage of more powerful elements on modern PC machines . Core to the PC version was to make sure that the game played well using typical keyboard and mouse controls in addition to a controller , and to assure the graphics exceeded the limitations of the Xbox 360 ; Matias <unk> , Remedy 's CEO , stated that these elements were important , as " If this is not tuned to perfection , all the visuals are lost and the emotional touchstones are missed " . The PC version was completed in about five months , and the game formally announced to the public in December 2011 . 
 The game , which includes the main game and both DLC chapters , was released on the Steam platform on 16 February 2012 . Within 48 hours , Remedy announced that revenue from sale of this version surpassed their development and marketing costs for the game . A retail PC version , distributed by Nordic Games , was released on 2 March 2012 , in both a regular edition and a Collector 's edition , containing a soundtrack disc , The Alan Wake Files , and other special content . The PC retail release for the United States was released on 24 April 2012 , being distributed by Legacy Interactive . 
 = = Sequel and new Alan Wake title = = 
 Developer Oskari Häkkinen has stated that there is a possibility for Alan Wake 2 , as the first title is only " Season 1 " and the DLC will " bridge the gap to what we 're working towards . " However Häkkinen added that the idea is currently in ' limbo ' while Microsoft is focusing on downloadable content for the first game . Writer Mikko <unk> adds the story is " bigger than one game " and the sequel would be " weird and wonderful " . 
 On 10 May 2011 , Remedy revealed they were working on a new Alan Wake game , after some information leaked out about the project before an official announcement . Remedy noted that it is not Alan Wake 2 and neither is it downloadable content . At the time , the company gave a Fall 2011 estimate for the release . In November 2011 it was announced that the new Alan Wake title will be available on the Xbox Live Arcade service , and will be revealed at the Spike Video Game Awards on 10 December 2011 . 
 The first screenshot of the new game appeared on Game Informer on 7 November 2011 . The screenshot shows Alan Wake in a different attire , with a flannel shirt and jeans , next to a road sign that says the town of Night Springs is 15 miles away . Night Springs is a fictional television show in Alan Wake , and is the setting of said show . On 10 November , a short teaser trailer was unveiled . During the days leading up to the publication of the first screenshot , Remedy employees made a number of comments on the official Alan Wake community forums about the new game . It was shared that the new title is " structured like a full release complete with a pretty damn impressive storyline that expands the originals in some interesting ways . " Although no specifics were revealed , Remedy responded to fans who were worried that being an Xbox Live Arcade game meant that the amount of content in the game would be too small . Remedy claimed that there will definitely be enough " value for money " for the players of the game , and that fans " will be blown away by the proportion of things pretty soon " . 
 In May 2013 , a new game by Remedy was announced at the Xbox One event called Quantum Break , before explaining the following day that a sequel to Alan Wake had been postponed . Despite their love of the property and initially beginning work on a sequel , Alan Wake was not financially successful enough to receive the funding they needed to continue developing the sequel at the time . 
 In April 2015 Polygon published an article describing the development process of Alan Wake 2 that started shortly after the first game released . Alan Wake 2 already had a working prototype and Remedy was prepared to pitch the game to Microsoft , however According to Sam Lake , Remedy 's founder , Microsoft wanted something else and development of the sequel has shifted to Quantum Break . Most of the ideas for Alan Wake 2 were implemented on American Nightmare . Like the game 's location , the Arizona Desert . 
 = Red @-@ backed fairywren = 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren ( Malurus melanocephalus ) is a species of passerine bird in the family Maluridae . It is endemic to Australia and can be found near rivers and coastal areas along the northern and eastern coastlines from the Kimberley in the northwest to the Hunter Region in New South Wales . The male adopts a striking breeding plumage , with a black head and upperparts and tail , and brightly coloured red back and brown wings . The female has brownish upperparts and paler underparts . The male in eclipse plumage and the juvenile resemble the female . Some males remain in non @-@ breeding plumage while breeding . Two subspecies are recognised ; the nominate form melanocephalus of eastern Australia has a longer tail and orange back , and the short @-@ tailed form cruentatus from northern Australia has a redder back . 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren mainly eats insects , and supplements its diet with seed and small fruit . The preferred habitat is heathland and savannah , particularly where low shrubs and tall grasses provide cover . It can be nomadic in areas where there are frequent bushfires , although pairs or small groups of birds maintain and defend territories year @-@ round in other parts of its range . Groups consist of a socially monogamous pair with one or more helper birds who assist in raising the young . These helpers are progeny that have attained sexual maturity yet remain with the family group for one or more years after fledging . The red @-@ backed fairywren is sexually promiscuous , and each partner may mate with other individuals and even assist in raising the young from such pairings . Older males in breeding plumage are more likely to engage in this behaviour than are those breeding in eclipse plumage . As part of a courtship display , the male wren plucks red petals from flowers and displays them to females . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren was first collected from the vicinity of Port Stephens in New South Wales and described by ornithologist John Latham in 1801 as the black @-@ headed flycatcher ( Muscicapa melanocephala ) ; its specific epithet derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> ' black ' and <unk> ' head ' . However , the specimen used by Latham was a male in partial moult , with mixed black and brown plumage and an orange back , and he named it for its black head . A male in full adult plumage was described as Sylvia dorsalis , and the explorers Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield gave a third specimen from central Queensland the name Malurus brownii , honouring botanist Robert Brown . John Gould described Malurus cruentatus in 1840 from a short @-@ tailed scarlet @-@ backed specimen collected in Northwestern Australia by Benjamin Bynoe aboard the HMS Beagle on its third voyage . The first three names were synonymised into Malurus melanocephalus by Gould who maintained his form as a separate species . An intermediate form from north Queensland was described as pyrrhonotus . Ornithologist Tom Iredale proposed the common name " elfin @-@ wren " in 1939 , however this was not taken up . 
 Like other fairywrens , the red @-@ backed fairywren is unrelated to the true wren ( family Troglodytidae ) . It was previously classified as a member of the old world flycatcher family Muscicapidae and later as a member of the warbler family Sylviidae before being placed in the newly recognised fairywren family Maluridae in 1975 . More recently , DNA analysis has shown that the Maluridae family is related to the Meliphagidae ( honeyeaters ) , and the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes , scrubwrens , thornbills , gerygones and allies ) in the large superfamily Meliphagoidea . 
 Within the Maluridae , it is one of 12 species in its genus , Malurus . It is most closely related to the Australian white @-@ winged fairywren , with which it makes up a phylogenetic clade , with the white @-@ shouldered fairywren of New Guinea as the next closest relative . Termed the bicoloured wrens by ornithologist Richard Schodde , these three species are notable for their lack of head patterns and ear tufts , and one @-@ coloured black or blue plumage with contrasting shoulder or wing colour ; they replace each other geographically across northern Australia and New Guinea . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 George Mack , ornithologist of the National Museum of Victoria , was the first to classify the three forms melanocephalus , cruentatus and pyrrhonotus as one species , although Richard Schodde reclassified pyrrhonotus as a hybrid from a broad hybrid zone in North Queensland ; this area is bounded by the Burdekin , Endeavour and Norman Rivers . Breeding males of intermediate plumage , larger and scarlet @-@ backed , or smaller and orange @-@ backed , as well as forms that resemble one of the two parent subspecies , are all encountered within it . A molecular study published in 2008 focussing on the Cape York population found it was genetically closer to the eastern forest subspecies than to the Top End form . These birds became segregated around 0 @.@ 27 million years ago , with some gene flow still with eastern birds . 
 Two subspecies are recognised : 
 M. m. melanocephalus , the nominate subspecies , has an orange back and longer tail and is found from northern coastal New South Wales through to North Queensland . This form has been previously called the orange @-@ backed fairywren . 
 M. m. cruentatus occurs across Northern Australia from the Kimberleys to northern Queensland . It is smaller than the nominate subspecies , with males averaging 7 @.@ 1 g ( 0 @.@ 25 oz ) and females 6 @.@ 6 g ( 0 @.@ 23 oz ) in weight . Males in breeding plumage on Melville Island have a deeper crimson colour to their back . <unk> ' bloodstained ' is derived from the Latin verb <unk> ' to stain with blood ' . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 Ornithologist Richard Schodde has proposed the ancestors of the two subspecies were separated during the last glacial period in the Pleistocene around 12 @,@ 000 years ago . <unk> had pushed the grasslands preferred by the wren to the north , and with subsequent wetter warmer conditions it once again spread southwards and met the eastern form in northern Queensland and intermediate forms arose . The distribution of the three bi @-@ coloured fairywren species indicates their ancestors lived across New Guinea and northern Australia in a period when sea levels were lower and the two regions were joined by a land bridge . Populations became separated as sea levels rose , and New Guinea birds evolved into the white @-@ shouldered fairywren , and Australian forms into the red @-@ backed fairywren and the arid @-@ adapted white @-@ winged fairywren . 
 = = Description = = 
 The smallest member of the genus Malurus , the red @-@ backed fairywren measures 11 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 1 ⁄ 2 in ) and weighs between 5 – 10 g ( 0 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 35 oz ) , averaging around 8 g ( 0 @.@ 28 oz ) . The 6 cm ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 in ) long tail is black in the breeding male , and brown in eclipse males , females and juvenile birds . Averaging 8 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) , the bill is relatively long , narrow and pointed and wider at the base . Wider than it is deep , the bill is similar in shape to those of other birds that feed by probing for or picking insects off their environs . 
 Like other fairywrens , the red @-@ backed fairywren is notable for its marked sexual dimorphism ; the male adopts full breeding plumage by the fourth year , later than all other fairywrens apart from its relative the white @-@ winged fairywren . The male in breeding plumage has a black head and body with striking red back and brown wings . At other times it has a brown upper body and white underparts . Some , mainly younger , males do remain in eclipse plumage while breeding . The female looks remarkably similar with a buff brown body and a yellowish spot under the eye . The female of this species differs from those of other fairy wren species in that it lacks a blue tint in the tail . Geographically , it follows Gloger 's rule ; female birds have whiter bellies and paler brown upperparts inland in sunnier climates . Juveniles of both sexes look very similar to females . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The typical song used by the red @-@ backed fairywren to advertise its territory is similar to that of other fairy wrens , namely a reel made up of an introductory note followed by repeated short segments of song , starting weak and soft and ending high and shrill with several syllables . The call is mostly made by the male during mating season . Birds will communicate with one another while foraging with a soft <unk> , barely audible further than 10 – 15 m ( 33 – 49 ft ) away . The alarm call is a high @-@ pitched zit . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren is endemic to Australia and can be seen along rivers and the coast from Cape <unk> in northern Western Australia through the Kimberleys , Arnhem Land and the Gulf Country and into Cape York , with the Selwyn Range and upper reaches of the Flinders River as a southern limit . It is also found on the nearby offshore islands Groote Eylandt , Sir Edmund Pellew , Fraser , Melville and Bathurst Islands . It then occurs all the way down the east coast east of the Great Dividing Range to the Hunter River in New South Wales , preferring wet , grassy tropical or sub @-@ tropical areas , with tall grasses such as <unk> ( Imperata cylindrica ) , species of Sorghum , and Eulalia . It is not a true migrant , although it may be locally nomadic due to the changes in vegetation , and may leave its territory after the breeding season . The species will retreat to fire @-@ resistant cover at times of fire . 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren avoids arid habitats , and is replaced to the south of its range by the white @-@ winged fairywren . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The red @-@ backed fairywren is diurnal , and becomes active at dawn and again , in bursts , throughout the day . When not foraging , birds often shelter together . They roost side @-@ by @-@ side in dense cover as well and engage in mutual preening . The usual form of locomotion is hopping , with both feet leaving the ground and landing simultaneously . However , a bird may run when performing the rodent @-@ run display . Its balance is assisted by a relatively long tail , which is usually held upright and is rarely still . The short , rounded wings provide good initial lift and are useful for short flights , though not for extended jaunts . Birds generally fly in a series of undulations for a maximum of 20 or 30 m ( 66 or 98 ft ) 
 In dry tall grasslands in monsoonal areas , the change in vegetation may be so great due to either fires or wet season growth that birds may be more nomadic and change territories more than other fairywrens . They form more stable territories elsewhere , such as in coastal areas . Cooperative breeding is less common with this species than with other fairywrens ; helper birds have been sporadically reported , but the red @-@ backed fairywren has been little studied . 
 Both the male and female adult red @-@ backed fairywren may utilise the rodent @-@ run display to distract predators from nests with young birds . The head , neck and tail are lowered , the wings are held out and the feathers are fluffed as the bird runs rapidly and voices a continuous alarm call . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Like other fairywrens , the red @-@ backed fairywren is predominantly insectivorous ; they eat a wide variety of insects , including beetles such as weevils , leaf- , <unk> , <unk> and ground @-@ beetles , bugs , grasshoppers , moths , wasps and cicadas . Insect larvae and eggs are eaten as well as spiders . Seeds and other plant material make up only a very small proportion of its diet . It can be found hunting for insects in leaf litter , shrubbery and on the edges of bodies of water , mostly in the morning and late afternoon . Adults of both sexes as well as helper birds feed the young . 
 = = = Courtship and breeding = = = 
 During the mating season , the male moults its brown feathers and displays a fiery red plumage . It may fluff its red back and shoulder feathers out so they cover part of the wings in a puffball @-@ display . It will fly about and confront another male to repel it , or to assert dominance over a female . It also picks red petals and sometimes red seeds and presents them to other birds . 90 % of the time , the male presents to a female in what appears to be a courtship ritual . The other 10 % of the time , it presents to another male in an act of apparent aggression . 
 Over half the red @-@ backed fairywrens in an area can be found in pairs during the mating season . This is apparently a defence against the resource @-@ limited nature of the environment . It is more difficult to maintain a larger interdependent group during dry spells , so the birds try to stay in pairs or smaller groups , which include adults that help parents look after young . Paternity tests have shown that an older male with bright plumage has much more success in the mating season and can mate with more than one female . Accordingly , it has higher sperm storage and makes more mating overtures towards females . A male with browner and less bright plumage or a younger male with bright plumage has a much lower success rate than a bright , older male for mating . Further , an unpaired male serves as a helper to a mated pair in feeding and care of young . When the male pairs his bill darkens , and this happens within three weeks . This is much easier to control than plumage , as moulting takes time and is controlled by seasonality . The bill is vascular and much easier to change in response to the pairings . 
 The mating season lasts from August to February , and coincides with the arrival of the rainy season in northern Australia . The female does the bulk of the nest building , although the male does assist ; this is unusual for the genus Malurus . Concealed in grass tussocks or low shrubs , the spherical nest is constructed of dried grasses and usually lined with smaller , finer grasses and hair . Nests examined in southeast Queensland tended to be larger and <unk> than those in northern Australia ; the former measured 12 – 15 cm high by 9 – 12 cm wide and bore a partly covered 3 – 6 cm diameter entrance , whereas the latter average around 10 – 13 cm in height by 6 – 8 cm wide with a 2 – 4 cm entrance . Construction takes around one week , and there may be an interval of up to another seven days before eggs are laid . The eggs produced are white with reddish @-@ brown spots in clutches of three to four , and measure 14 @.@ 5 – 17 x 10 – 13 mm ; those of subspecies melanocephalus are a little larger than those of cruentatus . The eggs are incubated for two weeks by the female alone . The nestlings are hidden under cover for one week after hatching . The juveniles depend on parents and helpers for approximately one month . They learn to fly between 11 – 12 days after hatching . Broods hatched earlier in the season will help to raise the broods hatched later on . They will stay as a clutch group for the season after hatching . 
 = = Predators and threats = = 
 Adults and their young may be preyed upon by mammals such as the feral cat ( Felis catus ) and red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) , as well as rodent species , and native predatory birds , such as the Australian magpie ( Gymnorhina tibicen ) , butcherbird species ( Cracticus spp . ) , blue @-@ winged kookaburra ( Dacelo <unk> ) , crows and ravens ( Corvus spp . ) , and shrike @-@ thrushes ( Colluricincla spp . ) , and reptiles such as goannas ( Varanus spp . ) . 
 = Mikea people = 
 The Mikea are a group of Malagasy @-@ speaking horticulturalists and foragers who are often described as the hunter @-@ gatherers of Madagascar . They inhabit the Mikea Forest , a patch of mixed spiny forest and dry deciduous forest along the coast of southwestern Madagascar . The Mikea are predominantly of Sakalava origin , although the term describes a lifestyle rather than an ethnic group per se , and individuals from a variety of Malagasy ethnic groups are found among the Mikea . The family encampments of the Mikea shift from prime corn planting territory at the edge of the forest in the rainy season to the interior forest rich with tenrecs and other game in the dry season , when the community becomes highly dependent on spongy tubers to meet their daily demand for water . Their lifestyle is interdependent with that of their neighboring Vezo fishermen and the Masikoro farmers and herders , with whom they trade products caught , foraged or cultivated in the forest . Many Mikea also occasionally engage in paid work such as guarding the zebu herds or tending the corn fields of others . 
 The present @-@ day Mikea are not a remnant of an ancient Malagasy hunter @-@ gatherer society , but are instead descendants of individuals who took refuge in the forest beginning in the 1800s to escape military conflict , heavy taxation and other oppressive factors . Their way of life is perceived by villagers and city dwellers alike as ancestral , contributing to a mystique about them that has inspired various myths and legends . They are commonly believed to be the mythical Vazimba , the original inhabitants of the island , although there is no evidence to support this view . While some 1 @,@ 500 individuals are known to identify as Mikea , many Malagasy disbelieve that the community continues to exist in the present day . 
 = = Ethnic identity = = 
 The Mikea are hunter @-@ gatherers ( also called foragers ) who practice limited farming . The Mikea label is applied to those who live this subsistence lifestyle rather than being tied to a specific ethnicity . There are numerous groups termed Mikea along the west and southwest coast of Madagascar , with the majority living in and around the spiny Mikea Forest on the southwestern coast between Morombe and Toliara , an area extending 2500 square kilometers . Historically this main concentration of Mikea may have extended as far south as the Fiherenana River and as far north as the Mangoky River ; another main cluster of Mikea live to the west and southwest of Lake <unk> . They are typically considered a subset of the Sakalava ethnic group , although there are Mikea individuals who trace their origins to other ethnic groups . Their adherence to a way of life perceived by villagers and city dwellers as ancestral has contributed to a mystique and various myths and legends about them , and many Malagasy believe they are the descendents of Vazimba , the original inhabitants of the island , although there is no evidence to support this view . The majority of Malagasy believe the existence of the Mikea to be a myth and are unaware that any Malagasy continue to live the Mikea lifestyle to the present day . The term Mikea is principally used by outsiders to label this group and is not often used by members of this community themselves . Most Mikea prefer to call themselves either Vezo @-@ Mikea or Masikoro @-@ Mikea , depending on their specific family lineages . 
 = = History = = 
 The Mikea are not remnants of an early hunter @-@ gatherer society . Although researchers remain uncertain when the Mikea first adopted a forest @-@ dwelling , hunter @-@ gatherer lifestyle , they have determined that the Mikea were only recently established as a community . The current Mikea population is believed to be descended largely from Masikoro villagers who fled into the forest to escape advancing Merina and Sakalava armies in the 18th and 19th centuries . Colonial French documents dating to 1901 describe hunter gatherers by the name of Mikea living in the southwest of the island . The population is believed to have swelled during the 1947 uprising against French colonial rule , when many Malagasy families left towns and villages to hide in forests across the country . Oil exploration in the 1950s and 1960s entailed cutting paths through the formerly untouched forests of the southwest , which further contributed to the migration of villagers into the forest to adopt the Mikea lifestyle . 
 = = Society = = 
 Mikea are subject to national laws like all Malagasy citizens but in practice national laws , government and social services do not reach this population while dwelling in the forest . Within Mikea forest encampments an egalitarian form of self @-@ government predominates , with the eldest male family member having the main decision @-@ making authority for the group . This is in contrast to certain ethnic groups , such as the Merina , who had a complex form of social organization that overlaid a caste system with specific social roles assigned to particular family groups . In 1991 , an estimated 1 @,@ 500 Malagasy were living the Mikea lifestyle , primarily around the Mikea Forest , an area that receives limited rainfall . This number was estimated at several hundred in the 1950s , suggesting a growth in population . The true number of people living from forest scavenging is difficult to estimate with accuracy , as the label " Mikea " is very flexible , and the degree of reliance on scavenging as opposed to seasonal farming can vary significantly at any given time depending on economic and environmental conditions . The Mikea are subject to social stigma linked to their image as primitive or uncivilized people . 
 Housing and social organization among the Mikea can vary from one individual or community to the next . Some Mikea remain in the forest their entire lives , while others live part of their lives in villages or towns . While living in the forest , groups of Mikea typically move seasonally between encampments nearest to critical resources . In the rainy season , they often live in groups of 30 @-@ 50 people near tracts of virgin forest in proximity to their newly cleared and planted corn fields . The houses in this settlement are square with peaked roofs , as elsewhere in Madagascar , and are typically made of thatch and bark on a wooden pole frame . These houses are loosely clustered with generous space between each lodging . The rainy season encampment serves for three to five years as a base for forest foraging before resource depletion requires a move to a new location . Those working the corn fields may live in simple grass shelters alongside their crops until April or May , when they return to the bark houses . During the dry season from May to October , the encampment splits into smaller groups that relocate deeper into the forest to settle near babo tuber patches , with dwellings limited to brush shelters and thatch sunshades , and some individuals not living in shelters at all . In both types of settlements furniture is nearly non @-@ existent and Mikea typically sleep in the sand or pits dug at the base of giant termite mounds . 
 The Mikea struggle to ensure the quality of life they seek . While the forest has long provided for their basic needs , deforestation and population growth are straining resources . In addition , Mikea are increasingly seeking to obtain better quality material goods for themselves , such as clothing , which necessitates greater engagement with the external economy through trade and wage labor to earn local currency . Lack of access to social services such as education and health clinics are also taking their toll : with only one health clinic in the Mikea Forest area and low access to water for bathing , rates of diseases such as tuberculosis , leprosy and skin disease are disproportionately prevalent . 
 = = = Family affiliation = = = 
 Mikea tend to trace their lineage back to specific villages within one or more of three main lineages , associated respectively with the northern , southern and central parts of the Mikea Forest . Most also have relatives living in Vezo and / or Masikoro villages in the region . Many Mikea families have established <unk> ( a " joking relationship " , commonly found in southern and eastern Africa ) with the <unk> <unk> clan of the Masikoro , which indicates a degree of familial closeness with this <unk> . 
 Mikea encampments are typically family groups . These consist of an elder couple , their married sons and daughters @-@ in @-@ law , the grandchildren of these marriages , and the elder couple 's own unmarried children of any age . Adult daughters typically move to join their husband 's family encampment upon marriage , but married couples often share their time between the husband 's or wife 's parents ' encampments . Family unions are formed through a <unk> ceremony in which the man is presented to his intended bride 's family , and the acceptance of her parents <unk> the union . Children of the marriage are legitimized by the husband 's bestowal of presents to his wife 's parents . The relationship between the wife 's brother ( <unk> , " male mother " ) and her children can be very strong in Mikea marriages , and the <unk> will commonly adopt children that his sister 's husband does not legitimize . Both the husband and the wife have the right to divorce at any time and remarry . Polygamy is also practiced . 
 = = = Religious affiliation = = = 
 Like other Malagasy , the Mikea spiritual belief system revolves around respect for ancestors . They also share the common Malagasy belief in a creator god , termed <unk> . Many Mikea believe in various types of forest spirits ( koko ) , which are associated with certain natural spots in the forest deemed sacred ; these sites serve as the focus of various ceremonies , in which rum has spiritual and symbolic significance . The greatest of the nature spirits is <unk> , the lord of the forest . The extended family group , which spreads through multiple encampments , is united around a central priest figure , the <unk> <unk> , who officiates over major family ceremonies dedicated to the ancestors . In addition , within each encampment is at least one ombiasy ( <unk> ) who interprets the will of the ancestors and spirits , and plays important roles in such ceremonies as marriage , circumcision , blessings , ancestral rituals , funerals , and tromba and bilo spirit possession ceremonies . Some also practice sikidy and other forms of divination , and provide spiritual advice on the best days or places to hunt , plant , shift camp , and other such events of daily life . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Mikea are culturally and linguistically nearly identical to the neighboring Vezo fishing clan and Masikoro herding and farming clan of the Sakalava ; only the traditional source of livelihood distinguishes the three groups . The popular association of the Mikea with the ancestral Vazimba clan has contributed to widespread belief that the Mikea possess Vazimba attributes , such as being small in stature , unclothed , shy and avoidant of contact with outsiders , and living in perfect harmony with the natural environment . None of these are borne out by evidence . 
 The Mikea are known to make masks – a rarity in Madagascar – using human teeth and hair . 
 = = = Dance and music = = = 
 Music is a significant part of Mikea social and spiritual life . Specific songs are associated with a wide range of life events and ceremonies , including <unk> ( funerals ) , bilo ( magical healing rituals ) , tromba ( spirit possession ) , <unk> ( martial arts matches ) , <unk> ( circumcision ceremonies ) and more . Most music is vocal - often making use of whistling , shouts and other vocal effects in addition to singing - with percussion accompaniment ranging from handclapping to djembe or <unk> drums . Conch shells and the jejy lava ( stringed instrument with a gourd resonator , played with a bow ) are also performed ; both of these ancient instruments are increasingly rare in Madagascar and among the Mikea the latter is performed by men for one another . Rarer and more costly instruments like the marovany wooden box zither and the valiha bamboo tube zither are used for certain sacred rituals that invoke the ancestors . The marovany or valiha player is typically paid a <unk> monetary tribute to perform the ceremonial music . Many songs are accompanied by specific dances and rituals that continue to be practiced among the Mikea in daily life . 
 = = Language = = 
 The Mikea speak a dialect of the Malagasy language , which is a branch of the Malayo @-@ Polynesian language group derived from the Barito languages , spoken in southern Borneo . Their dialect is close to that spoken by the Vezo fishing clan and Masikoro herding clan of the Sakalava people . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The arid conditions of the spiny forest , which receives less than 600 millimeters of rainfall each year , largely shape Mikea economic activities . Nearly everything they consume is scavenged from the forest , and the average Mikea needs two hours or less to collect adequate food for the day . Their main source of food is tubers , particularly during the dry season when few other foods may be reliably available . Adults and children of both genders work to dig up using a metal @-@ tipped digging stick ( <unk> ) and a digging bowl ( <unk> ) . The starchy <unk> tuber is roasted or boiled before eating , while the Mikea eat the watery babo ( or <unk> ) raw for hydration or use its water for boiling other foods ; the <unk> tuber is dried and ground to make a flour that is sold at village markets . They also gather forest fruits , melons and honey , with the latter a particularly important source of income for the Mikea during the rainy season . To obtain water during the rainy season the Mikea capture rain run @-@ off from the rooftops of their houses using hollowed @-@ out logs or transport water on foot or zebu @-@ drawn wagon from the villages , while during the cool dry season the Mikea consume their store of water @-@ engorged babo tubers and drink water from natural or man @-@ made wells when possible . 
 Key protein sources include birds and tenrecs . Mikea adults and children of both sexes use clubs to kill the small tenrec ( <unk> , 0 @.@ 4 kilograms ) , which is widespread year round , and the larger one ( <unk> , 2 @-@ 3 kilograms ) , which is mainly caught during the rainy season . To a lesser extent they also hunt or trap two to three species of lemur , feral cats , occasional wild boars , turtles and rodents using blowguns , spears and dogs , and use a hook and line to catch fish in saline inland lakes . Some Mikea raise animals for food or sale at market , including goats , chickens and guinea fowl ; tree nuts also provide additional protein . 
 The principal crop of the Mikea is corn , which was introduced to Madagascar in the 1890s . They also occasionally grow manioc . The dry season is used to cut new corn fields , which are burned in October ( swidden agriculture , locally termed <unk> ) and planted in November and December as the rains begin to fall . This corn is harvested three months later and consumed during the wet season ; surplus is dried and sold , with some saved for the following year 's planting and consumption . The traders who gather the maize from the Mikea process it for international export at a significant profit . 
 The Mikea live in a symbiotic relationship with the neighboring Masikoro farmers and herders , and the Vezo fishing clan . The Mikea live primarily on food scavenged from the forest but also grow seasonal crops . Their mobility and reliance on scavenging as opposed to crop growing shifts in response to changes in environmental and economic pressures on availability of resources within the Mikea community as well as those of their Vezo and Masikoro neighbors . The Mikea sell their forest products , as well as woven mats and food animals they raise , at weekly Vezo and Masikoro markets in nearby villages to obtain the necessities they cannot scavenge , such as clothing and medicine . Some Mikea migrate for periods of time to work in local villages or the town of Morombe . They are also hired to work for Vezo and Masikoro villagers , such as by cutting forest for villagers or other <unk> ' corn fields , or guarding villagers ' zebu herds . They occasionally acquire one or more zebu in addition to or in lieu of payment , as these are seen as a form of wealth and are mainly sacrificed in ancestral ceremonies rather than eaten as food . The rainy season is the time when Mikea are most likely to leave their scavenging encampments for wage labor opportunities in villages or for the corn harvest . This is also the time when Masikoro and Vezo villagers are most likely to move into the forest to grow corn . 
 = Al Jean = 
 Alfred Ernest " Al " Jean III ( born January 9 , 1961 ) is an American screenwriter and producer . Jean is well known for his work on The Simpsons . He was born and raised in Detroit , Michigan and graduated from Harvard University in 1981 . Jean began his writing career in the 1980s with fellow Harvard alum Mike Reiss . Together , they worked as writers and producers on television shows such as The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , ALF and It 's Garry Shandling 's Show . 
 Jean was offered a job as a writer on the animated sitcom The Simpsons in 1989 , alongside Reiss , and together they became the first members of the original writing staff of the show . They served as show runners during the show 's third ( 1991 ) and fourth ( 1992 ) seasons , though they left The Simpsons after season four to create The Critic , an animated show about film critic Jay Sherman . It was first broadcast on ABC in January 1994 ( then aired its second season on Fox in March 1995 ) and was well received by critics , but did not catch on with viewers and only lasted for two seasons . 
 In 1994 , Jean and Reiss signed a three @-@ year deal with The Walt Disney Company to produce other television shows for ABC and the duo created and executive produced Teen Angel , which was canceled in its first season . Jean returned full @-@ time to The Simpsons during the tenth season ( 1998 ) . He became show runner again with the start of the thirteenth season in 2001 , without Reiss , and has held that position since . Jean was also one of the writers and producers who worked on The Simpsons Movie , a feature @-@ length film based on the series , released in 2007 . 
 = = Personal life and education = = 
 Al Jean was born Alfred Ernest Jean III on January 9 , 1961 . He was born and raised in Farmington Hills , Michigan , graduated from Farmington Hills Harrison High School , and is of Irish ancestry . Jean arrived at Harvard University when he was sixteen years old and graduated in 1981 with a bachelor 's degree in mathematics . Daryl <unk> , one of Jean 's freshman roommates , said he was a " math whiz " when he arrived at Harvard but " soon blossomed and found his comedic feet . " In <unk> Hall at Harvard , Jean met fellow freshman Mike Reiss ; they befriended one another and collaborated their writing efforts for the humor publication Harvard Lampoon . Jeff Martin , another writer for the Lampoon , said " they definitely loomed large around the magazine . They were very funny guys and unusually polished comedy writers for that age . We were never surprised that they went on to success . " Jean has also stated that the duo spent most of their time at the Lampoon , adding that " it was practically my second dorm room . " He eventually became vice @-@ president of the publication . 
 Jean currently lives in Los Angeles , California with his wife , television writer Stephanie Gillis . The two were wed in <unk> , Ireland in 2002 . Jean also has two daughters . They were nineteen and five years old respectively in January 2010 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career and The Simpsons = = = 
 The humor magazine National Lampoon hired Jean and Reiss after they graduated in 1981 . During the 1980s , the duo began collaborating on various television material . During this period they worked as writers and producers on television shows such as The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , ALF , Sledge Hammer ! and It 's Garry Shandling 's Show . In 1989 , Jean was offered a job as a writer on the animated sitcom The Simpsons , a show created by Matt Groening , James L. Brooks , and Sam Simon that continues to air today . Many of Jean 's friends were not interested in working on The Simpsons because it was a cartoon and they did not think it would last long . Jean , however , was a fan of the work of Groening , Brooks , and Simon , and therefore took the job together with Reiss . 
 The duo became the first members of the original writing staff of The Simpsons and worked on the thirteen episodes of the show 's first season ( 1989 ) . While watching the first episode of the show , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , premiering on television in December 1989 , Jean opined to himself that the series was the greatest project he had been involved with and desired to continue working on it for the rest of his professional career . What he enjoyed most about The Simpsons at the time was something he recognized from Brooks ' previous work : although the show was largely based on humor , it had depth and warmth . 
 Although Jean has been credited as the sole writer of several episodes of the show , he considers the process to be mainly collaborative : " the principal writer [ of an episode ] has , at most , written 40 % of the script . It 's a real team effort . " The person who is credited as the writer in the episode 's opening credits is the person that came up with the idea for the episode and wrote the first draft , even if he or she only contributed to a small part of the final script . Jean has stated that Lisa Simpson is one of his favorite characters to write for . She is the character he relates to the most because of their similar childhoods and the fact that he has a daughter . 
 Jean became show runner of The Simpsons at the start of the third season ( 1991 ) together with Reiss . A show runner has the ultimate responsibility of all the processes that an episode goes through before completion , including the writing , the animation , the voice acting , and the music . When Jean began his tenure as show runner , the only thing he thought to himself every day was " Don 't blow it and screw up this thing everyone loves . " The first episode Jean and Reiss ran was " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " ( aired September 19 , 1991 ) , and they felt a lot of pressure on them to make it good . They were so pressured that they did six to seven rewrites of the script in order to improve its humor . Jean said he " kept thinking ' It 's not good enough . It 's not good enough . ' " Reiss added that " we were definitely scared . We had never run anything before , and they dumped us on this . " 
 Jean and Reiss served as show runners until the end of the fourth season in 1993 . Since the show had already established itself in the first two seasons , they were able to give it more depth during their tenure . Jean believes this is one of the reasons that many fans and critics regard season three and four as the best seasons of The Simpsons . Bill Oakley , another writer on The Simpsons , has commented that " Mike and Al are responsible for the best thing that ever appeared on television , which was the third season of The Simpsons . " Comedy writer Jay Kogen has said that " those years with Al Jean and Mike Reiss running it were pretty darn good . And then the ones after that maybe not so much . Some people ran it better than others . " 
 = = = The Critic and Disney = = = 
 Jean and Reiss left The Simpsons after its fourth season in order to create The Critic , an animated show about film critic Jay Sherman ( voiced by Jon Lovitz ) ; the show was executive produced by Brooks . It was first broadcast on ABC in January 1994 and was well received by critics , but did not catch on with viewers and was put on hiatus after six weeks . It returned in June 1994 and completed airing its initial production run . The Critic was moved to the Fox network for its second season . Since The Simpsons also aired on that network , Brooks was able to create a crossover between it and The Critic . 
 This crossover occurred through the Simpsons episode " A Star Is Burns " ( 1995 ) . Groening was not fond of the crossover , publicly citing it as a thirty @-@ minute advertisement for The Critic . Brooks said , " for years , Al and Mike were two guys who worked their hearts out on this show , staying up until 4 in the morning to get it right . The point is , Matt 's name has been on Mike 's and Al 's scripts and he has taken plenty of credit for a lot of their great work . In fact , he is the direct beneficiary of their work . The Critic is their shot and he should be giving them his support . " Reiss stated that he was a " little upset " by Groening 's actions and that " this taints everything at the last minute . [ ... ] This episode doesn 't say ' Watch The Critic ' all over it . " Jean added " What bothers me about all of this , is that now people may get the impression that this Simpsons episode is less than good . It stands on its own even if The Critic never existed . " On Fox , The Critic was again short @-@ lived , broadcasting ten episodes before its cancellation . A total of only 23 episodes were produced , and it returned briefly in 2000 with a series of ten Internet broadcast webisodes . The series has since developed a cult following thanks to reruns on Comedy Central and its complete series release on DVD . 
 In 1994 , Jean and Reiss signed a three @-@ year deal with The Walt Disney Company to produce other television shows for ABC . The duo created and executive produced Teen Angel , which was canceled in its first season . Reiss said " It was so compromised and overworked . I had 11 executives full @-@ time telling me how to do my job . " The pair periodically returned to work on The Simpsons — for example , while under contract at Disney they were allowed to write and produce four episodes of the show , including season eight 's " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " ( 1997 ) . 
 = = = Further work on The Simpsons = = = 
 Jean returned full @-@ time to The Simpsons during the tenth season ( 1998 ) . He once again became show runner with the start of the thirteenth season in 2001 , this time without Reiss . Jean called it " a great job with a lot of responsibility , " and cited " the fact that people love it so much " as " great . " He adds , however , that " the hardest thing at this point is just thinking of fresh ideas . People are so on top of things that we 've done before , so the challenge now is to think of an idea that 's good , but hasn 't been seen . " Jean 's return was initially welcomed , with MSNBC 's Jon Bonné stating : " Jean , who took the show 's helm from executive producer Mike Scully in 2001 , has guided the show away from its gag @-@ heavy , Homer @-@ centric incarnation ... these are certainly brighter days for the show 's long @-@ time fans . " However , some critics have argued that the quality of the show has declined in recent years during Jean 's tenure . Jean has responded to this criticism by saying : " Well , it 's possible that we 've declined . But honestly , I 've been here the whole time and I do remember in season two people saying , ' It 's gone downhill . ' If we 'd listened to that then we would have stopped after episode 13 . I 'm glad we didn 't . " 
 Jean was one of the writers and producers who worked on The Simpsons Movie , a feature @-@ length film that was released in 2007 . The show 's voice cast was signed on to do the film in 2001 , and work then began on the script . The producers of The Simpsons were initially worried that creating a film would have a negative effect on the show , as they did not have enough crew to focus their attention on both projects . As the show progressed , additional writers and animators were hired so that both the show and the film could be produced at the same time . Groening and Brooks were therefore able to invite Jean ( who continued to work as show runner on the television show ) to produce the film with them . 
 Jean frequently appears on the Simpsons DVD audio commentaries for episodes which he has collaborated on . He told IGN that he enjoys doing them because he has not seen some of the episodes in ten to fifteen years , and " it 's kind of like a reunion to see some of the people that I worked with before , so it 's a really pleasant experience . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Jean has received eight Emmy Awards and a Peabody Award for his work on The Simpsons . In 1997 , he and Reiss won an Annie Award in the " Best Producing in a TV Production " category for the Simpsons episode " The Springfield Files " . In 1991 they shared the Writing A Comedy Series <unk> Award for the It 's Garry Shandling 's Show Episode " My Mother The Wife " . In 2006 , the duo was given the Animation Writers Caucus Animation Award which is given by the Writers Guild of America to writers that " advanced the literature of animation in film and / or television through the years and who has made outstanding contributions to the profession of the animation writer . " 
 = Maryland Route 32 = 
 Maryland Route 32 ( MD 32 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The road runs 51 @.@ 79 miles ( 83 @.@ 35 km ) from Interstate 97 ( I @-@ 97 ) and MD 3 in Millersville west and north to Washington Road in Westminster . The east – west portion of MD 32 is the Patuxent Freeway , a four- to six @-@ lane freeway between I @-@ 97 and MD 108 in Clarksville . The freeway passes through Odenton and Fort Meade , the site of Fort George G. Meade and the National Security Agency ( NSA ) , in western Anne Arundel County and along the southern part of Columbia in Howard County . Via I @-@ 97 , MD 32 connects those communities with U.S. Route 50 and US 301 in Annapolis . The state highway also intersects the four primary highways connecting Baltimore and Washington : the Baltimore – Washington Parkway , US 1 , I @-@ 95 , and US 29 . MD 32 's north – south section , Sykesville Road , connects Clarksville and Westminster by way of Sykesville and Eldersburg in southern Carroll County . 
 MD 32 was constructed as the original state road from West Friendship north to Westminster and from Westminster west to Taneytown in the early 1910s . The state highway was extended northwest to the Pennsylvania state line near Emmitsburg in the late 1910s . The portion of MD 32 from Glenelg to US 1 in Savage was built as MD 106 in the 1920s and early 1930s . MD 32 was extended south from West Friendship and assumed all of MD 106 in the mid @-@ 1940s . In the mid @-@ 1950s , the section of MD 32 from Westminster west to Emmitsburg was renumbered as an extension of MD 97 . MD 32 would later be restored to its old route through Westminster and west toward Taneytown when MD 97 , which is now MD 140 west of Westminster , was relocated in the early 1960s . MD 32 was truncated to Westminster in the late 1970s and rolled back to its present northern terminus in 2001 . 
 Along its present course , MD 32 bypassed Sykesville and was relocated from Clarksville to Glenelg in the early 1960s . The state highway was also extended east from Savage to Fort Meade in the late 1960s . A disjoint segment of MD 32 was constructed on a new alignment from MD 175 in Odenton to MD 178 in Crownsville in the early 1970s . The Patuxent Freeway was built from Fort Meade to Columbia in the mid @-@ 1980s and from Fort Meade to Millersville in the late 1980s and early 1990s . The freeway was completed from Columbia to Clarksville in the mid @-@ 1990s and through Fort George G. Meade in 2005 . Future plans call for MD 32 to be upgraded to a freeway from Clarksville to West Friendship . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 32 is maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSHA ) for its entire length except for the section between Samford Road and Canine Road in Fort Meade , which is maintained by the U.S. government . The highway is a part of the main National Highway System from its eastern terminus in Millersville to I @-@ 70 and US 40 in West Friendship ; the highway is also a National Highway System principal arterial from the Howard – Carroll county line to MD 91 at Gamber . 
 = = = Millersville to Fort Meade = = = 
 MD 32 begins at a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 97 and MD 3 ( Robert Crain Highway ) in Millersville . MD 32 starts as a pair of two @-@ lane flyover ramps that split west from northbound I @-@ 97 and join southbound I @-@ 97 ; the MD 32 ramps head northwest while I @-@ 97 curves to the northeast and settles into the wide median of the northern end of MD 3 . After passing through its interchange with MD 3 , MD 32 heads northwest as the Patuxent Freeway , a four @-@ lane freeway that passes to the north of the community of Gambrills . The state highway 's first interchange is with Sappington Station Road , a spur from the westbound ramps of MD 32 that is unsigned MD 32AA . The eastbound ramps connect with county @-@ maintained Burns Crossing Road . MD 32 continues northwest along the northern edge of Odenton , where the freeway gradually curves to the southwest , has a diamond interchange with MD 170 ( Telegraph Road ) and a partial cloverleaf interchange with MD 175 ( Annapolis Road ) , and crosses over the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and MARC 's Penn Line between the interchanges . 
 MD 32 heads west from Odenton along the southern edge of Fort George G. Meade . The freeway has a dumbbell interchange with MD 198 ( Laurel Fort Meade Road ) just north of Tipton Airport . MD 32 curves northwest and has an interchange with Samford Road , which is one of two interchanges that provide access to the NSA . The median of MD 32 widens at the interchange as the eastbound ramps enter and exit on the left to a roundabout , from which Samford Road crosses the westbound lanes of MD 32 . Immediately to the north of a trumpet interchange with Canine Road , which provides access to the NSA , the National Vigilance Park , and the National <unk> Museum , the freeway has a cloverleaf interchange with the Baltimore – Washington Parkway . 
 = = = Fort Meade to Clarksville = = = 
 MD 32 traverses Dorsey Run into the industrial community of Annapolis Junction , where westbound MD 32 has an interchange with Guilford Road , which leads to National Business Parkway and the historic home Grassland . The state highway crosses over CSX 's Capital Subdivision into Howard County and immediately has a partial cloverleaf interchange with Dorsey Run Road . Dorsey Run Road , which is unsigned MD <unk> , provides access to the Savage station on MARC 's Camden Line and several industrial parks in Annapolis Junction . MD 32 continues northwest into Savage , where the highway has a cloverleaf interchange with US 1 ( Washington Boulevard ) that includes collector @-@ distributor lanes in both directions . North of Savage , the freeway has a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 95 that has a pair of left @-@ exiting ramps from westbound MD 32 to southbound I @-@ 95 and from eastbound MD 32 to northbound I @-@ 95 . 
 MD 32 continues west as a six @-@ lane freeway through the expansive new town of Columbia . The freeway passes south and north of the villages of King 's <unk> and Owen Brown , respectively , where the highway has a partial cloverleaf interchange with Broken Land Parkway and a four @-@ loop interchange with Eden Brook Drive and Shaker Drive . MD 32 crosses the Little Patuxent River between the two interchanges . Just south of Simpsonville , the state highway has a cloverleaf interchange with US 29 ( Columbia Pike ) , which provides access to Columbia Town Center . The freeway reduces to four lanes and crosses the Middle Patuxent River just east of its diamond interchange with <unk> Road and Cedar Lane . MD 32 continues along the southern edge of the village of River Hill , where the highway has a half @-@ interchange with Great Star Drive , which is unsigned MD <unk> , allowing access to and from the east . The state highway continues northwest to Clarksville , where the highway has a diamond interchange with MD 108 ( Clarksville Pike ) . 
 = = = Clarksville to Westminster = = = 
 West of its interchange with MD 108 , MD 32 's name changes to Sykesville Road and becomes a north @-@ south highway , which continues as a partially controlled @-@ access two @-@ lane highway through a mix of farmland and large @-@ plot residential subdivisions . The state highway is paralleled to the west by its old alignment , Ten Oaks Road . East of the community of Dayton , the state highway passes by MDSHA 's Dayton shops . In Glenelg , MD 32 passes under <unk> Road and expands to a two @-@ lane divided highway for its dumbbell interchange with Burnt Woods Road , which also provides access to the northern end of Ten Oaks Road and <unk> Road . The state highway becomes undivided again and veers northeast and north toward West Friendship . MD 32 crosses the Middle Patuxent River and Terrapin Branch before its intersection with MD 144 ( Frederick Road ) , where the highway expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway . The state highway has a diamond interchange with I @-@ 70 and US 40 ( Baltimore National Pike ) before reducing to a four @-@ lane undivided highway that continues north to MD 32 's intersection with MD 99 ( Old Frederick Road ) . 
 MD 32 continues north as a two @-@ lane road to Sykesville . Just south of the town , the state highway intersects West Friendship Road , the old alignment of MD 32 that is now unsigned MD 851 . MD 32 veers northeast and crosses the Patapsco River and CSX 's Old Main Line Subdivision into Carroll County ; immediately to the east of MD 32 's crossing is the highway 's old aluminum bridge . The state highway passes to the west of Springfield Hospital Center , whose original buildings are preserved as the Warfield Complex , Hubner , and T Buildings . MD 32 temporarily expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway at its intersection with Springfield Avenue , which is the northern end of MD 851 , and continues north into the suburban community of Eldersburg . The state highway expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway at Piney Ridge Parkway and maintains that form through its intersection with MD 26 ( Liberty Road ) . MD 32 continues through the suburban area as a four @-@ lane undivided highway with two lanes northbound , one lane southbound , and a center turn lane . The state highway passes to the east of Liberty High School and reduces to two lanes north of Bennett Road . 
 MD 32 heads into a forested area and crosses the Morgan Run arm of Liberty Reservoir . The state highway passes through an S @-@ curve before heading through the communities of Louisville and Gamber , where the highway meets the southern end of MD 91 ( Gamber Road ) . MD 32 continues northwest through a mix of farmland and residential subdivisions toward Fenby , where the highway intersects MD 97 ( New Washington Road ) . Just north of MD 97 adjacent to Carroll Community College , the state highway meets MD 97 's old alignment , Old Washington Road , which is unsigned MD <unk> . MD 32 continues north as Washington Road through a suburban area ; the highway parallels MD 97 and passes to the east of the historic Friendship Valley Farm and Carroll County Almshouse and Farm , which is now the Carroll County Farm Museum . Just north of Bennett Avenue , MD 32 reaches its northern terminus at the southern city limit of Westminster . The roadway continues north as a municipal street to Main Street , which heads northwest through the Westminster Historic District . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original construction = = = 
 When the Maryland State Roads Commission ( MDSRC ) , the predecessor of MDSHA , laid out its original state road system in 1909 , the commission included the roads from Westminster to Taneytown and from West Friendship to Westminster via Eldersburg . These highways already contained several stretches of improved highway ; Main Street in Westminster and the highways for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) on either side of Gamber and for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) on either side of Sykesville were paved by 1910 . In addition , the designated state roads included two turnpikes : the Westminster and Meadow Branch Turnpike operated from the western city limit of Westminster northwest to Fountain Valley on the road to Taneytown ; and the Westminster and Fenby Turnpike operated from the southern city limit of Westminster to Fenby . 
 In 1911 , the whole highway from West Friendship to Eldersburg was completed after the addition of 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide macadam sections on either side of the existing paved road through Sykesville . That same year , construction began on the state road between Eldersburg and Fenby . The roads from Eldersburg to the existing paved road through Gamber and from Gamber to Fenby were completed with a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide macadam surface in 1912 and 1913 , respectively . The road from Fountain Valley to Taneytown was paved as a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide concrete road from Fountain Valley through <unk> in 1914 and from there to Taneytown in 1915 . The former turnpikes still remained to be improved in 1915 ; those roads were resurfaced with macadam by 1919 to complete the original state road from West Friendship to Taneytown . 
 The next portion of what was to become MD 32 to be constructed was an extension of the Taneytown road northwest through Emmitsburg , which was planned by 1915 . The sections from Taneytown to the Monocacy River and from the river 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west toward Emmitsburg were completed as a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide concrete road by 1919 . The remaining 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to Emmitsburg were underway by 1920 and built as a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide concrete road by 1921 . The highway was completed from Emmitsburg northwest to the Pennsylvania state line by 1923 . When MDSRC started assigning numbers to its state roads in 1927 , the highway from US 40 in West Friendship to the Pennsylvania state line northwest of Emmitsburg was designated MD 32 . 
 The portion of MD 32 from Glenelg to Savage was originally designated MD 106 . This highway was paved in concrete from Dayton to Clarksville and from Clarksville to about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the Middle Patuxent River near Simpsonville by 1923 . That same year , a concrete road was added south from West Friendship to the Middle Patuxent River . The concrete road from Clarksville was extended to the Middle Patuxent River opposite Simpsonville in 1925 . A macadam road was built from <unk> to Oakland Mills Road in Guilford between 1924 and 1926 . Guilford was connected to US 1 near Savage with a gravel road by 1927 . The gap in MD 106 through Simpsonville was filled with a concrete road in 1929 and 1930 . MD 32 was extended southwest from the Middle Patuxent River to north of Glenelg around 1933 . MD 106 was extended north from Dayton to Glenelg as a macadam road in 1934 . The gap in the highway north of Glenelg was filled by 1946 , by which time MD 32 had been extended south and east over the course of MD 106 to Savage . 
 = = = Improvements = = = 
 The first major improvement to the original course of MD 32 was the replacement of the highway 's one @-@ lane covered bridge over the Monocacy River with a wider triple @-@ span concrete arch bridge in 1925 . The highway was widened to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) from Westminster to just east of Taneytown by 1930 and from Taneytown to the Pennsylvania state line by 1934 . MD 32 was reconstructed and widened again from Emmitsburg to the Pennsylvania state line in 1948 and through Taneytown in 1949 . When US 40 was relocated as a four @-@ lane divided highway through West Friendship in 1951 , the new highway was placed on a bridge over MD 32 and a two @-@ way ramp added to connect the grade @-@ separated highways . MD 32 was relocated between Eldersburg and Louisville and a new bridge was constructed over Morgan Run in 1952 to replace the old road that would have been submerged by the filling of Liberty Reservoir . 
 In 1956 , the portion of MD 32 from Fenby north to Westminster and from Westminster west through Taneytown and Emmitsburg to the Pennsylvania state line was renumbered MD 97 , which had been extended north from Howard County . The portion of MD 32 from MD 26 in Eldersburg to MD 97 in Fenby was transferred to county maintenance at the same time . In 1960 , the road from Eldersburg to Fenby returned to the state highway system . In addition , MD 97 was moved to a new alignment , New Washington Road ; the new alignment ran from Fenby to US 140 , which then connected Baltimore with Gettysburg , in Westminster . MD 97 then followed the Westminster Bypass to the northwest side of the city . Subsequently , MD 32 was extended along its original alignment through Westminster to MD 97 near Western Maryland College ( now McDaniel College ) . MD 32 would later be assigned to its original alignment from Fountain Valley to east of Taneytown when MD 97 's new alignment between the two communities was completed in 1965 . The disjoint segment of MD 32 was renumbered MD 832 in 1978 . In 1979 , US 140 was decommissioned ; the highways from Baltimore to Westminster and from Westminster through Emmitsburg became MD 140 . MD 97 was moved to its present course from Westminster toward Gettysburg . MD 32 's northern terminus was rolled back to MD 31 around 1987 . The state highway was truncated at the Westminster city limit in 2001 following the reconstruction of Main Street and its transfer to city maintenance . 
 MD 32 was reconstructed and widened from Sykesville to Eldersburg starting in 1957 and from West Friendship to just south of Sykesville in 1958 . The state highway 's bypass of Sykesville was completed in 1963 ; the old road through the center of Sykesville became MD 851 . MD 32 's new bridge across the Patapsco River was the longest of only three aluminum triangular box beam girder bridges constructed in the United States . The girder system was topped by a concrete slab deck and underlain with standard concrete abutments and piers and steel bearing pads on which the aluminum girders rested . These bridges , which were designed by Fairchild Engine and Airplane Company , were constructed of aluminum due to that metal 's light weight but similar strength compared to steel . Many experimental aluminum bridges were built due to a severe shortage of steel in the early 1960s . Aluminum bridges are rarely constructed because they are much more expensive than steel and concrete bridges . 
 In the 1990s , MDSHA discovered the bridge 's rarity while conducting a bridge inventory . The inventory also found premature deterioration of its supports due to galvanic corrosion involving the steel bearing pads and aluminum girder structure . Because repairing the structure would have been extremely difficult , MDSHA decided to build a replacement bridge immediately to the west of the aluminum bridge ; the new bridge opened in 2004 along with a slight relocation in MD 32 on both sides of the bridge . The aluminum bridge was added to the state 's Historic Bridge Registry and was left in place as a historic landmark after MD 32 's new bridge over the Patapsco River opened . 
 = = = Patuxent Freeway = = = 
 In 1956 , MD 32 was extended east on Guilford Road from US 1 to the Howard – Anne Arundel county line at Annapolis Junction . The state highway was relocated to its present alignment from Glenelg to Clarksville between 1961 and 1964 , bypassing Ten Oaks Road . MD 32 was expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway in West Friendship when its interchange with I @-@ 70 was reconstructed as a diamond interchange in 1973 . MD 32 was extended east into Anne Arundel County in 1969 when the designation was extended to just east of the Baltimore – Washington Parkway on the edge of Fort George G. Meade . The first two sections of what would become the Patuxent Freeway opened in 1972 . A short section of divided highway opened from just west of Oakland Mills Road in Guilford to a turnaround just west of <unk> Road that included MD 32 's modern interchange with I @-@ 95 . The other section was a two @-@ lane road from MD 175 in Odenton northeast along Sappington Station Road and then east along the current alignments of MD 32 and I @-@ 97 to MD 178 just east of I @-@ 97 Exit 5 in Crownsville . The eastern section , which from 1972 to 1977 was one of the three disjoint sections of mainline MD 32 between Crownsville and Taneytown , included an interchange with MD 3 in Millersville . As of 1978 , MD 32 's interchange with the Baltimore – Washington Parkway was a partial cloverleaf interchange with four ramps on the north side of MD 32 — due to the state highway closely paralleling the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad 's spur to the military base — and a fifth ramp from the northbound parkway to eastbound MD 32 . The MD 3 interchange included the ramps to and from MD 32 in the direction of Fort Meade plus a ramp from westbound MD 32 to northbound MD 3 . All other movements were made via MD 178 or Millersville Road . 
 Construction on the Patuxent Freeway resumed in 1981 in Howard County . The freeway opened from Dorsey Run Road to US 29 in 1985 . The freeway was extended across the Middle Patuxent River to tie into the existing two @-@ lane road near Cedar Lane by 1987 . The new highway was extended east from Dorsey Run Road to just west of the Baltimore – Washington Parkway as a four @-@ lane divided highway that same year . Sections of MD 32 's old alignment became part of MD 732 . The highway from Dorsey Run Road to the parkway was upgraded to a freeway with the completion of interchanges at Dorsey Run Road and a ramp to Guilford Road in 1991 . The interchange between MD 32 and the Baltimore – Washington Parkway was upgraded to a full cloverleaf around 1993 . The final section of the Patuxent Freeway in Howard County opened from west of US 29 to west of MD 108 in 1996 . 
 I @-@ 97 was under construction from Annapolis to Millersville by 1987 . When that section of the Interstate was completed in 1989 , the highway took over the portion of MD 32 from MD 178 to MD 3 . The easternmost portion of MD 32 became I @-@ 97 's Exit 5 interchange ramps ; the MD 3 interchange was upgraded to provide full access . Also in 1989 , construction began on MD 32 between the Baltimore – Washington Parkway and I @-@ 97 . MD 32 was extended as a four @-@ lane divided highway along the existing road from the parkway east to MD 198 and as a two @-@ lane road on a new alignment from MD 198 to MD 175 . The sections of MD 32 from MD 198 to MD 175 west of Odenton and from Burns Crossing Road to I @-@ 97 were under construction to expand them to a freeway ; the freeway segment from MD 175 to Burns Crossing Road on the north side of Odenton was also under construction . The freeway between MD 198 and MD 175 was complete by 1991 . The remainder of the Patuxent Freeway from Fort Meade to Millersville was completed in 1993 . 
 In 2000 , construction began on the gap in the Patuxent Freeway through Fort George G. Meade . MD 32 's interchanges with MD 198 and Samford Road were completed in 2002 . The MD 198 project involved extending the latter highway east along the northern edge of Tipton Airport so MD 198 could tie into the fort 's Mapes Road entrance ; the Mapes Road intersection east of MD 198 was also eliminated by the construction . The Patuxent Freeway through Fort Meade was finished when MD 32 's interchange with Canine Road was completed in 2005 . 
 = = = Sykesville Road upgrade = = = 
 MDSHA has long @-@ term plans to upgrade MD 32 to a four @-@ lane freeway from MD 108 to I @-@ 70 . The first project , which involved constructing a modified dumbbell interchange to connect MD 32 with <unk> Road , Ten Oaks Road , <unk> Road , and Ivory Road in Glenelg , was completed in 2008 . The next project involved the construction of a diamond interchange at Linden Church Road , which , before the dumbbell interchange was completed in the fall of 2013 , met MD 32 at a pair of signalized , three @-@ way directional crossover intersections between Glenelg and Clarksville . Several other interchanges will be constructed or modified : 
 At MDSHA 's Dayton Shop south of Glenelg , a half @-@ diamond interchange will be built on the southbound side of MD 32 and a right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchange constructed for northbound MD 32 traffic to access the maintenance facility . 
 North of Glenelg , Rosemary Lane will be extended west to cross over MD 32 . The county highway will be connected to MD 32 via right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchanges between the state highway and frontage roads . 
 In West Friendship , northbound MD 32 would have half of a partial cloverleaf interchange with MD 144 . Access between MD 144 and southbound MD 32 would be via a right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchange with a frontage road . MD 144 's intersections with the frontage road and the ramps to and from northbound MD 32 will be roundabouts . 
 MD 32 's interchange with I @-@ 70 will be transformed from a diamond interchange to a partial cloverleaf interchange with free @-@ flowing ramps from MD 32 to I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 MD 32 is signed east – west from I @-@ 97 in Millersville to MD 108 in Clarksville and north – south from MD 108 to Westminster . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 32 has three existing auxiliary routes : 
 MD 32AA is the designation for Sappington Station Road , which runs 1 @.@ 00 mile ( 1 @.@ 61 km ) from westbound MD 32 west to MD 175 in Odenton . The state highway begins at the westbound MD 32 exit ramp for Exit 3 . MD 32AA merges with the entrance ramp to westbound MD 32 and intersects the northern section of Burns Crossing Road before crossing over MD 32 . The state highway intersects the southern section of Burns Crossing Road and heads southwest to its terminus at a roundabout with MD 175 ( Annapolis Road ) , Odenton Road , and Higgins Drive . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for <unk> Avenue , a 0 @.@ 04 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 064 km ) spur east from Gambrills Road just south of Gambrills Road 's overpass of MD 32 in Gambrills . 
 MD 32B is the designation for the unnamed 0 @.@ 02 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 032 km ) connector between MD 32 and MD <unk> , which is a spur of old alignment of MD 32 north of West Friendship . 
 = Lhasa de Sela = 
 Lhasa de Sela ( September 27 , 1972 – January 1 , 2010 ) , also known by the mononym Lhasa , was an American @-@ born singer @-@ songwriter who was raised in Mexico and the United States , and divided her adult life between Canada and France . Her first album , La Llorona , went platinum in Canada and brought Lhasa a Félix Award and a Juno Award . 
 Following this success , Lhasa toured with Lilith Fair , then joined her sisters in a French circus troupe , contributing her husky voice to the musical backdrop . She lived in Marseille and began to write more songs , then moved back to Montreal and produced a second album , The Living Road . Once again , she toured in support of her album , and she collaborated with other musicians on their projects . During this time , BBC Radio 3 honored her as the best world music artist of the Americas in 2005 . She published a book about her impressions of life on the road . 
 Lhasa recorded a third album , titled Lhasa , but she was diagnosed with cancer in 2009 around the time it was released . She endured severe treatments but these did not halt the illness . She died on New Year 's Day 2010 . A memorial program of her music was put together in January 2012 , performed in Montreal by artists who had worked with her . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Lhasa was born in Big Indian , New York , of a Mexican father , language instructor Alejandro " Alex " Sela , and an American mother , photographer and actress Alexandra Karam . According to Lhasa , her hippie parents did not give her a name until the age of five months ; her mother was reading a book about Tibet and the word Lhasa " just grabbed her " as the right name for the baby girl . Lhasa 's maternal grandmother was Elena Karam ( 1909 – 2001 ) , an actress best known for her leading role in Elia Kazan 's film America America . Her paternal grandmother was Carmen de <unk> ( 1906 – 1982 ) , a Panamanian pianist who studied in Los Angeles with Egon Petri , and with Edgar Varèse in San Francisco . Lhasa had a Lebanese great @-@ grandfather named Basel who sang in six languages . Her mother played harp and her father played flute . Her first decade was spent criss @-@ crossing the United States and Mexico , living and traveling in a converted school bus with her parents and siblings , home @-@ schooled by her mother . Both her parents spoke fluent Spanish , but she was raised speaking primarily English , with Spanish added during a total of eight years ' residence in Mexico . Along with her family she listened to a wide variety of recordings including songs by Chilean musician Victor Jara ; as a young child she dreamed of marrying him some day , not knowing he had been killed . 
 At age 13 when her parents separated , Lhasa , her mother and her sisters settled in San Francisco where Lhasa started singing in a Greek cafe . She included Spanish language lessons in her high school studies . After viewing a documentary about Billie Holiday , Lhasa determined that she , too , would make a career in singing . 
 In 1991 , she traveled to Montreal to visit her sisters who were students at l 'École nationale de cirque , the National Circus School of Canada , and she decided to make Montreal her home . <unk> in a Francophone culture for the first time , she sang for five years in bars , collaborating with rock guitarist Yves Desrosiers . In 1992 , Denis Wolff , general manager of the independent Canadian record company , <unk> , saw Lhasa performing , her head shaved , in front of a tiny nightclub audience . He was struck with " her personality , her charisma and her voice " – he soon signed her to the label . With Desrosiers she developed the material that eventually became her first album . 
 = = Career = = 
 <unk> finished La Llorona in early 1997 with Desrosiers producing , arranging and accompanying . The Spanish @-@ language album mixed 1930s and 1940s @-@ era Latin American songs with original songs ; it was strongly influenced by Mexican music but also by klezmer , torch songs , gypsy jazz and Middle Eastern music . Even though she did not consider herself fluent in Spanish , Lhasa said that she enjoyed singing in the language because it came from " a deeper place " . Wolff said that he expected the album to be marketed to people other than Spanish speakers because it was so different from contemporary Hispanic music . 
 La Llorona was released first in Quebec on February 4 , 1997 , then in the US two months later . A music video was shot for one song , " Desierto " , released in May . The album brought Lhasa much success , including the Quebec Félix Award in Canada for " Artiste <unk> – musique du monde " ( " Best world music artist from Quebec " ) in 1997 and a Canadian Juno Award for Best Global Artist in 1998 . The album was certified platinum in Canada . By 2003 it had sold 120 @,@ 000 units in Canada , 330 @,@ 000 in France , and 30 @,@ 000 in the U.S. 
 After touring in Europe and North America for several years with Lilith Fair , Lhasa moved to France in 1999 to join her sisters in <unk> , a circus / theatre company . Lhasa sang in the troupe 's show called " La Maison Autre " ( " The Other House " ) . Living out of trailers with her sisters and traveling from place to place , Lhasa said it was " like when I was growing up . " She eventually reached Marseille , where she started writing songs again . After composing enough material , Lhasa returned to Montreal with her new songs to produce her second album , The Living Road , which was released in 2003 . While La Llorona had been entirely in Spanish , The Living Road included songs in English , French and Spanish . 
 A two @-@ year tour followed the release of The Living Road , taking Lhasa and her group to 17 countries . Lhasa collaborated with a variety of other artists . She was a guest singer on the Tindersticks ' track " Sometimes It Hurts " off their Waiting for the Moon album , and later joined Tindersticks ' singer Stuart Staples for a duet on the track " That Leaving Feeling " , found on his Leaving Songs album . She also appeared as a guest on the albums of French singers Arthur H and Jérôme Minière , and the French gypsy music group <unk> . BBC Radio 3 named her the best world music artist of the Americas ; one of the categories of the 2005 World Music Awards . The Living Road was nominated for best " Culture Crossing " album and " Album of the Year " , but it did not win . Her song " Anywhere On This Road " was placed on the annual compilation CD of award winners ; the BBC cited Ibrahim <unk> 's " alluring Arabic trumpet " on the song as " just one stunning moment " among many within Lhasa 's album . Lhasa filmed a video for the song " Con <unk> <unk> " ; directed by Ralph <unk> and Brigitte Henry , the video was nominated in 2006 for a Juno Award but did not win . At the 2007 ION International Film Festival , the video was named the " Music Video of the Year " . 
 Lhasa published a French @-@ language book in 2008 , titled La Route chante ( The Road sings ) . The book offers snippets of experiences and impressions of Lhasa 's life on the road with her sisters , of music , and of her childhood . 
 Lhasa 's third album Lhasa was released in April 2009 in Canada and Europe , with fewer musicians involved in the production . The next month in the U.S. , she could also be heard on the title track of Patrick Watson 's album Wooden Arms . After the Lhasa album was recorded but before it was released , Lhasa was diagnosed with breast cancer . The album 's closing song , " Anyone and Everyone " , was described as prophetic by Jan Fairley of The Guardian – it was written from the viewpoint of one who knows death is near . Lhasa said that the song was about inner happiness and " feeling my feet in the earth , having a place in the world , of things taking care of themselves . " 
 Because of her illness , Lhasa canceled a proposed world tour that would have begun in late 2009 . She also set aside plans to make an album of songs written by Chileans Victor Jara and Violeta Parra . 
 = = Death = = 
 Following a 21 @-@ month @-@ long battle with breast cancer , Lhasa died , age 37 , on the evening of January 1 , 2010 , at her home in Montreal . She was survived by her partner Ryan Morey , by her parents , and by nine siblings . Lhasa was cremated , in accordance with her wishes . On January 9 , a funeral ceremony was held for family and friends at the Ukrainian National Federation Hall in Montreal . A cemetery plot and stone for Lhasa are at Notre @-@ Dame @-@ des @-@ Neiges Cemetery , Montreal . 
 Following her death , it snowed in Montreal for four days . Lhasa collaborator Patrick Watson said that some of her friends felt it was a last message from her , and with experimental group <unk> he co @-@ wrote a song dedicated to Lhasa : " Snow Day for Lhasa " . 
 A sold @-@ out memorial concert called " La Route chante : A Community Show for Lhasa " was held on January 6 , 2012 , at the Rialto Theatre in Montreal , honoring the life of Lhasa . Musicians who collaborated with Lhasa performed , along with other artists such as Katie Moore , Thomas Hellman , and Plants and Animals . Lhasa 's manager , David @-@ Étienne Savoie , and her collaborator Watson originated the concept of a memorial concert , and the musicians met in Watson 's studio to rehearse . To open the concert , The Barr Brothers played together with Sarah Pagé , Miles Perkin and Joe Grass , interpreting Lhasa 's " Small Song " . Other performers included Ariane Moffatt , <unk> , Watson , Mario <unk> , Arthur H , Jérôme Minière and Brazilian @-@ born singer <unk> . A second show was added the following night to accommodate demand for tickets . 
 On January 16 , Jim Corcoran devoted an episode of his CBC Radio One program À <unk> , a weekly show about Quebec music , to a Lhasa tribute show . 
 On the summer solstice , June 21 , 2010 , another memorial ceremony took place in Bourgogne , France . Some of Lhasa 's ashes were dispersed in a small river that flows into the Mediterranean Sea . 
 Madonna Hamel 's audio documentary She Moves Between Worlds : Remembering Lhasa de Sela combined a previously unpublished conversation between Hamel and Lhasa with interviews and responses to the conversation by band members and friends . The documentary was aired January 1 , 2013 , on CBC 's Inside The Music . 
 = = Discography = = 
 La Llorona ( 1997 ) 
 The Living Road ( 2003 ) 
 Lhasa ( 2009 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 El Desierto ( 1997 ) 
 Con <unk> <unk> ( 2005 ) 
 Rising ( 2009 ) 
 Cold Souls ( 2009 ) 
 = Motifs in the James Bond film series = 
 The James Bond series of films contain a number of repeating , distinctive motifs which date from the series ' inception with Dr. No in 1962 . The series consists of twenty four films produced by Eon Productions featuring the James Bond character , a fictional British Secret Service agent . The most recent instalment is the 2015 film Spectre , which was released in UK cinemas on 26 October 2015 . There have also been two independently made features , the satirical Casino Royale , released in 1967 , and the 1983 film Never Say Never Again . 
 Whilst each element has not appeared in every Bond film , they are common threads that run through most of the films . These motifs vary from integral plot points , such as the assignment briefing sessions or the attempts to kill Bond , to enhancements of the dramatic narrative , such as music , or aspects of the visual style , such as the title sequences . These motifs may also serve to enhance excitement in the plot , through a chase sequence or for the climax of the film . Some of these — such as " Bond girls " or megalomaniac villains — have been present in all of the stories , whilst others — such as Q 's gadgets or the role of M — have changed over time , often to shape or follow the contemporary zeitgeist . These elements are formulaic and the Bond films tend to follow a set pattern with only limited variety , often following within a strict order . A number of the elements were altered or removed in 2006 with the reboot of the series , Casino Royale . 
 Some of the elements involved are a result of the production crew used in the earliest films in the series , with the work of Ken Adam , the original production designer , Maurice Binder , title designer , and John Barry , composer , continually updated and adapted as the series progressed . 
 = = Opening sequences = = 
 = = = Gun barrel sequence = = = 
 All of the Eon Bond films feature the unique gun barrel sequence , created by graphic artist Maurice Binder , which has been called by British media historian James Chapman " the trademark motif of the series " . As Bond walks across the screen , he is viewed by the audience through the barrel of a gun trained on him by an unknown assailant . Bond wheels around and shoots directly at the gun / viewer , followed by the assassin 's blood spilling down the barrel / screen . It was originally filmed in sepia by putting a pinhole camera inside an actual .38 calibre gun barrel , with stunt man Bob Simmons playing the part of Bond . This is accompanied by the opening bars of the " James Bond Theme " , composed by Monty Norman , orchestrated by trumpeter and composer John Barry and Burt Rhodes . 
 After Maurice Binder 's death in 1991 , Daniel Kleinman was responsible for the gun barrel sequence up to and including Casino Royale . Design house MK12 supervised the graphics for Quantum of Solace . Chapman has suggested that the sequence is a significant part of the James Bond mythos because it " foregrounds the motif of looking " that is central to the spy film genre . The gun barrel imagery sometimes carried over to the film posters used to promote Bond films , including as a familiarising element on the introduction of Timothy Dalton for The Living Daylights . 
 The sequence was traditionally placed at the start of each film until the 2006 instalment Casino Royale , where it appears after the cold open and is incorporated into the plot ; in the 2008 film , Quantum of Solace , the sequence was placed at the end of the film and incorporates the film 's title in its design . 
 = = = Pre @-@ title sequence = = = 
 In the first film of the series , Dr. No , the gun barrel sequence is followed by the main titles , but starting with From Russia with Love and in all subsequent films , the titles are preceded by a pre @-@ title sequence or " teaser " . The contents of the sequence can relate to the main plot of the film in a number of ways , including being not at all related ( as in Goldfinger ) , loosely connected ( as with The World Is Not Enough ) or fully related to the plot ( as can be seen in Licence to Kill and On Her Majesty 's Secret Service ) . 
 From Thunderball through to Die Another Day , the gun barrel sequence segues into the pre @-@ title sequence by having the opening shot be sighted through the barrel . Beginning with The Spy Who Loved Me , the teasers emphasised not only action sequences but stunts , a practice that prevailed until Casino Royale . The sequence for The World Is Not Enough is unusually long : at over fourteen minutes it is two to three times the length of most others . 
 = = = Title sequence = = = 
 The main title sequences incorporate visual elements that often reflect each film 's theme , often showing silhouettes of nude or provocatively clad women set against swirling images . For example , the 1965 film Thunderball features scenes of deep @-@ sea diving and this is reflected in the associated opening sequence ; similarly the opening sequence for the 1964 film Goldfinger shows clips from Bond films projected onto the gold @-@ painted silhouette of actress Margaret Nolan : the titles have been described by Bond scholars Smith and Lavington as " Gorgeous , iconic , seminal . " 
 The concept for the titles came from designer Robert Brownjohn , who worked on From Russia with Love and Goldfinger , before he fell out with producer Harry Saltzman and left the series . In creating the titles , Brownjohn was inspired by seeing light projecting on people 's bodies as they got up and left a cinema ; he was also influenced by constructivist artist László Moholy @-@ Nagy projecting light on to clouds in the 1920s . Brownjohn also used the effect in the poster he created for Goldfinger . Designer Maurice Binder , who had worked on the first Bond film , Dr. No , had been unable to work on either From Russia with Love and Goldfinger , but returned for Thunderball , where he retained Brownjohn 's concept for the titles . Binder eventually worked on thirteen Bond films and after his death in 1991 , the opening credits were done by Daniel Kleinman . This changed for Quantum of Solace , with the studio MK12 taking control . Kleinman returned to direct the Skyfall title sequence , and the title sequence for Spectre . 
 A contemporary artist usually sings during the title sequence and an instrumental version of the main track may also be featured as a leitmotif during the film , which repeats in various moods . Writing for Rolling Stone , Andy Greene says that " James Bond title songs , as a rule , have the name of the movie in the chorus , " though he notes that this is not always the case . On Her Majesty 's Secret Service has an entirely instrumental credit sequence , though the film features an alternate theme , " We Have All the Time in the World " , sung by Louis Armstrong . John Barry provided the title song music on ten of the eleven films for which he composed the musical score . Several of the songs produced for the films have been nominated for Academy Awards for Original Song and become pop hits , including Paul McCartney 's " Live and Let Die " , Carly Simon 's " Nobody Does It Better " ( for the film The Spy Who Loved Me ) , and Sheena Easton 's " For Your Eyes Only " with Adele 's " Skyfall " and Sam Smith 's " Writing 's on the Wall " eventually winning the award . 
 = = Plot elements = = 
 = = = Flirting with Moneypenny = = = 
 With the exception of the first two Daniel Craig films , Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace , every Bond film has a sequence in which Bond interacts with Miss Moneypenny , the personal assistant to M , Bond 's superior . Lois Maxwell was the first to portray Moneypenny and did so for fourteen Eon @-@ produced Bond films from Dr. No in 1962 to A View to a Kill in 1985 opposite Connery , Lazenby , and Moore . She was followed by Caroline Bliss , Samantha Bond and Naomie Harris , who played opposite Dalton , Brosnan and Craig respectively . The four have arguably divergent interpretations of Moneypenny 's personality , as do the six actors who have played Bond . 
 A running joke throughout the film series is Moneypenny 's unrequited love for Bond and his playful flirting with her . She flirts back , jokes and sometimes pouts , hoping to wrangle a proposal and a wedding ring out of him . A fantasy sequence in Die Another Day marks the only occasion in the Eon film series in which Moneypenny was actually shown in a romantic embrace with Bond , although this is only in Q @-@ branch 's virtual reality machine . 
 = = = Receiving assignment from M = = = 
 Early in most plots Bond is called in to see M , the head of the UK 's Secret Intelligence Service ( also known as MI6 ) in his or her office to receive his assignment . In several films , Bond receives the assignment outside the MI6 offices , or at a local secret office . Upon meeting , Bond often finding M in a subdued state of agitation over a new threat to world peace . M typically shows confidence in the service 's best agent but feels a need to rein in Bond for his risky methods and often chides him for his indiscretions . 
 The first actor to portray M was Bernard Lee , who appeared in all eleven Bond films from Dr. No in 1962 to Moonraker in 1979 . With Lee 's illness from stomach cancer in 1980 – 1981 , he was unable to appear in his scenes for For Your Eyes Only ; he died on 16 January 1981 and , out of respect , no new actor was hired to assume the role for the film . Instead , the script was re @-@ written so that the character is said to be on leave , letting Chief of Staff Bill Tanner takes over the role as acting head of MI6 and briefing Bond alongside the Minister of Defence . 
 Lee was replaced for four films between 1983 and 1989 , by Robert Brown who had previously appeared in the series as Admiral Hargreaves . Judi Dench took over the role of M from 1995 's GoldenEye until 2012 's Skyfall . In Skyfall , Gareth Mallory , played by Ralph Fiennes , takes over as M at the end of the film after the death of Dench 's character . 
 The code name for the British Secret Service in both the books and the films was " Universal Exports " . It has been featured repeatedly in the films in various ways , such as the abbreviation " <unk> " in From Russia with Love , a brass name plate in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service and Bond 's helicopter in For Your Eyes Only . Academic Paul Stock argues that M 's office — and Universal Exports by extension — is a metonym for England , whilst he sees M as being an iconic representative of England and Englishness . 
 = = = Technical briefing with Q = = = 
 After getting his assignment , Bond is often sent to Q Branch for the technical briefing in which he receives special equipment to be used in his mission . The pre @-@ mission briefings quickly became one of the motifs that ran through the Bond series . Dr. No provided no spy @-@ related gadgets , although a Geiger counter was used . Industrial designer Andy Davey observed that the first ever onscreen spy @-@ gadget was the attaché case shown in From Russia with Love , which he described as " a classic 007 product " . The gadgets assumed a higher profile in the 1964 film Goldfinger and the film 's success encouraged further espionage equipment from Q Branch to be supplied to Bond , although the increased use of technology led to an accusation that Bond was over @-@ reliant on equipment , particularly in the later films . 
 Starting with From Russia with Love , the briefings with Q branch involve various gadgets and technology , although Boothroyd is not referred to in the credits as Q until the third film , Goldfinger . Each Bond film thereafter up until Die Another Day contains a technical briefing of some kind , usually given by Q , with the exception of Live and Let Die , in which Q does not appear and On Her Majesty 's Secret Service in which Q does not brief 007 but is demonstrating to M. 
 Q is sometimes shown joining Bond in the field , taking with him a portable workshop and his staff . These workshops are established in unusual locations , such as an Egyptian tomb in The Spy Who Loved Me and a South American monastery in Moonraker . On three occasions , in Octopussy , Licence to Kill and Spectre , Q takes active roles in Bond 's missions . For the 2006 Casino Royale reboot and the subsequent instalment , Quantum of Solace , the character of Q was , like Moneypenny , dropped , and although Bond still receives a supply of mission equipment , no technical briefing is shown on screen . The technical briefings resume , under the tutelage of Q , in Skyfall and Spectre . 
 There are several running jokes throughout the series . Established in Goldfinger is Q 's continuing disgust at how his equipment is often lost , damaged or destroyed by Bond during missions . Another is how easily distracted Bond is in the lab ( " Now pay attention " ) as Q rattles off details about the use of the equipment which Bond needs to commit to memory . Another part of the customary byplay between Q and Bond is Bond 's amused reaction to the latest devices and the Quartermaster 's indignant response ( " I never joke about my work " ) . There are also sight gags showing prototype equipment . In the field , however , Bond always remembers the details and takes full advantage of the tools supplied . 
 Desmond Llewelyn played Q in seventeen Bond films , appearing in more Bond films than any other actor , where he worked with the first five James Bond actors . Llewelyn 's first film was the second in the Eon series , From Russia with Love , after the actor who played the part in Dr. No , Peter Burton , was unavailable for the filming schedule . ( Burton 's character was not yet called Q , but " the Armourer " , Major Boothroyd , who instructed Bond on a new firearm , the Walther PPK . ) After appearing as Q 's assistant in The World Is Not Enough , John Cleese appeared as Q in Pierce Brosnan 's last film , Die Another Day . For Daniel Craig 's third film , Skyfall , the character was re @-@ introduced , with Ben Whishaw playing the part . 
 = = = Guns , cars and aircraft = = = 
 Guns 
 The first Bond film , Dr. No , saw M ordering Bond to leave his Beretta behind and take up the Walther PPK , which the film Bond used in eighteen films . Since Tomorrow Never Dies , Bond 's main weapon has been the Walther P99 semi @-@ automatic pistol . 
 Cars 
 Bond has driven a number of cars , including the Aston Martin V8 Vantage during the 1980s , the V12 Vanquish and DBS during the 2000s , as well as the Lotus Esprit ; the BMW Z3 , BMW 750iL and the BMW Z8 . He has , however , also needed to drive a number of other vehicles , ranging from a Citroën 2CV to a Routemaster Bus , amongst others . 
 Bond 's most famous car is the silver grey Aston Martin DB5 , first seen in Goldfinger ; it later featured in Thunderball , GoldenEye , Tomorrow Never Dies , Casino Royale , Skyfall and Spectre . The films have used a number of different Aston Martins for filming and publicity , one of which was sold in January 2006 at an auction in the US for $ 2 @,@ 090 @,@ 000 to an unnamed European collector . 
 Aircraft 
 Bond also shows his taste for aircraft : a gyrocopter — Little Nellie — features in You Only Live Twice , a Cessna 185 Seaplane in Licence to Kill , an <unk> Jet in Octopussy , the Space Shuttle in Moonraker and an Aero _ L @-@ 39 _ Albatros in Tomorrow Never Dies . 
 = = = Meeting allies = = = 
 Once in the field , Bond frequently meets up with a local ally upon arrival . These can be his foreign counterparts like Tiger Tanaka in Japan or CIA operatives like Felix Leiter , or his own staff in a secret location . Such characters can also be female , some of whom succumb to Bond 's charms . Often these allies will provide Bond either with information to complete his mission , or with additional gadgets from Q. Some allies recur through a number of instalments , such as the Western @-@ friendly KGB chief , General Gogol , Sir Frederick Gray , the Minister of Defence and René Mathis . 
 = = = = Felix Leiter = = = = 
 One of Bond 's closest allies in both the novels and films is CIA operative Felix Leiter . Fleming wrote twelve novels , of which Leiter appears in six ; in the second book , Live and Let Die , Leiter was attacked by a shark and lost his right arm and half his left leg and his subsequent appearances were with prosthetics . For the film series the shark attack occurred in Licence to Kill , the fifteenth instalment in the series . Following Licence to Kill , Leiter did not appear until the reboot of the franchise with Casino Royale . 
 In total Leiter appears in nine Eon Bond films : four out of the six Connery films , one film with Moore , both Dalton instalments and none with Brosnan ( where Bond 's CIA contact is Jack Wade ) , but returned for Craig 's ; he is also not in George Lazenby 's sole Bond film . In the Eon series , there were no Leiter film appearances between 1973 and 1987 and no Leiter appearances between 1989 and 2006 . 
 Although other recurring characters in the Eon series , such as M , Q and Moneypenny , had continuity within the actors , the character of Leiter has not . In the nine Eon films in which Leiter makes an appearance , there have been seven actors playing the role . Only two actors have played the part twice : David Hedison and Jeffrey Wright . Wright 's first appearances also made him the first African @-@ American actor to play the part in the Eon series , although Leiter was also played by Afro @-@ American actor Bernie Casey in one of the non @-@ Eon films , Never Say Never Again . 
 = = = Chase scenes = = = 
 Keeping with the greater Hollywood tradition , every Bond film features chase scenes , usually more than one per film . Bond and his allies evade their pursuers in a wide variety of vehicles , including custom air- and watercraft , to trucks and even tanks and moon @-@ buggies . Although most chase sequences feature Bond getting chased by the villains , such as the Aston @-@ Martin DB5 in Goldfinger and the ski sequence in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service , some feature Bond chasing the villains , such as the tank pursuit in GoldenEye and all sequences in Casino Royale . As the Eon series has progressed , the chases have repeated themselves with some variations and have all increased in extravagance . 
 Among the more unusual chase sequences include the gondola sequence from Moonraker , which leaves the canals of Venice to continue on land , and the cello case chase in The Living Daylights , as well as a double @-@ decker bus in Live and Let Die . 
 = = International locations = = 
 Bond 's adventures have taken him to over sixty countries , as well as outer space , in locations mostly described as attractive and exotic . These locations are primarily real places , though on occasion — such as San Monique ( Live and Let Die ) and Isthmus ( Licence to Kill ) — the destinations have been fictional . 
 The locations used for filming have often altered because of the effects of Bond 's presence : Scaramanga 's hideout on Ko Tapu ( Thai : เกาะตะปู ) in The Man with the Golden Gun is often now referred to as James Bond Island both by locals and in tourist guidebooks . Similarly , the revolving restaurant , located atop the Schilthorn near the village of Mürren used in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service has retained the name Piz Gloria since filming took place there . 
 Klaus Dodds has noted that there is a geopolitical aspect to the locations used , although this is often a pre @-@ emption of an issue by the film . For example , in the first film , Dr. No , the title villain 's disruption of the American Project Mercury space launch from Cape Canaveral with his atomic @-@ powered radio beam mirrored claims that American rocket testing at Cape Canaveral had problems with rockets going astray . Similarly Bond 's anti @-@ heroin mission in Live and Let Die coincided with President Nixon 's 1972 declaration of a War on Drugs , whilst GoldenEye played against the backdrop of Ronald Reagan 's Strategic Defense Initiative . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Larger @-@ than @-@ life villains = = = 
 For the series of Bond novels , Fleming realised that without threatening villains Bond seemed less heroic : this tradition of strong literary villain was brought across to the screen in the Eon series . The third Bond film , Goldfinger , set a pattern for having a main villain with a loyal and dangerous henchman , a model which was followed in subsequent films . 
 Whilst Bond scholar Glenn <unk> argues that there are only three Bond villains of note — Dr. No , Auric Goldfinger and Ernst Stavro Blofeld , fellow scholar Kerstin <unk> has identified a path of development of villains , all of whom adapt to a contemporary zeitgeist : 
 Ernst Stavro Blofeld ( 1963 – 2015 ) — Model megalomaniac facing 007 seven times 
 Francisco Scaramanga ( 1974 ) — the first " freelance " villain 
 Aristotle Kristatos ( 1981 ) — the first false ally 
 Franz Sanchez ( 1989 ) — the first villain with the already fulfilled operation 
 Alec Trevelyan ( 1995 ) — the first MI6 villain 
 Elliot Carver ( 1997 ) — the modern megalomaniac 
 Elektra King ( 1999 ) — the first villainess 
 Many of Bond 's adversaries are characterised by an unusual physical deformity ; for example , Le Chiffre suffered <unk> , causing his tear ducts to weep blood . Not all of the villains have unusual physical traits ; Mathieu Amalric 's Dominic Greene was depicted without such characteristics , instead being inspired by Tony Blair and Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 Many of the henchmen employed by the villains may have unique weapons ; Oddjob , Auric Goldfinger 's enforcer , carries a bowler hat with a razor @-@ sharp blade concealed in the rim , while Xenia Onatopp is known to crush victims to death with her thighs during intercourse . In addition to these weapons , many of the henchmen are physically different ; the over @-@ large Tee Hee had an iron claw , Jaws , an assassin with steel teeth , was played by <unk> ( 7 ' 2 " ) actor Richard Kiel , whilst Renard ( the henchman to the main villainess Elektra ) survived being shot in the head , which progressively killed off his senses and his ability to feel pain . 
 Many of Bond 's adversaries meet their deaths at the hands of Bond who often uses his environment or equipment to kill his opponent . Mr. Big was killed when Bond force @-@ fed him a pellet of compressed gas , causing him to inflate and explode whilst Hugo Drax was ejected into outer space . Very few villains actually survive the course of Bond 's assignment , and their deaths often come in the final scenes of the film . Lindner has noted that a number of the villains or henchmen have met their deaths through Bond using the technology of the villains against themselves and these include Alec Trevelyan being speared by part of the communications dish , Elliot Carver impaled by his sea @-@ drill and Renard skewered by a nuclear fuel rod . 
 = = = Bond girls = = = 
 At some point on the mission , Bond meets the principal Bond girl , a character portraying Bond 's love interest or one of his main sex objects . There is always one Bond girl central to the plot , and often one or two others who cross his path , helpful or not . They may be victims rescued by Bond , or else ally agents , villainesses , or <unk> . Many partner with Bond on the assignment , while others such as Honey Ryder are solely passive participants in the mission . More generally , the degree to which Bond girls are pivotal to propelling the plot forward varies from one film to the next . Five of the Bond girls are " bad " girls ( or at least working for the villain ) who turn " good " ( or switch sides ) usually due to Bond 's influence . Bond has fallen in love with only Tracy di Vicenzo in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service and Vesper Lynd in Casino Royale , but both of them die at or near the end of the respective films . 
 Roald Dahl , a screenwriter of You Only Live Twice , said he was given a formula to work to for the film : " you put in three girls ... Girl number one is pro @-@ Bond . She stays around roughly through the first reel of the picture . Then she is bumped off by the enemy , preferably in Bond 's arms . " The next girl is anti @-@ Bond and normally captures him , but Bond will save himself by using his charm and sexual potency : she is normally killed mid @-@ way through the film . Girl number three will survive and end the film in Bond 's embrace . 
 Academic Kimberly A. <unk> notes that James Bond promotes stereotypical , sex @-@ typed male attitudes , especially when interacting with women and in doing so demonstrates Western society 's patriarchal , individualistic culture . Academic Tricia Jenkins , meanwhile , sees that Bond as " <unk> " , as he is " more masculine , more sexually desirable , more heterosexual than the others around him " . Bond girls became a major theme in many Bond film posters , beginning with Dr. No ; the suggestiveness of the images used had to be toned down in some countries . 
 Bond girls often have highly suggestive names , including Goldfinger 's Pussy Galore , which the American censor refused to allow on promotional materials and for the US market she was subsequently referred to as " Miss Galore " or " Goldfinger 's personal pilot " ; however Honor Blackman took delight in embarrassing interviewers by repeatedly mentioning her character 's name . Other double entendre names included Holly Goodhead from Moonraker , Mary Goodnight and Chew Mee from The Man with the Golden Gun , Honey Ryder from Dr. No , Plenty O 'Toole from Diamonds Are Forever , Xenia Onatopp from GoldenEye , and Christmas Jones from The World Is Not Enough . 
 = = Humour = = 
 One of the elements used throughout the Bond series is humour , particularly ' one @-@ liners ' , delivered by Bond , either when killing an enemy , or at the end of the film when with a woman . The humour was present in the first film in the series , Dr. No , with Bond leaving a corpse in a car outside Government House and asking the Duty Sergeant to make sure he didn 't get away , whilst in Goldfinger , Bond electrocutes a man in a bath , before commenting , " Shocking , positively shocking " . 
 During Sean Connery 's Bond films , the humour was delivered by Connery to soften a violent situation , such as the electrification , or his shooting a villain with a spear gun and saying " I think he got the point " . The humour changed towards innuendo and self @-@ mockery during the Roger Moore films , with his jokes delivered with what media historian James Chapman considered to be a " wink at the audience " , with the suggestion that the violence was all a joke . This was shown in Live and Let Die when he threw the villain , Tee Hee , out of a train , removing his prosthetic arm in the process , Moore commented that he was " Just being disarming , darling " . When Timothy Dalton took the role , the humour was downplayed , bringing the character more in line with that of the novels . The humour returned for the Brosnan films , with Bond admitting between kisses that he " always enjoyed studying a new tongue " . Similarly , Moneypenny called Bond a " cunning linguist " after she interrupted his lesson with his Danish @-@ language teacher . Brosnan was not happy with some of the humour in the films , particularly the " stupid one @-@ liners — which I loathed — and I always felt phony doing them " . 
 The films often include a one @-@ liner , often of a sexual nature , at the dénouement . At the close of The Spy Who Loved Me , Roger Moore 's final line when caught with a woman , was that he was " Keeping the British end up , Sir ! " , something that Chapman considered to have " plumbed new depths of banality " . Similarly , Moonraker closes with a distracted Q answering M 's question of " What 's he doing ? " with " I think he 's attempting re @-@ entry , sir " ; a line described by Barnes and Hearn as " sheer magnificence " . 
 The films also contain elements of visual humour : when Jaws is dropped into a shark pool in The Spy Who Loved Me , it is Jaws who bites the shark . The following film , Moonraker , sees Bond in a comic chase scene with a gondola that becomes a hovercraft , a continuation that Bond author Raymond Benson considered " so dumb that one wonders at what age group the film was really aimed . " The music and sound effects are also used for comic effect in the films : the laboratory of Hugo Drax is opened by <unk> that play the tune of Close Encounters of the Third Kind , whilst when Bond and Anya are seen walking across the desert in The Spy Who Loved Me , the theme from Lawrence of Arabia is heard . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Protracted attempt to kill Bond = = = 
 In most of the films , the main villain often captures Bond and , rather than kill him quickly , attempts a slow and protracted death , from which Bond will always escape . This will often also come with a scene of the villain explaining his master plan to Bond . Goldfinger chained Bond to a nuclear bomb in the vault , while Alec Trevelyan tied an unconscious Bond to a helicopter that was programmed to fire its own missiles at itself . Francisco Scaramanga gave Bond lunch and then proposed a duel in his " fun room " , while Hugo Drax trapped Bond beneath the exhaust of a rocket to burn to death . This convention within the Bond canon has been lampooned in spoof films , including the Austin Powers series . 
 = = = Climax = = = 
 The climax of most Bond films is the final confrontation with the villain and his henchmen , sometimes an entire army of cohorts , often in his hard @-@ to @-@ reach lair . The villain 's retreat can be a private island ( Dr. No , The Man with the Golden Gun ) , underwater ( The Spy Who Loved Me ) , mountaintop retreat ( On Her Majesty 's Secret Service , For Your Eyes Only ) volcano ( You Only Live Twice ) , or underground base ( Live and Let Die ) , a ship ( Thunderball , Tomorrow Never Dies ) , an oil rig ( Diamonds Are Forever ) or even a space station ( Moonraker ) — among other variations . Bond usually sabotages the lair and , with time ticking down , dispatches the supervillain , rescues the principal Bond girl and they escape as the place blows up . In some cases , the villain or his primary henchman escapes to launch a final attack on Bond and his lover in the final scene . 
 = = = Ending = = = 
 In the first twenty two films of the Eon Bond series , only On Her Majesty 's Secret Service and Casino Royale , have ended with the central Bond girl deceased . In all other films , except Quantum of Solace and Skyfall , Bond is kissing her , making love , or implying that he will do so . Sometimes an embarrassed M catches Bond during his embraces . Most endings feature a double entendre and , in many of the films , the Bond girl purrs , " Oh , James . " 
 Until Octopussy , the title of the next film to be produced was also usually named , in the format " James Bond will return ... " or " James Bond will be back " , although these were sometimes incorrect : The Spy Who Loved Me promised James Bond would return in For Your Eyes Only , but after the success of Star Wars , the producers decided to make Moonraker instead and For Your Eyes Only followed in 1981 . 
 = = Quotations = = 
 The first Bond film , Dr. No , included the introduction of the character of James Bond . Bond was introduced in an exchange near the beginning of the film in a " now @-@ famous nightclub sequence featuring Sylvia Trench " , to whom he makes his " immortal introduction " . It was Sean Connery 's second line in the film . 
 Following the release of Dr. No , the quote " Bond ... James Bond " , became a catch phrase that entered the lexicon of Western popular culture : writers Cork and Scivally said of the introduction in Dr. No that the " signature introduction would become the most famous and loved film line ever " . In 2001 it was voted as the " best @-@ loved one @-@ liner in cinema " by British cinema goers . On 21 June 2005 , the line was honoured as the 22nd historically greatest cinema quotation by the American Film Institute , in its 100 Years Series . 
 Not all the films contain the introduction , Quantum of Solace , for example and in others it is often mocked by others — in Thunderball , the villainous character Fiona Volpe mocks him by saying it to him while with Mr. Big in Live and Let Die interrupts Bond 's introduction with : " Names is for tombstones , baby ... waste him ! " 
 Bond usually evinces a preference for vodka martinis and his instruction on how it must be prepared quickly became another catchphrase . 
 The instruction was honoured by the AFI as the 90th most @-@ memorable cinema quotation . In order to distance his version of Bond from Sean Connery 's , Roger Moore did not order a martini . The martini was present in the first Ian Fleming novel , Casino Royale , where Bond eventually named it " The Vesper " , after Vesper Lynd . The same recipe was then used for the 2006 film of the novel , with the martini ordered by Daniel Craig 's Bond . 
 = 2004 European Open ( snooker ) = 
 The 2004 European Open was the 2004 edition of the European Open snooker tournament , held from 1 to 6 March 2004 , at the Hilton Conference Centre , <unk> , Malta . It was the final year the event was known as European Open , as the event was renamed to Malta Cup in next year . Stephen Maguire defeated Jimmy White by nine frames to three ( 9 – 3 ) in the final to claim his first ranking @-@ event title , transforming him from " talented underachiever into a world @-@ ranking event winner " , according to The Times . In the semi @-@ finals Maguire defeated Stephen Lee and White beat Tony Drago . The tournament was the fifth of eight WPBSA ranking events in the 2003 / 2004 season , following the Welsh Open and preceding the Irish Masters . 
 = = Tournament summary = = 
 Prior to the 1988 / 1989 season no ranking tournament had been continuously staged outside of the United Kingdom ( although the World Championship had been held twice in Australia ) . The snooker governing body , the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association ( WPBSA ) , decided to include overseas events and the first two locations chosen were Canada and Europe . The European Open was first held in 1989 in Deauville , France , and was suspended for 1997 / 1998 and 2000 / 2001 . It moved to the Hilton Conference Centre , <unk> , Malta for the first time in 2004 and was renamed the Malta Cup the following season . 
 The 2004 tournament was the fifth of eight WPBSA ranking events in the 2003 / 2004 season , following the Welsh Open and preceding the Irish Masters . Held in January , the Welsh Open was won by Ronnie O 'Sullivan , who defeated Steve Davis by nine frames to eight ( 9 – 8 ) in the final . The defending European Open champion was also O 'Sullivan , who defeated Stephen Hendry 9 – 6 in last year 's final . Paul Hunter , who had defeated O 'Sullivan in the final of the non @-@ ranking Masters in February , entered the tournament " playing the best snooker of his career " , according to Phil Yates of The Times . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 The qualifying stage was played between players ranked 17 and those ranked lower for one of 16 places in the final stage . The matches were best @-@ of @-@ 9 frames until the semi @-@ finals . In March 2004 Maltese player Tony Drago defeated Adrian Gunnell 5 – 2 in a match held over from the qualifying stage in November . 
 = = = Round 1 = = = 
 The qualifiers went through to face members of the top 16 . In this round , Davis came from 2 – 4 down to beat Joe Swail 5 – 4 , in a match where both players missed chances . In the deciding frame , Davis won on the pink ball after Swail had missed the brown . After the match , Davis said it was a historic day as he had never won a match in the country . Stephen Lee received a walkover to the next round after his opponent Robin Hull withdrew due to medical reasons . World number 41 Stephen Maguire made a break of 89 in the final frame of his match against Peter Ebdon to win 5 – 4 , and world number three O 'Sullivan opened his match against Marco Fu with a century break of 110 and went on to win 5 – 1 . Chris Small , who suffers from the spinal condition ankylosing spondylitis , whitewashed UK champion Matthew Stevens 5 – 0 , in a match lasting almost three hours and which saw Stevens lose two frames on the black ball . Neil Robertson defeated Ken Doherty 5 – 3 , and Joe Perry beat David Roe by the same scoreline . In the last match of the day , David Gray beat Fergal O 'Brien 5 – 3 . 
 World number one Mark Williams was defeated 1 – 5 by Anthony Hamilton , who made a break of 133 . Williams refused to answer questions at the post @-@ match press conference , explaining : " I 'm not saying anything because if I do I could be in trouble so I 'm keeping my mouth shut . " Hunter and Hendry made high breaks of 49 and 55 in defeating Brian Morgan and Jimmy Michie 5 – 1 , respectively . After the match Hendry — the world number two and a seven @-@ time world champion said " I feel like going to apologise to each fan one by one because it was such a bad match " . John Higgins whitewashed Barry Pinches 5 – 0 , compiling a 132 break in the last frame in a match where Pinches made a high break of 33 . Jimmy White overcame James Wattana 5 – 4 having trailed 2 – 3 . Graeme Dott defeated Drew Henry 5 @-@ 3 and <unk> Hann beat Simon Bedford 5 – 0 . In the last game of the day , Drago beat Alan McManus 5 – 4 . 
 = = = Round 2 = = = 
 In round two O 'Sullivan defeated Small 5 – 1 , coming from behind to win in each of the first three frames with breaks of 58 , 81 , and 46 . A break of 112 completed the victory , after which O 'Sullivan said his opponent had made him work . In the fifth frame O 'Sullivan continued playing despite needing snookers , later explaining , " I wanted to keep playing because I was enjoying it so much " . White made breaks of 72 , 52 , 69 , 51 , and 65 in defeating Hendry 5 – 3 , after which Hendry said his performance was " horrendous " , and White said his refusal to go out the night before contributed to his performance . In the sixth frame White led by 41 points before missing an easy red , allowing Hendry to win on the black with a 55 break to level at 3 – 3 . White dominated the next two frames for the victory . Higgins , without a tournament victory for over two years , whitewashed Dott 5 – 0 with breaks of 82 , 81 , 57 , and 52 , and said it was the " best [ he had ] felt for ages " . Drago defeated Hunter 5 – 2 to reach the quarter @-@ finals of a ranking events for the first time since 1998 , in a low @-@ quality match where Drago made one break over 50 . Lee defeated Davis 5 – 3 in a four @-@ hour match , and Higgins completed a second whitewash when he beat Dott 5 – 0 , bringing his career record against Dott to 9 – 1 . Maguire defeated Perry 5 – 4 to reach his first ranking quarter @-@ final , and Hann beat Hamilton 5 – 1 to claim the final place in the next round . 
 = = = Quarter @-@ finals = = = 
 In the quarter @-@ finals Lee defeated O 'Sullivan 5 – 4 in a match that lasted 3 hours and 32 minutes . O 'Sullivan came from 2 – 3 down to lead 4 – 3 before Lee leveled the match . In the final frame O 'Sullivan led 36 – 0 , before Lee made a 46 break and fluked a snooker that enabled him to claim victory . O 'Sullivan said his performance was very poor , while Lee said he was quietly confident . White defeated Robertson 5 – 3 to reach his third semi @-@ final of the season . White led 4 – 1 and was 56 points ahead in the sixth but missed a straightforward green , allowing Robertson to win on the black with a 67 break . Robertson took the next frame before a risky long pot in the eighth allowed White to win the match . White — who last won a ranking title 12 years ago prior at this event — said , " Everyone knows I 've been in front so many times in the past and tossed it away so I was having nightmares out there " . Drago quickly won the first four frames of his match against Hann , conceding the fifth , before completing a 5 – 1 victory , after which he said the crowd support helped him . Maguire caused an upset when he beat Higgins 5 – 3 , a match that saw Maguire lose the first two frames before winning the next four . After the match Maguire he said he had " starting to think about winning it now " . 
 = = = Semi @-@ finals = = = 
 The semi @-@ finals were best @-@ of @-@ 11 frames . White reached his first final in four years when he defeated Drago 6 – 4 . Leading 4 – 1 White made a break of 104 to win the sixth frame , before missing a straightforward red to allow his opponent to win the seventh with an 84 break . Drago won the next two in 15 minutes with breaks of 44 and 109 — completing the latter in four minutes — before an 86 break gave White the victory , after which White said , " Playing Tony here , I got a taste of what players have against me at the Masters when the crowd are all on my side but they were fair and I enjoyed every minute of it . " 
 In the other semi @-@ final Maguire beat Lee 6 – 4 in an error @-@ strewn match which lasted four hours . After winning the first two frames Maguire lost the next three , but " kept his cool " to seal the victory . Maguire said the match was a " battle " and that he was surprised at how badly his opponents had played in the tournament , while Lee said he " just blew up " and that , " When you ’ re as poor as that you get into such a state of mind that you can ’ t think straight " . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 The match was White 's 23rd appearance in a final and his first since the 2000 British Open . In the best @-@ of @-@ 17 final Maguire defeated White 9 – 3 to win his first ranking title at the age of 22 , earning £ 48 @,@ 000 in prize money . The victory , according to The Times , transformed Maguire from " talented underachiever into a world @-@ ranking event winner " ; according to BBC Sport his victory was a surprise . 
 In the afternoon session Maguire made two sizeable breaks and one of 137 to lead 3 – 0 . He won the next frame and compiled a century in the fifth . The sixth frame was awarded to Maguire , when White violated the three @-@ miss rule . <unk> in the jaws of a corner pocket , White twice attempted to hit the pack of five reds off a side cushion and missed . On his third attempt he adopted a slow roll to the pack and again missed . In the evening session , trailing 0 – 6 , White won his first frame before the next four were shared , the last of which included a break of 125 by White . At 8 – 2 a break of 57 gave Maguire the victory . 
 After his victory Maguire acknowledged the influence of Terry Griffiths who had been working with him on the mental side of the game : " He 's been on the phone just telling me to keep calm and that I can do it if I believe in myself " . Maguire said he always knew he was good enough to win a tournament and that he would aim for a top @-@ 16 finish for the season . White said , " Stephen outplayed me in safety , potting and position so he deserved to win " and , " He gave me a good bashing . I 'm pleased for him because he 's a nice lad but I 'm disappointed because I didn 't compete " . 
 = = Main draw = = 
 Key 
 w / o 
 = walkover 
 w / d = 
 withdrew 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = USS Taylor ( DD @-@ 94 ) = 
 USS Taylor ( DD @-@ 94 ) was a Wickes @-@ class destroyer built in 1918 for the United States Navy , which saw service in World War I and the years following . She was named for Rear Admiral Henry Taylor . 
 One of 111 ships of her class , Taylor was commissioned near the end of World War I and patrolled in the Atlantic Ocean during and immediately following the war , though she saw no service supporting the war . After eight years out of commission , she returned to service in 1930 patrolling along the East Coast of the United States and in Latin America . Decommissioned in 1938 , she then became a training hulk . During World War II her forward section was removed and grafted onto USS Blakeley after the latter ship was damaged in a submarine attack . Taylor continued to serve as a training hulk until she was sold for scrap in 1945 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Taylor was one of 111 Wickes @-@ class destroyers built by the United States Navy between 1917 and 1919 . She , along with seven of her sisters , were constructed at Mare Island Navy Yard in San Francisco , California , using detailed designs drawn up by Bath Iron Works . 
 She had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 070 long tons ; 1 @,@ 200 short tons ) an overall length of 314 feet .5 inches ( 95 @.@ 720 m ) , a beam of 30 feet 11 @.@ 75 inches ( 9 @.@ 4425 m ) and a draught of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . On trials , Taylor reached a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . She was armed with four 4 " / 50 caliber guns , one 3 " / 23 caliber gun , and twelve 21 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . She had a regular crew complement of 122 officers and enlisted men . She was coal @-@ powered , and driven by two Curtis steam turbines powered by four Yarrow boilers with an indicated horsepower of 24 @,@ 200 shaft horsepower ( 18 @,@ 000 kW ) . 
 Specifics on Taylor 's performance are not known , but she was one of the group of Wickes @-@ class destroyers known unofficially as the ' Liberty Type ' to differentiate them from the destroyers constructed from detail designs drawn up by Bethlehem Steel , which used Parsons or Westinghouse turbines . The ' Liberty ' type destroyers deteriorated badly in service , and in 1929 all 60 of this group were retired by the Navy . Actual performance of these ships was far below intended specifications especially in fuel economy , with most only able to make 2 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 600 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) instead of the design standard of 3 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 700 km ; 3 @,@ 600 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The class also suffered from poor maneuverability and were overweight . 
 She was the first U.S. Navy ship to be named USS Taylor , commemorating Navy admiral Henry Clay Taylor . A second Taylor would be commissioned in 1942 , a Fletcher @-@ class destroyer named for William Rogers Taylor . That ship saw extensive service in World War II , the Korean War , and the Vietnam War . 
 = = History = = 
 Taylor was laid down as Destroyer No. 94 on 15 October 1917 by the Mare Island Navy Yard , and launched on 14 February 1918 . She was commissioned on 1 June 1918 , sponsored by Ms. Mary Gorgas , and under the command of Commander Charles T. Hutchins , Jr . 
 Upon commissioning , Taylor joined Destroyer Division 12 of the Atlantic Fleet . She cruised with that fleet during World War I but saw no action . Following the war on 1 April 1919 , she was assigned to Destroyer Division 8 . In 1920 , Taylor was placed in reduced commission though still operating on the Atlantic coast . That summer , on 17 July , the Navy adopted the alpha @-@ numeric hull designation system , and Taylor became DD @-@ 94 . In October , she was placed back in full commission and , until the summer of 1922 , operated with Destroyer Division 8 , Flotilla 8 , Squadron 3 . On 21 June 1922 , the ship was placed out of commission at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 Taylor remained inactive there until 1 May 1930 , when she was placed back in commission under the command of Commander George B. <unk> . She was assigned to Destroyer Division 33 , Squadron 7 , which was part of the Scouting Fleet . During this time , she operated from Charleston , South Carolina , until November when she was placed in reduced commission once again . At the same time , Taylor was detached from the Scouting Fleet and transferred to Destroyer Division 47 , Squadron 16 of the Training Squadron . She was assigned to the 6th and 7th Naval Districts to train reservists and to carry Reserve Officer Training Corps midshipmen on summer cruises . By 1 April 1931 , Scouting Fleet became Scouting Force , and the destroyer was reassigned as an element of Division 28 of the Training Squadron . She operated with that unit until early in 1934 when she joined Squadron 19 of the rotating reserve with which she remained until late 1931 . 
 On 1 September , she relieved the destroyer J. Fred Talbott on duty with the Special Service Squadron . She patrolled the West Indies and the Gulf of Mexico with that force for one year due to instability in Latin America . By 1 October 1935 , Taylor was back with the Training Squadron as a unit of the newly established Division 30 . She trained reservists until early in 1937 when she returned to the Special Service Squadron in relief of the destroyer Manley . She returned to patrols in the Caribbean area . Returning to the United States in 1938 , Taylor was moor at Philadelphia to prepare for inactivation . The destroyer was placed out of commission on 23 September 1938 . Her name was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 6 December 1938 , and she was offered for sale in July 1939 . However , on 11 July 1940 , she was redesignated Damage Control Hulk No. 40 and tasked to train damage control parties . 
 On 25 May 1942 , sister ship Blakeley was struck by a torpedo fired from German submarine U @-@ 156 while patrolling off Martinique . The torpedo struck between frames 18 and 24 at about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) below Blakeley 's water line , and the force of the impact blew off 60 feet ( 18 m ) of her bow and forecastle . Sailing under her own power to Philadelphia Naval Yard , Blakeley had the forward 60 feet of Taylor 's hull grafted onto her throughout the summer of 1942 . This was completed in September 1942 , and Blakeley , with Taylor 's forward hull , served through the remainder of the war . The remaining 255 feet ( 78 m ) of Taylor spent the remainder of World War II in her duties as a training hulk . She was sold for scrap in 1945 , and delivered on 8 August . 
 = Hurricane Ophelia ( 2011 ) = 
 Hurricane Ophelia was the most intense hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season . The seventeenth tropical cyclone , sixteenth tropical storm , fourth hurricane , and third major hurricane , Ophelia originated in a tropical wave in the central Atlantic , forming approximately midway between the Cape Verde Islands and the Lesser Antilles on September 17 . Tracking generally west @-@ northwestward , Ophelia was upgraded to a tropical storm on September 21 , and reached an initial peak of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on September 22 . As the storm entered a region of higher wind shear it began to weaken , and was subsequently downgraded to a remnant low on September 25 . The following day , however , the remnants of the system began to reorganize as wind shear lessened , and on September 27 , the National Hurricane Center once again began advisories on the system . Moving northward , Ophelia regained tropical storm status early on September 28 , and rapidly deepened to attain its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) several days later . The system weakened as it entered cooler sea surface temperatures and began a gradual transition to an extratropical cyclone , a process it completed by October 3 . 
 Following the development of Ophelia , numerous storm watches and warnings were issued for the northeastern Caribbean Islands . Residents were urged to prepare for strong winds and substantial flooding . As the system made its closest approach , Ophelia produced several inches of rainfall , leading to mudslides and several road rescues . While light rain totals and gusty winds below tropical storm force were recorded on the island of Bermuda , storm surge and dangerous rip currents along the coast caused minimal damage . In Newfoundland , heavy rainfall contributed to floods that destroyed roads and many buildings . Following Ophelia 's transition into an extratropical cyclone , residents across Europe were urged to prepare for strong winds in excess of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) in some locations , as well as rainfall accumulations up to 4 in ( 100 mm ) . In northern Ireland , a combination of moisture and significantly cooler weather produced several inches of snow across the region , cutting electricity to hundreds . Overall , there were no deaths reported in association with Ophelia , and damage was minimal . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The formation of Hurricane Ophelia is attributed in part to a low @-@ latitude tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa in mid @-@ September . As the wave tracked westward , it began to interact with the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) , and was subsequently introduced with a low chance of tropical development in the National Hurricane Center 's ( NHC ) 48 @-@ hour Tropical Weather Outlook . Though atmospheric wind shear was only marginally favorable , the cloud pattern organized , and a surface low @-@ pressure area developed in association with the disturbance . Deep shower and thunderstorm activity continued to fire as the disturbance moved in a general westward motion , and it was assessed with a high chance of development by early on September 19 . Following satellite trends and data from the Advanced Scatterometer , the disturbance was upgraded to a tropical depression at 1800 UTC the following day , while positioned roughly 1300 mi ( 2090 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles , and to a tropical storm six hours later . 
 Tropical Storm Ophelia continued to intensify as it moved west @-@ northwest . Curved convective bands became prominent in the northern semicircle of the cyclone , and deep convection developed near the center . This intensification trend was short @-@ lived , however , as increased wind shear from a nearby upper @-@ level low caused the low @-@ level center to become partially exposed . Despite the poor presentation on satellite imagery , data from a nearby buoy revealed that the system was stronger than previously thought , with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on September 22 . As the upper @-@ level low moved closer to Ophelia , inducing increasingly unfavorable shear on the storm , it caused the low @-@ pressure area to become completely void of thunderstorms . While deep convection waned significantly early on September 23 , it made a comeback by that afternoon , and an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance aircraft found 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) winds in the system , much stronger than the intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) the system was assessed with before the flight . This intensity did not maintain long as the cloud pattern once again became disorganized . The low @-@ level center became exposed once again during the pre @-@ dawn hours of September 25 , and without the return of organized shower and thunderstorm activity , led to the NHC declaring Ophelia as a remnant area of low pressure , while situated 180 mi ( 290 km ) east of the northern Leeward Islands . 
 Though the low @-@ level center dissipated later that afternoon , a well @-@ defined mid @-@ level center lingered . The National Hurricane Center initially assessed the remnants of Ophelia with a low chance of regeneration as deep convection fired in association with the low , but these odds were subsequently increased to a medium chance by the afternoon hours of September 26 . A new low @-@ level circulation developed within the well @-@ organized cloud mass , and the system was once again given a high chance of tropical cyclone formation that evening . Following an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance flight into the system , the disturbance was upgraded to Tropical Depression Ophelia at 1200 UTC on September 27 , and was once again upgraded to a tropical storm with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) 18 hours later . As the cyclone reached the western periphery of the subtropical ridge positioned across the central Atlantic , it began to curve northward and intensify once again . Deep convection blossomed atop the center late on September 28 , and microwave imagery depicted the development of an eye . Upper @-@ level outflow expanded in all four quadrants of the cyclone by the afternoon hours of September 29 , and satellite intensity estimates continued to rise , prompting the NHC to upgrade Ophelia to a Category 1 hurricane by 1800 UTC that day . 
 An unexpected period of rapid deepening began early on September 30 as a well @-@ defined eye became clearly visible on satellite imagery . Ophelia intensified into a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) by 0600 UTC and became the season 's third major hurricane — a Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale — twelve hours later . Cloud tops continued to cool in the system 's eyewall late on October 1 , with cloud tops in the eye of the system warming . Ophelia intensified into a Category 4 hurricane at 0000 UTC on October 2 and simultaneously attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 940 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) as it passed east of Bermuda . Weakening ensued the following day as the hurricane entered cooler sea surface temperatures and an environment characterized by significantly more stable air . Ophelia weakened below major hurricane intensity by 1800 UTC and became a tropical storm for the final time by 0600 UTC on October 3 . The system lost its tropical characteristics and was subsequently declared an extratropical cyclone four hours later while positioned just southwest of Newfoundland . The extratropical low was absorbed by a larger weather system by the afternoon hours of the following day . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Though the center of Ophelia remained 205 mi ( 330 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles , its outer bands produced heavy rains across the region . In Dominica , more than 4 in ( 100 mm ) of rain fell over parts of the country , triggering flooding along several rivers . Nearly 1 @,@ 600 people were stranded and many cars were washed away by the flooding , while landslides severed access to several communities . Several businesses and schools were closed in preparation of the storm . As Ophelia made its closest approach to the region , heavy rainfall submerged Canefield Airport , and numerous roads , buildings and farms were damaged , leaving residents trapped . Gusty winds , reaching 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) at times , and scattered thunderstorms affected portions of Guadeloupe . 
 Following Ophelia 's upgrade to hurricane status on September 29 , the Bermuda Weather Service ( BWS ) issued a tropical storm watch for the entirety of the island . Over the following days , the threat of damaging winds gradually decreased as the storm 's forecast track took it far enough east of the territory to spare the region of a direct hit . Correspondingly , the BWS discontinued the watch on the evening of October 1 . Four flights from the United States to Bermuda were canceled due to stormy conditions . Along the coast , the Department of Parks raised high surf warnings for the entire south shore and temporarily closed Horseshoe Beach . Additionally , a few local events were postponed . Passing roughly 140 mi ( 220 km ) east of Bermuda , the outer bands of Ophelia produced 0 @.@ 38 in ( 9 @.@ 7 mm ) of rain and wind gusts up to 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) across the islands . 
 On October 1 , Environment Canada issued a tropical storm watch for the Avalon Peninsula . Throughout Newfoundland , residents were warned of heavy rains approaching 4 in ( 100 mm ) . Striking the region just over a year after Hurricane Igor , Ophelia revealed that repairs made in the wake of the previous hurricane were occasionally inadequate . Six roads on the Burin and Bonavista peninsulas were shut down during the storm ; two of the works sustained significant damage . Several culverts installed after Igor were washed away by Ophelia . 
 While Ophelia was still impacting Newfoundland , forecasters in the United Kingdom warned residents that the remnants of the storm would bring unsettled weather to the nation within a few days . In the midst of a record @-@ breaking heat wave , with temperatures reaching an all @-@ time monthly record high of 86 ° F ( 29 @.@ 9 ° C ) , the storm was expected to bring much cooler weather across the region . Strong winds and heavy rains were also anticipated , leading to the cancellation of ferry services . <unk> temperatures in association with the remnants of the storm were expected to produce snowfall across the United Kingdom as well . In Donegal the first snows of the season fell , leaving hundreds of residents without electricity . 
 = Wieferich prime = 
 In number theory , a Wieferich prime is a prime number p such that p2 divides 2p − 1 − 1 , therefore connecting these primes with Fermat 's little theorem , which states that every odd prime p divides 2p − 1 − 1 . Wieferich primes were first described by Arthur Wieferich in 1909 in works pertaining to Fermat 's last theorem , at which time both of Fermat 's theorems were already well known to mathematicians . 
 Since then , connections between Wieferich primes and various other topics in mathematics have been discovered , including other types of numbers and primes , such as Mersenne and Fermat numbers , specific types of pseudoprimes and some types of numbers generalized from the original definition of a Wieferich prime . Over time , those connections discovered have extended to cover more properties of certain prime numbers as well as more general subjects such as number fields and the abc conjecture . 
 As of October 2014 , the only known Wieferich primes are 1093 and 3511 ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) . 
 = = Equivalent definitions = = 
 The stronger version of Fermat 's little theorem , which a Wieferich prime satisfies , is usually expressed as a congruence relation 2p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) . From the definition of the congruence relation on integers , it follows that this property is equivalent to the definition given at the beginning . Thus if a prime p satisfies this congruence , this prime divides the Fermat quotient <formula> . The following are two illustrative examples using the primes 11 and 1093 : 
 For p 
 = 11 , we get <formula> which is 93 and leaves a remainder of 5 after division by 11 , hence 11 is not a Wieferich prime . For p = 
 1093 , we get <formula> or <unk> ... <unk> ( 302 intermediate digits omitted for clarity ) , which leaves a remainder of 0 after division by 1093 and thus 1093 is a Wieferich prime . 
 Wieferich primes can be defined by other equivalent congruences . If p is a Wieferich prime , one can multiply both sides of the congruence 2p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) by 2 to get 2p ≡ 2 ( mod p2 ) . Raising both sides of the congruence to the power p shows that a Wieferich prime also satisfies <unk> ≡ 2p ≡ 2 ( mod p2 ) , and hence <unk> ≡ 2 ( mod p2 ) for all k ≥ 1 . The converse is also true : <unk> ≡ 2 ( mod p2 ) for some k ≥ 1 implies that the multiplicative order of 2 modulo p2 divides gcd ( <unk> − 1 , φ ( p2 ) ) 
 = p − 1 , that is , 2p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) and thus p is a Wieferich prime . This also implies that Wieferich primes can be defined as primes p such that the multiplicative orders of 2 modulo p and modulo p2 coincide : <unk> 2 = 
 <unk> 2 , ( By the way , <unk> 
 = 364 , and <unk> = 
 1755 ) . 
 H. S. Vandiver proved that 2p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p3 ) if and only if <formula> . 
 = = History and search status = = 
 In 1902 , W. F. Meyer proved a theorem about solutions of the congruence ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod pr ) . Later in that decade Arthur Wieferich showed specifically that if the first case of Fermat 's last theorem has solutions for an odd prime exponent , then that prime must satisfy that congruence for a 
 = 2 and r = 
 2 . In other words , if there exist solutions to <unk> + <unk> + <unk> 
 = 0 in integers x , y , z and p an odd prime with p <unk> xyz , then p satisfies 2p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) . In 1913 , Bachmann examined the residues of <formula> . He asked the question when this residue vanishes and tried to find expressions for answering this question . 
 The prime 1093 was found to be a Wieferich prime by Waldemar Meissner in 1913 and confirmed to be the only such prime below 2000 . He calculated the smallest residue of <formula> for all primes p < 2000 and found this residue to be zero for t = 
 364 and p = 1093 , thereby providing a counterexample to a conjecture by <unk> about the impossibility of the Wieferich congruence . E. <unk> later ordered verification of the correctness of <unk> congruence via only elementary calculations . Inspired by an earlier work of Euler , he simplified <unk> proof by showing that 10932 | ( 2182 + 1 ) and remarked that ( 2182 + 1 ) is a factor of ( 2364 − 1 ) . It was also shown that it is possible to prove that 1093 is a Wieferich prime without using complex numbers contrary to the method used by Meissner , although Meissner himself hinted at that he was aware of a proof without complex values . 
 The prime 3511 was first found to be a Wieferich prime by N. G. W. H. <unk> in 1922 and another proof of it being a Wieferich prime was published in 1965 by Guy . In 1960 , Kravitz doubled a previous record set by <unk> and in 1961 <unk> extended the search to <unk> with the aid of <unk> . Around 1980 , Lehmer was able to reach the search limit of 6 × 109 . This limit was extended to over 2 @.@ 5 × 1015 in 2006 , finally reaching 3 × 1015 . It is now known , that if any other Wieferich primes exist , they must be greater than 6 @.@ 7 × 1015 . The search for new Wieferich primes is currently performed by the distributed computing project Wieferich @ Home . In December 2011 , another search was started by the <unk> project . As of November 2015 , <unk> has extended the search limit to over 4 @.@ 9 × 1017 and continues . 
 It has been conjectured ( as for Wilson primes ) that infinitely many Wieferich primes exist , and that the number of Wieferich primes below x is approximately log ( log ( x ) ) , which is a heuristic result that follows from the plausible assumption that for a prime p , the ( p − 1 ) -th degree roots of unity modulo p2 are uniformly distributed in the multiplicative group of integers modulo p2 . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Connection with Fermat 's last theorem = = = 
 The following theorem connecting Wieferich primes and Fermat 's last theorem was proven by Wieferich in 1909 : 
 Let p be prime , and let x , y , z be integers such that <unk> + <unk> + <unk> 
 = 0 . Furthermore , assume that p does not divide the product xyz . Then p is a Wieferich prime . 
 The above case ( where p does not divide any of x , y or z ) is commonly known as the first case of Fermat 's last theorem ( FLTI ) and FLTI is said to fail for a prime p , if solutions to the Fermat equation exist for that p , otherwise FLTI holds for p . In 1910 , <unk> expanded the theorem by showing that , if the preconditions of the theorem hold true for some prime p , then p2 must also divide 3p − 1 − 1 . Granville and Monagan further proved that p2 must actually divide mp − 1 − 1 for every prime m ≤ 89 . Suzuki extended the proof to all primes m ≤ 113 . 
 Let Hp be a set of pairs of integers with 1 as their greatest common divisor , p being prime to x , y and x + y , ( x + y ) p − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) , ( x + <unk> ) being the <unk> power of an ideal of K with ξ defined as cos 2π / p + i sin 2π / p . K = 
 Q ( ξ ) is the field extension obtained by adjoining all polynomials in the algebraic number ξ to the field of rational numbers ( such an extension is known as a number field or in this particular case , where ξ is a root of unity , a cyclotomic number field ) . From uniqueness of factorization of ideals in Q ( ξ ) it follows that if the first case of Fermat 's last theorem has solutions x , y , z then p divides x + y + z and ( x , y ) , ( y , z ) and ( z , x ) are elements of Hp . Granville and Monagan showed that ( 1 , 1 ) ∈ Hp if and only if p is a Wieferich prime . 
 = = = Connection with the abc conjecture and non @-@ Wieferich primes = = = 
 A non @-@ Wieferich prime is a prime p satisfying 2p − 1 ≢ 1 ( mod p2 ) . J. H. Silverman showed in 1988 that if the abc conjecture holds , then there exist infinitely many non @-@ Wieferich primes . More precisely he showed that the abc conjecture implies the existence of a constant only depending on α such that the number of non @-@ Wieferich primes to base α with p less than or equal to a variable X is greater than log ( X ) as X goes to infinity . Numerical evidence suggests that very few of the prime numbers in a given interval are Wieferich primes . The set of Wieferich primes and the set of non @-@ Wieferich primes , sometimes denoted by W2 and <unk> respectively , are complementary sets , so if one of them is shown to be finite , the other one would necessarily have to be infinite , because both are proper subsets of the set of prime numbers . It was later shown that the existence of infinitely many non @-@ Wieferich primes already follows from a weaker version of the abc conjecture , called the <unk> ( k , ε ) conjecture . Additionally , the existence of infinitely many non @-@ Wieferich primes would also follow if there exist infinitely many square @-@ free Mersenne numbers as well as if there exists a real number ξ such that the set { n ∈ N : λ ( 2n − 1 ) < 2 − ξ } is of density one , where the index of composition λ ( n ) of an integer n is defined as <formula> and <formula> , meaning <formula> gives the product of all prime factors of n . 
 = = = Connection with Mersenne and Fermat primes = = = 
 It is known that the nth Mersenne number Mn = 2n − 1 is prime only if n is prime . Fermat 's little theorem implies that if p > 2 is prime , then <unk> − 1 ( 
 = 2p − 1 − 1 ) is always divisible by p . Since Mersenne numbers of prime indices <unk> and Mq are co @-@ prime , 
 A prime divisor p of Mq , where q is prime , is a Wieferich prime if and only if p2 divides Mq . 
 Thus , a Mersenne prime cannot also be a Wieferich prime . A notable open problem is to determine whether or not all Mersenne numbers of prime index are square @-@ free . If q is prime and the Mersenne number Mq is not square @-@ free , that is , there exists a prime p for which p2 divides Mq , then p is a Wieferich prime . Therefore , if there are only finitely many Wieferich primes , then there will be at most finitely many Mersenne numbers with prime index that are not square @-@ free . <unk> showed a related result : if there are infinitely many square @-@ free Mersenne numbers , then there are infinitely many non @-@ Wieferich primes . 
 Similarly , if p is prime and p2 divides some Fermat number Fn = 
 <unk> + 1 , then p must be a Wieferich prime . 
 In fact , if and only if there exists a natural number n and a prime p that p2 divides <formula> ( where <formula> is <unk> polynomial ) , then p is a Wieferich prime . For example , 10932 divides <formula> , <unk> divides <formula> . Mersenne and Fermat numbers are just special situations of <formula> . Thus , if 1093 and 3511 are only two Wieferich primes , then all <formula> are square @-@ free except <formula> and <formula> ( In fact , when there exists a prime p which p2 divides some <formula> , then it is a Wieferich prime ) ; and clearly , if <formula> is a prime , then it cannot be Wieferich prime . ( Notice any odd prime p divides only one <formula> and n divides p − 1 , and if and only if the period length of 1 / p in binary is n , then p divides <formula> . Besides , if and only if p is a Wieferich prime , then the period length of 1 / p and 1 / p2 are the same ( in binary ) . Otherwise , this is p times than that . ) 
 For the primes 1093 and 3511 , it was shown that neither of them is a divisor of any Mersenne number with prime index nor a divisor of any Fermat number , because 364 and 1755 are neither prime nor powers of 2 . 
 = = = Connection with other equations = = = 
 Scott and Styer showed that the equation px – <unk> 
 = d has at most one solution in positive integers ( x , y ) , unless when p4 | <unk> 2 – 1 if p ≢ 65 ( mod 192 ) or unconditionally when p2 | <unk> 2 – 1 , where <unk> 2 denotes the multiplicative order of 2 modulo p . They also showed that a solution to the equation ± ax1 ± <unk> = 
 ± ax2 ± <unk> = c must be from a specific set of equations but that this does not hold , if a is a Wieferich prime greater than 1 @.@ 25 x 1015 . 
 = = = Binary periodicity of p − 1 = = = 
 Johnson observed that the two known Wieferich primes are one greater than numbers with periodic binary expansions ( 1092 = <unk> = <unk> ; 3510 = <unk> = <unk> ) . The Wieferich @ Home project searches for Wieferich primes by testing numbers that are one greater than a number with a periodic binary expansion , but up to a " bit pseudo @-@ length " of 3500 of the tested binary numbers generated by combination of bit strings with a bit length of up to 24 it has not found a new Wieferich prime . 
 = = = <unk> of p − 1 = = = 
 It has been noted ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) that the known Wieferich primes are one greater than mutually friendly numbers ( the shared <unk> index being 112 / 39 ) . 
 = = = Connection with pseudoprimes = = = 
 It was observed that the two known Wieferich primes are the square factors of all non @-@ square free base @-@ 2 Fermat pseudoprimes up to 25 × 109 . Later computations showed that the only repeated factors of the pseudoprimes up to 1012 are 1093 and 3511 . In addition , the following connection exists : Let n be a base 2 <unk> and p be a prime divisor of n . If <formula> , then also <formula> . Furthermore , if p is a Wieferich prime , then p2 is a Catalan <unk> . 
 = = = Connection with directed graphs = = = 
 For all primes up to 100000 L ( pn + 1 ) 
 = L ( pn ) only for two cases : L ( 10932 ) = 
 L ( 1093 ) 
 = 364 and L ( <unk> ) = 
 L ( 3511 ) 
 = 1755 , where m is the modulus of the doubling diagram and L ( m ) gives the number of vertices in the cycle of 1 . The term doubling diagram refers to the directed graph with 0 and the natural numbers less than m as vertices with arrows pointing from each vertex x to vertex 2x reduced modulo m . It was shown , that for all odd prime numbers either L ( pn + 1 ) = 
 p · L ( pn ) or L ( pn + 1 ) = L ( pn ) . 
 = = = Properties related to number fields = = = 
 It was shown that <formula> and <formula> if and only if 2p − 1 ≢ 1 ( mod p2 ) where p is an odd prime and <formula> is the fundamental discriminant of the imaginary quadratic field <formula> . Furthermore , the following was shown : Let p be a Wieferich prime . If p ≡ 3 ( mod 4 ) , let <formula> be the fundamental discriminant of the imaginary quadratic field <formula> and if p ≡ 1 ( mod 4 ) , let <formula> be the fundamental discriminant of the imaginary quadratic field <formula> . Then <formula> and <formula> ( χ and λ in this context denote Iwasawa invariants ) . 
 Furthermore , the following result was obtained : Let q be an odd prime number , k and p are primes such that p = 2k + 1 , k ≡ 3 ( mod 4 ) , p ≡ − 1 ( mod q ) , p ≢ − 1 ( mod q3 ) and the order of q modulo k is <formula> . Assume that q divides h + , the class number of the real cyclotomic field <formula> , the cyclotomic field obtained by adjoining the sum of a p @-@ th root of unity and its reciprocal to the field of rational numbers . Then q is a Wieferich prime . This also holds if the conditions p ≡ − 1 ( mod q ) and p ≢ − 1 ( mod q3 ) are replaced by p ≡ − 3 ( mod q ) and p ≢ − 3 ( mod q3 ) as well as when the condition p ≡ − 1 ( mod q ) is replaced by p ≡ − 5 ( mod q ) ( in which case q is a Wall − Sun − Sun prime ) and the incongruence condition replaced by p ≢ − 5 ( mod q3 ) . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 = = = Near @-@ Wieferich primes = = = 
 A prime p satisfying the congruence 2 ( p − 1 ) / 2 ≡ ± 1 + Ap ( mod p2 ) with small | A | is commonly called a near @-@ Wieferich prime ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) . Near @-@ Wieferich primes with A = 0 represent Wieferich primes . Recent searches , in addition to their primary search for Wieferich primes , also tried to find near @-@ Wieferich primes . The following table lists all near @-@ Wieferich primes with | A | ≤ 10 in the interval [ 1 × 109 , 3 × 1015 ] . This search bound was reached in 2006 in a search effort by P. Carlisle , R. Crandall and M. <unk> . 
 The sign + 1 or -1 above can be easily predicted by Euler 's criterion ( and the second supplement to the law of quadratic reciprocity ) . 
 Dorais and <unk> used a different definition of a near @-@ Wieferich prime , defining it as a prime p with small value of <formula> where <formula> is the Fermat quotient of 2 with respect to p modulo p ( the modulo operation here gives the residue with the smallest absolute value ) . The following table lists all primes p ≤ 6 @.@ 7 × 1015 with <formula> . 
 The two notions of nearness are related as follows . If <formula> , then by squaring , clearly <formula> . So if A had been chosen with <formula> small , then clearly <formula> is also ( quite ) small , and an even number . However , when <formula> is odd above , the related A from before the last squaring was not " small " . For example , with <formula> , we have <formula> which reads extremely non @-@ near , but after squaring this is <formula> which is a near @-@ Wieferich by the second definition . 
 = = = Base @-@ a Wieferich primes = = = 
 A Wieferich prime base a is a prime p that satisfies 
 ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) . 
 Such a prime cannot divide a , since then it would also divide 1 . 
 It 's a conjecture that for every natural number a , there are infinitely many Wieferich primes in base a . 
 Bolyai showed that if p and q are primes , a is a positive integer not divisible by p and q such that ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod q ) , aq − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p ) , then <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod pq ) . Setting p 
 = q leads to <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) . It was shown that <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) if and only if ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) . 
 Known solutions of ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) for small values of a are : ( checked up to 5 × 1013 ) 
 For more information , see and . ( Note that the solutions to a = 
 <unk> is the union of the prime divisors of k which does not divide b and the solutions to a 
 = b ) 
 The smallest solutions of <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) are 
 2 , 1093 , 11 , 1093 , 2 , 66161 , 5 , 3 , 2 , 3 , 71 , 2693 , 2 , 29 , <unk> , 1093 , 2 , 5 , 3 , 281 , 2 , 13 , 13 , 5 , 2 , 3 , 11 , 3 , 2 , 7 , 7 , 5 , 2 , <unk> , 3 , 66161 , 2 , 17 , 8039 , 11 , 2 , 23 , 5 , 3 , 2 , 3 , ... ( The next term > 4 @.@ 9 × 1013 ) ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) 
 There are no known solutions of <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) for n = 
 47 , 72 , 186 , 187 , 200 , 203 , 222 , 231 , 304 , 311 , 335 , 347 , 355 , 435 , 454 , 542 , 546 , 554 , 610 , 639 , 662 , 760 , 772 , 798 , 808 , 812 , 858 , 860 , 871 , 983 , 986 , 1002 , 1023 , 1130 , 1136 , 1138 , .... 
 It is a conjecture that there are infinity many solutions of ap − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) for every natural number a . 
 The bases b < p2 which p is a Wieferich prime are ( for b > p2 , the solutions are just shifted by k · p2 for k > 0 ) , and there are p − 1 solutions < p2 of p and the set of the solutions congruent to p are { 1 , 2 , 3 , ... , p − 1 } ) ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) 
 The least base b > 1 which prime ( n ) is a Wieferich prime are 
 5 , 8 , 7 , 18 , 3 , 19 , 38 , 28 , 28 , 14 , 115 , 18 , 51 , 19 , 53 , 338 , 53 , 264 , 143 , 11 , 306 , 31 , 99 , 184 , 53 , 181 , 43 , 164 , 96 , 68 , 38 , 58 , 19 , 328 , 313 , 78 , 226 , 65 , 253 , 259 , 532 , 78 , 176 , 276 , 143 , 174 , 165 , 69 , 330 , 44 , 33 , 332 , 94 , 263 , 48 , 79 , 171 , 747 , 731 , 20 , ... ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) 
 We can also consider the formula <formula> , ( because of the generalized Fermat little theorem , <formula> is true for all prime p and all natural number a such that both a and a + 1 are not divisible by p ) . It 's a conjecture that for every natural number a , there are infinitely many primes such that <formula> . 
 Known solutions for small a are : ( checked up to 4 × 1011 ) 
 = = = Wieferich pairs = = = 
 A Wieferich pair is a pair of primes p and q that satisfy 
 pq − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod q2 ) and <unk> − 1 ≡ 1 ( mod p2 ) 
 so that a Wieferich prime p ≡ 1 ( mod 4 ) will form such a pair ( p , 2 ) : the only known instance in this case is p = 1093 . There are only 7 known Wieferich pairs . 
 ( 2 , 1093 ) , ( 3 , <unk> ) , ( 5 , <unk> ) , ( 5 , <unk> ) , ( 83 , 4871 ) , ( 911 , <unk> ) , and ( 2903 , <unk> ) ( sequences <unk> , <unk> and <unk> in OEIS ) 
 = = = Wieferich sequence = = = 
 Start with a ( 1 ) any natural number ( > 1 ) , a ( n ) 
 = the smallest prime p such that ( a ( n − 1 ) ) p − 1 = 
 1 ( mod p2 ) but p2 does not divide a ( n − 1 ) − 1 or a ( n − 1 ) + 1 . ( If p2 divides a ( n − 1 ) − 1 or a ( n − 1 ) + 1 , then the solution is a trivial solution ) It is a conjecture that every natural number k 
 = a ( 1 ) > 1 makes this sequence become periodic , for example , let a ( 1 ) = 
 2 : 
 2 , 1093 , 5 , 20771 , 18043 , 5 , 20771 , 18043 , 5 , ... , it gets a cycle : { 5 , 20771 , 18043 } . 
 Let a ( 1 ) 
 = 83 : 
 83 , 4871 , 83 , 4871 , 83 , 4871 , 83 , ... , it gets a cycle : { 83 , 4871 } . 
 Let a ( 1 ) = 
 59 ( a longer sequence ) : 
 59 , <unk> , <unk> , 13 , 863 , 7 , 5 , 20771 , 18043 , 5 , ... , it also gets 5 . 
 However , there are many values of a ( 1 ) with unknown status , for example , let a ( 1 ) 
 = 3 : 
 3 , 11 , 71 , 47 , ? ( There are no known Wieferich primes in base 47 ) . 
 Let a ( 1 ) = 
 14 : 
 14 , 29 , ? ( There are no known Wieferich prime in base 29 except 2 , but 22 
 = 4 divides 29 − 1 = 
 28 ) 
 Let a ( 1 ) = 39 ( a longer sequence ) : 
 39 , 8039 , 617 , 101 , <unk> , 29 , ? ( It also gets 29 ) 
 It is unknown that values for a ( 1 ) > 1 exist such that the resulting sequence does not eventually become periodic . 
 When a ( n − 1 ) = k , a ( n ) will be ( start with k 
 = 2 ) : 1093 , 11 , 1093 , 20771 , 66161 , 5 , 1093 , 11 , 487 , 71 , 2693 , 863 , 29 , <unk> , 1093 , <unk> , 5 , 7 , 281 , ? , 13 , 13 , <unk> , 20771 , 71 , 11 , 19 , ? , 7 , 7 , 5 , 233 , <unk> , 1613 , 66161 , <unk> , 17 , 8039 , 11 , 29 , 23 , 5 , 229 , 1283 , 829 , ? , 257 , <unk> , ? , ... ( For k = 
 21 , 29 , 47 , 50 , even the next value is unknown ) 
 = = = Wieferich numbers = = = 
 A Wieferich number is an odd natural number n satisfying the congruence <unk> ( n ) ≡ 1 ( mod n2 ) , where φ denotes the Euler 's totient function ( according to Euler 's theorem , <unk> ( n ) ≡ 1 ( mod n ) for every odd natural number n ) . If Wieferich number n is prime , then it is a Wieferich prime . The first few Wieferich numbers are : 
 1 , 1093 , <unk> , 3511 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , … ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) 
 It can be shown that if there are only finitely many Wieferich primes , then there are only finitely many Wieferich numbers . In particular , if the only Wieferich primes are 1093 and 3511 , then there exist exactly 105 Wieferich numbers , which matches the number of Wieferich numbers currently known . 
 More generally , a natural number n is a Wieferich number to base a , if <unk> ( n ) ≡ 1 ( mod n2 ) . 
 Another definition specifies a Wieferich number as odd natural number n such that n and <formula> are not coprime , where m is the multiplicative order of 2 modulo n . The first of these numbers are : 
 21 , 39 , 55 , 57 , 105 , 111 , 147 , 155 , 165 , 171 , 183 , 195 , 201 , 203 , 205 , 219 , 231 , 237 , 253 , 273 , 285 , 291 , 301 , 305 , 309 , 327 , 333 , 355 , 357 , 385 , 399 , … ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) 
 As above , if Wieferich number q is prime , then it is a Wieferich prime . 
 = = = Lucas – Wieferich primes = = = 
 A Lucas – Wieferich prime associated with the pair of integers ( P , Q ) is a prime p such that Up − ε ( P , Q ) ≡ 0 ( mod p2 ) , where Un ( P , Q ) denotes the Lucas sequence of the first kind and ε equals the Legendre symbol <formula> . All Wieferich primes are Lucas @-@ Wieferich primes associated with the pair ( 3 , 2 ) . 
 = = = = Fibonacci – Wieferich primes = = = = 
 Let Q 
 = − 1 , P be any natural number , these primes are called P @-@ Fibonacci – Wieferich primes or P @-@ Wall – Sun – Sun primes , and if P = 
 1 , they are called Fibonacci @-@ Wieferich primes , and if P 
 = 2 , they are called Pell – Wieferich primes . For example , 241 is a Wieferich prime when P = 
 3 , so it is a 3 @-@ Fibonacci @-@ Wieferich prime or 3 @-@ Wall – Sun – Sun prime . In fact , 3 is an n @-@ Fibonacci @-@ Wieferich prime if and only if n congruent to 0 , 4 , or 5 ( mod 9 ) , like the traditional Wieferich primes , 3 is a base n Wieferich prime if and only if n congruent to 1 or 8 ( mod 9 ) . 
 = = = Wieferich places = = = 
 Let K be a global field , i.e. a number field or a function field in one variable over a finite field and let E be an elliptic curve . If v is a non @-@ <unk> place of norm <unk> of K and a ∈ K , with v ( a ) = 0 then v ( <unk> − 1 − 1 ) ≥ 1 @.@ v is called a Wieferich place for base a , if v ( <unk> − 1 − 1 ) > 1 , an elliptic Wieferich place for base P ∈ E , if <unk> ∈ E2 and a strong elliptic Wieferich place for base P ∈ E if <unk> ∈ E2 , where <unk> is the order of P modulo v and <unk> gives the number of rational points ( over the residue field of v ) of the reduction of E at v. 
 = William B. Davis = 
 William Bruce Davis ( born January 13 , 1938 ) is a Canadian actor and director , best known for his role as The Smoking Man on The X @-@ Files . Besides appearing in many TV programs and movies , Davis founded his own acting school , the William Davis Centre for Actors Study . In his personal life , Davis is an avid water @-@ skier , lectures on skepticism at events such as the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry 's <unk> , and advocates for action on climate change . In 2011 Davis published his memoir , Where There ’ s Smoke .... The Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Davis was born in Toronto , Canada , to a lawyer father and psychologist mother . He began his acting career as a child in 1949 , in radio drama and summer stock theatre . His cousins Murray and Donald Davis ran the Straw Hat Players in Ontario in the late 1940s and early 1950s , and rehearsed in the basement of Davis ' house . When they needed a boy they gave William his first professional acting job . He went on from there to have a career as a boy actor on Canadian Broadcasting Corporation radio before his voice broke . In 1955 he enrolled in the University of Toronto to study philosophy , but actively pursued a career as an actor alongside future actor Donald Sutherland . In 1959 , he graduated from the University of Toronto with a Bachelor of Arts in philosophy . While at university he switched his attention from acting to directing and with his partner , Karl <unk> , took over and ran the Straw Hat Players for four years . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1960 Davis went to England to train at LAMDA ( The London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art ) . He worked in the UK for the next five years directing in repertory theatres and acting schools . He was artistic director of the Dundee Repertory Theatre . His last position in the UK was as an assistant director at The National Theatre of Great Britain under Laurence Olivier where he worked with Albert Finney , Maggie Smith , Derek Jacobi , and Ronald Pickup among others . He returned to Canada in 1965 to work at The National Theatre School of Canada and soon , at the age of 28 , was appointed artistic director of the English Acting Section . During this period he was also active as a freelance director at major Canadian theatres . In 1971 he joined the newly formed Drama Department at Bishop 's University in <unk> , Quebec . While there he became the founding artistic director of Festival <unk> , a professional summer theatre that ran for the next decade . 
 Returning to Toronto in the late seventies Davis spent several years as a radio drama director and on the faculty of Humber College . In demand as an acting teacher during this period , he resumed acting after an absence of nearly twenty years . Davis earned a number of roles on stage and film before accepting the position of artistic director of the Vancouver Playhouse Acting School , which required relocating with his wife and family . Davis writes in his memoir , " And so , in the fall of 1985 , we hitched our second hand boat to our second hand car and drove across the country " . 
 While his time at the Vancouver Playhouse was short @-@ lived , he remained in Vancouver where he founded his own acting school , The William Davis Centre for Actors Study , a training ground for several future stars including Lucy Lawless . Acting roles became more frequent leading to his iconic role , The Smoking Man ( also referred to as " The Cancer Man " ) , on The X @-@ Files where he made frequent appearances for the next nine years . In addition to The X @-@ Files , Davis has played a wide range of roles , on series from Stargate SG @-@ 1 to Smallville and a host of television movies and other projects . From time to time he attends fan conventions , signing autographs and copies of his memoir . 
 In recent years Davis has returned to directing for theatre and film . He wrote and directed three short films and co @-@ wrote and directed several episodes of a television series for CBC Television , 49th & Main . In 2011 he directed two plays for The United Players of Vancouver , Waste by Harley Granville Barker and Hay Fever by Noël Coward . Most recently he directed The Habit of Art ( 2013 ) by Alan Bennett , Sherlock Holmes and the Case of the Jersey Lily ( 2015 ) by Katie <unk> and Robert Bolt ’ s A Man for All Seasons at the Jericho Arts Centre in Vancouver , British Columbia . 
 During that period , he also aired in 10 episodes of the Canadian hit show Continuum as Older Alec Sadler on Showcase . Most recently , Davis his reprised his iconic X @-@ Files role in the six @-@ episode Season 10 . [ 17 ] Fox aired the six @-@ episode event from January 24 – February 22 , 2016 , and enjoyed great ratings , making each four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour session in the make @-@ up chair worth it for the “ iconic ” villain . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Despite being known for his smoking character , Davis quit smoking in the 1970s ; when The X @-@ Files started up , he was given a choice between herbal cigarettes and tobacco cigarettes . At first , he chose to use tobacco cigarettes , but switched to herbal because he was afraid of becoming addicted to them again . Davis used his notoriety on the show to assist The Canadian Cancer Society in its programs to combat smoking . In 2014 , Davis donated his investments that support fossil fuels to the David Suzuki Foundation in an effort to both ethically invest , and help fund work to fight climate change . Davis is a passionate advocate for action in response to climate change , believes it is a critical issue of our time and speaks on the subject often . Taking action on a personal level , Davis drives a Tesla powered by hydroelectricity . 
 He is also a former national champion water skier and for a time held various records in older age divisions . In a conversation with Brendan Beiser , Davis states he holds the record for tricks in his age category , adding " I did hold the slalom record until this past year until some young <unk> of 65 from Ontario took the record away from me " . 
 In 2011 , Davis married Emmanuelle Herpin . He has two daughters , Melinda and Rebecca , from an earlier marriage . He also has two grandchildren . 
 = = Skepticism = = 
 While on The X @-@ Files , Davis was constantly challenged by The X @-@ Files fans about his non @-@ belief in the paranormal and aliens . Davis credits Barry Beyerstein and Committee for Skeptical Inquiry ( CSI ) for introducing him to the skeptic community . Davis became increasingly involved in the skeptical movement and began to give lectures as a skeptical spokesman at universities across North America and at skeptic conventions , including CSI 's <unk> in New Orleans . 
 When asked about his belief in the paranormal at the London Film and Comic Con in 2010 , Davis replied , " The onus is on you to prove the extraordinary ... I did a lot of research and saw where a lot of the arguments were wanting . " 
 Interviewed by Jacob Fortin on guilt about being a skeptic on a show that Richard Dawkins campaigned against , Davis replied that at first he had some trepidation until realizing that Dawkins " had no evidence whatsoever and presented none " that the show encouraged people to think uncritically . " The show is fiction ... it isn 't a documentary . " In another interview with Justin Trottier of Center for Inquiry Canada Davis answered similarly , adding that from his own informal polls of audiences of X @-@ Files fans it seemed there was no greater belief in the paranormal than the normal population and he comforted himself with this thought . 
 Asked about a debate Davis moderated with alien abduction believer John E. Mack , Davis said that many people expected him to support Mack , but they discovered that he was " way on the other side " . Davis recounted that he had some great discussions with Mack ; " He was brilliant ... he was wrong , but he was very good ... One of the problems with human intelligence is that we are so good at defending ideas that we arrived at irrationally . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Hispanics in the United States Coast Guard = 
 Hispanics in the United States Coast Guard can trace their tradition of service to the early 19th century , when they initially performed duties at light house stations as keepers and assistant keepers in its predecessor services ( the United States Revenue Cutter Service and the United States Life @-@ Saving Service ) . Hispanic is an ethnic term employed to categorize any citizen or resident of the United States , of any racial background , of any country , and of any religion , who has at least one ancestor from the people of Spain or is of non @-@ Hispanic origin , but has an ancestor from Mexico , Puerto Rico , Cuba , Central or South America , or some other Hispanic origin . The three largest Hispanic groups in the United States are the Mexican @-@ Americans , Puerto Ricans , and Cubans . 
 According to the U.S. Census Bureau the estimated Hispanic population of the United States is over 50 million , or 16 % of the U.S. population , and Hispanics are the nation 's largest ethnic or racial minority . The 2010 U.S. Census estimate of over 50 million Hispanics in the U.S. does not include the 3 @.@ 9 million residents of Puerto Rico , thereby making the people of Hispanic origin the nation 's largest ethnic or race minority as of July 1 , 2005 . 
 Amongst the Hispanic pioneers in the Coast Guard were the Andreu family of Florida ; Joseph Ximenez , the first Hispanic @-@ American to command a Coast Guard vessel ; and Detlef Frederick Argentine de Otte , the first Hispanic to graduate from Revenue Cutter Service School of Instruction . The Coast Guard can be transferred to the Department of the Navy by the President or Congress during time of war . During World War I , Hispanics served in the United States Revenue Cutter Service and U.S. Life @-@ Saving Service ; and during World War II , Hispanics served aboard ships guarding the shores of the United States and the Atlantic Ocean against enemy submarines . However some men , such as Jose R. Zaragoza , served on missions on lonely atolls . Hispanics have served in every major conflict , and continue to do so . Coast guard service is not limited to armed conflicts with other nations ; the Coast Guard also plays a vital role in the apprehension of illegal immigrants and drug smugglers . 
 Hispanic men and women have reached the top ranks of the Coast Guard , serving their country in sensitive leadership positions on domestic and foreign shores . In 1991 , LTJG Katherine <unk> became the first Hispanic @-@ American female to command an afloat unit . In 2006 , Ronald J. Rábago was the first Hispanic @-@ American promoted to Rear Admiral ( lower half ) . In 2009 , Rear Admiral Joseph R. Castillo became the first Hispanic @-@ American district commander in the U.S. Coast Guard . Hispanics currently account for 11 % of the enlisted personnel , and 9 % of the United States Coast Guard Academy 's student body . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1800 – 1900 = = = 
 The United States Coast Guard was formed in 1915 when its predecessors – the United States Life @-@ Saving Service and the United States Revenue Cutter Service , which was established in 1790 by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton as an armed maritime law enforcement service – were merged . According to Dr. William H. <unk> , Ph.D. , Atlantic Area Historian of the United States Coast Guard , the following events involving Hispanics occurred in the early years of the Coast Guard its predecessor services . 
 The first Hispanic to serve in the United States Revenue Cutter Service , predecessor to the Coast Guard , was Juan Andreu who from 1824 to 1845 served as the Keeper of the St. Augustine Lighthouse in Florida , thus making him also the first Hispanic to oversee a U.S. federal installation of any kind . Maria Andreu ( a.k.a. Maria Mestre de los Dolores ) , a family member , followed in his footsteps and served as Keeper of the same lighthouse from 1859 to 1862 , becoming the first Hispanic @-@ American woman to serve in the Coast Guard ( <unk> ) and the first Hispanic @-@ American woman to command a U.S. federal shore installation . 
 The first Hispanic @-@ American to command a Coast Guard vessel ( <unk> ) was Joseph Ximenez , who took command of the Carysfort Reef Lightship in Florida in 1843 . He was not , however , the first Hispanic officer . That distinction belongs to Domingo <unk> , who is listed by the United States Revenue Cutter Service Register as having served aboard USRC Grant in 1872 , as an engineering officer . The first known Hispanics to have served in the U.S. Life @-@ Saving Service were <unk> <unk> Pena and Ramon Delgado who , in 1897 , served at the Brazos Life @-@ Saving Station in Texas . 
 Born in Buenos Aires , Argentina , Detlef Frederick Argentine de Otte entered the Revenue Cutter Service Academy in 1889 and graduated in 1891 . During his career he served aboard the USRC Levi Woodbury as Second Lieutenant . During the Spanish – American War he served with the North Atlantic Squadron , which took part in the blockade of Havana . Cuba . He later assumed command of several cutters ; served as Captain of the Port for Brest , France , during World War I ; and became the first Commander of the service ’ s Norfolk District , now known as Coast Guard District " 5 . " He rose to the rank of Commodore and received a promotion to Rear Admiral in retirement . 
 = = = 1900 – 1941 = = = 
 In 1914 , the schooner Isaiah K. <unk> sank off the coast of Massachusetts during a storm . Mess Attendant First Class Arthur J. Flores and Seaman John E. Gomez , assigned to USRC Acushnet , volunteered to save survivors of the schooner and were awarded the Silver Lifesaving Medal for their heroism . That same year , USRC Algonquin , which was stationed in the Caribbean , set sail with fifteen Hispanic @-@ Americans ( a fourth of the cutter 's complement ) to San Juan , Puerto Rico to assist the Puerto Ricans battling fires that threatened to destroy parts of that city . In 1915 , the City of San Juan , Puerto Rico , paid tribute to the crew of the cutter Algonquin and presented them with an Official Resolution of Thanks . The Coast Guard was already formed by September 1918 , with the merger of United States Revenue Cutter Service and United States Life @-@ Saving Service , when Seaman Richard E. Cordova became the first Hispanic Coast Guardsman to perish in a military conflict when his cutter , the USCGC Tampa , was torpedoed and sunk with all its crew by a German U @-@ Boat during World War I. The Coast Guard can be transferred to the Department of the Navy by the President or Congress during time of war . Boatswains Mate First Class Pablo <unk> and <unk> Indalecio Lopez , members of the Texas Brazos Life @-@ Saving Station crew were awarded the Coast Guard Silver Lifesaving Medal and The Grand Cross Medal from the American Cross of Honor Society for their assistance in the rescue of the crew of the schooner Cape Horn on September 16 , 1919 . In 1935 , Chief Boatswains Mate Pablo <unk> was given command of the Port Isabel ( Texas ) Boat Station , becoming the first Hispanic @-@ American to do so . 
 On September 28 , 1925 , Chief Warrant Officer 2 Joseph B. Aviles , Sr. ( 1897 – 1990 ) , born in a farm near the town of Naranjito , Puerto Rico when the island was still a Spanish colony , became the first Hispanic chief petty officer in the Coast Guard . During World War II he received a war @-@ time promotion to chief warrant officer , becoming the first Hispanic to reach that level as well . Aviles joined the United States Navy in 1915 and served seven years and eight months , eventually reaching the rank of Chief Gunner 's Mate . During the years that he served in the Navy , the United States Congress passed the Jones – Shafroth Act ( 1917 ) which conferred United States citizenship on all citizens of Puerto Rico . On September 28 , 1925 , he entered the United States Coast Guard with the rate of chief gunners mate and served for two years before re @-@ enlisting on September 11 , 1928 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During World War II , the Coast Guard was transferred to the Department of the Navy and as such many men saw action in said conflict . During the invasion of Saipan , which began on June 15 , 1944 , Valentin R. Fernandez , a landing craft coxswain , was awarded a Silver Lifesaving Medal for maneuvering a Marine landing party ashore under constant Japanese attack . The first known Hispanic @-@ American Coast Guardsman to be awarded with a Bronze Star Medal was Louis Rua , whose craft , a U.S. Army large tug en route to the Philippines , went to the rescue of another ship which had been torpedoed by enemy action and helped saved 277 survivors from the abandoned ship , while serving aboard a U.S. Army large tug en route to the Philippines . 
 Upon the outbreak of World War II , Joseph B. Aviles , Sr. received a war @-@ time promotion to chief warrant officer ( November 27 , 1944 ) , thus becoming the first Hispanic American to reach that level as well . He retired from the Coast Guard on July 27 , 1946 and worked as a security guard at a hospital in Baltimore until 1962 when at the age of 65 he retired . Aviles died at his residence in Columbia , Maryland , on February 22 , 1990 and was buried with full military honors in Plot D O <unk> of the Baltimore National Cemetery at Catonsville , MD . 
 Lieutenant Junior Grade Clarence Samuels , born on <unk> , Panama , enlisted in the Coast Guard on July 16 , 1920 and became a naturalized citizen of the United States on July 21 , 1923 . On May 12 , 1939 he was appointed a chief photographer 's mate becoming not only the first Hispanic of African descent photographer in the Guard , but also only the second photographer in the entire history of the Service . On July 29 , 1944 , he assumed command of Lightship No. 115 , operating in the Panama Sea Frontier . Thus , he became the first admitted Hispanic of African descent to command a cutter , as well as the first one to be an officer @-@ in @-@ charge of a Coast Guard vessel during wartime . Samuels entered the Coast Guard as a seaman 2nd Class and reached the rank of lieutenant ( as a part of the massive demobilization of the Coast Guard following the end of hostilities , his lieutenancy was revoked and he was dis @-@ rated to chief photographer 's mate ) . Samuels retired from the Coast Guard on September 1 , 1947 . 
 Gunner 's Mate Second Class Joseph Tezanos , a native of Santander , Spain , was aboard LST 20 in Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , when an explosion on board one of the armada ’ s LSTs set off a chain reaction . Tezanos along with a gang of several other hastily assembled volunteers scrambled on board a rescue boat . Tezanos and his shipmates rescued men from the water in danger of drowning and evacuated others from the burning ships . He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for " distinguished heroism while serving as a volunteer member of a boat crew engaged in rescue operations during a fire in Pearl Harbor , Oahu , T.H. on 21 May 1944 . Under conditions of great personal danger from fire and explosions and with disregard of his own safety he assisted in the rescuing of approximately 42 survivors some of whom were injured and exhausted from the water and from burning ships . " Tezanos saw action at Kiska , Alaska ; Tarawa Atoll in the Gilbert Islands ; and Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands . Tezanos was sent to New London , Connecticut , at the Coast Guard Academy to take the four @-@ month program , from which he graduated in 1945 , becoming the first known Hispanic American to complete the service ’ s Reserve Officer Training Program and one of the very first Hispanic American officers in the United States Coast Guard . After the war he built a successful career in the international business world . 
 In December 1942 , Lt. Juan del Castillo became the first Hispanic American to receive an officer ’ s commission upon his graduation from the Officer ’ s Candidate School . Del Castillo , who enlisted in June 1942 , served on convoys in the Caribbean and on board cutters in the North Pacific . He also received training at the Naval Communications School at Harvard University . After he retired he worked for the U.S. Department of Agriculture and developed " CSM , " a high @-@ protein food substance used in disaster relief , famines and mass feeding operations . 
 Another <unk> graduate was Lieutenant John <unk> Martinez , who was born in New Orleans and entered the service during World War II . He received an Academy appointment in 1946 , and in 1951 was commissioned an ensign in the Coast Guard . From 1954 to 1956 <unk> . Martinez served as commanding officer at the LORAN Transmitting Station in <unk> , Japan . Martinez prepared and delivered classes in LORAN ( Long Range Aids to Navigation ) procedures at the U.S. Air Force 34th Bombardment Squadron which was stationed nearby . He was later assigned as advisor in the U.S. Naval Mission to the Haitian Garde @-@ Cotes d <unk> . He taught classes for the Haitian military leadership and later oversaw the overhaul of Garde @-@ Cotes patrol vessels . 
 Not everyone served aboard ships during the war . Some men like Jose R. Zaragoza served on missions on some lonely atolls . When 19 @-@ year @-@ old Zaragoza , a native of Los Angeles , California , joined the Coast Guard , he was sent on patrols in the Pacific coast of the United States to defend against sabotage and invasion from the Japanese . Later he received instructions in the then @-@ emerging and secretive field of LORAN navigation and was sent to Ulithi atoll , located between Guam and the Philippines . He assisted with LORAN research and development , and served on Ulithi for 15 months . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 During the Vietnam War , Fireman Heriberto S. " Ed " Hernandez from San Antonio , Texas , enlisted in the Coast Guard . In 1968 , he was deployed for duty with Coast Guard Squadron One in Vietnam and was assigned to the USCGC Point Cypress , an 82 @-@ foot ( 25 m ) cutter . On December 5 , 1968 Point Cypress was attacked and Hernandez was killed during small boat operations . He was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star Medal with a combat " V " for valor and a Purple Heart Medal . Vice Admiral Elmo R. Zumwalt wrote : " Fireman Hernandez 's heroic actions under enemy fire were instrumental to the success of friendly forces in harassing and destroying the enemy 's morale and feeling of security . Fireman Hernandez 's professional skill , courage under enemy fire , and devotion to duty reflected great credit upon himself , and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . " The first Hispanic @-@ American Coast Guardsman to receive the Silver Star Medal for combat action in Vietnam was Engineman Second Class Larry D. Villareal on January 21 , 1969 . 
 = = = Post – Vietnam War = = = 
 On September 16 , 2000 , Seaman Apprentice William Ray " Billy " Flores , was posthumously awarded the Coast Guard Medal in a ceremony near Ft . Worth , Texas . The Coast Guard Medal is awarded to any service member who , while serving in any capacity with the United States Coast Guard , distinguishes themselves by heroism not involving actual conflict with an enemy . On January 28 , 1980 , Flores ' cutter , USCGC Blackthorn , collided with the tanker Capricorn . After the ships collided , Blackthorn capsized , and Flores and another crew member threw life @-@ jackets to their shipmates who had jumped into the water . As the Blackthorn began to submerge , Flores used his own belt to strap open the life @-@ jacket locker door , allowing additional life @-@ jackets to float to the surface . He remained aboard to assist trapped shipmates and to comfort those who were injured and disoriented . Flores died in the line of duty . 
 In 2006 , Ronald J. Rábago became the first person born in the United States of Hispanic American descent to be promoted to Rear Admiral ( lower half ) in the Coast Guard . He was the Coast Guard 's Program Executive Officer ( <unk> ) and Director of Acquisition Programs . On July 13 , 2007 , Rábago relieved Rear Adm. Gary T. Blore as the program executive officer of the U.S. Coast Guard 's largest recapitalization and modernization initiative , the $ 24 billion , 25 @-@ year programmed Integrated Deepwater System Program . The Integrated Deepwater System Program ( IDS Program ) , or " Deepwater , " is the 25 @-@ year program to <unk> the United States Coast Guard 's aircraft , ships , logistics , and command and control systems . The $ 24 billion program includes equipment that will be used across all missions . Rábago not only acted as program executive officer of Deepwater , but also as director of all Coast Guard acquisition programs . His office oversaw all major acquisitions of cutters , aircraft , <unk> and boats . 
 = = <unk> illegal immigrants and drug smugglers = = 
 The Coast Guard is focusing on retaining Hispanic and Spanish @-@ speaking front @-@ line workers as it aims to intercept illegal immigrants . The current Coast Guard workforce meets both diversity goals and operational demands for having Spanish @-@ speaking workers on hand to communicate with apprehended illegal immigrants and human traffickers . These traffickers often pack people into boats and race along the Florida coastline , in an attempt to elude American enforcement . 
 The need for Spanish speaking Coast Guardsmen was emphasized on September 17 , 2008 , when two cocaine @-@ laden semi @-@ submarines from Colombia were captured en route to the eastern Pacific coast of the United States . Just five days later , a 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) semi @-@ submersible was seized about 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ) south of Guatemala . As the boarding team unloaded the last few bales , the Coast Guard said , the unstable vessel began to take on water through its exhaust vents and sank . The U.S. Navy , Coast Guard and Drug Enforcement Administration officials say South American drug cartels are turning to semi @-@ submersible vessels , which have a low profile to avoid detection , because of the government 's success at thwarting other smuggling techniques , including the use of fishing trawlers and speed boats . 
 = = The U.S. Coast Guard Academy = = 
 The U.S. Coast Guard Academy , located in New London , Connecticut , accepts about 250 young men and women into its program each year . The four @-@ year academic program leads to a Bachelor of Science degree in a variety of majors . 
 Detlef Frederick Argentine de Otte , born in Buenos Aires , Argentina , entered the Revenue Cutter Service School of Instruction ( as the <unk> was previously known ) in 1889 and graduated in 1891 . He is the first Hispanic to the reach the rank of Commodore and to receive a promotion to Rear Admiral in retirement . 
 Paul Powers Perez , class of 1945 , was the first person born in the United States of Hispanic American descent to graduate from the academy . He was followed by John <unk> Martinez , class of 1951 . In 2002 , Cadet 1 / c Sarah Salazar became the first Hispanic female Regimental Commander at the Coast Guard Academy . 
 At 9 % of the total student body , Hispanics are the largest minority group in the academy . As of 2010 the ethnic and racial breakdown of the student body in the academy is as follows : 81 % White / Non @-@ Hispanic , 9 % Hispanic , 2 % Black / Non @-@ Hispanic , 3 % Asian / Pacific Islander and 1 % American Indian / Alaskan Native . The Coast Guard is actively promoting U.S. Coast Guard college and career opportunities amongst Hispanics . Captain Adolfo Ramirez is an in @-@ house Executive on Loan at the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities at San Antonio , Texas , which represents more than 330 colleges and universities . His job is to explain the college programs , and military and civilian career opportunities that the Coast Guard can provide to Hispanic communities in education , and in service to the United States . 
 = = Population representation = = 
 According to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense , in 2003 , Hispanic representation in the Coast Guard 's NPS active component enlisted accessions was at 11 percent . Also in 2003 , Hispanics represented slightly over 6 percent of the Coast Guard 's active component officer accessions , and 13 percent of the Coast Guard 's reserve enlisted accessions . 
 = = Chronological list of personal Hispanic accomplishments in the USCG = = 
 The following Hispanic @-@ Americans are the first in their respective USCG fields to accomplish the following : 
 <unk> <unk> Hollis was the first Hispanic @-@ American female advanced to chief petty officer on May 1 , 1991 . 
 In 1991 , LTJG Katherine <unk> became the first Hispanic @-@ American female to command an afloat unit when she took command of USCGC Bainbridge Island . She was also the first Hispanic @-@ American female intelligence officer in the Coast Guard . 
 In 1992 , Sonia Colon became the second Hispanic American female advanced to chief petty officer . 
 The first Hispanic to command a <unk> ( Tactical Law Enforcement Team ) , was then @-@ Lieutenant Jose L. Rodriguez when he took command of <unk> South , 1996 – 1998 . He was also the first Coast Guardsman to command a U.S. Marine Corps unit when he took command of the Riverine Training Center , Special Operations Training Group , II MEF at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina in July 1999 . He was also the first Hispanic @-@ American Coast Guardsman to earn his Gold Navy / Marine Corps jump wings while in the Coast Guard and assigned to a jump billet ( USMC Majors Billet at Special Operations Training Group II MEF ) . He earned his wings that same year . He also became the first commanding officer of one of the two <unk> commissioned in the Coast Guard . 
 In 2002 , Lieutenant Junior Grade Angelina Hidalgo became the second Hispanic @-@ American female to command an afloat unit . 
 Lieutenant Commander Quique Ramon Ortiz and Lieutenant Commander Jose Rodriguez commissioned the first Maritime Safety and Security Team ( <unk> ) s in Coast Guard history , <unk> <unk> and <unk> ( East and West Coast ) . The <unk> is an anti @-@ terrorism team established to protect local maritime assets . 
 On July 21 , 2005 , Captain Charley L. Diaz became the first Hispanic @-@ American to command a high endurance cutter when he assumed command of the USCGC Sherman . In March 2007 , he led the Sherman crew in the largest maritime drug bust in U.S. history with the seizure of the motor vessel Gatun off the coast of Panama carrying nearly 20 tons of cocaine worth an estimated $ 600M . 
 In 2006 , LT Isabel Papp , USPHS , became the first female medical officer to be assigned to a Port Security Unit ( PSU ) . PSU 's are deployable units organized for sustained force protection operations . She was also the first Hispanic @-@ American female MD to be assigned to a PSU . She had also been the first Hispanic @-@ American female Physician 's Assistant in the Coast Guard Reserve . 
 In July 2009 , <unk> Joseph R. Castillo became the first Hispanic @-@ American district commander in the U.S. Coast Guard when he was appointed Commander of District 11 . 
 = = Note = = 
 = Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know = 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her second studio album , Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) . It was released on March 5 , 2001 , by JIVE Records as the fourth and final single from the album . After meeting with producer Robert John " Mutt " Lange in Switzerland , Spears recorded several songs for the album , including " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " , which she considered one of her favorites on the album . Additional lyrics were written by guitar player Keith Scott and country pop singer Shania Twain . The teen @-@ pop ballad speaks of a woman wanting to hear her boyfriend say that he needs loves her , and features a sound similar to David Bowie and Iggy Pop 's song " China Girl " ( 1983 ) . 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who considered it a good break from the album 's genre and praised Spears ' vocals , comparing them to those of Twain and Stevie Wonder . The song attained moderate commercial success , reaching number one in Romania , and peaking inside the top ten in Austria , Europe and Switzerland , while reaching top twenty positions in many European countries . " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was only released for mainstream radio in the United States ; therefore , it failed to chart on any major music chart in the country . 
 An accompanying music video , directed by Herb Ritts , portrays Spears in love scenes with her fictional boyfriend , played by French model Brice Durand . The singer 's real @-@ life boyfriend at the time Justin Timberlake , however , was said to be annoyed at the kissing scenes , while the original video was considered too racy at the time by Spears ' mother , Lynne , because it contained sexually explicit material . Parts of the video were edited before its release to the public on March 2 , 2001 . As part of promotion for the song , Spears performed it at TRL , Saturday Night Live , and The View . It has also been included on four of her concert tours . " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was nominated at Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards in the category of " Best Song " in 2002 . Spears has named " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " one of her favorite songs from her career . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1999 , Spears began work on her second studio album , Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) , in Sweden and Switzerland . After meeting with Robert Lange in Switzerland , the singer started to record several songs for the album , including " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " . After finishing the track , Spears revealed in an interview with Billboard that " with the first album , I didn 't get to show my voice off . The songs were great , but they weren 't very challenging . This song is incredible . It 's going to surprise people in the best way . " " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was written and produced by Robert Lange , while additional lyrics were written by his then @-@ wife Shania Twain and Keith Scott . Spears recorded her vocals for the song between November and December 1999 at Robert Lange 's and Shania Twain 's chateau in La @-@ Tour @-@ de Peilz , Switzerland , and it was later mixed by Nigel Green and programmed by Cory Churko , Kevin Churko and Richard Meyer . During a live concert at Hawaii , included on her second home video release Live and More ! ( 2000 ) , Spears claimed the song as one of her favourites on Oops ! ... I Did It Again . " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was released on January 17 , 2001 as the final single from the album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " is a pop ballad that lasts for three minutes and 51 seconds . The song is composed in the key of E major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 76 beats per minute , and Spears ' vocal range spans from the low @-@ note of F ♯ 3 to the high @-@ key of D ♯ 5 . A NME staff reviewer said that the song takes the riff of David Bowie and Iggy Pop 's " China Girl " ( 1983 ) and " puts it over schmaltzy cocktail @-@ hour bass and love film strings . " Tom Terrell of MTV , however , compared the riff to the one of A Taste of Honey 's cover of " Sukiyaki " ( 1981 ) . Terrell further commented that the " Eagles @-@ esque chorus " features " an ' 80s hair band power ballad groove " where " Britney soul @-@ <unk> with a vocal that channels both Stevie Wonder ( via " Knocks Me Off My Feet " ) and Shania herself . " 
 Stephanie McGrath of Jam ! said the song is " a nice break from the ' baby <unk> ' , ' yeah <unk> ' and insistent drum beats that pepper the other songs " of Oops ! [ sic ] . David Veitch of Calgary Sun compared the backing vocals to " nicely old @-@ fashioned shoo @-@ be @-@ doo @-@ doos " . Lyrically , " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " alludes to how Spears wants to hear her boyfriend say he needs her all the way and that he loves her . Spears considered it a " pure and delicate " song . " It 's just one of those songs that pull you in . That 's why I like it , and I like singing it as well , " she continued . " I think they wrote it ' specially for me , because the lyrics of the song , if you really listen ... they 're more of what I can relate to , ' cause they 're kind of young lyrics , I think . I don 't think Shania would probably sing some of the words that I 'm saying . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " received mostly positive reviews from contemporary critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic deemed it a " sweetly sentimental ballad " along with the other ballads on Oops ! ... I Did It Again , while a Rhapsody review considered them " perfectly constructed ballads " . Stephanie McGrath of Jam ! called the song " the best showcase of Spears ' talents . " A NME staff reviewer considered the track " absolutely frightening , " with Tracy E. Hopkins of Barnes & Noble deeming " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " a " polished ballad " , and praising Shania Twain for the songwriting . Billboard journalist Michael Paoletta noted that Spears may not have the vocal range of " colleagues Jessica Simpson and Christina Aguilera , but she does have an instantly recognizable style @-@ and Oops ! ... indicates that she 's developing a soulful edge and emotional depth that can 't be conjured with a glass @-@ shattering not " , further commenting that this can be confirmed " on the <unk> , Shania Twain @-@ penned ballad ' Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know ' . " While reviewing 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour , Jocelyn Vena of MTV considered the song , along with " Toxic " , " old @-@ school jams " . The song was nominated at Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards in the category of " Best Song " in 2002 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was not commercially available in the United States , and was sent only to mainstream radio on April 2 , 2001 . Therefore , the track failed to appear on any major music chart in the United States . However , " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was successful in Europe , debuting and peaking at number nine on the European Hot 100 Singles on the chart issue dated April 14 , 2001 . The song was also able to reach the top ten in Austria and Switzerland , while attaining top 20 positions in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Finland , Ireland , Norway and Sweden . In the United Kingdom , it debuted and peaked at number 12 on April 7 , 2001 , exiting the UK Singles Chart after eight weeks . " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " achieved commercial success in Romania , where it reached number one and was the third best @-@ selling single of 2001 . Despite reaching number 14 in Denmark , the song was later certified Gold by International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , for shipping over 5 @,@ 000 units of the single in the county . The single was not released in Australia ; instead , it was included as a bonus second disc of the limited edition of Oops ! ... I Did It Again released in the country . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was directed by the American photographer Herb Ritts , and shot at Key <unk> in Miami , Florida in the last week of January 2001 . Spears revealed she was inspired by Janet Jackson 's video for " Love Will Never Do ( Without You ) " ( 1990 ) to select Ritts as the video 's director . According to Ritts , the singer " wanted to do something fresh . There was one outfit , no dancing , and that meant that it boiled down to her . She really had to act the song , and she was very impressive . " He also revealed the setting of the video was built as " a funky beach shack " similar to Madonna 's " Cherish " ( 1989 ) and Chris Isaak 's " Wicked Game " ( 1989 ) . " The story is , pretty much , Britney longing for him to tell her the words " , said Ritts , who was impressed with the chemistry between the singer and her fictional boyfriend , played by French model Brice Durand . Spears ' real @-@ life boyfriend at the time Justin Timberlake , however , " was said to be miffed at Spears ' kissing scenes with French model , " according to Jennifer Vineyard of MTV . Spears mother , Lynne , also criticized considered the original music video for being too racy at the time , because it contained sexually explicit material . Parts of the video were edited before its release to the public . 
 The music video debuted at number one on MTV 's TRL on March 2 , 2001 . The video begins with Spears and her boyfriend in a hammock . Cuts of her cuddling with her love interest beside a fire are also included . We also see her and her boyfriend on the seashore doing a love scene . Inside a tiki hut , Spears exclaims the words she wants her boyfriend to know . In the second half of the video , she is seen on a tree where her boyfriend reaches for her . There are also scenes where she is running on the beach and her boyfriend is chasing after her . Spears wears only a bikini top and a pair of cutoff shorts during the whole video . The music video was considered by Spears as " the funnest video I 've ever done . " An alternate footage of the video can be found on the DVD of Spears first compilation album Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . Vineyard considered the footage as the one that " makes the most use of Britney 's body of work , with the spaceman from " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , an opening door from " My Prerogative " and one love interest from " Toxic " all making cameos " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The first performance of " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was on March 8 , 2000 , during the Crazy 2k Tour in Pensacola , Florida , where Spears appeared onstage sitting on a magic carpet and flew over the audience while singing the song . After releasing her second studio album , Oops ! ... I Did It Again , Spears performed the song on the American music show TRL , on Saturday Night Live and on The View . She also performed the song live on 2000s Oops ! ... I Did It Again World Tour . After performing " Sometimes " , she climbed the staircase and briefly spoke to the audience before moving into the performance of the song , for which she wore a long white dress trimmed with boa feathers . " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was performed also on 2001 's Dream Within a Dream Tour . The performance consisted of Spears singing the song on an elevated platform wearing an evening gown with artificial snow falling from the ceiling , while two of her dancers performed a routine . 
 Almost ten years later , " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " was performed by Spears on 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour . The performance consists of Spears sitting on a swing singing the song , whilst a male dancer dances beneath her , at one point attaching himself by his feet to the swing whilst midair . Shirley Halperin of The Hollywood Reporter named it one of the best performances of the show along with " Piece of Me " and " 3 " , stating that " ironically enough , [ they ] were the ones with fewest frills . " In a review of the special broadcast by American premium television channel Epix of the tour , Jocelyn Vena of MTV summarized her thoughts about the performance saying , " It 's rare these days to see Britney Spears show her soft side , but she takes a break from the nonstop , fist @-@ pumping music during the spectacle that is the Femme Fatale Tour and kicks it old @-@ school , showing us she still has the heart and soul to bust out a power ballad . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " adapted from Oops ! ... I Did It Again liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded at Mutt Lange 's and Shania Twain 's chateau in La @-@ Tour @-@ de Peilz , Switzerland . 
 Mixed by Nigel Green for Out Of Pocket Productions , Ltd . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Pettigrew State Park = 
 Pettigrew State Park is a North Carolina State Park in Tyrrell and Washington Counties , North Carolina in the United States . It covers 5 @,@ 830 acres ( 23 @.@ 6 km2 ) around the shore lines of Lake Phelps and the Scuppernong River . The park 's developed facilities are south of U.S. Route 64 near Roper and Creswell , North Carolina . Pettigrew State Park is open for year @-@ round recreation , including hiking , camping , fishing , boating and picnicking . 
 Pettigrew State Park is named for Confederate General J. Johnston Pettigrew , who lived in a nearby home . It surrounds Somerset Place , a North Carolina state historic site that includes a restored 1830s plantation house and outbuildings that can be toured , including reconstructed slave quarters . 
 Pettigrew State Park was established during the Great Depression after the land was leased from the Farm Security Administration , a New Deal program of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
 Part of Pettigrew State Park surrounds Lake Phelps , one of the oldest lakes in the eastern United States and a former hunting and fishing ground for the Algonquian peoples . Archaeologists have found dugout canoes in the lake that are up to 4 @,@ 400 years old , preserved by its unusually clean waters . Pettigrew is home to an abundance of wildlife : Lake Phelps is a primary wintering location for several types of waterfowl , including Canada geese and Tundra swans . The park is also home to the woodland creatures , such as raccoons and white @-@ tailed deer , that are commonly found along the east coast of the United States . Lake Phelps contains several species of game fish including largemouth bass and catfish . 
 The park also manages the 16 @,@ 600 @-@ acre ( 67 km2 ) Lake Phelps , which is a North Carolina State Lake . All together , the park manages 22 @,@ 430 acres ( 90 @.@ 8 km2 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early inhabitants = = = 
 Pettigrew State Park surrounds Lake Phelps , North Carolina 's second largest natural made lake . The lake , on a peninsula between Albemarle Sound and the Pamlico River , is one of a series of Carolina bay lakes that stretch from New Jersey to Florida along the Atlantic Coastal Plain . Exactly how the lakes were formed remains a mystery . What is known is that Lake Phelps is not fed by any stream , but relies entirely upon rain and springs to maintain its water level . Since the lake is not fed by a stream that could carry pollutants from nearby farms and factories , the water is very clean . Lake Phelps is five miles ( 8 km ) across , with an average depth of just 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . The lake is thought to be more than 38 @,@ 000 years old . 
 Lake Phelps is named for Josiah Phelps , the first white man to enter its waters . Phelps and another colonial explorer , Benjamin , were searching through what was then known as the Great Eastern Dismal or Great Alligator Dismal in 1755 . Phelps and Tarkington were part of a group of hunters who entered the swamps in search of game and farmland . The group had become discouraged and were about to leave when Tarkington scaled one of the trees and spotted the lake a short distance away . Phelps went ahead and ran into the water . As the first in the water he was given the honor of naming the lake . 
 The history of human habitation in and around Pettigrew State Park stretches back as far as 8000 BC . Archaeologists have found thousands of relics at the park , including pottery , arrowheads , and sunken dugout canoes . Estimates place some of the dugouts as being at least 4 @,@ 400 years old . They were preserved in the bottom of the lake by its unusually clean waters . 
 The dugouts were created by Algonquian peoples who were seasonal visitors to the area . They built them from the logs of cypress by slowing burning out the center of the log and scraping the burnt wood out , leaving only the outer shell . Historians believe that the Algonquian would sink their canoes to the bottom of the lake for safekeeping until they would return the following fishing and hunting season . Thirty of these ancient canoes have been found in Lake Phelps , with perhaps more yet to be discovered . 
 = = = Plantation era = = = 
 Josiah Collins was one of the first European @-@ descended settlers to live and farm in the area of Pettigrew State Park , arriving in the 1780s . Collins and his partners drained the swamps surrounding Lake Phelps and established an extensive plantation known as Somerset Place . 
 Collins and his partners brought in slaves from Africa to dig a canal from Lake Phelps to the Scuppernong River . The canal served two purposes : first , as a means of transporting goods and people to and from the plantation ; and second , it served as a massive drainage ditch as the slaves of Somerset Place worked to drain the surrounding swamps . Later , the canal system was expanded to provide irrigation for the rice and corn fields of the plantation . 
 Pettigrew State Park is named for J. Johnston Pettigrew a Confederate General who lies buried in the family cemetery in the park . Pettigrew was one of the commanding officer 's at the Battle of Gettysburg and led a company of soldiers at Pickett 's Charge . He sustained mortal wounds during General Robert E. Lee 's retreat from Gettysburg . The general , who grew up on a farm that adjoined Somerset Place , is buried with his father and grandfather . Their final resting place is a popular stopping point for visitors to the park . 
 Somerset Place was a prosperous plantation until the American Civil War , when plantation life was forever altered by Abraham Lincoln and the signing of the Emancipation Proclamation . The Collins family was unable to maintain the plantation following the war and sold it off . 
 = = = State park era = = = 
 Somerset Place and the land that is now Pettigrew State Park passed through the hands of several owners until it was acquired by the Farm Security Administration in 1937 during the Great Depression . The state of North Carolina administers the land under the terms of a 99 @-@ year lease signed in 1939 with the United States Department of Agriculture . Pettigrew State Park has been expanded at various times since it opened in 1939 . Two of the most recent land acquisitions included adding the entire shoreline of Lake Phelps , and the largest expansion , which took place along the Scuppernong River in 2004 . 
 The Scuppernong had remained largely undeveloped throughout history . In 1793 , the town of Columbia was built on its banks , as were several boat landings . The Scuppernong is a blackwater river : it water is colored like black tea or coffee . The Scuppernong served as a means of transportation for the early settlers in this region of North Carolina . Since 1989 the Nature Conservancy has sought to protect it in its most natural state . In 2002 the Nature Conservancy offered to donate four tracts of land that they owned along the Scuppernong if the state would purchase three more tracts that became available that same year . The state agreed and in 2004 the area along the river was officially added to the state park system . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Plant life = = = 
 Pettigrew State Park is home to one of the last stands of old @-@ growth forest in eastern North Carolina . A forest of bay trees , sweetgum , pawpaw , persimmon , bald cypress and poplar are found on the northern shore of Lake Phelps . The cypress have a trunk diameter of up to ten feet ( 3 m ) and the poplar have a trunk diameter of six feet ( 2 m ) . There are vines that are as wide as an average man 's leg and grow up the trees in excess of 130 feet ( 40 m ) . In the section of the park along the Scuppernong River , the Atlantic white cedar and other rare cedar trees have grown to rather large sizes . Several of the trees at Pettigrew State Park are listed on the North Carolina and National Registries of Big Trees . 
 Wildflowers are found throughout Pettigrew State Park . <unk> lily , periwinkle , buttercup , Jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ pulpit , <unk> , and jewelweed are sometimes found on the banks and in the shallows of Lake Phelps . The Scuppernong River provides a habitat for swamp dogwood , evening primrose , blue flag iris and cardinal flowers . The <unk> dogwood is also found near the river . This particular dogwood is rare in North Carolina and the type along the Scuppernong is rarer still . 
 = = = Animal life = = = 
 Lake Phelps and the Scuppernong River attract a wide variety of waterfowl . Lake Phelps is just one of several large , shallow freshwater lakes on the Pamlico @-@ Albemarle Peninsula . These lakes are all winter grounds for ducks , geese and swans . The waterfowl at Lake Phelps use the area primarily for roosting purpose before flying off to nearby feeding sites . Tundra swans and Canada geese feed in nearby farm fields and the ducks feed in the wetlands . The waterfowl usually arrive in the area in October and overwinter until February or March . Commonly seen waterfowl are Canada geese , tundra swans , mallards , American black ducks and northern pintail . 
 Pettigrew State Park is home to several species of birds of prey . Ospreys build their nests in the tops of the tallest trees in the park and feed on the abundant fish of Lake Phelps . The population of bald eagles is increasing and they are occasionally seen over the park . At least three species of owl , the great horned owl , barred owl and eastern screech owl , make their home in the forests of the park , as do red tailed and red shouldered hawks . American kestrel and northern harriers also find suitable habitats at Pettigrew State Park . 
 Wading and woodland birds are year @-@ round residents of Pettigrew State Park . The banks of Lake Phelps and the Scuppernong River provide an abundance of cover and food for sandpipers , great blue herons , great egrets , and green herons . The woods are home to <unk> , pileated woodpeckers , woodcocks , red @-@ <unk> woodpeckers , and mourning doves . Songbirds found at the park include prairie and prothonotary warblers , common <unk> and northern <unk> . 
 Pettigrew State Park also provides habitats for eastern woodland mammals . Black bear and white @-@ tailed deer inhabit the woods , as do Virginia opossum , raccoon , American mink , muskrat , North American river otter , fox , and bobcats . The endangered red wolf has been reintroduced to eastern North Carolina , including Pettigrew State Park . 
 The most common species are game fish , found in Lake Phelps , are largemouth bass , chain pickerel , catfish , yellow perch and pumpkinseed . These fish are what brought the Algonquian to the area nearly 10 @,@ 000 years ago . 
