 = = = Executive branch = = = 
 On November 6 , 1998 , U.S. President Bill Clinton issued a memorandum for the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General expressing concern about sellers at gun shows not being required to run background checks on potential buyers . He called this absence a " loophole " and said that it made gun shows prime targets for criminals and gun traffickers . He requested recommendations on what actions the administration should take , including legislation . 
 During his campaign and presidency , President George W. Bush endorsed the idea of background checks at gun shows . Bush 's position was that the gun show loophole should be closed by federal legislation since the gun show loophole was created by previous federal legislation . President Bush ordered an investigation by the U.S. Departments of Health , Education , and Justice in the wake of the Virginia Tech shootings in order to make recommendations on ways the federal government can prevent such tragedies . On January 8 , 2008 he signed the NICS Improvement Amendments Act of 2007 ( NIAA ) into law . Goals and objectives that the NIAA sought to address included : 
 The gap in information available to NICS about such prohibiting mental health <unk> and commitments . Filling these information gaps will better enable the system to operate as intended , to keep guns out of the hands of persons prohibited by federal or state law from receiving or possessing firearms . 
 At the beginning of 2013 , President Barack Obama outlined proposals regarding new gun control legislation asking congress to close the gun show loophole by requiring background checks for all firearm sales . Closing the gun show loophole became part of a larger push for universal background checks to close " federal loopholes on such checks at gun shows and other private sales . " 
 = = Notable opinions = = 
 In 1996 the Violence Policy Center ( VPC ) released Gun Shows in America : Tupperware ® Parties for Criminals , a study that identified problems associated with gun shows . The VPC study documented the effect of the 1986 Firearms Owners ' Protection Act in regard to proliferation of gun shows , which resulted in " a readily available source of weapons and ammunition for a wide variety of criminals , as well as Timothy McVeigh and David Koresh " . According to the VPC , the utility of gun shows to dangerous individuals stems primarily from the exemption enjoyed by private sellers from the sales criteria of the Brady law as well as the absence of a background check . The director of the program which is located at the UC Davis , Garen J. <unk> , wrote , " There is no such loophole in federal law , in the limited sense that the law does not exempt private @-@ party sales at gun shows from regulation that is required elsewhere . " <unk> said , 
 The fundamental flaw in the gun show loophole proposal is its failure to address the great majority of private @-@ party sales , which occur at other locations and increasingly over the Internet at sites where any non @-@ prohibited person can list firearms for sale and buyers can search for private @-@ party sellers . 
 On May 27 , 1999 Wayne LaPierre , executive vice president of the National Rifle Association ( NRA ) , testified before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime , saying : " We think it is reasonable to provide mandatory , instant criminal background checks for every sale at every gun show . No loopholes anywhere for anyone . " LaPierre has since said that he is opposed to universal background checks . 
 In 1999 , Dave Kopel , attorney and gun rights advocate for the NRA , said : " gun shows are no ' loophole ' in the federal laws , " and that singling out guns shows was " the first step toward abolishing all privacy regarding firearms and implementing universal gun registration . " In January 2000 , Kopel said that no proposed federal law would have made any difference at Columbine since the adults who supplied the weapons were legal purchasers . 
 In 2003 , Alexander <unk> asserted that requiring background checks for all gun show sales was the prelude to registration and their Second Amendment rights would be jeopardized . 
 In 2009 , Nicholas J. Johnson of the Fordham University School of Law , wrote : 
 Criticisms of the " gun show loophole " imply that federal regulations allow otherwise prohibited retail purchases ( " primary market sales " ) of firearms at gun shows . This implication is false . The real criticism is leveled at secondary market sales by private citizens . 
 In 2010 , the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence said : " Because of the gun show loophole , in most states prohibited buyers can walk into any gun show and buy weapons from unlicensed sellers with no background check . Many of these gun sellers operate week @-@ to @-@ week with no established place of business , traveling from gun show to gun show . " 
 In 2013 , the NRA said that a universal background check system for gun buyers is both impracticable and unnecessary , but an effective instant check system that includes records of persons adjudicated mentally ill would prevent potentially dangerous people from getting their hands on firearms . The group argues that only 10 percent of firearms are purchased via private sellers . They also dispute the idea that the current law amounts to a gun @-@ show loophole , pointing out that many of the people selling at gun shows are federally licensed dealers . The group has stated in that past that : gun control supporters ' objectives are to reduce gun sales and register guns , and that there is no " loophole , " but legal commerce under the status quo ( like book fairs or car shows ) . 
 = = Contributing events = = 
 After the Columbine High School massacre on April 20 , 1999 , gun shows and background checks became a focus of national debate in the United States . Weeks after the Columbine shooting , Frank Lautenberg introduced a proposal to close the gun show loophole in federal law . It was passed in the Senate , but did not pass in the House . 
 The Virginia Tech shooting on April 16 , 2007 again brought discussion of the gun show loophole to the forefront of U.S. politics , even though the shooter passed a background check and purchased his weapons legally at a Virginia gun shop via a Wisconsin @-@ based Internet dealer . Previously , in December 2005 , a Virginia judge had directed the Virginia Tech gunman to undergo outpatient treatment , but because he was treated as an outpatient , Virginia did not send his name to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System ( NICS ) . On April 30 , 2007 , Tim Kaine , the Governor of Virginia , issued an executive order intended to prohibit the sale of guns to anyone found to be dangerous and forced to undergo involuntary mental health treatment . He called on lawmakers to close the gun show loophole . A bill to close the gun show loophole in Virginia was submitted , but eventually failed . Since then , Virginia lawmakers efforts to close the gun show loophole were continuously blocked by gun rights advocates . The Governor wrote : 
 I was disappointed to see the Virginia legislature balk , largely under pressure from the NRA , at efforts to close the gun @-@ show loophole that allows anyone to buy weapons without any background check . That loophole still exists . 
 After the July 2012 Aurora shooting in Colorado , the October 2012 <unk> Spa shootings in Wisconsin , and the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Connecticut , state and local debates regarding the gun show loophole resumed . After the Aurora shooting , then president of the NRA , David Keene , said that such tragedies are often exploited by the media and politicians . He said , " Colorado has already closed the so @-@ called ' loophole ' and the killer didn 't buy his guns at a gun show . " The handgun in the <unk> Spa shooting was purchased legally in a private transaction , not at a gun show . The Sandy Hook shooter used weapons legally purchased by his mother . 
 = Papa 's Cabin = 
 " Papa 's Cabin " is the fifteenth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ ninth episode overall . Written by John Enbom and directed by Michael Fields , the episode premiered on The CW on February 27 , 2007 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica and her father Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) investigate more suspects in the murder of Dean O 'Dell ( Ed Begley , Jr . ) , particularly his wife Mindy ( Jaime Ray Newman ) and her lover Hank Landry ( Patrick Fabian ) . Both of them become particularly suspicious when they disappear , and Hank is implied as the killer when Mindy 's dead body washes onshore . However , Veronica later deduces that teaching assistant Tim Foyle ( James Jordan ) committed the murder to frame Hank . 
 " Papa 's Cabin " , the final episode of the Dean O 'Dell story arc , marks the final appearances of Fabian , Newman , and Jordan in their respective roles . Series creator Rob Thomas enjoyed Fabian and Jordan 's performances in the episode , while filming of scenes on the ocean contained some production troubles . Upon its initial airing , the episode received 2 @.@ 66 million viewers and mixed reviews from television critics ; many considered this episode to be a solid conclusion to the story arc but one that was less exciting than previous mystery @-@ ending episodes . Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club believed that the episode was intellectually satisfying , while Jon Lachonis of BuddyTV opined that the decision to make Tim the murderer was not appropriate . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 Despite the fact that Hank Landry is a prime suspect for Keith , Landry reassures Veronica that she can still be his protégé . Keith continues to question Mindy O ’ Dell , citing inconsistencies in his testimony . Mindy says that the other man arguing in her room was the Dean . She also says that Hank could have been the murderer , as she was not in the area at the time of the murder . Keith enters Veronica ’ s criminology class and arrests Hank . Keith questions him as well , and he says that Mindy set him up with the blood on his clothes , noting that he went to a convenience store before driving home . However , Keith puts him in a cell , where he is visited by Tim Foyle , and Hank tells him to find the bug that was placed on his phone . Later , Veronica sees Tim breaking into Mars Investigations , trying to find the bug , and Tim effectively enlists Veronica ’ s help . They visit the convenience store with no luck for the time being . Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) sees Logan ( Jason Dohring ) and Parker ( Julie Gonzalo ) having lunch together and tells Veronica , but she doesn ’ t seem upset . Mindy buys a boat at the local pier . Keith and Veronica receive news that Mindy has left town . 
 Veronica and Tim investigate Hank ’ s alibi further , and it checks out , leading to his release . Veronica and Tim find secret phone recordings kept by Hank . Veronica brings Keith the CD , but he informs her that Hank has disappeared as well . We see Hank showing up on Mindy ’ s boat . While listening to the phone calls , Veronica notices Mindy and Hank talking about a place named “ Papa ’ s cabin ” . They investigate the most recent phone calls made by Hank , and find that his alibi was faked — he was helping the witness ’ s son escape foster care . Keith comes up with the idea that Papa ’ s cabin has something to do with Ernest Hemingway . Keith visits the cabin , a retreat in Central America , before boarding the motorboat . He finds Hank , who says that he was working with her to kill the Dean . He says that he and Mindy had a fight , and Mindy fell overboard . We see Mindy ’ s body washed up on a beach . 
 With Landry arrested , Tim takes over the criminology class . The class starts to discuss the Dean O ’ Dell case , with Tim giving a broad overview of the subject . However , Veronica asks several questions to him which he does not answer very well . Veronica suddenly connects the dots and says that Tim committed the murder in order to frame Hank , who denied him a job opportunity . Tim is arrested and confesses to the murder , while Hank is being tried for manslaughter in the death of Mindy . Keith and Veronica share dinner after solving their cases . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Papa 's Cabin " was written by John Enbom and directed by Michael Fields , marking Enbom 's sixteenth and penultimate writing credit and Fields 's seventh and penultimate directing credit for the series . " Papa 's Cabin " features the final appearance of Hank Landry , played by Patrick Fabian , making it the closing installment of an eight @-@ episode arc . The episode reveals that Tim Foyle ( James Jordan ) was the actual killer of Dean O 'Dell , a mystery which had been the focus of the show for six episodes . Jordan had <unk> played a janitor named Lucky in season two ; his new character was always meant to act as a foil to Veronica . In fact , scripts had initially named Tim Foyle as simply " Foil " for this reason . The nickname stuck , and his full name was chosen as a pun on tin foil . The episode was the final installment of the series to air before a two @-@ month hiatus , temporarily losing its time slot to Pussycat Dolls Present . Ain 't It Cool News considered the CW 's short description of the episode to be evidence that Veronica and Keith would continue working together , despite the fact that he recently became interim Sheriff . 
 Thomas enjoyed Fabian 's performance in the episode , arguing that it was an example of the actor 's scene stealer quality that led Thomas to initially cast him after his appearance in an episode of his earlier series Cupid . The scene in which Keith boards the ship on which Hank is located was difficult to film because there were limited daylight filming hours . The crew thought it was important for the audience to see the waves and the ocean . However , they were unable to finish filming the scene within the course of one day , so the crew made a quick decision to place a makeshift blue screen as part of the background for the interior of the boat . It was intended that the blue screen be edited in post @-@ production in order to represent the ocean , but upon learning that this change would cost millions of dollars , the crew decided to forgo the alteration and instead pass off the blue screen as a tarpaulin . 
 Jordan had to wear a wig and a fake goatee for the episode . Thomas described Jordan 's one @-@ word response to the question " Do we look like we smoke ? " as the best quip of the season . Thomas was also laudatory towards Jordan 's character 's reactions towards Veronica about events he secretly already knew , such as when he hears a voicemail from Hank not recommending him for an internship . He thought that he played the lie realistically but that one could see through his façade upon a repeat viewing . Because the Dean O 'Dell storyline was six episodes instead of the initially scheduled seven , some plot strands had to be removed from the final episode and story arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Papa 's Cabin " received 2 @.@ 66 million viewers , ranking 95th of 102 in the weekly rankings . This marked an increase in nearly 400 @,@ 000 viewers from the previous episode , " Mars , Bars " , which earned 2 @.@ 27 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics , with reviewers generally calling " Papa 's Cabin " a solid finale to the Dean O 'Dell mystery but one that was less entertaining than previous mystery @-@ ending episodes . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . He wrote that it was " an interesting episode that went against the grain as far as what the show has done with similar reveals in the past . " While stating that Tim being the actual murderer was not very surprising , the reviewer felt satisfied with the scene in which Veronica pieces the clues together to implicate Tim . He also commented on how " Papa 's Cabin " differed from previous mystery @-@ ending episodes by having lower stakes , a characteristic he felt was appropriate . He thought it was similar to a traditional detective story model , meaning that it " fell in line with the feel of the show . " However , he did not enjoy the fact that Fabian 's character was being written out of the show . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , lauded the episode . He referred to the conclusion of the Dean O 'Dell story arc as the closure to a conventional mystery in the sense that Veronica and Keith slowly built up evidence instead of stumbling on one incriminating object by chance . The reviewer also thought that the episode provided an intellectually satisfying conclusion to the mystery and that it " maintains that level of involvement . " 
 Jon Lachonis of BuddyTV sharply criticized the episode , opining that it was predictable , contrived , and unsatisfying . Calling the Dean O 'Dell storyline " Veronica Mars 's weakest mystery , " the reviewer thought that " Papa 's Cabin " spent too much time on Mindy and Hank , arguing that it was obvious they were not the culprits . In addition , he derided the decision to make Tim the murderer , stating that it was not true to his character . Television Without Pity graded the episode a " B " . Alan Sepinwall , on his blog What 's Alan Watching ? , was mixed towards the episode , stating that it was " a solid resolution to the Dean O 'Dell mystery " , he thought more highly of the last several episodes . However , he criticized the fact that the mystery only lasted for six episodes , arguing that these smaller story arcs were not working well for the show , referring to this episode as feeling " rushed " due to the limited time to advance the mystery . 
 = Massachusetts Route 25 = 
 Route 25 is a numbered state highway located in Plymouth County and Barnstable County , Massachusetts , United States . The route is a nominally east – west freeway for its entire length , and less commonly known as the Blue Star Memorial Highway . An eastward continuation of Interstate 495 , Route 25 provides freeway access to Cape Cod . The route 's western terminus is at a trumpet interchange with I @-@ 495 and I @-@ 195 in Wareham . The route has three numbered interchanges along its 10 @.@ 006 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 103 km ) length before terminating at the northern end of the Bourne Bridge in Bourne ; the mainline of Route 25 continues across the bridge and over the Cape Cod Canal as Massachusetts Route 28 south . 
 Prior to 1982 , the Route 25 designation was given to that segment of what is now I @-@ 495 from Route 24 in Raynham to the interchange with I @-@ 195 in Wareham . Upon completion of the I @-@ 495 segment between Route 24 and I @-@ 95 , that portion of the existing freeway was redesignated as I @-@ 495 in various stages during the 1970s and 1980s , eventually reducing Route 25 to a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 km ) segment that continued eastward from I @-@ 495 to the modern location of Exit 2 in Downtown Wareham . Construction of an eastern continuation of Route 25 to the Bourne Bridge was delayed for nearly three decades due to property disputes and environmental concerns , but the final 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 km ) segment opened in 1987 . The freeway was originally planned to continue over the Bourne Bridge into Cape Cod as part of the Southside Connector , but this plan was abandoned by the Massachusetts Highway Department ( MassHighway ) in the late 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 25 begins at a trumpet interchange with I @-@ 495 and I @-@ 195 in Wareham , Massachusetts ; the two left lanes of Route 25 west mainline onto Route 495 north , with the right @-@ hand lane serving I @-@ 195 via Exit 1 . From I @-@ 195 , Route 25 east is accessible via Exit 22A ; I @-@ 195 terminates at the interchange . Interstate 495 also terminates at its junction with Route 25 ; the two southbound lanes of I @-@ 495 default onto Route 25 east . After the interchange with I @-@ 195 and I @-@ 495 , Route 25 begins to head in a southeastern direction into the town of Wareham as a six @-@ lane freeway . The route passes under <unk> Road and through Maple Swamp , located at the northern end of Parker Mills Pond . 
 After the <unk> Road overpass , the route continues on a southeastern projection , passing close to several farms and cranberry bogs in Wareham . After passing under Charge Pond Road , Route 25 enters a densely populated region of Wareham with an alignment parallel to Route 28 ( Cranberry Highway ) . Eastbound Route 25 has its first interchange with Maple Springs Road , a local road that connects to US 6 and Route 28 and is used to access Wareham and the village of Onset . Shortly after the interchange , numbered as Exit 2 ( formerly Exit 1 ) , Route 25 proceeds across Agawam Mill Pond via a short causeway . Exit 2 off Route 25 west is located to the east of Agawam Mill Pond and connects to US 6 and Route 28 via Glen Charlie Road , an unnumbered route that also serves the village of White Island Shores . 
 After Exit 2 , Route 25 bends to the northeast , bypassing Buttermilk Bay and the densely populated village of Buzzards Bay to the south . The route passes Union Pond and Dicks Pond to the south and Spectacle Pond and Sandy Pond to the north before entering the town of Plymouth . In Plymouth , Route 25 passes to the north of several cranberry bogs and small ponds . While the freeway has no interchanges in Plymouth , a rest area is located off eastbound Route 25 in the town ; the area is inaccessible from westbound Route 25 . Due to state funding cutbacks , services at the rest area are limited to summer weekends ( Friday to Sunday ) as of 2010 . After the rest area , Route 25 passes over Bourne Road and turns sharply to head in a southwestern direction . The route passes under <unk> Road after entering the town of Bourne . In Bourne , Route 25 has its final interchange ; Exit 3 ( formerly Exit 2 ) serves the villages of Buzzards Bay and Sagamore , connecting to US 6 ( Scenic Highway ) and Route 28 north . From Exit 3 , US 6 is used to access the Sagamore Bridge in northern Bourne and the towns of Hyannis and Provincetown on Cape Cod . 
 After Exit 3 , the Route 25 designation continues for 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) . The six @-@ lane freeway narrows into a four @-@ lane undivided highway shortly before the approach ramps to the Bourne Bridge . Route 25 is concurrent with Route 28 from Exit 3 until the US 6 underpass , at which point the Route 25 designation officially ends ; the two eastbound lanes of Route 25 continue as Route 28 south over the Bourne Bridge and the Cape Cod Canal and onto Cape Cod . Route 28 continues southward to the town of Falmouth and then eastward to Hyannis and Orleans . An estimated daily average of over 35 @,@ 000 motorists utilized the Route 25 expressway in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early alignment = = = 
 The origins of Route 25 date back to 1947 , when the Massachusetts Department of Public Works ( MassDPW ) announced plans for an expressway that would link I @-@ 95 in Foxborough with Cape Cod . The planned route was given the Route 25 designation northwest of a planned interchange with the Fall River Expressway ( Route 24 ) in Raynham and the Route 28 designation to the southeast of Route 24 . After ten years of planning studies , the route received preliminary approval from the MassDPW in 1957 , and construction began in 1958 ; the entire route was designated as Route 25 in 1962 , with Route 28 instead being aligned on local roads . The portion of the freeway between Route 24 in Raynham and I @-@ 195 in Wareham was completed in 1967 . In 1969 , MassDPW extended the freeway eastward to US 6 in Wareham . 
 In the 1970s , the MassDPW changed the planned designation of the unconstructed Route 25 expressway northwest of Route 24 to I @-@ 495 . When this portion of I @-@ 495 was completed in 1982 , the state also designated the existing alignment of Route 25 between Route 24 and the I @-@ 195 interchange in Wareham as I @-@ 495 . After the reassignment , Route 25 was shortened to a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 km ) stretch from I @-@ 195 east to Downtown Wareham . 
 From 1969 until 1987 , the eastern terminus of Route 25 was at a junction with Maple Springs Road , US 6 and Route 28 in Wareham near the modern location of Exit 2 . The MassDPW and the Massachusetts Highway Department ( MassHighway ) had plans to extend the freeway eastward to Cape Cod as early as 1953 , when the route was included in the proposed Cape Cod Expressway that would connect New York City with Cape Cod . Route 25 was originally planned to connect to the Sagamore Bridge , which carried US 6 over the Cape Cod Canal and was used to access the towns of Hyannis and Provincetown . In 1962 , however , the MassDPW conducted traffic studies on the two bridges crossing the canal and found that the Sagamore Bridge was above vehicular capacity , whereas the more southern Bourne Bridge had excess capacity . The Route 25 freeway was then redesigned to cross over the Bourne Bridge and connect with the Mid @-@ Cape Highway ( US 6 ) on the southern side of the canal via the proposed Southside Connector . The connector would have been constructed through the Massachusetts Military Reservation in Bourne , but was canceled by the MassDPW and MassHighway in 1977 when environmental tests indicated the freeway would disturb underground aquifers serving as water sources for the region . MassDPW instead changed the proposed eastern terminus of the Route 25 expressway to the approach ramps of the Bourne Bridge . 
 = = = Completion of the freeway = = = 
 Construction of Route 25 east of Wareham , however , was delayed for nearly three decades to property disputes , environmental concerns and resistance from business owners in Buzzards Bay village , who claimed the freeway would divert all the traffic , and their business , elsewhere , leaving a ghost town in its wake . The proposed alignment ran through land where much of the state 's cranberry harvest was located , and this led to lengthy lawsuits and delays . In particular , farmers were concerned that salt runoff from winter ice removal would harm cranberry harvests . Throughout the 1970s and 1980s , the MassDPW developed several proposals to control storm water runoff and avoid potential damage to the cranberry crops . Engineers for the department developed four different drainage systems to be used along the length of the freeway that would divert runoff away from the Wareham River basin . In addition , the freeway was planned with a thicker asphalt pavement that was largely impervious to water . 
 The freeway was also delayed due to a larger property dispute with Hope Ingersoll , the owner of the 900 @-@ acre ( 364 ha ) Grazing Fields Farm on <unk> Road in Bourne , well known in the region as an artists ' colony and a producer of organic food . MassDPW proposed constructing Route 25 through the center of the farm , but Ingersoll hired engineers to develop an alternate routing . In 1978 , MassDPW rejected Ingersoll 's design , instead approving the alignment that ran through farmland seized by eminent domain . In 1980 , a state judge ruled that MassDPW had to conduct environmental studies on both the original routing and Ingersoll 's proposal . MassDPW eventually opted to construct Ingersoll 's design , giving Route 25 a longer alignment that arced to the north and east of Grazing Fields Farm before turning westward toward the Buzzards Bay business district and the Bourne Bridge . The route finally began construction in 1982 , and in 1989 the MassDPW was forced to pay Ingersoll $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 1982 USD ) for 90 acres ( 36 ha ) of farmland seized for the expressway 's construction . 
 In 1987 , the final 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 km ) segment of Route 25 from Maple Springs Road in Wareham to the Bourne Bridge was completed . A rest area and information center in Plymouth also opened with the freeway . The new expressway relieved congestion along US 6 and Route 28 in the Buzzards Bay business district , greatly reducing the number of accidents along the approach to the Bourne Bridge . In 2007 , MassHighway completed a renumbering of the three interchanges along the length of Route 25 as part of a signing upgrade project . Previously , the I @-@ 195 interchange had been numbered Exit 1 as part of I @-@ 495 's numbering scheme , with the Onset interchange also being Exit 1 as part of Route 25 's own scheme . This led to a confusing situation in which the road had two consecutive Exit 1s , so MassHighway devised a solution in which I @-@ 495 and MA @-@ 25 would " share " Exit 1 ( the I @-@ 195 interchange ) , and all other exits on MA @-@ 25 would be bumped up a number . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 All interchanges will be renumbered to mileage @-@ based numbers under a project scheduled to start in 2016 . The proposed new numbers from west to east are 0 , 3 , and 10 . 
 = Subrahmanya Temple , Saluvankuppam = 
 The Subrahmanya Temple at Saluvankuppam , Tamil Nadu , is a shrine dedicated to the Hindu deity Murugan . Archaeologists believe that the shrine , unearthed in 2005 , consists of two layers : a brick temple constructed during the Sangam period ( the 3rd century BC to the 3rd century AD ) and a granite Pallava temple dating from the 8th century AD and constructed on top of the brick shrine . The Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) team which conducted the excavation believe that brick temple could be the oldest of its kind to be discovered in Tamil Nadu . However , noted Indian archaeologist R. <unk> is critical of this claim owing to lack of references to the shrine in the popular literature of the period . 
 The temple was discovered by a team of archaeologists from the ASI based on clues found in a rock inscription left exposed by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami . Initially , excavations revealed an 8th @-@ century Pallava @-@ era shrine . Further excavations revealed that the 8th @-@ century shrine had been built on the brick foundation of an earlier shrine . The brick shrine has been dated to the Sangam period . 
 The temple faces north , unlike most Hindu temples . Artefacts from two phases , the Sangam phase as well as the Pallava phase , have been found . The temple is Tamil Nadu 's oldest shrine to Murugan . It is also believed to be one of only two pre @-@ Pallava temples to be discovered in the state , the other being the <unk> Perumal Temple at Veppathur . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 After the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami had subsided , archaeologists discovered rock inscriptions which had been exposed by the tsunami waves close to the hamlet of Saluvankuppam , near the UNESCO @-@ designated World Heritage Site of Mahabalipuram . The inscriptions by the Rashtrakuta king Krishna III and the Chola kings <unk> I and Kulothunga Chola I spoke of a Subrahmanya Temple at <unk> ( the present day <unk> ) . S. <unk> , epigraphist with the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) , identified a nearby mound as the site of the temple . In 2005 , archaeologists unearthed an 8th @-@ century Pallava temple under the mound . G. Thirumoorthy , ASI Assistant Archaeologist , believed that the shrine could be the oldest Subrahmanya temple to be excavated in Tamil Nadu . There were speculations on whether the temple could be one of the " Seven Pagodas " . 
 However , further excavations revealed that the 8th @-@ century temple was constructed over the remains of an older brick temple . According to Thirumoorthy , the garbhagriha or sanctum sanctorum of the brick temple was filled with sand and covered with granite slabs upon which the newer temple was constructed . Sathyamurthy , Superintendent , ASI Chennai Circle , said that the brick temple could be dated to the Sangam period as the shrine faced north unlike modern temples which face either east or west . This proved conclusively that the temple was constructed before the 6th or 7th century AD when the <unk> shastras , the canonical texts of temple architecture , were written . Estimates of the age of the brick shrine range from 1700 to 2200 years . 
 Archaeologists believe that the brick shrine was destroyed either by a cyclone or a tsunami which took place 2 @,@ 200 years ago . The Pallavas built a granite temple on the brick foundation in the 8th century AD , which also was likely to have been destroyed by a tsunami . Archaeologists believe that the second tsunami must have occurred in the 13th century AD as the latest inscriptions which speak of the shrine have been dated to 1215 . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Although the city of Mahabalipuram was constructed by the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I in the 7th century AD , there is evidence that a small port might have functioned at the site even earlier . Megalithic burial urns dating to the very dawn of the Christian era have been discovered near Mahabalipuram . The Sangam age poem <unk> describes a port called <unk> which some scholars identify with the present @-@ day Mahabalipuram . <unk> near Mahabalipuram has been identified as the site of the port of <unk> mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea . 
 = = Inscriptions = = 
 There are many rock inscriptions near the temple . The discovery of three granite pillars with inscriptions of grants made to the shrine led to the discovery of the temple itself . While one pillar contains an inscription recording the donation of ten <unk> ( small balls ) of gold by one <unk> of Mahabalipuram in 858 , another records the donation of 16 <unk> of gold in 813 for the maintenance of a lamp by a Brahmin woman named <unk> . The third pillar has an inscription by Raja Raja Chola I. Apart from these , there are five other pillars with inscriptions by the Pallava kings Dantivarman I , Nandivarman III and <unk> , the Rashtrakuta king Krishna III and the Chola king Rajendra Chola III . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The temple is dedicated to the Hindu deity Murugan and faces north . The garbhagriha or sanctum sanctorum is 2 metres long and 2 @.@ 2 metres wide and is made of 27 courses of bricks . The bricks used are similar to the ones used in other Sangam age sites such as Puhar , Urayur , <unk> and Arikamedu . A stone vel is positioned at the entrance of the shrine . During the excavations , a terracotta plaque depicting a <unk> Koothu , a dance which is mentioned in the 1st century AD Tamil epic <unk> , was discovered . <unk> feels that there may not have been any idol in the square garbhagriha as it is too small to house one . The temple is surrounded by a <unk> or a compound wall dating from the Sangam period . According to Thirumoorthy , the shrine is " the biggest brick temple complex dating to the pre @-@ Pallava period " . 
 The temple is built on a cushion of alluvium on which a layer of man @-@ made bricks were laid . On top of this were another four layers of man @-@ made bricks separated by four layers of laterite . There were two types of bricks used : large @-@ sized laterite bricks of the Sangam period and thin , tabular bricks of a later age . The bricks were plastered together with lime . 
 = = Artefacts unearthed = = 
 A terracotta Nandi ( the bull of the god Shiva – father of Murugan ) , head of a woman , terracotta lamps , potsherds and a <unk> ( aniconic symbol of Shiva ) made of green stone are some of the important artefacts found at the site . The Nandi is the first one made of terracotta to be found . While most of the items unearthed belong to the Sangam period , artefacts of a later period including a Chola copper coin have also been found . 
 = Russian battleship Oslyabya = 
 Oslyabya ( Russian : <unk> ) was the second of the three Peresvet @-@ class second @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy at the end of the nineteenth century , although construction delays meant that she was the last to be completed . The ship was part of the Second Pacific Squadron sent to the Far East during the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , and served as the flagship of Rear Admiral Baron Dmitry von Fölkersam . Oslyabya was sunk on 27 May 1905 at the Battle of Tsushima , and was the first all @-@ steel battleship to be sunk by naval gunfire alone . Sources differ on the exact number of casualties , but over half her crew went down with the ship . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Peresvet class was inspired by the British second @-@ class battleships of the Centurion class . The British ships were intended to defeat commerce @-@ raiders like the Russian armored cruisers Rossia and Rurik ; the Peresvet @-@ class ships were designed to support the Russian cruisers . This role placed a premium on high speed and long range at the expense of heavy armament and armor . 
 Oslyabya had a length of 434 feet 5 inches ( 132 @.@ 4 m ) overall , a beam of 71 feet 6 inches ( 21 @.@ 79 m ) and a draft of 26 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) . Designed to displace 12 @,@ 674 long tons ( 12 @,@ 877 t ) , she was almost 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) overweight and displaced 14 @,@ 408 long tons ( 14 @,@ 639 t ) when built . Her crew consisted of 27 officers and 744 enlisted men . The ship was powered by three vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by 30 Belleville boilers . The engines were rated at 14 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 800 kW ) , using forced draft , and designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Oslyabya , however , reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 33 knots ( 33 @.@ 95 km / h ; 21 @.@ 09 mph ) from 15 @,@ 051 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 224 kW ) during her sea trials in September 1902 . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 060 long tons ( 2 @,@ 090 t ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 6 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of eleven Canet 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull and in the bow , underneath the forecastle . Smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included twenty 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) QF guns , twenty 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns and eight 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . She was also armed with five 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes , three above water and two submerged . The ship carried 45 mines to be used to protect her anchorage . 
 Oslyabya 's waterline armor belt consisted of Harvey armor and was four to nine inches ( 102 to 229 mm ) thick . The belt was 7 feet 9 inches ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , of which the upper 36 inches ( 910 mm ) was intended to be above the waterline , but the ship was significantly overweight and only had three inches ( 76 mm ) showing at normal load . At full load , the belt was completely submerged and her only protection was the four @-@ inch upper belt . The Krupp cemented armor of her gun turrets had a maximum thickness of nine inches and her deck ranged from two to three inches ( 51 to 76 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Oslyabya , named for Rodion Oslyabya , a 14th @-@ century monk of the <unk> @-@ <unk> Lavra and a hero of the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380 , was laid down on 21 November 1895 by the New Admiralty Shipyard in Saint Petersburg and launched on 8 November 1898 . Problems at the New Admiralty Shipyard delayed her completion until 1903 at a cost of 11 @,@ 340 @,@ 000 rubles . The ship sailed for Port Arthur on 7 August 1903 with the armored cruiser Bayan , but Oslyabya ran aground in the Strait of Gibraltar on 21 August and was under repair until late November , first in Algeria , then at La Spezia , Italy . After repairs , the ship resumed her voyage to the Far East , but she was recalled to join the Baltic Fleet on 12 February 1904 , following the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War three days previously . After arrival at St. Petersburg in April , Oslyabya was fitted with 4 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) Barr & Stroud rangefinders , telescopic gun sights , a new ventilation system , and Telefunken radio equipment . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 The Russian strategy since 1897 had been for ships from the Baltic Fleet to be ordered to the Far East if war with Japan broke out , while the First Pacific Squadron in Port Arthur would avoid a general fleet battle until reinforcements arrived . On 15 October 1904 , Oslyabya set sail for Port Arthur from Libau as von Fölkersam 's flagship , along with the other vessels of the Second Pacific Squadron , under the overall command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky . Historian Mark <unk> said that : " This epic 18 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 29 @,@ 000 km ) journey was the longest voyage of a coal @-@ powered battleship fleet in history . " En route to Denmark , the battleship was slightly damaged when the destroyer <unk> collided with her . When his ships reached the port of Tangier , Morocco , on 28 October , Rozhestvensky ordered his older battleships , under the command of von Fölkersam , to go through the Mediterranean and Red Sea to rendezvous with his main force in Madagascar . Rozhestvensky led his squadron , including Oslyabya , down the Atlantic coast of Africa , rounding Cape Horn , and reached the island of Nosy Be off the northwest coast of Madagascar on 9 January 1905 , where they remained for two months while Rozhestvensky finalized his coaling arrangements . By this time Port Arthur had surrendered to the Japanese and he could not count on resupplying there , nor rendezvousing with the First Pacific Squadron . Rozhestvensky 's reunited squadron sailed for Camranh Bay , French Indochina , on 16 March and reached it almost a month later to await the obsolete ships of the Third Pacific Squadron , commanded by Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov . These reached Camranh Bay on 9 May and the combined force sailed for Vladivostok on 14 May . 
 En route , Rozhestvensky reorganized his ships into three tactical divisions for the forthcoming battle ; the first consisted of the four new Borodino @-@ class battleships commanded by himself , von Fölkersam commanded the Second Division that consisted of the battleships Oslyabya , Navarin , Sissoi Veliky and the armored cruiser Admiral Nakhimov , and Nebogatov retained his ships as the Third Division . Von Fölkersam , ill with cancer , died on 26 May and Rozhestvensky decided not to inform the fleet in order to keep morale up . Oslyabya 's Captain 1st Rank Vladimir Ber became the commander of the Second Division , while Nebogatov had no idea that he was now the squadron 's de facto second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 While figures are not available for Oslyabya , one Russian account after the battle said that the Borodinos were approximately 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) overweight as they were overloaded with coal and other supplies that were stored high in the ships , reducing their stability . Oslyabya 's main armor belt was fully submerged with a full load , much less any additional coal and supplies , and thus the four @-@ inch @-@ thick upper armor was the only available protection for the ship 's waterline . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 The Russians were spotted early on the morning of 27 May by Japanese ships as they entered the Korea Strait en route to Vladivostok . During the subsequent battle Oslyabya led the Second Division of the squadron and was initially the target of at least two battleships and a pair of armored cruisers when the Japanese opened fire at 14 : 10 . As the Japanese approached , Rozhestvensky ordered the fleet to move from line ahead formation to parallel columns and Oslyabya was forced to almost stop in her tracks to avoid hitting the battleship Oryol , the last ship of Rozhestvensky 's division , as she maneuvered . Almost immediately , the shells began inflicting damage , knocking out the rangefinder , wounding the gunnery officer and severing the cables connecting the guns to the Geisler fire @-@ control system . Other hits shot away the mainmast and knocked out the forward gun turret as well as three of the port six @-@ inch guns . Splinters from one of the many hits entered her conning tower , killing the quartermaster and wounding most of the men inside . This caused the ship to fall out of line to starboard and she was engaged by six Japanese armored cruisers at short range . More serious were several large @-@ caliber shells that struck along the ship 's waterline about 15 minutes into the engagement that caused major flooding ; they opened up enough of the ship 's bow to the sea that her forward motion forced more and more water into her hull and she began listing to port . Flooding of her starboard forward magazine was ordered in an attempt to counteract the list , but it just added more weight forward and destroyed the ship 's stability . Oslyabya 's list increased to 12 degrees at 14 : 20 , flooding many of the lower turrets . Her funnels touched the water around 15 : 10 and Ber ordered " abandon ship " . The ship sank a few minutes later , with her starboard propeller still turning , taking Ber and 470 of her crew with her . 
 = Eva Braun = 
 Eva Anna Paula Hitler ( née Braun ; 6 February 1912 – 30 April 1945 ) was the longtime companion of Adolf Hitler and , for less than 40 hours , his wife . Braun met Hitler in Munich when she was 17 years old , while she was working as an assistant and model for his personal photographer , and began seeing him often about two years later . She attempted suicide twice during their early relationship . By 1936 , she was a part of his household at the Berghof near Berchtesgaden and lived a sheltered life throughout World War II . Braun was a photographer , and many of the surviving colour photographs and films of Hitler were taken by her . She was a key figure within Hitler 's inner social circle , but did not attend public events with him until mid @-@ 1944 , when her sister Gretl married Hermann Fegelein , the SS liaison officer on his staff . 
 As the Third Reich collapsed towards the end of the war , Braun swore loyalty to Hitler and went to Berlin to be by his side in the heavily reinforced Führerbunker beneath the Reich Chancellery . As Red Army troops fought their way into the neighbourhood on 29 April 1945 , she married Hitler during a brief civil ceremony ; she was 33 and he was 56 . Less than 40 hours later , they committed suicide together in a sitting room of the bunker , she by biting into a capsule of cyanide , and he by a gunshot to the head . The German public was unaware of Braun 's relationship with Hitler until after their deaths . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Munich , Eva Braun was the second daughter of school teacher Friedrich " Fritz " Braun and Franziska " Fanny " <unk> , who had worked as a seamstress before her marriage . She was baptized into the Roman Catholic Church . Her elder sister , Ilse , was born in 1909 and her younger sister , Margarete ( Gretl ) , was born in 1915 . Braun 's parents were divorced in April 1921 , but remarried in November 1922 , probably for financial reasons ( hyperinflation was plaguing the German economy at the time ) . Braun was educated at a Catholic lyceum in Munich , and then for one year at a business school in the Convent of the English Sisters in <unk> am Inn , where she had average grades and a talent for athletics . At age 17 she took a job working for Heinrich Hoffmann , the official photographer for the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) . Initially employed as a shop assistant and sales clerk , she soon learned how to use a camera and develop photos . She met Hitler , 23 years her senior , at Hoffmann 's studio in Munich in October 1929 . He had been introduced to her as " Herr Wolff " . Eva 's sister , Gretl , also worked for Hoffman from 1932 onward , and the women rented an apartment together for a time . Gretl accompanied her sister on her later trips with Hitler to the Obersalzberg . 
 = = Relationship with Hitler = = 
 Hitler lived with his half @-@ niece , Geli Raubal , in an apartment at <unk> 16 in Munich from 1929 until her death . On 18 September 1931 Raubal was found dead in the apartment , shot with Hitler 's pistol , an apparent suicide . Hitler was in Nuremberg at the time . The relationship was important to him , likely the most intense of his life . Hitler began seeing more of Braun after the suicide . 
 Braun herself attempted suicide on 10 or 11 August 1932 by shooting herself in the chest with her father 's pistol . Historians feel the attempt was not serious , but was a bid for Hitler 's attention . After Braun 's recovery , Hitler became more committed to her and by the end of 1932 they had become lovers . She often stayed overnight at his Munich apartment when he was in town . Braun worked as a photographer for Hoffmann from 1933 on . This position enabled her to travel — accompanied by Hoffmann — with Hitler 's entourage , as a photographer for the Nazi Party . Later in her career she worked for Hoffman 's art press . 
 According to a fragment of her diary and the account of biographer <unk> Gun , Braun 's second suicide attempt occurred in May 1935 . She took an overdose of sleeping pills when Hitler failed to make time for her in his life . Hitler provided Eva and her sister with a three @-@ bedroom apartment in Munich that August , and the next year the sisters were provided with a villa in <unk> at <unk> . 12 ( now <unk> . 12 ) . By 1936 , Braun was at Hitler 's household at the Berghof near Berchtesgaden whenever he was in residence there , but she lived mostly in Munich . Braun also had her own apartment at the new Reich Chancellery in Berlin , completed to a design by Albert Speer . 
 Braun attended the Nuremberg Rally for the first time in 1935 , as a member of Hoffman 's staff . Hitler 's half @-@ sister , Angela Raubal ( the dead Geli 's mother ) , took exception to her presence there , and was later dismissed from her position as housekeeper at his house in Berchtesgaden . Researchers are unable to ascertain if her dislike for Braun was the only reason for her departure , but other members of Hitler 's entourage saw Braun as untouchable from then on . 
 Hitler wished to present himself in the image of a chaste hero ; in the Nazi ideology , men were the political leaders and warriors , and women were homemakers . He believed that he was sexually attractive to women and wished to exploit this for political gain by remaining single , as he felt marriage would decrease his appeal . He and Braun never appeared as a couple in public ; the only time they appeared together in a published news photo was when she sat near him at the 1936 Winter Olympics . The German people were unaware of Braun 's relationship with Hitler until after the war . According to Speer 's memoirs , Braun never slept in the same room as Hitler and had her own rooms at the Berghof , in Hitler 's Berlin residence , and in the Berlin bunker . Speer later said , " Eva Braun will prove a great disappointment to historians . " 
 Biographer Heike Görtemaker notes that women did not play a big role in the politics of the Third Reich . Braun 's political influence on Hitler was apparently minimal . She was never allowed to stay in the room when business or political conversations took place , and was sent out of the room when cabinet ministers or other dignitaries were present . She was not a member of the Nazi Party . In his post @-@ war memoirs Hoffmann characterized Braun 's outlook as " inconsequential and feather @-@ brained " ; her main interests were sports , clothes , and the cinema . By all accounts , she led a sheltered and privileged existence and seemed uninterested in politics . One instance when she took an interest was in 1943 , shortly after Germany had fully transitioned to a total war economy . Among other things , this meant a potential ban on women 's cosmetics and luxuries . According to Speer 's memoirs , Braun approached Hitler in " high indignation " ; Hitler quietly instructed Speer , who was armaments minister at the time , to halt production of women 's cosmetics and luxuries rather than instituting an outright ban . 
 Braun continued to work for Hoffmann after commencing her relationship with Hitler . She took many photographs and movies of members of the inner circle , and some of these were sold to Hoffmann for extremely high prices . She received money from Hoffmann 's company as late as 1943 , and also held the position of private secretary to Hitler . This guise meant she could enter and leave the Chancellery unremarked , though she used a side entrance and a rear staircase . Görtemaker notes that Braun and Hitler enjoyed a normal sex life . Braun 's friends and relatives described Eva giggling over a 1938 photograph of Neville Chamberlain sitting on a sofa in Hitler 's Munich flat with the remark : " If only he knew what goings @-@ on that sofa has seen . " 
 On 3 June 1944 , Braun 's sister Gretl Braun married SS @-@ Gruppenführer Hermann Fegelein , who served as Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler 's liaison officer on Hitler 's staff . Hitler used the marriage as an excuse to allow Braun to appear at official functions , as she could then be introduced as Fegelein 's sister @-@ in @-@ law . When Fegelein was caught in the closing days of the war trying to escape to Sweden or Switzerland , Hitler ordered his execution . He was shot for desertion in the garden of the Reich Chancellery on 28 April 1945 . 
 = = Lifestyle = = 
 Conversion of the small holiday home Hitler purchased in 1933 on the mountain at Obersalzberg began in 1934 and was completed by 1936 . A large wing was added onto the original house and several additional buildings were constructed . The entire area was fenced off , and remaining houses on the mountain were purchased by the Nazi Party and demolished . Braun and the other members of the entourage were cut off from the outside world when in residence . Speer , Hermann Göring , and Martin Bormann had houses constructed inside the compound . 
 Hitler 's valet , Heinz Linge , stated in his memoirs that Hitler and Braun had two bedrooms and two bathrooms with interconnecting doors at the Berghof , and Hitler would end most evenings alone with her in his study before they retired to bed . She would wear a " dressing gown or house @-@ coat " and drink wine ; Hitler would have tea . Public displays of affection or physical contact were nonexistent , even in the enclosed world of the Berghof . Braun took the role of hostess amongst the regular visitors , though she was not involved in running the household . She regularly invited friends and family members to accompany her during her stays , the only guest to do so . 
 When Henriette von Schirach suggested that Braun should go into hiding after the war , Braun replied , " Do you think I would let him die alone ? I will stay with him up until the last moment ... " Hitler named Braun in his will , to receive 12 @,@ 000 Reichsmarks yearly after his death . He was very fond of her , and worried when she participated in sports or was late returning for tea . 
 Braun was very fond of her two Scottish Terrier dogs named Negus and Stasi and they feature in her home movies . She usually kept them away from Hitler 's German Shepherd , Blondi . Blondi was killed by one of the entourage on 29 April 1945 when Hitler ordered that one of the cyanide capsules obtained for Braun and Hitler 's suicide the next day be tested on the dog . Braun 's dogs and Blondi 's puppies were shot by Hitler 's dog handler , Fritz <unk> , on 30 April . 
 = = Marriage and suicide = = 
 In early April 1945 , Braun travelled from Munich to Berlin to be with Hitler at the Führerbunker . She refused to leave as the Red Army closed in on the capital . After midnight on the night of 28 – 29 April , Hitler and Braun were married in a small civil ceremony within the Führerbunker . The event was witnessed by Joseph Goebbels and Martin Bormann . Thereafter , Hitler hosted a modest wedding breakfast with his new wife . With Braun 's marriage , her legal name changed to Eva Hitler . When she signed her marriage certificate she wrote the letter B for her family name , then lined this out and replaced it with Hitler . 
 After 1 : 00 pm on the afternoon of 30 April 1945 , Braun and Hitler said their farewells to staff and members of the inner circle . Later that afternoon , at approximately 3 : 30 pm , several witnesses reported hearing a loud gunshot . After waiting a few minutes , Hitler 's valet , Heinz Linge , and Hitler 's SS adjutant , Otto Günsche , entered the small study and found the lifeless bodies of Hitler and Braun on a small sofa . Braun had bitten into a cyanide capsule , and Hitler had shot himself in the right temple with his pistol . The corpses were carried up the stairs and through the bunker 's emergency exit to the garden behind the Reich Chancellery , where they were burned . Braun was 33 years old when she died . 
 The charred remains were found by the Russians and secretly buried at the SMERSH compound in Magdeburg , East Germany , along with the bodies of Joseph and Magda Goebbels and their six children . On 4 April 1970 , a Soviet KGB team with detailed burial charts secretly exhumed five wooden boxes of remains . The remains were thoroughly burned and crushed , after which the ashes were thrown into the Biederitz river , a tributary of the nearby Elbe . 
 The rest of Braun 's family survived the war . Her mother , Franziska , died at age 96 in January 1976 , having lived out her days in an old farmhouse in Ruhpolding , Bavaria . Her father , Fritz , died in 1964 . Gretl gave birth to a daughter — whom she named Eva — on 5 May 1945 . She later married Kurt <unk> , a businessman . She died in 1987 . Braun 's elder sister , Ilse , was not part of Hitler 's inner circle . She married twice and died in 1979 . 
 = Article 9 of the Constitution of Singapore = 
 Article 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore , specifically Article 9 ( 1 ) , guarantees the right to life and the right to personal liberty . The Court of Appeal has called the right to life the most basic of human rights , but has yet to fully define the term in the Constitution . Contrary to the broad position taken in jurisdictions such as Malaysia and the United States , the High Court of Singapore has said that personal liberty only refers to freedom from unlawful incarceration or detention . 
 Article 9 ( 1 ) states that persons may be deprived of life or personal liberty " in accordance with law " . In Ong Ah Chuan v. Public Prosecutor ( 1980 ) , an appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council from Singapore , it was held that the term law means more than just legislation validly enacted by Parliament , and includes fundamental rules of natural justice . Subsequently , in Yong Vui Kong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) , the Court of Appeal held that such fundamental rules of natural justice embodied in the Constitution are the same in nature and function as common law rules of natural justice in administrative law , except that they operate at different levels of the legal order . A related decision , Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) , apparently rejected the contention that Article 9 ( 1 ) entitles courts to examine the substantive fairness of legislation , though it asserted a judicial discretion to reject bills of attainder and absurd or arbitrary legislation . In the same case , the Court of Appeal held that law in Article 9 ( 1 ) does not include rules of customary international law . 
 Other subsections of Article 9 enshrine rights accorded to persons who have been arrested , namely , the right to apply to the High Court to challenge the legality of their detention , the right to be informed of the grounds of arrest , the right to counsel , and the right to be produced before a magistrate within 48 hours of arrest . These rights do not apply to enemy aliens or to persons arrested for contempt of Parliament . The Constitution also specifically exempts the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act ( Cap . 67 , 2000 Rev. Ed . ) , the Internal Security Act ( Cap . 143 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) , and Part IV of the Misuse of Drugs Act ( Cap . 185 , 2008 Rev. Ed . ) from having to comply with Article 9 . 
 = = Text of Article 9 = = 
 Article 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore guarantees to all persons the right to life and right to personal liberty . It states : 
 9 . — ( 1 ) No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty save in accordance with law . 
 ( 2 ) Where a complaint is made to the High Court or any Judge thereof that a person is being unlawfully detained , the Court shall inquire into the complaint and , unless satisfied that the detention is lawful , shall order him to be produced before the Court and release him . 
 ( 3 ) Where a person is arrested , he shall be informed as soon as may be of the grounds of his arrest and shall be allowed to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice . 
 ( 4 ) Where a person is arrested and not released , he shall , without unreasonable delay , and in any case within 48 hours ( excluding the time of any necessary journey ) , be produced before a Magistrate , in person or by way of video @-@ conferencing link ( or other similar technology ) in accordance with law , and shall not be further detained in custody without the Magistrate 's authority . 
 ( 5 ) Clauses ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) shall not apply to an enemy alien or to any person arrested for contempt of Parliament pursuant to a warrant issued under the hand of the Speaker . 
 ( 6 ) Nothing in this Article shall invalidate any law — 
 ( a ) in force before the commencement of this Constitution which authorises the arrest and detention of any person in the interests of public safety , peace and good order ; or 
 ( b ) relating to the misuse of drugs or intoxicating substances which authorises the arrest and detention of any person for the purpose of treatment and rehabilitation , 
 by reason of such law being inconsistent with clauses ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) , and , in particular , nothing in this Article shall affect the validity or operation of any such law before 10th March 1978 . 
 Article 9 ( 1 ) embodies the concept of the rule of law , an early expression of which was the 39th article of the Magna Carta of 1215 : " No freeman shall be taken captive or imprisoned , or deprived of his lands , or outlawed , or exiled , or in any way destroyed , nor will we go with force against him nor send forces against him , except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land . " Article 9 ( 1 ) is similar , but by no means identical , to the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution which prohibits any state from denying " any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law " , and to Article 21 of the Constitution of India which states : " No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law . " Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of Malaysia and Singapore 's Article 9 ( 1 ) are worded the same way as the latter was adopted in 1965 from the former following Singapore 's independence from Malaysia . 
 = = Rights to life and personal liberty = = 
 = = = Meaning of life = = = 
 In Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) , the Court of Appeal of Singapore called the right to life " the most basic of human rights " . However , the courts have not yet had the opportunity to define the term life in Article 9 ( 1 ) . 
 Jurisdictions such as India , Malaysia and the United States interpret the same term in their respective constitutions broadly . In the United States Supreme Court case Munn v. Illinois ( 1877 ) , Justice Stephen Johnson Field stated that the term life means more than mere animal existence . Rather , the definition extends to all those limbs and faculties by which life is enjoyed . His rationale was that the term should not be " construed in any narrow or restricted sense " . Indian courts have likewise adopted a broad interpretation of life in Article 21 of the Indian Constitution to mean more than mere existence – instead , it includes the right to livelihood and the right to a healthy environment . Subsequently , in <unk> v. State of Andhra Pradesh ( 1997 ) , the meaning of life was expanded to include the right to live with human dignity ; and to the provision of minimum sustenance , shelter , and those other rights and aspects of life that make life meaningful and worth living . Similarly , Justice <unk> Natwarlal Bhagwati held in <unk> Mukti Morcha v. Union of India ( 1984 ) that the expression life included the right to be free from exploitation , and to the basic essentials of life included in the Directive Principles of State Policy that appear in the Indian Constitution . 
 In the Malaysian case Tan Tek Seng v. Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan ( 1996 ) , the appellant had appealed against his wrongful dismissal from employment on the grounds of procedural unfairness . One of the issues brought up was whether an unfair procedure meant that he had been deprived of his constitutional right to life or liberty protected by Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Malaysian Constitution , which is identical to Singapore 's Article 9 ( 1 ) . Judge of the Court of Appeal Gopal Sri Ram held that the courts should take into consideration the unique characteristics and situation of the country , and must not be blind to the realities of life . He went on to suggest that a liberal approach be adopted to grasp the intention of the framers of the Constitution by giving life a broad and liberal meaning . He opined that such an interpretation would include elements that form the quality of life , namely the right to seek and be engaged in lawful and gainful employment , and the right to live in a reasonably healthy and pollution @-@ free environment . He also noted that life cannot be extinguished or taken away except according to procedure established by law . 
 The Yong Vui Kong case suggests that Singapore courts may interpret the word life more narrowly than the Indian and Malaysian courts when called upon to do so . The Court of Appeal stated that the scope of Article 21 of the Indian Constitution had been expanded by the Indian courts to include " numerous rights relating to life , such as the right to education , the right to health and medical care and the right to freedom from noise pollution " , attributing this to the " pro @-@ active approach of the Indian Supreme Court in matters relating to the social and economic conditions of the people of India " . The Court declined to apply <unk> v. State of Punjab , in which the mandatory death penalty had been found unconstitutional , stating it was " not possible " to interpret Singapore 's Article 9 ( 1 ) in the way that the Indian Supreme Court had interpreted Article 21 of the Indian Constitution . 
 = = = Meaning of personal liberty = = = 
 Lo Pui Sang v. Mamata <unk> Dave ( 2008 ) took a narrow approach to the reading of personal liberty in Article 9 ( 1 ) . The High Court of Singapore held that personal liberty only refers to freedom from unlawful incarceration or detention , and does not include a liberty to contract . Although it was suggested this had always been the understanding of the term , no authority was cited . 
 The approach taken in Lo Pui Sang can be compared to the more liberal interpretation of liberty in the United States and Malaysia . In the US Supreme Court case of <unk> v. Louisiana ( 1897 ) , where a Louisiana statute was struck down on the ground that it violated an individual 's right to contract , it was held that liberty in the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution meant not only the right of the citizen to be free from any physical restraint of his person , but also the right to freely enjoy all his faculties – that is , to be free to use them in all lawful ways ; to live and work where he will ; to earn his livelihood by any lawful calling ; to pursue any livelihood or avocation ; and for that purpose to enter into all contracts that may be proper , necessary , and essential to his carrying out those purposes . Liberty was accorded the same broad reading in the subsequent case Meyer v. Nebraska ( 1923 ) , in which the Supreme Court held that a state statute mandating that English be the only language used in schools was unconstitutional as it infringed on the liberty guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment . The Court stated that liberty 
 ... denotes not merely freedom from bodily restraint but also the right of the individual to contract , to engage in any of the common occupations of life , to acquire useful knowledge , to marry , establish a home and bring up children , to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience , and generally to enjoy those privileges long recognized at common law as essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men . 
 It was held in the Malaysian Court of Appeal case of <unk> Balakrishnan v. <unk> <unk> Negeri Sabah ( 1998 ) that the term life in Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Constitution is not limited to mere existence , but is a wide concept that must receive a broad and liberal interpretation . Likewise , personal liberty should be similarly interpreted , as any other approach to construction will necessarily produce an incongruous and absurd result . On the facts , personal liberty extended to the liberty of an aggrieved person to go to court and seek judicial review , and thus a statutory provision that sought to oust the power of judicial review was apparently inconsistent with this fundamental liberty . However , the apparent inconsistency could be resolved by permitting an ouster clause to immunize from judicial review only those administrative acts and decisions that are not infected by an error of law . Although the Federal Court reversed the Court of Appeal on this point , in the subsequent case Lee Kwan Woh v. Public Prosecutor ( 2009 ) the Federal Court held that the provisions of the Constitution should be interpreted " generously and liberally " , and that " on no account should a literal construction be placed on its language , particularly upon those provisions that guarantee to individuals the protection of fundamental rights " . In its view : 
 ... it is the duty of a court to adopt a prismatic approach when interpreting the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part II of the Constitution . When light passes through a prism it reveals its constituent colours . In the same way , the prismatic approach will reveal to the court the rights submerged in the concepts employed by the several provisions under Part II . 
 The Federal Court went on to state that personal liberty " includes other rights " such as the right to " cross the frontiers in order to enter or leave the country when one so desires " . 
 It has been suggested that since Article 9 ( 1 ) of the Singapore Constitution is pitched at a high level of generality , there is no limitation in the ordinary natural meaning of the phrase . Thus , there is no requirement in the Constitution for personal liberty to be construed narrowly to mean only freedom from physical restraint . 
 = = = Meaning of save in accordance with law = = = 
 The meaning of the word law in Article 9 ( 1 ) has a direct bearing on the scope of the Article . If law is read broadly ( for example , as incorporating customary international law principles ) , the scope of the fundamental liberties would be wider . It would be narrower if , on the other hand , law is construed narrowly , as the Legislature would be able to curtail such rights through legislation more easily . This could lead to a watering @-@ down of the emphasis on fundamental liberties , as any infringement might be considered legitimate so long as the statute in question was validly enacted . 
 = = = = Fundamental rules of natural justice = = = = 
 In the Malaysian case Arumugam Pillai v. Government of Malaysia ( 1976 ) , the Federal Court construed the phrase save in accordance with law in Article 13 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of Malaysia restrictively . This provision states : " No person shall be deprived of property save in accordance with law . " The Court held that all that was required for the legislation in question to be constitutional was for it to have been validly passed by Parliament . Hence , the validity of any duly enacted piece of legislation could not be questioned on grounds of reasonableness , no matter how arbitrary the law appeared to be . 
 However , in 1980 the Privy Council rejected this interpretation in the case of Ong Ah Chuan v. Public Prosecutor , a decision on appeal from Singapore . This appeal questioned the constitutional validity of section 15 of the Misuse of Drugs Act , and one of the issues that had to be decided was the interpretation of the word law in Article 9 ( 1 ) . The Public Prosecutor contended that law should be given a narrow meaning . He argued that 
 since ' written law ' is defined in Art 2 ( 1 ) to mean ' this Constitution and all Acts and Ordinances and subsidiary legislation for the time being in force in Singapore ' and ' law ' is defined as including ' written law ' , the requirements of the Constitution are satisfied if the deprivation of life and liberty has been carried out in accordance with provisions contained in any Act passed by the Parliament of Singapore , however arbitrary or contrary to fundamental rules of natural justice the provisions of such Act may be . 
 However , the Public Prosecutor qualified the statement by providing a limitation , namely , that " the arbitrariness , the disregard of fundamental rules of natural justice for which the Act provides , must be of general application to all citizens of Singapore so as to avoid falling foul of the anti @-@ discriminatory provisions of Art 12 ( 1 ) " . 
 In a judgment delivered by Lord Diplock , the Privy Council rejected this interpretation , finding the Public Prosecutor 's argument fallacious . Reading the definition of written law as stated in Article 2 ( 1 ) together with Article 4 , which provides that " any law enacted by the Legislature after the commencement of this Constitution which is inconsistent with this Constitution shall , to the extent of the inconsistency , be void " , their Lordships held that " the use of the expression ' law ' in Art 9 ( 1 ) ... does not , in the event of challenge , relieve the court of its duty to determine whether the provisions of an Act of Parliament passed after 16 September 1963 and relied upon to justify depriving a person of his life or liberty are inconsistent with the Constitution and consequently void " . 
 In line with their view that Part IV of the Constitution should be given " a generous interpretation ... suitable to give to individuals the full measure of the [ fundamental liberties ] referred to " , their Lordships held that " references to ' law ' in such contexts as ' in accordance with law ' , ' equality before the law ' , ' protection of the law ' and the like ... refer to a system of law which incorporates those fundamental rules of natural justice that had formed part and parcel of the common law of England that was in operation in Singapore at the commencement of the Constitution " . This conception of the meaning of law in Article 9 ( 1 ) has been affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Nguyen Tuong Van v. Public Prosecutor ( 2005 ) and Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) . 
 It has been highlighted that this elevation of principles of natural justice to constitutional status , with the implication that they may override local statutes due to the supremacy of the Constitution over them , creates some tension with Article 38 which vests the law @-@ making power of Singapore in the legislature . 
 = = = = = Extent of natural justice = = = = = 
 In Ong Ah Chuan and the subsequent decision Haw Tua Tau v. Public Prosecutor ( 1981 ) , the Privy Council declined to set out a comprehensive list of fundamental rules of natural justice and merely stated some principles to deal with the issues at hand . At a 2000 conference , the Attorney @-@ General Chan Sek Keong , who became Chief Justice in 2006 , remarked that this gives the Court of Appeal a free hand to determine the scope of the fundamental rules of natural justice unencumbered by precedent . 
 Guidance as to the scope of fundamental rules of natural justice was provided in Haw Tua Tau . First , the Privy Council said that rules of natural justice are not stagnant and may change with the times . Secondly , they should be considered in the local context , in light of the entire system as a whole and from the perspective of the people operating the system . Further , in order to satisfy the rules of natural justice , the law in question should not be " obviously unfair " . In its view , under a system of justice in which the court is invested with partly inquisitorial functions , compelling an accused to answer questions put to him by a judge cannot be regarded as contrary to natural justice . The Court of Appeal later ruled in Public Prosecutor v. <unk> bin <unk> ( 1992 ) that the privilege against self @-@ incrimination was not a fundamental rule of natural justice , and thus not a constitutional right . 
 In Yong Vui Kong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) , the Court of Appeal stated that fundamental rules of natural justice embodied in the concept of law in constitutional provisions such as Articles 9 ( 1 ) and 12 ( 1 ) are the same in nature and function as common law rules of natural justice in administrative law , except that they operate at different levels of the legal order . The former invalidate legislation on the ground of unconstitutionality and can only be altered by amending the Constitution , while the latter invalidate administrative decisions on the ground of administrative law principles and can be abrogated or disapplied by ordinary legislation . 
 = = = = = A procedural or substantive concept ? = = = = = 
 Traditionally , at common law , natural justice is taken to be a procedural concept that embodies the twin pillars of audi alteram partem ( hear the other party ) and <unk> iudex in causa sua ( no one should be a judge in his or her own cause ) . In the United States , due process has both procedural and substantive components . Substantive due process involves the courts assessing the reasonableness of executive actions and legislation using rational basis review if a fundamental right is not implicated and strict scrutiny if it is . The question thus arises whether substantive fundamental rules of natural justice may be developed by local courts . However , a line of Malaysian cases has expressed the view that the concept of substantive due process is not applicable to Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Malaysian Constitution , which is identical to Singapore 's Article 9 ( 1 ) . There is also academic commentary that rejects the notion of " substantive natural justice " , arguing that it is too vague and leads to problems in application . Another argument against substantive natural justice is the fear that it may become an avenue for judges to invalidate laws on the basis of their own subjective opinions , leading to unbounded judicial activism . 
 On the other hand , it has also been suggested that substantive natural justice would merely be a full exercise of the judiciary 's proper role as conferred by the Constitution . In addition , one scholar has asserted that there is no doubt that a judicial inquiry covers both substantive and procedural aspects . It is said that Article 9 ( 1 ) connotes a judicial inquiry into the " fairness " of the law tested against certain principles regarded as fundamental to the legal system . Distinguishing between substantive and procedural fairness is a meaningless exercise , as it merely clouds the process of judicial inquiry . Judicial review is judicial review under whatever name , and as far as Article 9 ( 1 ) is concerned , there is no room for making this distinction . 
 However , in Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) the Court of Appeal appeared to reject such an approach by declining to require that procedural laws must be " fair , just and reasonable " before they can be regarded as law for the purpose of Article 9 ( 1 ) . It noted that the provision neither contains such a qualification , nor can such a qualification be implied from its context or wording . The Court considered it " too vague a test of constitutionality " and said : " Such a test hinges on the court ’ s view of the reasonableness of the law in question , and requires the court to intrude into the legislative sphere of Parliament as well as engage in policy making . " On the other hand , the Court acknowledged that Article 9 ( 1 ) does not justify all legislation whatever its nature . It held , obiter , that law might not encompass <unk> legislation ( that is , bills of attainder – legislation purporting to be of general application but in fact directed at securing the conviction of particular individuals ) , or legislation " of so absurd or arbitrary a nature that it could not possibly have been contemplated by our constitutional framers as being ' law ' when they crafted the constitutional provisions protecting fundamental liberties " . 
 = = = = Customary international law = = = = 
 In Nguyen Tuong Van v. Public Prosecutor ( 2004 ) , the Court of Appeal considered whether law in Article 9 ( 1 ) includes principles of customary international law . In that case , the appellant argued that effecting a death sentence for drug trafficking by hanging is unconstitutional as a form of cruel and inhuman punishment not " in accordance with law " . The Court agreed that there was a prohibition against torture and cruel and inhumane treatment in Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that this is considered customary international law . However , a customary international law rule had to be " clearly and firmly established " before it was adopted by the courts , and there was insufficient practice among states to hold that death by hanging was within the ambit of this prohibition . Also , even if there was a customary international law rule against death by hanging , domestic statutes would prevail in the event of conflict . 
 The Court of Appeal clarified in Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor ( 2010 ) , that customary international law cannot be read into the Constitution for two reasons . First , in order for a customary international law rule to have legal effect in Singapore , it has to be incorporated into domestic law . The incorporation can occur either by enactment in a statute or by a court declaration that the rule forms part of the common law . The Court felt it would be incorrect to incorporate customary international law rules into the meaning of law in Article 9 ( 1 ) as this would cloak the common law with the constitutional status to nullify a statute , thus reversing the usual hierarchy of legal rules . Secondly , the term law is defined in Article 2 ( 1 ) to include the common law only " in so far as it is in operation in Singapore " . However , a court cannot treat rules of customary international law as having been incorporated into Singapore common law if they are inconsistent with existing statutes . Furthermore , if there is a conflict between such a rule and a domestic statute , the latter prevails . 
 The Constitution is silent as to the reception of international law in domestic law . In Yong Vui Kong the Court of Appeal accepted that domestic law , including the Constitution , should " as far as possible " be consistently interpreted with Singapore 's international obligations . Nonetheless , while international human rights law can increase the normative pool judges may resort to in interpreting the Constitution , there are " inherent limits " such as the express wording of the constitutional text and constitutional history that " [ militates ] against the incorporation of those international norms " . 
 It has also been argued that although where possible local statutes should be interpreted in light of international treaties , it is not the role of the judiciary to import international law standards into the Constitution that are inconsistent with legislation instead of deferring to the views of the executive . According to this view , which hinges on a strict adherence to the separation of powers doctrine , the judiciary should guard against unwarranted incursions into the executive sphere , as it is for the executive to determine Singapore 's attitude and position in relation to foreign affairs . The judiciary must not undertake its task of interpreting the Constitution arbitrarily , but should accord with legal reasoning and sound principles . This necessarily raises the question of what the applicable legal principle during the interpretation process should be . It has been suggested that the executive and the judiciary should show solidarity by speaking with " one voice " , and that the courts should exercise deference in favour of what the executive deems to be the nation 's attitude towards the particular international law norm that is sought to be applied . 
 It may be submitted that such judicial deference to the executive results in a clear neglect of the enshrined fundamental liberties in the Constitution . The flip side to this criticism is that fundamental liberties may still be given due accord though other avenues , for example , the application of rules of natural justice . As the meaning accorded to a particular fundamental liberty may be a potential ground for overturning Parliamentary legislation , it is crucial that the court should not merely rely on international law to determine the meaning of the liberty , unless there is evidence that the executive considers there is indeed an adoption of the particular international law norm . 
 = = Application = = 
 = = = Right to life = = = 
 = = = = Abortion = = = = 
 One of the most difficult questions involving the right to life is when exactly life begins and ends . If an unborn child is treated as a living person , then it should be accorded the right to life under the Constitution . Laws permitting abortion would thus be unconstitutional . This issue has yet to come before the Singapore courts . 
 In Singapore , the Penal Code lays out sanctions for non @-@ compliance with the Termination of Pregnancy Act , which limits abortion to women who have not been pregnant for more than 24 weeks . By not conferring the right to life upon fetuses younger than the stipulated period , the legislation has accorded greater weight to the safety and security of expectant mothers who are threatened by their unborn children . This is in contrast with the approach taken in the Philippines , where the Constitution provides that the state shall equally protect the life of the mother and the life of the unborn from conception . Similarly , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms of the Czech Republic states that human life deserves to be protected before birth . Chances of a universal consensus on this issue are slim due to the difficulty in defining the beginning of life . 
 = = = = Right to die = = = = 
 In Singapore , attempted suicide , abetment of suicide , and abetment of attempted suicide are criminal acts . This applies to physicians who aid patients in ending their lives . Such physicians are unable to claim a defence under section 88 of the Penal Code since they intended to cause the patients ' deaths . However , physicians are absolved of liability if patients refuse treatment for terminal illnesses by issuing advance medical directives . 
 Whether the right to life guaranteed by Article 9 ( 1 ) encompasses a right to die – that is , a right to commit suicide or a right to assisted suicide , usually in the face of a terminal illness – has not been the subject of any Singapore court case . In other jurisdictions , the right to life has generally not been interpreted in this way . In Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab ( 1996 ) the Indian Supreme Court held that the right to life is a natural right embodied in Article 21 of the Indian Constitution , and since suicide is an unnatural termination or extinction of life it is incompatible and inconsistent with the concept of the right to life . The US Supreme Court has also declined to recognize that choosing death is a right protected by the Constitution . In Washington v. Glucksberg ( 1997 ) , a group of Washington residents asserted that a state law banning assisted suicide was unconstitutional on its face . The majority held that as assisted suicide is not a fundamental liberty interest , it was not protected under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . Several of the justices seemed persuaded that the availability of palliative care to " alleviate suffering , even to the point of causing unconsciousness and hastening death " outweighed recognizing a new <unk> " right to commit suicide which itself includes a right to assistance in doing so " . 
 = = = Right to personal liberty = = = 
 = = = = Rights of arrested persons = = = = 
 Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Constitution enshrines the right of persons who have been detained to apply to the High Court challenging the legality of their detention . The application is for an order for review of detention , which was formerly called a writ of habeas corpus . The Court is required to inquire into the complaint , and order the detainee to be produced before the Court and released unless it is satisfied that the detention is lawful . 
 Article 9 ( 3 ) requires that an arrested person be informed " as soon as may be " of the grounds of his arrest . Article 9 ( 4 ) goes on to provide that if the arrested person is not released he must , without unreasonable delay , and in any case within 48 hours ( excluding the time of any necessary journey ) be produced before a magistrate and cannot be further detained in custody without the authority of the magistrate . The person 's attendance before the magistrate may be in person or by way of video @-@ conferencing or other similar technology in accordance with law . 
 = = = = = Right to counsel = = = = = 
 Article 9 ( 3 ) also states that an arrested person must be allowed to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice . 
 = = Restrictions on the rights to life and personal liberty = = 
 As mentioned above , Parliament is entitled to restrict the rights to life and personal liberty as long as it acts " in accordance with law " . More specific restrictions on Article 9 include Article 9 ( 5 ) , which provides that Articles 9 ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of the Constitution do not apply to enemy aliens or to persons arrested for contempt of Parliament pursuant to a warrant issued by the Speaker . 
 = = = Detention under the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act and the Misuse of Drugs Act = = = 
 Article 9 ( 6 ) saves any law 
 ( a ) in force before the commencement of the Constitution authorizing the arrest and detention of any person in the interests of public safety , peace and good order ; or 
 ( b ) relating to the misuse of drugs or intoxicating substances which authorizes the arrest and detention of any person for treatment and rehabilitation , 
 from being invalid because of inconsistency with Articles 9 ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) . This provision took effect on 10 March 1978 but was expressed to apply to laws in force prior to that date . Introduced by the Constitution ( Amendment ) Act 1978 , the provision <unk> the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act and Part IV of the Misuse of Drugs Act from unconstitutionality . 
 Preventive detention is the use of executive power to detain individuals on the basis that they are predicted to commit future crimes that will threaten national interest . Among other things , the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act empowers the Minister for Home Affairs , if satisfied that a person has been associated with activities of a criminal nature , to order that he or she be detained for a period not exceeding 12 months if the Minister is of the view that the detention is necessary in the interests of public safety , peace and good order . 
 Under the Misuse of Drugs Act , the Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau may order drug addicts to undergo drug treatment or rehabilitation at an approved institution for renewable six @-@ month periods up to a maximum of three years . 
 = = = Detention under the Internal Security Act = = = 
 Section 8 ( 1 ) of Singapore 's Internal Security Act ( " ISA " ) gives the Minister for Home Affairs the power to detain a person without trial for any period not exceeding two years on the precondition that the President is : " satisfied ... that ... it is necessary to do so ... with a view to preventing that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore ... or to the maintenance of public order or essential services therein " . The period of detention may be renewed by the President indefinitely for periods not exceeding two years at a time as long as the grounds for detention continue to exist . 
 The ISA has its constitutional basis in Article 149 of the Constitution , which sanctions preventive detention and allows for laws passed by the legislature against subversion to override the Articles protecting the personal liberties of the individual . Specifically , Article 149 ( 1 ) declares such legislation to be valid notwithstanding any inconsistency with five of the fundamental liberty provisions in the Constitution , including Article 9 . Thus , detentions under the ISA cannot be challenged on the basis of deprivation of these rights . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Ong Ah Chuan v. Public Prosecutor [ 1980 ] UKPC 32 , [ 1981 ] A.C. 648 , [ 1979 – 1980 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 710 , Privy Council ( on appeal from Singapore ) . 
 Haw Tua Tau v. Public Prosecutor [ 1981 ] UKPC 23 , [ 1982 ] A.C. 136 , [ 1981 – 1982 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) 133 , P.C. ( on appeal from Singapore ) . 
 Tan Tek Seng v. Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan [ 1996 ] 1 M.L.J. [ Malaya Law Journal ] 261 , Court of Appeal ( Malaysia ) . 
 Washington v. Glucksberg 521 U.S. 702 ( 1997 ) , Supreme Court ( United States ) . 
 <unk> Balakrishnan v. <unk> <unk> Negeri Sabah [ 1998 ] 3 M.L.J. 289 , C.A. ( Malaysia ) . 
 Nguyen Tuong Van v. Public Prosecutor [ 2004 ] SGCA 47 , [ 2005 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 103 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 15 November 2010 . 
 Lee Kwan Woh v. Public Prosecutor [ 2009 ] 5 M.L.J. 301 , Federal Court ( Malaysia ) . 
 Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor [ 2010 ] 3 S.L.R. [ Singapore Law Reports ] 489 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act ( Cap . 67 , 2000 Rev. Ed . ) ( " CLTPA " ) . 
 Internal Security Act ( Cap . 143 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) ( " ISA " ) . 
 Misuse of Drugs Act ( Cap . 185 , 2008 Rev. Ed . ) ( " MDA " ) . 
 Penal Code ( Cap . 224 , 2008 Rev. Ed . ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Lim , C.L. ( 2005 ) , " The Constitution and the Reception of Customary International Law : Nguyen Tuong Van v Public Prosecutor " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies 1 : 218 – 233 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " ' It is a Little Known Legal Fact ' : <unk> , Customary Human Rights Law and Constitutional Interpretation : Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 558 – 570 , SSRN <unk> . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Ganesh , Aravind ( 2010 ) , " <unk> the Constitution : Yong Vui Kong v Public Prosecutor [ 2010 ] SGCA 20 " , Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal 10 ( 2 ) : 273 – 292 , doi : 10 @.@ 5235 / <unk> . 
 Lee , Jack Tsen @-@ Ta ( 2011 ) , " The Mandatory Death Penalty and a Sparsely <unk> Constitution " , Law Quarterly Review 127 : 192 – 195 . 
 McDermott , Yvonne ( 2010 ) , " Yong Vui Kong v. Public Prosecutor and the Mandatory Death Penalty for Drug Offences in Singapore : A Dead End for Constitutional Challenge ? " , International Journal on Human Rights and Drug Policy 1 : 35 – 52 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Tey , Tsun Hang ( 2010 ) , " Death Penalty Singapore @-@ Style : Clinical and Carefree " , Common Law World Review 39 : 315 – 357 , doi : 10 @.@ 1350 / <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( July 1997 ) , " Trends in Constitutional Interpretation : <unk> Ong , Awakening Arumugam ? " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 240 – 290 . 
 <unk> , Victor V [ <unk> ] ( 2004 ) , " Four Models of Due Process " , International Journal of Constitutional Law 2 ( 3 ) : 492 – 524 , doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / icon / 2 @.@ 3 @.@ 492 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Hor , Michael ( 2006 ) , " Death , Drugs , Murder and the Constitution " , in Teo , <unk> Sood , gen. ed . , Developments in Singapore Law between 2001 and 2005 , Singapore : Singapore Academy of Law , pp. 499 – 539 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 05 @-@ 7232 @-@ 7 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 25 November 2010 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ( 2011 ) , " Fundamental Liberties I : Protection of Life & Liberty " , An Introduction to Singapore 's Constitution ( rev. ed . ) , Singapore : Talisman Publishing , pp. 146 – 165 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 08 @-@ 6456 @-@ 9 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " Protection of Life & Liberty " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 735 – 794 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " Rights of the Accused Person " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 795 – 838 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 = Acton Town tube station = 
 Acton Town is a London Underground station in the south @-@ west corner of Acton , west London , in the London Borough of Ealing , close to the border with the London Borough of Hounslow . The station is served by the District and Piccadilly lines and is in Travelcard Zone 3 . On the District line , it is between Chiswick Park and Ealing Common stations , and on the Piccadilly line it is between Hammersmith ( Turnham Green in the early mornings and late evenings ) and Ealing Common on the Uxbridge branch & South Ealing on the Heathrow branch . 
 Acton Town station was opened as Mill Hill Park on 1 July 1879 by the District Railway ( DR , now the District line ) . It remained as a terminus until on 1 May 1883 and 23 June 1903 the DR opened two branches from Acton Town to Hounslow Town and Park Royal & Twyford Abbey respectively . On 4 July 1932 the Piccadilly line was extended to Acton Town . District line services to both the Hounslow and Uxbridge branches were withdrawn completely on 9 and 10 October 1964 after which operations were provided by the Piccadilly line alone . 
 The original brick @-@ built station was built in 1879 and in February 1910 the station building was reconstructed . On 1 March 1910 the station was given its present name . In 1931 and 1932 the station was rebuilt again in preparation for transferring the Uxbridge branch service from the District line to the Piccadilly line . The new station was designed by Charles Holden in a modern European geometric style using brick , reinforced concrete and glass . 
 = = Location = = 
 The station is at the junction of Gunnersbury Lane ( <unk> ) and Bollo Lane . To the south @-@ west of the station is the former Acton Works , central overhaul and engineering works for the London Underground . It is now home to the London Transport Museum 's reserve collection of rail and road vehicles ( as known as London Transport Museum Depot or Museum Depot ) . The museum depot is opened to the public on a number of weekends throughout the year . To the north of the station is the District line 's Ealing Common Depot . 
 Frank Pick House is near the station , on Gunnersbury Lane . It is named after Frank Pick , the London Passenger Transport Board 's chief executive . It is home to one of the engineering departments of the London Underground . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = District line = = = 
 = = = = Hounslow and Uxbridge branches = = = = 
 Acton Town station was opened as Mill Hill Park on 1 July 1879 by the District Railway ( DR , now the District line ) on its extension from Turnham Green to Ealing Broadway . On 1 May 1883 the DR opened a branch from Acton Town to the now defunct Hounslow Town station , which developed into the Heathrow branch . On 23 June 1903 the DR tracks extended north of Acton Town to a new station at Park Royal & Twyford Abbey which became the first of the Underground 's surface lines to use electric traction instead of steam with the Acton Town — Ealing Common section also electrified . The existing deep tube lines , ( City and South London Railway , Waterloo & City Railway ( now Waterloo & City line ) and Central London Railway ) had always been electrically powered . Services on the Hounslow branch ( now the Heathrow branch ) and to Central London were electrified on 13 June 1905 and 1 July 1905 respectively . 
 = = = = South Acton branch = = = = 
 On 13 June 1905 passenger service began on the short branch to South Acton . A short fifth platform for the single car train of the South Acton branch was provided to the north of the eastbound island platform . At first the service ran to Hounslow West and to Uxbridge but it was later reduced to a shuttle between Acton Town and South Acton on 15 February 1932 . The South Acton branch was closed on 28 February 1959 due to low usage ; its platform at Acton Town has not been removed and is still visible . The platform is hidden behind advertising hoardings and not obvious to the casual observer . Much of the branch remains including a bridge support on the south side of Bollo Lane . In the picture , the area behind the hoarding in the background is the location of the former branch platform ( Platform 5 ) which was only ever very short , two carriages at most . 
 = = = Piccadilly line = = = 
 On 4 July 1932 the Piccadilly line was extended west from its original terminus at Hammersmith and shared the route with the District line to Ealing Common . From Ealing Common to South Harrow , the District line was replaced by the Piccadilly line , and from that date , District line trains from Acton Town ran only either to Hounslow West or to Ealing Broadway . On 9 January 1933 Piccadilly line trains , sharing with the District line , began serving Northfields on the Hounslow branch , and their service was extended to Hounslow West on 13 March 1933 but Piccadilly line trains did not call at South Ealing until 1935 . District line services on the Hounslow branch were withdrawn on 9 and 10 October 1964 after which operations were provided by the Piccadilly line alone . 
 = = Station building = = 
 The original brick @-@ built station was built in 1879 . In February 1910 the station building was reconstructed and on 1 March 1910 the station was given its present name . In 1931 and 1932 the station was rebuilt again in preparation for transferring the Uxbridge branch service from the District line to the Piccadilly line . The new station was designed by Charles Holden in a modern European geometric style using brick , reinforced concrete and glass . 
 As other stations Holden designed , Acton Town station features a tall block @-@ like ticket hall rising above a low horizontal structure housing the station offices and shops . The ticket hall has a projecting London Underground roundel sign over a canopy , the brick walls of the ticket hall are punctuated with panels of clerestory windows and the structure is capped with a flat concrete slab roof . From the ticket hall enclosed stairs descend to the platforms under integral concrete canopies on paired piers in alternating broad and narrow bay formation . A part of the narrow bays is infilled by kiosks , integral poster boards , roundel signs and fixed seating . The platforms are linked by a secondary bridge at the southern end . Reinforced concrete platform canopies replaced the original timber canopies . Since 17 May 1994 , the station has been a Grade II Listed building . 
 The stated reason for why it should be listed was : 
 " Reinforced concrete post and lintel construction with red brick infill , some load @-@ bearing . Symmetrical almost square and double @-@ height ticket hall flanked by kiosks on bridge , from which parade of shops descends to Bollo Lane with secondary entrance under stepped boxed lighting to the rear . Ticket hall gives on to complex access area with open frame construction , whence enclosed stairs descend to platforms under integral <unk> canopies - incorporating clerestory - on paired piers in alternating broad and narrow bay formation . The narrow bays part infilled by kiosks , integral poster boards , roundel signs and fixed seating . The platforms are linked by a secondary bridge at the southern end . All the frontage shops have their original bronzed glazing , particularly elaborate in the taller frontages to Bollo Lane and in the side passage . All <unk> original save that to single shop east of station . The station windows metal with strong horizontal emphasis in their glazing bars . Ticket hall has projecting roundel sign over canopy , and three double @-@ height paired windows to street frontage with similar windows at upper level to rear . Exposed concrete frame to ceiling , rendered upper walls with brown tiling below . Original tiled floors . Included as an important example of Holden 's mature work for an interchange station . " 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 Between Acton Town and Hammersmith , District line trains serve all stations , but Piccadilly line trains run non @-@ stop to Hammersmith except for calling at Turnham Green at the start and end of the day . The run between Acton Town and Hammersmith spans nearly three miles – the longest distance between stops on the Piccadilly line . West of Acton Town , District line trains go via Ealing Common to Ealing Broadway and Piccadilly line trains run either via South Ealing to Heathrow , or via Ealing Common to Uxbridge . 
 = = = = District line = = = = 
 The typical off @-@ peak service in trains per hour ( tph ) is : 
 6tph eastbound to Upminster ( Barking on Sundays ) 
 6tph westbound to Ealing Broadway 
 There is also a morning service every day from Acton Town ( Ealing Broadway on Saturdays ) to Edgware Road and a late evening service from Edgware Road to Ealing Broadway on Sundays only . 
 = = = = Piccadilly line = = = = 
 Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 2 – 5 minutes eastbound , every 5 – 15 minutes westbound to Uxbridge ( Rayners Lane in the early mornings ) , and every 2 – 7 minutes westbound to Heathrow Terminals 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 3 and 5 or via the Heathrow Terminal 4 loop . 
 During occasional closures on the District line , the Piccadilly line provides additional services to serve destinations on the District line such as Ealing Broadway . This is done either by diverting some trains bound for Rayners Lane and Uxbridge , or as a shuttle from Acton Town . Also , Piccadilly line trains may also run on the District line tracks between Hammersmith and Acton Town to serve the District line stations with no platforms on the Piccadilly line , namely Ravenscourt Park , Stamford Brook , Turnham Green and Chiswick Park . 
 = = = Connections = = = 
 London Bus routes 207 , 427 , 440 and E3 , and night routes N7 , N11 and N207 serve the station . Bus route 207 stretches from Southall to White City while route 440 goes from Gunnersbury to Stonebridge Park . Bus route 427 begins at the station and terminates at Uxbridge . Bus route E3 starts from Chiswick and ends at Greenford . Night route N7 runs from Northolt to Russell Square . Route N11 starts at Ealing Broadway and ends at Liverpool Street while route N207 stretches from Oxford Circus to Uxbridge . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Erforsche mich , Gott , und erfahre mein Herz , BWV 136 = 
 Erforsche mich , Gott , und erfahre mein Herz ( Examine me , God , and know my heart ) , BWV 136 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . Bach composed the cantata in 1723 in Leipzig to be used for the eighth Sunday after Trinity . He led the first performance on 18 July 1723 . 
 The work is part of Bach 's first annual cycle of cantatas . He began to compose cantatas for all occasions of the liturgical year when he took up office as Thomaskantor in May 1723 . The cantata is structured in six movements : two choral movements at the beginning and end frame a sequence of alternating recitatives and arias . The opening movement is based on a verse from Psalm 139 ; the closing chorale on a stanza from Johann Heermann 's hymn " Wo soll ich fliehen hin " . The cantata is scored for three vocal soloists ( alto , tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir , corno , two oboes , strings and basso continuo . 
 = = History and words = = 
 When Bach took up office as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig in May 1723 on the first Sunday after Trinity , he began to compose cantatas for all occasions of the liturgical year . He wrote Erforsche mich , Gott , und erfahre mein Herz for the eighth Sunday after Trinity . The prescribed readings for the Sunday are from the Epistle to the Romans , " For as many as are led by the Spirit of God , they are the sons of God " ( Romans 8 : 12 – 17 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the warning of false prophets from the Sermon on the Mount ( Matthew 7 : 15 – 23 ) . An unknown librettist wrote the text , closely related to the prescribed gospel . His text is the first in a group of ten cantatas following the same structure of biblical text – recitative – aria – recitative – aria – chorale . The ten cantatas were dedicated to the 8th to 14th and 21st to 22nd Sunday after Trinity and the second Sunday after Easter . 
 The opening chorus is based on Psalms 139 : 23 , focused on the examination of the believer 's heart by God . The closing chorale is stanza 9 of Johann Heermann 's hymn " Wo soll ich fliehen hin " ( 1630 ) on the melody of " Auf meinen <unk> Gott " , which Bach used again in 1724 as the base for his chorale cantata Wo soll ich fliehen hin , BWV 5 . 
 The Bach scholar Alfred Dürr concludes from the autograph that only the middle section of movement 3 and the chorale were composed in 1723 with certainty . The other parts may rely on a former unknown secular or church cantata , according to the conductor John Eliot Gardiner and the musicologist <unk> Isoyama . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata in six movements is scored for three vocal soloists ( alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir ( SATB ) , corno ( horn , Co ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . One oboe is marked " d 'amore " ( Oa ) in the autograph kept by the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin . Some scholars , including Dürr and Gardiner , believe that the second oboe part in the choral movements 1 and 6 should also be played by oboe d 'amore . The title on the original parts reads : " Domin : 8 post Trinit : / Erforsche mich Gott , und erfahre mein ect . / â / 4 Voci / Corno / 2 Hautbois / 2 Violini / Viola / e / Continuo / di Sign : / J.S.Bach " . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring and keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening chorus expands on a psalm verse , " Erforsche mich , Gott , und erfahre mein Herz " ( Examine me , God , and discover my heart ) . The music in the style of a Gigue expresses confidence facing the examination . In 1739 it was characterized by Johann Mattheson 1739 as " somewhat like the rapid arrow of a stream " ( " <unk> wie der <unk> Strom @-@ Pfeil eines Bachs " ) . The movement is structure in two parts ( A and A ' ) , with choral fugues on the same themes , both presenting the complete text . An extended instrumental ritornello , dominated by the horn , is heard before , between and after the choral sections . The first fugue is preceded by a choral Devise ( statement ) . Throughout the movement the two oboes never play independently but double the violins in the <unk> and the soprano in the vocal sections . The virtuoso horn parts may have been intended for the exceptional Gottfried Reiche . 
 Bach used the same material as in this movement later in the " Cum Sancto Spiritu " of his Missa in A major . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 A secco recitative , " Ach , daß der <unk> , so dort die Erde <unk> " ( Alas , that the curse , which strikes the earth there ) , renders a contrasting change of mood . Bach interprets the curse of sin , and the hopeless situation of the humans and the threat of the Last Judgment in music full of dissonances . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The alto aria , " Es kömmt ein Tag " ( A day will come ) , is accompanied by an oboe , an oboe d 'amore according to Alfred Dürr and John Eliot Gardiner . The middle section , " Denn seines <unk> Grimm <unk> " ( For the wrath of His vengeance will annihilate ) , is certainly composed in 1723 . The middle section is marked Adagio and in common time , contrasting to the first section , marked with Presto and with a 12 / 8 time signature . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 A secco recitative , " Die Himmel <unk> sind nicht rein " ( The heavens themselves are not pure ) , tends to an arioso in the last measures . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The violins in unison accompany the duet of tenor and bass , " <unk> <unk> <unk> der Sünden <unk> " ( Indeed the stains of sin cling to us ) . The voices sing sometimes in imitation , sometimes in homophony , in the style of duets Bach wrote at Köthen earlier in his career . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The chorale , " Dein Blut , der <unk> <unk> " ( Your blood , the noble juice ) , is expanded to five parts with a combination of the four @-@ part chorus and an accompanying violin part , similar to the chorale of Erschallet , ihr Lieder , erklinget , ihr Saiten ! BWV 172 , written earlier by Bach for Pentecost 1714 in Weimar . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The sortable listing is taken from the selection provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and instrumental ensembles are roughly marked as large by red background , such as boys ' choirs and the Bach orchestras of the 1950s , while instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = SMS Stettin = 
 SMS Stettin ( " His Majesty 's Ship Stettin " ) was a Königsberg @-@ class light cruiser of the Kaiserliche Marine . She had three sister ships : Königsberg , Nürnberg , and Stuttgart . Laid down at AG Vulcan Stettin shipyard in 1906 , Stettin was launched in March 1907 and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet seven months later in October . Like her sisters , Stettin was armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and a pair of 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , and was capable of a top speed in excess of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . 
 In 1912 , Stettin joined the battlecruiser Moltke and cruiser Bremen for a goodwill visit to the United States . After the outbreak of World War I , Stettin served in the reconnaissance forces of the German fleet . She saw heavy service for the first three years of the war , including at the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 and the Battle of Jutland in May – June 1916 , along with other smaller operations in the North and Baltic Seas . In 1917 , she was withdrawn from frontline service and used as a training ship until the end of the war . In the aftermath of Germany 's defeat , Stettin was surrendered to the Allies and broke up for scrap in 1921 – 1923 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Stettin was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Wacht " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in her namesake city in 1906 . She was launched on 7 March 1907 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 29 October 1907 . The ship was 115 @.@ 3 meters ( 378 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 29 m ( 17 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 814 t ( 3 @,@ 754 long tons ; 4 @,@ 204 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eleven coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 25 @.@ 2 knots ( 46 @.@ 7 km / h ; 29 @.@ 0 mph ) and a range of approximately 5 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 650 km ; 6 @,@ 620 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Stettin had a crew of 14 officers and 308 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side @-@ by @-@ side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , amounting to 150 shells per gun . The ship was also equipped with eight 5 @.@ 2 cm SK L / 55 guns with 4 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Stettin served with the High Seas Fleet in German waters . In early 1912 , Stettin was assigned to a goodwill cruise to the United States , along with the battlecruiser Moltke , the only German capital ship to ever visit the US , and the light cruiser Bremen . On 11 May 1912 the ships left Kiel and arrived off Hampton Roads , Virginia , on 30 May . There , they met the US Atlantic Fleet and were greeted by then @-@ President William Howard Taft aboard the presidential yacht USS Mayflower . After touring the East Coast for two weeks , they returned to Kiel on 24 June . 
 = = = Actions in the North Sea = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Stettin was serving in the North Sea with the High Seas Fleet . On 6 August , she and the cruiser Hamburg escorted a flotilla of U @-@ boats into the North Sea in an attempt to draw out the British fleet , which could then be attacked by the U @-@ boats . The force returned to port on 11 August , without having encountered any British warships . Some two weeks later , on 28 August , Stettin was involved in the Battle of Heligoland Bight . At the start of the engagement , Stettin , Frauenlob , and Hela stood in support of the line of torpedo boats patrolling the Heligoland Bight ; Stettin was at anchor to the northeast of Heligoland island , and the other two ships were on either side . The German screen was under the command of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper , the commander of reconnaissance forces for the High Seas Fleet . 
 When the British first attacked the German torpedo boats , Hipper immediately dispatched Stettin and Frauenlob , and several other cruisers that were in distant support , to come to their aid . At 08 : 32 , Stettin received the report of German torpedo boats in contact with the British , and immediately weighed anchor and steamed off to support them . Twenty @-@ six minutes later , she encountered the British destroyers and opened fire , at a range of 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) . The attack forced the British ships to break off and turn back west . During the engagement , lookouts aboard Stettin spotted a British cruiser in the distance , but it did not join the battle . By 9 : 10 , the British had withdrawn out of range , and Stettin fell back to get steam in all of her boilers . During this portion of the battle , the ship was hit once , on the starboard No. 4 gun , which killed two men and badly injured another . Her intervention prevented the British from sinking the torpedo boats V1 and S13 . 
 By 10 : 00 , Stettin had steam in all of her boilers , and was capable of her top speed . She therefore returned to the battle , and at 10 : 06 , she encountered eight British destroyers and immediately attacked them , opening fire at 10 : 08 . Several hits were observed in the British formation , which dispersed and fled . By 10 : 13 , the visibility had decreased , and Stettin could no longer see the fleeing destroyers , and so broke off the chase . The ship had been hit several times in return , without causing significant damage , but killing another two and wounding another four men . At around 13 : 40 , Stettin reached with the cruiser Ariadne , which was just coming under attack from several British battlecruisers . Stettin 's crew could see the large muzzle flashes in the haze , which after having disabled Ariadne , turned on Stettin at 14 : 05 . The haze saved the ship , which was able to escape after ten salvos missed her . At 14 : 20 , she encountered Danzig . The German battlecruisers Von der Tann and Moltke reached the scene by 15 : 25 , by which time the British had already disengaged and withdrawn . Hipper , in Seydlitz , followed closely behind , and ordered the light cruisers to fall back on his ships . After conducting a short reconnaissance further west , the Germans returned to port , arriving in Wilhelmshaven by 21 : 30 . 
 On 15 December , the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group , led by Hipper , conducted a bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on the English coast . The main body of the High Seas Fleet , commanded by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , stood by in distant support ; Stettin and two flotillas of torpedo boats screened the rear of the formation . That evening , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival screens in the darkness convinced Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany . 
 = = = Operations in the Baltic = = = 
 On 7 May 1915 , the IV Scouting Group , which by then consisted of Stettin , Stuttgart , München , and Danzig , and twenty @-@ one torpedo boats was sent into the Baltic Sea to support a major operation against Russian positions at Libau . The operation was commanded by Rear Admiral Hopman , the commander of the reconnaissance forces in the Baltic . The IV Scouting Group was tasked with screening to the north to prevent any Russian naval forces from moving out of the Gulf of Finland undetected , while several armored cruisers and other warships bombarded the port . The Russians did attempt to intervene with a force of four cruisers : Admiral Makarov , Bayan , Oleg , and Bogatyr . The Russian ships briefly engaged München , but both sides were unsure of the others ' strength , and so both disengaged . Shortly after the bombardment , Libau was captured by the advancing German army , and Stettin and the rest of the IV Scouting Group were recalled to the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 In May 1916 , the German fleet commander , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , planned a major operation to cut off and destroy an isolated squadron of the British fleet . The operation resulted in the battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . During the battle , Stettin served as the flagship of Commodore Ludwig von Reuter , the commander of the IV Scouting Group . The IV Scouting Group was tasked with screening for the main German battlefleet . As the German fleet approached the scene of the unfolding engagement between the British and German battlecruiser squadrons , Stettin steamed ahead of the leading German battleship , König , with the rest of the Group dispersed to screen for submarines . Stettin and the IV Scouting Group were not heavily engaged during the early phases of the battle , but around 21 : 30 , they encountered the British cruiser HMS Falmouth . Stettin and München briefly fired on the British ship , but poor visibility forced the ships to cease fire . Reuter turned his ships 90 degrees away and disappeared in the haze . 
 During the withdrawal from the battle on the night of 31 May at around 23 : 30 , the battlecruisers Moltke and Seydlitz passed ahead of Stettin too closely , forcing her to slow down . The rest of the IV Scouting Group did not notice the reduction in speed , and so the ships became disorganized . Shortly thereafter , the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron came upon the German cruisers , which were joined by Hamburg , Elbing , and Rostock . A ferocious firefight at very close range ensued ; Stettin was hit twice early in the engagement and was set on fire . A shell fragment punctured the steam pipe for the ship 's siren , and the escaping steam impaired visibility and forced the ship to abandon an attempt to launch torpedoes . In the melee , HMS Southampton was hit by approximately eighteen 10 @.@ 5 cm shells , including some from Stettin . In the meantime , the German cruiser Frauenlob was set on fire and sunk ; as the German cruisers turned to avoid colliding with the sinking wreck , the IV Scouting Group became dispersed . Only München remained with Stettin . The two ships accidentally attacked the German destroyers G11 , V1 , and V3 at 23 : 55 . 
 By 04 : 00 on 1 June , the German fleet had evaded the British fleet and reached Horns Reef ; the Germans then returned to port . In the course of the battle , Stettin had suffered eight men killed and another 28 wounded . She had fired a total of 81 rounds of ammunition from her 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 In 1917 , Stettin was withdrawn from front line service and used as a training ship with the U @-@ boat school . She served in this capacity until the end of the war . Under Article 185 of the Treaty of Versailles , which ended the war after the Armistice that ceased fighting on 11 November 1918 , Stettin was listed among the warships still in German service that were to be surrendered to the Allied powers , and accordingly she was stricken on 5 November 1919 . She was surrendered to Great Britain as a war prize on 15 September 1920 , under the transfer name " T " . She was then sold to shipbreakers in Copenhagen and dismantled for scrap in 1921 – 1923 . 
 = Washington State Route 510 = 
 State Route 510 ( SR 510 ) is a 13 @.@ 07 @-@ mile ( 21 @.@ 03 km ) long state highway in Thurston County , a subdivision of the US state of Washington . The highway extends southeast from an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in Lacey to SR 507 in Yelm . SR 510 roughly parallels the Nisqually River , the border between Thurston and Pierce counties , between the Fort Lewis and Nisqually Indian Community area to Yelm . Five educational institutions , including one community college and two high schools , are served by the route . The roadway was built by 1916 as a connector from Saint Clair Lake to the Northern Pacific Railway station in Yelm and was designated as Secondary State Highway 5I ( SSH 5I ) in 1937 . The original route of SSH 5I ran from Tumwater east to Yelm , following the present @-@ day Yelm Highway . In 1959 , the highway was realigned to serve a new freeway , later I @-@ 5 , in Lacey ; SSH 5I was replaced in the 1964 highway renumbering by SR 510 . The Yelm @-@ Tenino Trail was built over the Northern Pacific line in 1993 and a bypass is being constructed around Yelm . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 510 begins as Marvin Road at exit 111 , a diamond interchange on Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in southern Lacey . The highway travels south by the Hawks Prairie Village Mall , home of the Hawks Prairie Center , a division of the South Puget Sound Community College . South of the mall is the Martin Way intersection , located west of River Ridge High School and one of the busiest intersections on the roadway at a daily average of 24 @,@ 000 motorists in 2008 , and the Pacific Avenue roundabout , where SR 510 turns east , renamed Pacific Avenue , northeast of Long Lake . After leaving Lacey city limits , the roadway begins to parallel the <unk> line owned by Tacoma Rail south towards the Old Pacific Highway . At the Old Pacific Highway , the road becomes the St. Clair Cutoff Road , named for nearby Saint Clair Lake , and crosses the railroad tracks twice . After turning northeast , parallel to Saint Clair Lake 's shoreline , the highway dips southeast , now parallel to the Nisqually River , into Fort Lewis and the Nisqually Indian Community . Outside of the community , SR 510 is renamed the Yelm Highway and passes Southworth Elementary . After intersecting Mudd Run Road , future western terminus of the Yelm Loop , the roadway enters Yelm city limits . After turning southeast , SR 510 becomes Yelm Avenue and serves Yelm High School . Shortly thereafter , the roadway serves Yelm Middle School , crosses the Yelm @-@ Tenino Trail , a 7 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) long rail trail in operation since 1993 , and ends at First Street , signed as SR 507 , which continues southeast as Yelm Avenue . 
 = = Alternate route = = 
 Stage 1 of a 120 @-@ foot ( 36 @.@ 58 m ) wide , 2 lane bypass of Yelm , named the Yelm Loop , is completed and open to traffic . The bypass begins at a roundabout with SR 510 near the current Mudd Run Road intersection and travels east through a residential and industrial area , currently ending at <unk> Road . The unfinished portion of the Yelm Loop is currently officially signed as State Route 510 Alternate . 
 Stage 2 will finish the Yelm Loop to <unk> and this segment is currently unfunded . The highway will turn south , pass a city park , and end at a traffic signal with SR 507 east of Yelm . Plans for the Yelm Loop were created in 2004 and the Washington State Legislature funded Stage 1 in 2009 , with its construction completed in October 2010 . The city is actively anticipating completion of Stage 2 , which will redirect traffic that has increased since the 1990s . When completed , it is expected that the current traversal of State Route 510 will be moved to the Alternate , becoming the new State Route 510 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 510 began as an unsigned county @-@ maintained road that ran from the Saint Clair Lake area to the Northern Pacific Railway station at Yelm , constructed by 1916 . The road later extended west to Tumwater and designated Secondary State Highway 5I ( SSH 5I ) in 1937 . The old route followed present @-@ day Yelm Highway on the southern side of Saint Clair Lake and Patterson Lake to Tumwater . In 1959 , SSH 5I was moved to a northern route to the U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) and US 410 freeway in Lacey . SR 510 officially replaced SSH 5I after the 1964 highway renumbering ; US 99 and US 410 also became Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in 1968 . 
 SR 510 between I @-@ 5 and Pacific Avenue was reconstructed and widened in late 2003 , with the addition of a roundabout at the Pacific Avenue intersection . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Thurston County . 
 = CS gas = 
 The compound 2 @-@ chlorobenzalmalononitrile ( also called o @-@ <unk> <unk> ) ( chemical formula : <unk> ) , a <unk> , is the defining component of a tear gas commonly referred to as CS gas , which is used as a riot control agent . Exposure causes a burning sensation and tearing of the eyes to the extent that the subject cannot keep their eyes open , and a burning irritation of the nose , mouth and throat mucous membranes causing profuse coughing , mucous nasal discharge , disorientation , and difficulty breathing , partially incapacitating the subject . CS gas is an aerosol of a volatile solvent ( a substance that dissolves other active substances and that easily evaporates ) and 2 @-@ chlorobenzalmalononitrile , which is a solid compound at room temperature . CS gas is generally accepted as being non @-@ lethal . It was discovered by two Americans , Ben Corson and Roger Stoughton , at Middlebury College in 1928 , and the chemical 's name is derived from the first letters of the scientists ' surnames . 
 CS was developed and tested secretly at Porton Down in Wiltshire , England , in the 1950s and 1960s . CS was used first on animals , then subsequently on British Army servicemen volunteers . CS has less effect on animals due to " under @-@ developed tear @-@ ducts and protection by fur " . 
 = = Production = = 
 CS is synthesized by the reaction of 2 @-@ <unk> and <unk> via the Knoevenagel condensation : 
 <unk> + <unk> ( CN ) 2 → <unk> ( CN ) 2 + H2O 
 The reaction is catalysed with weak base like <unk> or pyridine . The production method has not changed since the substance was discovered by Corson and Stoughton . Other bases , solvent free methods and microwave promotion have been suggested to improve the production of the substance . 
 The physiological properties had been discovered already by the chemists first synthesising the compound in 1928 : " Physiological Properties . Certain of these <unk> have the effect of sneeze and tear gases . They are harmless when wet but to handle the dry powder is disastrous . " 
 = = = Use as an aerosol = = = 
 As 2 @-@ chlorobenzalmalononitrile is a solid at room temperature , not a gas , a variety of techniques have been used to make this solid usable as an aerosol : 
 <unk> and sprayed in the molten form . 
 Dissolved in organic solvent . 
 CS2 dry powder ( CS2 is a <unk> , micro @-@ pulverized form of CS ) . 
 CS from thermal grenades by generation of hot gases . 
 In the Waco Siege , CS was dissolved in the organic solvent dichloromethane ( also known as methylene chloride ) . The solution was dispersed as an aerosol via explosive force and when the highly volatile dichloromethane evaporated , CS crystals precipitated and formed a fine dispersion in the air . 
 = = Effects = = 
 Many types of tear gas and other riot control agents have been produced with effects ranging from mild tearing of the eyes to immediate vomiting and prostration . CN and CS are the most widely used and known , but around 15 different types of tear gas have been developed worldwide e.g. <unk> or <unk> , <unk> , and CNC . CS has become the most popular due to its strong effect . The effect of CS on a person will depend on whether it is packaged as a solution or used as an aerosol . The size of solution droplets and the size of the CS particulates after evaporation are factors determining its effect on the human body . 
 The chemical reacts with moisture on the skin and in the eyes , causing a burning sensation and the immediate forceful and uncontrollable shutting of the eyes . Effects usually include tears streaming from the eyes , profuse coughing , exceptional nasal discharge that is full of mucus , burning in the eyes , eyelids , nose and throat areas , disorientation , dizziness and restricted breathing . It will also burn the skin where sweaty and / or sunburned . In highly concentrated doses it can also induce severe coughing and vomiting . Almost all of the immediate effects wear off within an hour ( such as exceptional nasal discharge and profuse coughing ) , although the feeling of burning and highly irritated skin may persist for hours . Affected clothing will need to be washed several times or thrown away . 
 = = = Secondary effects = = = 
 People or objects contaminated with CS gas can cause secondary exposure to others , including healthcare professionals and police . In addition , repeated exposure may cause <unk> . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Although described as a non @-@ lethal weapon for crowd control , studies have raised doubts about this classification . As well as causing severe pulmonary damage , CS can also significantly damage the heart and liver . 
 On 28 September 2000 , Prof. Dr. Uwe Heinrich released a study commissioned by John C. Danforth , of the United States Office of Special Counsel , to investigate the use of CS by the FBI at the Branch <unk> ' Mount Carmel compound . He concluded that the lethality of CS used would have been determined mainly by two factors : whether gas masks were used and whether the occupants were trapped in a room . He suggests that if no gas masks were used and the occupants were trapped , then , " there is a distinct possibility that this kind of CS exposure can significantly contribute to or even cause lethal effects . " 
 At least one study has associated CS exposure with miscarriages . This is consistent with its reported <unk> effect ( abnormal chromosome change ) on mammalian cells . 
 In Israel , CS gas was reported to be the cause of death of <unk> Abu Rahmah on 31 December 2010 , although the Israel Defense Forces have questioned the veracity of the report . Other reports suggest the cause of death was in fact the impact of a high @-@ velocity CS gas canister to the chest . In Egypt , CS gas was reported to be the cause of death of several protesters in Mohamed Mahmoud Street near Tahrir square during the November 2011 protests . 
 The solvent in which CS is dissolved , methyl isobutyl ketone ( <unk> ) , is classified as harmful by inhalation ; irritating to the eyes and respiratory system ; and repeated exposure may cause skin dryness or cracking . 
 = = Decontamination = = 
 CS contamination can be removed by washing with soap and water , or an alkaline solution of water and 5 % sodium <unk> . 
 = = Use = = 
 CS is used in spray form by many police forces as a temporary incapacitant and to subdue attackers or persons who are violently aggressive . Officers who are trained in the use and application of CS spray are routinely exposed to it as part of their training . 
 Blank pistol cartridges carrying CS in powder form have been released to the public . These , when fired at relatively close ranges , fully expose the target to the effects of CS , and are employed as a potent defensive weapon in regions where blank firing pistols are legally permitted for such use . 
 Although predominantly used by police it has also been used in criminal attacks in various countries . 
 Use of CS in war is prohibited under the terms of the Chemical Weapons Convention , signed by most nations in 1993 with all but five other nations signing between 1994 and 1997 . The reasoning behind the prohibition is pragmatic : use of CS by one combatant could easily trigger retaliation with much more toxic chemical weapons such as nerve agents . Only four nations have not signed the Chemical Weapons Convention and are therefore unhindered by restrictions on the use of CS gas : Angola , Egypt , North Korea and Somalia . 
 Domestic police use of CS is legal in many countries , as the Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits only military use . 
 = = = Bahrain = = = 
 CS gas has been used extensively by Bahrain 's police since the start of the Bahraini uprising . The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry concluded that Bahrain 's police used a disproportionate amount of CS gas when dispersing protests , and that in some situations , police fired CS gas into private homes in an " unnecessary and indiscriminate " manner . In one particular incident witnessed by Commission investigators , police fired " at least four tear gas canisters ( each containing six projectiles ) ... from a short range into the kitchen and living room of a home . " 
 According to opposition activists and families of the dead , ten individuals died as a result of CS gas between 25 March 2011 and 17 December 2011 . One allegedly died from the impact of the CS gas canister , and the remainder are said to have died from the effects of inhaling the gas . The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry received information that a further three deaths may have been attributable to the use of CS gas . Of these three , one allegedly died from the impact of the canister , and two from the effects of inhaling the gas . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Since 2008 , the <unk> police force in Montreal has increased its use of CS Gas for crowd control , although Police policy is to only use it as a " last resort " . 
 Several incidents where protesters have been seriously injured by having CS gas fired at them from point @-@ blank range have raised concerns about the methodology and training of Officers in the Montreal Riot Squad , particularly in relation to " Use of Force " . 
 = = = Cyprus = = = 
 CS was first tested in the field by the British army in Cyprus in 1958 . At this time it was known by the code name <unk> . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 CS has been widely used by Egyptian Police / Military Forces from January 2011 onwards . 
 = = = Hong Kong = = = 
 The Police Tactical Unit ( Hong Kong ) of the Hong Kong Police Force used 87 rounds of CS projectiles ( both riot gun launched and hand thrown ) in Hong Kong on September 28 , 2014 against hundreds of unarmed demonstrators demanding democratic elections during 2014 Hong Kong protests , also known as the Umbrella Movement . 
 The CS gas canisters and content used were purchased by the Hong Kong SAR Government from <unk> , a British weapons manufacturer . The crowd used umbrellas to fend off the gas , often ineffectively . 
 Apart from the HK police , CS gas spray is also used by Witness Protection and Firearms Section of Independent Commission Against Corruption ( Hong Kong ) 
 = = = Iraq = = = 
 Iraq successfully developed CS during the 1970s and during the 1980s produced tons of the substance firstly at Salman Pak and later at al @-@ Muthanna . 
 Blackwater Worldwide , acting as an agent of the United States , deployed CS in the Iraq War from a helicopter hovering over a checkpoint in the Green Zone in Baghdad . 
 = = = Israel = = = 
 Israel Police forces spray CS gas at riot control situations . It is widely used at demonstrations within the Palestinian Territories and at the Israeli West Bank barrier . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 CS tear gas was used in suppression of the mutiny in Makati that was led by Sen. Antonio <unk> . The tear gas was fired in the building and all the people in the building including reporters were affected . 
 = = = Sri Lanka = = = 
 The LTTE , also known as Tamil Tigers of Sri Lanka , an insurgent group in Sri Lanka used CS gas against government forces in September 2008 . Its use hindered the army 's progress but ultimately proved ineffective in preventing the army from overrunning LTTE positions . 
 This is one of the few cases of insurgents using CS gas . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 = = = = Northern Ireland = = = = 
 CS gas was used extensively in the <unk> area of Derry , Northern Ireland during the " Battle of the <unk> " , a two @-@ day riot in August 1969 . A total of 1 @,@ 091 canisters containing <unk> of CS each , and 14 canisters containing <unk> of CS each , were released in the densely populated residential area . On 30 August the Himsworth Inquiry was set up to investigate the medical effects of its use in Derry . Its conclusions , viewed in the political context of the time , still pointed towards the necessity of further testing of CS gas before being used as a riot control agent . During the rioting in Belfast , the following year , known as the Falls Curfew , the Army fired up to 1 @,@ 600 canisters into the densely populated Falls Road area . It was also used in <unk> on 9 July 1972 on the breakdown of the IRA ceasefire . Not long after , the British Army and RUC ceased using CS in Northern Ireland . 
 = = = = Great Britain = = = = 
 = = = = = CS gas = = = = = 
 CS gas has never been routinely deployed on the British mainland . It has seen use in rare cases . 
 The first use of CS gas on the UK mainland that was not part of military training was carried out in 1944 during a hostage siege at a north London address . Soldiers were asked to throw CS grenades through the skylight in hope of bringing the incident to a speedy conclusion , but the hostage @-@ taker had brought his civilian @-@ issue gas mask with him , negating the effect . 
 The siege of Trough Gate 1973 in Oldham was the second non @-@ military use of CS gas on the UK mainland . During a four @-@ hour standoff , Frank Alan Stockton shot at police but was flushed from his home with CS gas and police dogs . 
 In 1981 , CS gas was used to quell rioting in the Toxteth area of Liverpool . 
 In the March 2007 shootings in Leicester , CS gas was used after which a scuffle broke out . On 11 March 2007 a shooting incident occurred at around <unk> following a performance by Pretty Ricky at the university . A 21 @-@ year @-@ old student at the university , who was employed as security staff at the event , received gunshot wounds to his abdomen and was taken to hospital where his condition was not believed to be life @-@ threatening . Six others were also injured during what was described as a scuffle that broke out after CS gas ( tear gas ) was sprayed following the event . 
 Following the 2011 England riots , there was consideration given to making CS gas , water cannon and other riot control measures available to police for use in the event of serious disorder . 
 The British Armed Forces use CS gas annually to test their CBRN equipment . During initial training they introduce recruits to CS gas by introducing them into a small enclosed space known as a Confidence Test Facility ( CTF ) and igniting chemical tablets to induce CS production . After recruits have carried out their CBRN drills , they must remove their respirators so that they are exposed to the CS for up to 20 seconds to experience its effects and become confident their masks work . 
 = = = = = CS spray = = = = = 
 CS incapacitant spray has been used routinely by the British police since its introduction in 1996 . It is issued as an item of equipment to police officers for protection and to assist in dealing with violent incidents . 
 A six @-@ month trial by sixteen police forces in England began on 1 March 1996 . 
 On 16 March 1996 , a Gambian asylum seeker , Ibrahima Sey , was taken to Ilford Police Station in east London . Whilst incapacitating Sey , who was suffering from excited delirium , police sprayed him with CS spray and held him on the ground for approximately 15 minutes , and he subsequently died . 
 In 1999 , the mental health charity MIND called for a suspension of the use of CS spray on mentally ill people until it was proved to be safe . 
 The CS spray used by police forces is in the form of a hand @-@ held aerosol canister containing a 5 % solution of CS dissolved in methyl isobutyl ketone and propelled by pressurized nitrogen . The CS spray used by UK police is generally more concentrated than that used by American police forces ( 5 % vs 1 % ) . The liquid stream is directed where the user points the canister , being accurate up to 4 metres . 
 For an officer to be authorised to carry CS spray as part of their personal protection equipment , they have to have completed a training course in use of the spray , which includes being sprayed with a 3 % solution of CS . They are also trained in helping the incapacitated person recover once successfully restrained . 
 Under UK firearm law , CS and other incapacitant sprays are classed as prohibited weapons , making it unlawful for a member of the public to possess them . 
 Some forces have opted to replace CS spray with Captor or <unk> spray , with 60 % of forces now estimated to be using <unk> . 
 In February 2006 , Dan Ford , from Wareham in Dorset , received permanent scarring to his face after being sprayed with CS during an arrest by police . Ford was subsequently advised by doctors to stay out of sunlight for at least 12 months . After the incident , his cousin , Donna Lewis , was quoted as saying , " To look at him , it was like looking at a melting man , with liquid oozing from his face . " 
 To give an indication as to the frequency of use of CS sprays by police , officers in Reading , Berkshire deployed personal incapacitant spray on 486 occasions over a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year period from April 2009 . CS spray was used in the UK more than 10 @,@ 000 times in the period between its introduction in 1996 and September 1998 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 CS is used by many police forces within the United States . It was used by Federal Bureau of Investigation law enforcement officials in the 1993 Waco Siege . 
 Riot police in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania in September 2009 used CS gas and riot control techniques to disperse assemblies in the vicinity of the 2009 G @-@ 20 Pittsburgh summit . 
 In Berkeley , California during the Bloody Thursday events in the People 's Park on 21 May 1969 , a midday memorial was held for student James Rector , a non @-@ protester shot and killed by police , at Sproul Plaza on the University campus . In his honor , several thousand people peacefully assembled to listen to speakers remembering his life . National Guard troops surrounded Sproul Plaza , donned their gas masks , and pointed their bayonets inward , while helicopters dropped CS gas directly on the trapped crowd . No escape was possible , and the gas caused acute respiratory distress , disorientation , temporary blindness and vomiting . Many people , including children and the elderly , were injured during the ensuing panic . The gas was so intense that breezes carried it into Cowell Memorial Hospital , endangering patients , interrupting operations and incapacitating nurses . Students at nearby Jefferson and Franklin elementary schools were also affected . 
 Members of the United States armed forces are exposed to CS during initial training , and during training refresher courses or equipment maintenance exercises , using CS tablets that are melted on a <unk> . This is to demonstrate the importance of properly wearing a gas or protective mask , as the agent 's presence quickly reveals an improper fit or seal of the mask 's rubber gaskets against the face . Following exposure while wearing a mask , recruits are ordered to remove the masks and endure exposure in the room . These exercises also encourage confidence in the ability of the equipment to protect the wearer from such chemical attacks . Such an event is a requirement for graduation from United States Army Basic Training , Air Force Basic Military Training , Navy Basic Training , and Marine Corps recruit training . CS gas in the form of grenades is also used extensively in the United States Marine Corps and United States Army in some service schools . CS gas is used during the final field exercise of the Scout Sniper Basic Course to simulate being compromised . In addition , it is used during the 25 km ( 16 mi ) escape @-@ and @-@ evasion exercise ( " Trail of Tears " ) , the last event before graduation from the course . It is also used during several events in the Marine Corps Basic Reconnaissance Course ( BRC ) including some rucksack runs and escape @-@ and @-@ evasion exercises . While students going through the course are given the opportunity to bring and wear a gas mask for the event , usually none are worn because once donned , gas masks could not be removed until the end of the exercise . This could last anywhere from 3 – 12 hours and would make running 25 km while wearing 125 lb ( 57 kg ) of gear virtually impossible . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 It has been reported that thousands of tons of CS gas were used by the U.S. forces in Vietnam to bring Viet Cong into the open . It was also used by the North Vietnamese forces in some battles like Hue in 1968 or during the Easter Offensive in 1972 . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 CS gas has been and is still routinely used by Greek riot police ( MAT ) in order to quell student and labour protests , as well as riots . 
 CS was used to quell a protest in Lusaka , Zambia in July 1997 and the 1999 WTO riots in Seattle . Amnesty International reported that it had been manufactured by the UK company Pains @-@ Wessex . Subsequently , Amnesty called for an export ban when the receiving regime is either not fully trained in the use of CS , or had shown usage " contrary to the manufacturer ’ s instructions " . 
 In September 2000 , the Guardian newspaper revealed how a UK company , HPP , used legal loopholes to export CS to a private security company in Rwanda , in breach of United Nations sanctions . The Guardian also reported that CS was used by the Hutu militia in Rwanda to flush Tutsis out of buildings before hacking them to death . 
 CS has been used by the government in South Africa ; by Israel against Palestinians and Israelis ; by the South Korean government in Seoul , and during the Balkan conflicts by Serbia . In Malta it was used by police between 1981 and 1987 to the detriment of Nationalist Party Supporters . 
 CS tear gas was used at the G8 protests in Genoa , Italy and Quebec City , Canada during the <unk> anti @-@ globalization demonstrations during the Quebec City Summit of the Americas . 
 The Malaysia Federal Reserve Unit has also been known to use CS tear gas against its citizens who rallied for clean and fair elections under what were called <unk> rallies in 2011 and 2012 . 
 The Canadian , Norwegian and Australian Defence Forces train their personnel with CS gas in a manner similar to that of the USA , as it is a basic part of CBRN ( Chemical , Biological , Radiological , Nuclear ) training . Gas is released by burning tablets , usually in a building reserved for this purpose ( a " gas hut " ) . In the training , the person enters the building unprotected , and must fit and clear the gas mask before leaving . Other drills such as drinking and under @-@ mask decontamination are also practised . Some Norwegian units are exposed to CS gas while engaged in physical activity such as push @-@ ups . 
 France repeatedly used CS gas against refugees in camps around Calais in 2015 . 
 = West Branch Fishing Creek = 
 West Branch Fishing Creek is one of the northernmost major tributaries of Fishing Creek in Sullivan County , Pennsylvania and Columbia County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is 11 @.@ 1 miles ( 17 @.@ 9 km ) long and flows through Davidson Township , Sullivan County and Sugarloaf Township , Columbia County . The creek 's watershed has an area of 33 @.@ 5 square miles , nearly all of which is forested land . 
 Rock formations in the watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek include the Catskill Formation , the Huntley Mountain Formation , and the Burgoon Sandstone . North Mountain , Huckleberry Mountain , and Central Mountain are all in the creek 's vicinity . The temperature of the creek 's waters ranges from − 2 ° C ( 28 ° F ) to 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) and its pH ranges from approximately 5 @.@ 5 to just under 7 @.@ 0 . The creek 's discharge ranges from nearly 0 cubic meters per second to approximately 25 cubic meters per second . 
 Communities in the watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek include Central and Elk Grove . Lumbering was an industry in the watershed in the late 1800s . Fish species living in West Branch Fishing Creek include brown trout , brook trout , and sculpin . The upper reaches of the creek are designated as Class A Wild Trout Waters by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . There is significant benthic algae coverage in the lower reaches of the creek . 
 = = Course = = 
 West Branch Fishing Creek begins in Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 13 and southwestern Davidson Township , Sullivan County on Huckleberry Mountain . It flows northeast , almost immediately entering a valley . It soon picks up the tributaries <unk> Run and Slip Run from the left and turns southeast , its valley becoming progressively deeper . The creek continues southeast , flowing between Huckleberry Mountain and North Mountain . It picks up two more tributaries from the left and then picks up its first tributary from the right , Shingle Mill Run . Shortly afterwards , the creek turns east and begins receiving unnamed tributaries from both sides . After a few miles , Painter Run flows into the creek . The creek exits Davidson Township and Sullivan County shortly downstream . 
 Upon leaving Sullivan County , West Branch Fishing Creek enters Sugarloaf Township , Columbia County . Immediately after entering Columbia County , the creek flows through the community of Elk Grove . It flows east @-@ southeast for a short distance before reaching the communities of Central and Jamison City . The creek then makes a sharp turn south and flows between Central Mountain and Huckleberry Mountain and into a plain . After some distance , it turns southwest and crosses Pennsylvania Route 118 . Several hundred feet downstream , it and East Branch Fishing Creek merge to form Fishing Creek . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 During dry years , such as 2001 , 2002 , 2005 , 2007 , 2008 , and 2010 , parts of West Branch Fishing Creek run dry for an average of 107 days in a year . During wet years , such as 2003 , 2004 , 2006 , and 2009 , the creek only runs dry for 5 days per year on average . In June 2010 , 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) of the stream bed were found to be completely dry . The discharge of the creek usually ranges from slightly above 0 to 5 cubic meters per second . However , it is sometimes between 5 and 10 cubic meters per second and occasionally is as high as 25 cubic meters per second . 
 Between May 2010 and July 2011 , the lowest water temperatures occurred in West Branch Fishing Creek in January and February 2011 . The temperature was approximately − 1 ° C ( 30 ° F ) or − 2 ° C ( 28 ° F ) . The temperature was over 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) in July 2010 , with a maximum of 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) or 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . The temperature was nearly 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) in June 2010 and September 2010 . 
 From May 2010 to July 2011 , the concentration of dissolved oxygen ranged from slightly over 6 milligrams per liter to nearly 17 milligrams per liter . For comparison , the minimum threshold for optimal fish habitation is 5 milligrams per liter . In the aforementioned time period , the lowest concentration occurred in May 2010 . The second @-@ lowest concentration , approximately 7 milligrams per liter , occurred in June 2010 . The concentration of dissolved oxygen in the creek was nearly 17 milligrams per liter in January 2011 and February 2011 . The creek has the third @-@ lowest minimum concentration of dissolved oxygen of all named streams in the upper Fishing Creek watershed , including Fishing Creek itself . 
 West Branch Fishing Creek experiences more severe episodic acidification than any stream in the upper Fishing Creek watershed except for possibly East Branch Fishing Creek . The pH of West Branch Fishing Creek ranges from just over 5 @.@ 5 to just under 7 @.@ 0 . The alkalinity concentration of the creek in its upper reaches has been measured to be 2 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0020 oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of dissolved aluminum in the creek is usually less than 40 milligrams per liter and is in some cases nearly 0 milligrams per liter . The maximum concentration of dissolved aluminum in the creek is 60 to 70 milligrams per liter , which is below the threshold for toxicity . 
 The conductivity of West Branch Fishing Creek ranges from less than 20 to nearly 60 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Nearly all of the watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek is in the Appalachian Plateau physiographic province 's Deep Valley Section . However , the lowest reaches of it , south of Pennsylvania Route 118 , are in the Susquehanna Lowlands section of the ridge and valley physiographic province . 
 The main rock formations in the area of West Branch Fishing Creek are the Catskill Formation , the Huntley Mountain Formation , and the Burgoon Sandstone . These formations are all primarily made of sandstone , but also contain conglomerate , shale , and siltstone . They were formed during the Devonian , Mississippian and Devonian , and the Mississippian , respectively . The Catskill Formation is mostly found in the lower and middle reaches of the watershed , along the creek and its tributaries . The Huntley Mountain Formation is found in the upper reaches of the watershed and on some of the streams in that part of the watershed . The Burgoon Sandstone is found in the watershed , but not on many of its streams . 
 The soils in the watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek are acidic because of a lack of limestone . 
 The West Branch Fishing Creek watershed , along with the rest of the upper Fishing Creek watershed , experienced glaciation during the Ice Age . There is a small moraine in the valley of Hemlock Run , a tributary of West Branch Fishing Creek . The valley of the creek is a gorge , which is one of the main features of the western part of Pennsylvania State Game Lands # 13 . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek has an area of 33 @.@ 5 square miles . The watershed has a drainage density of 1 @.@ 3 per mile . The entire watershed is 12 @.@ 5 miles ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) long . The vast majority of the watershed is forested , with the only urban areas being the communities of Central and Elk Grove . There are a small number of residential areas and seasonal cabins in the watershed . 
 The watershed of West Branch Fishing Creek contains a number of sub @-@ watersheds . The largest of these is the watershed of Elk Run , which has an area of 7 @.@ 49 square miles and joins the creek 3 @.@ 64 miles ( 5 @.@ 86 km ) from its mouth . The second @-@ largest sub @-@ watershed is that of Painter Run . It has an area of 5 @.@ 2 square miles and joins the creek 6 @.@ 12 miles ( 9 @.@ 85 km ) upstream of its mouth . Both of these sub @-@ watersheds are on the northern side of West Branch Fishing Creek 's main stem . 
 = = History = = 
 The community of Emmons was founded on West Branch Fishing Creek 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of Jamison City by George R. Baum , who constructed a sawmill there . At the time , it was known as <unk> . The mill was destroyed in a flood in 1850 . The area remained uninhabited until industrial lumbering began in 1882 . 
 In September 1864 , a thousand soldiers of the United States Army searched the valley of West Branch Fishing Creek as far as the Sullivan County line for an alleged fortress manned by 500 armed deserters and draft evaders . However , they were unable to find the fortress or any deserters . 
 The community of Elk Grove is located on West Branch Fishing Creek approximately 1 @.@ 0 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) upstream of the community of Central . It was established sometime before 1915 . In 1915 the community had twelve homes and a hotel known as the Elk Grove Hotel . Historically the Pentecost Lumber Company engaged in lumbering in the area of the creek and built a railroad line from the Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad at Central several miles upstream , to a point at Emmons . The Pentecost Lumber Company shipped both bark and timber to Jamison City . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The drainage basin of West Branch Fishing Creek is designated as a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery , except for the drainage basins of the tributaries Shingle Mill Run and Elk Run , which are designated as Exceptional Value waters and Migratory Fisheries . Wild trout naturally reproduce in the creek . However , dry stream beds often prevent wild brook trout from migrating up the creek . Nevertheless , the creek has the highest population of wild brook trout of any major stream in the upper Fishing Creek watershed . In an electrofishing survey done by the Fishing Creek Sportsman Association , 17 sculpin , 11 wild brook trout , 7 escaped ( and unidentified ) trout , 6 hatchery brown trout , and 1 hatchery brook trout were observed on the creek . The creek is designated by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission as Class A Wild Trout Waters from its source to the tributary Hemlock Run , a distance of 2 @.@ 50 miles ( 4 @.@ 02 km ) . 
 A location on West Branch Fishing Creek downstream of the community of Elk Grove is one of two places in the watershed of upper Fishing Creek where the stream bed is more than 60 % covered by benthic algae . The high population of algae here is possibly due to leaking septic tanks in the area . In Elk Grove , there are between 100 and 200 aquatic macroinvertebrates per square meter in the creek . Further upstream , there are nearly 300 aquatic macroinvertebrates per square meter . At the headwaters of the creek , approximately 25 % of the macroinvertebrate taxa belong to the order Plecoptera , about 25 % belong to the order Ephemeroptera , approximately 25 % belong to the order Trichoptera , about 20 % belong to the order Chironomidae , and roughly 5 % belong to other orders . At the creek 's mouth , approximately 20 % of the macroinvertebrate taxa are in the order Plecoptera , approximately 55 % belong to the order Ephemeroptera , roughly 20 % are in the orders Trichoptera and Chironomidae . Approximately 5 % are in other orders . 
 Woody detritus can be found on West Branch Fishing Creek . The creek 's riparian buffer is unfragmented . 
 In 2011 , the habitat quality of upper Fishing Creek and its tributaries were rated on a scale of 1 to 200 ( with a higher rating indicating better habitability ) by Point Park University and the Fishing Creek Sportsmans ' Association . The headwaters of West Branch Fishing Creek had a score of 191 , tying West Creek for the highest @-@ rated site in the upper Fishing Creek watershed . Most of West Branch Fishing Creek received a rating between 166 and 200 , indicating optimal habitat quality . The lower reaches of the creek , however , received a rating of 113 to 165 , indicating suboptimal habitat quality . 
 The Shannon Diversity Index of West Branch Fishing Creek is between 2 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 5 at Elk Grove . Further upstream , the Shannon Diversity Index of the creek is approximately 2 @.@ 8 . In the lower reaches of the creek , downstream of Painter Run , its Hilsenhoff Biotic Index is between 2 @.@ 6 and 3 @.@ 5 . Between Shingle Mill Run and Painter Run , West Branch Fishing Creek 's Hilsenhoff Biotic Index is between 1 @.@ 6 and 2 @.@ 5 . 
 = Atlantic City Expressway = 
 The Atlantic City Expressway ( officially numbered , but unsigned , as Route 446 and abbreviated A.C. Expressway , ACE , or ACX , and known locally as " the Expressway " ) is a 44 @.@ 19 @-@ mile ( 71 @.@ 12 km ) , controlled @-@ access toll road in New Jersey , managed and operated by the South Jersey Transportation Authority . It serves as an extension of the freeway portion of Route 42 in Turnersville ( which is itself an extension of Interstate 76 ) southeast to Atlantic City . It connects the Philadelphia metropolitan area with Atlantic City and other Jersey Shore resorts . In addition to providing a route between the Delaware Valley and Atlantic City , as well as other Shore Points , the expressway also serves other South Jersey communities , including Hammonton and Mays Landing . The expressway intersects many major roads , including Route 73 in Winslow Township , Route 54 in Hammonton , Route 50 in Hamilton Township , the Garden State Parkway in Egg Harbor Township , and U.S. Route 9 in Pleasantville . 
 The Atlantic City Expressway has an open system of tolling , with two mainline toll plazas ( Egg Harbor in Hamilton Township and Pleasantville ) and seven exits with ramp tolls . The total cost to travel the length of the Atlantic City Expressway is currently $ 3 @.@ 75 and E @-@ ZPass is accepted . In 2008 , two separate plans were made to raise the tolls along the road , one proposed by Governor Jon Corzine and one proposed by the South Jersey Transportation Authority that would increase tolls 50 % . The latter toll increase took place effective November 18 , 2008 . The expressway features one service area , Farley Plaza , in Hamilton Township a short distance west of the Egg Harbor Toll Plaza , as well as a gas station and mini @-@ mart near the Atlantic City Welcome Center in Pleasantville . In a few years , the road is expected to use all @-@ electronic tolling . 
 Plans for the road go back to the 1930s , when a parkway was proposed between Camden and Atlantic City that was never built . Plans resurfaced for the road in the 1950s when a group of officials led by State Senator Frank S. Farley pushed for a road to help the area economy . The New Jersey Expressway Authority was created in 1962 to be responsible for building an expressway . The Atlantic City Expressway was built between 1962 and 1965 at a total cost of $ 48 @.@ 2 million . The South Jersey Transportation Authority assumed control of the road in 1991 from the New Jersey Expressway Authority . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Gloucester and Camden Counties = = = 
 The Atlantic City Expressway begins at Route 42 in Turnersville in Washington Township , Gloucester County , where it continues north as the North – South Freeway , a part of Route 42 . Here , Route 42 continues south on the Black Horse Pike and Route 168 continues north on the Black Horse Pike . A westbound exit provides a connection to northbound Route 168 . The expressway then heads southeast , straddling between Washington Township and Gloucester Township , Camden County . On the Gloucester Township / Winslow Township border , the Atlantic City Expressway features a diamond interchange with County Route 689 . Past CR 689 , there is a full interchange with County Route 536 Spur . The expressway passes under County Route 536 and then features a partial interchange with County Route 723 , with an eastbound exit and a westbound entrance . It then meets Route 73 at another partial interchange , with a westbound exit and an eastbound entrance . 
 = = = Atlantic County = = = 
 The Atlantic City Expressway crosses into Hammonton , Atlantic County . Continuing to the southeast , it encounters Route 54 at a full interchange . It then enters Hamilton Township and passes under County Route 559 . The lanes of the Atlantic City Expressway in both directions split for the Farley Service Plaza , which is located in the median of the expressway . Past the Farley Service Plaza , the Atlantic City Expressway meets the mainline Egg Harbor Toll Plaza . It then features a full interchange with Route 50 , with the westbound exit and eastbound entrance being E @-@ ZPass only . It meets County Route 670 , with another partial interchange featuring an eastbound off @-@ ramp and a westbound on @-@ ramp that provides access to the Atlantic City Race Track . Next , it has an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for County Route 575 , which provides access to U.S. Route 40 , U.S. Route 322 , and the Hamilton Mall . To and from the east , a ramp runs from the Atlantic City Expressway to the US 40 / US 322 split . 
 The Atlantic City Expressway then enters Egg Harbor Township . It interchanges with County Route 646 , which provides access to the Atlantic City International Airport , and passes under County Route 563 . It then features a cloverleaf interchange with the Garden State Parkway and crosses into Pleasantville . The expressway meets U.S. Route 9 at a diamond interchange . It passes under County Route 585 and features a partial interchange with North Franklin Boulevard , with a westbound exit and eastbound entrance . 
 The Atlantic City Expressway continues to the Pleasantville Toll Plaza . Past the toll plaza , the travel lanes separate and a long parking area , used by Atlantic City casino employees , lies within the median of the expressway . It then encounters the Atlantic City Welcome Center and Service Plaza and enters Atlantic City . Upon entering Atlantic City , the expressway features an eastbound exit and westbound entrance to US 40 / US 322 . It then continues southeast , crossing the Beach Thorofare , and soon after encounters an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for the Atlantic City @-@ Brigantine Connector , which provides access to the Atlantic City Convention Center , the Marina district , and Brigantine . It then ends at a traffic light at the intersection with Baltic Avenue near Tanger Outlets The Walk , where it becomes the one @-@ way pair of Missouri Avenue eastbound ( also known as Christopher Columbus Boulevard and County Route 692 ) and Arkansas Avenue westbound ( County Route 694 ) . 
 In 2010 , the Atlantic City Expressway counted almost 55 million toll @-@ paying vehicles . The speed limit on the Atlantic City Expressway is 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) with " conditions permitting " on the posted sign for most of the route . Call boxes are located every mile on either side . 
 = = Toll plazas and rest area = = 
 Automobiles currently must pay a $ 3 @.@ 00 toll at the Egg Harbor Toll Plaza , which is located east of the Farley Service Plaza at milepost 17 @.@ 5 , and a $ 0 @.@ 75 toll near Pleasantville . Both mainline toll plazas have Express E @-@ ZPass lanes through the center of the plaza . Exits between the two toll plazas may also charge a small fee , depending on the distance . A $ 0 @.@ 75 toll for cars is currently charged at the eastbound exits and westbound entrances at exits 5 , 28 , and 33 and the westbound exits and eastbound entrances at exits 9 and 12 ; in addition , a $ 0 @.@ 40 toll for cars is currently charged at the eastbound exits and westbound entrances at exits 38 and 41 . A $ 3 @.@ 00 E @-@ ZPass only toll is charged for the westbound exit and eastbound entrance at exit 17 . 
 On January 8 , 2008 , Governor Jon Corzine proposed a 50 percent increase in tolls on New Jersey 's three toll roads in 2010 , with increases of a similar percentage every four years after that , in order to help pay down the state debt . Each time tolls increased , there would be an additional increase for inflation since the last toll increase ( for the first , since 2006 ) . The roads would be maintained by a nonprofit public @-@ benefit corporation , which would pay back bonds to the state . Under this plan , without considering inflation , tolls on the Atlantic City Expressway would have risen from $ 2 @.@ 50 to $ 16 @.@ 59 in 2022 . It was possible that commuters would receive discounts from the higher toll rates . However , the proposal was not enacted due to opposition from leaders of the New Jersey Legislature . On September 5 , 2008 , a proposal by the South Jersey Transportation Authority was created to raise tolls by 50 percent , from $ 2 @.@ 50 to $ 3 @.@ 75 , in order to fund improvements to the road as well as to the Atlantic City International Airport . This toll increase took place effective November 18 , 2008 . In 2009 , the South Jersey Transportation Authority considered making the tolls on the Atlantic City Expressway completely electronic , in which E @-@ ZPass would be used . Vehicles without E @-@ ZPass will be billed using license plate technology , with a 10 % surcharge applied to their tolls . The Atlantic City Expressway was expected to become an all @-@ electronic toll road by Memorial Day weekend 2011 . However , the tolls on the road were later not expected to become cashless until between 2013 and 2015 . 
 Since 2014 , eastbound tolls have been waived at the Egg Harbor toll plaza between 5 : 00 and 6 : 00 pm on the Friday before Memorial Day in order to promote the unofficial beginning of the summer tourist season at the Jersey Shore . <unk> 's & Pete 's , a local sports bar chain , pays for the tolls normally collected during this hour . In October 2014 , eastbound tolls were waived at the Egg Harbor and Pleasantville toll plazas on Tuesdays between 12 : 00 pm and 12 : 00 am in order to encourage midweek tourism to Atlantic City . 
 Farley Service Plaza , the only service area on the route , has a building containing several fast food restaurants and a gas station . It is located between the two sides of the road to service traffic coming in either direction . In the mid @-@ 2000s , an additional gas station and mini @-@ mart were opened in the narrow center median behind the Atlantic City Welcome Center by Exit 2 . 
 = = History = = 
 The road was originally planned as a parkway in 1932 , running from the Ben Franklin Bridge in Camden to Atlantic City , but it never materialized . The idea for a limited access road between the Philadelphia area and Atlantic City resurfaced in the 1950s when South Jersey officials , led by State Senator Frank S. Farley , pushed for an expressway between the two areas to help the economy of Southern New Jersey . The New Jersey State Highway Department authorized traffic studies for a toll road between Turnersville and Atlantic City in 1958 and 1959 , and the New Jersey Expressway Authority Act in 1962 called for a five @-@ member agency ( the New Jersey Expressway Authority ) with representatives from four Southern New Jersey counties to be responsible for issuing bonds to build and maintain the Atlantic City Expressway . 
 Construction of the Atlantic City Expressway started in the summer of 1962 . The design was to feature a 300- to 400 @-@ foot @-@ wide roadway with 12 @-@ foot @-@ wide travel lanes and right shoulders as well as 3 @-@ foot @-@ wide left shoulders . The portion between Route 42 in Turnersville and the Garden State Parkway in Egg Harbor Township was completed on July 31 , 1964 , and the portion between the Garden State Parkway and Atlantic City was finished in July 1965 . Construction of the Atlantic City Expressway cost a total of $ 48 @.@ 2 million . Tolls on the Atlantic City Expressway initially cost $ 0 @.@ 75 at the Egg Harbor toll plaza and $ 0 @.@ 15 at the Pleasantville toll plaza . In 1991 , the South Jersey Transportation Authority was created by the New Jersey Legislature to operate the Atlantic City Expressway , the Atlantic City International Airport , and operations of the Atlantic County Transportation Authority . 
 In recent years , many improvements have been made to the Atlantic City Expressway . A new interchange with County Route 689 on the Gloucester Township / Winslow Township border was completed in 2000 at a cost of $ 5 million . The Atlantic City @-@ Brigantine Connector was completed on July 31 , 2001 to connect the Atlantic City Expressway to the Marina district and Brigantine . In 2005 , the Atlantic City Expressway added a third lane in both directions between the Garden State Parkway and Atlantic City and in the eastbound direction between Route 73 and the Garden State Parkway . In addition , the Pleasantville Toll Plaza was reconstructed , replacing the older cash booths with newer technology . 
 On November 21 , 2008 , construction began on the reconstruction of Interchange 17 , with completion on June 18 , 2010 . As a result of reconstructing this interchange , the <unk> approved raising the interchange toll to $ 3 @.@ 00 . This new rate is charged to motorists heading to or from the east along the Atlantic City Expressway at Route 50 . The proposal drew opposition from area officials who felt the proposed rate was too high . The westbound exit and eastbound entrance at Interchange 17 was designed to be E @-@ ZPass only , the first such interchange on the Atlantic City Expressway . 
 In 2007 , it was announced that the mainline Expressway from milepost 7 @.@ 0 – 31 @.@ 0 would be widened in the westbound direction to accommodate a third lane from just north of the Garden State Parkway to Route 73 . Interchange 17 ( Route 50 ) would be reconstructed to form a full movement interchange ( completed June 18 , 2010 ) , and the Egg Harbor Toll Plaza would receive Express E @-@ ZPass lanes to maintain highway speed . Construction on these three projects was financed by a $ 25 million bond . The Express E @-@ ZPass was completed in May 2011 , with the first phase completed in the summer of 2010 . 
 The work under the widening project also included improvements to bridges , lighting , and guide signs . In addition , Intelligent Transportation System ( ITS ) technology , such as traffic cameras and variable message signs , were also added to the Atlantic City Expressway to enhance safety and aid in monitoring traffic . The first phase widened the road from the Garden State Parkway to the Egg Harbor Toll Plaza . The second phase widened the road from the Egg Harbor Toll Plaza to milepost 24 @.@ 5 . The third phase widened the road west to Route 73 . The ITS components were installed along these sections of the roadway through the course of each phase . The widening work was completed in May 2014 and the third lane opened in its entirety by Memorial Day 2014 . The fourth phase added ITS technology to the parts of the road that are not being widened . 
 = = Future developments = = 
 The <unk> revealed plans for a major road improvement project that would link the Atlantic City International Airport directly to the Atlantic City Expressway , with construction beginning as early as 2013 . The plan includes new ramps with two overpasses over the expressway . The road would connect Amelia Earhart Boulevard with an overpass above Airport Circle . Plans also call for building a service road with another overpass that would provide access to Delilah Road . Another project involves the installation of an overpass at the end of Amelia Earhart Boulevard next to the entrance to the FAA tech center . The proposed roadway would intrude upon a small section of a mobile home park and land owned by Egg Harbor Township . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Mileposts run from east to west . 
 = War of the Coprophages = 
 " War of the Coprophages " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 5 , 1996 . It was written by Darin Morgan , and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " War of the Coprophages " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 1 , being watched by 16 @.@ 32 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics , who praised its humorous tone . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder investigates a small town plagued by deaths in which the bodies are found covered in cockroaches . Working from home , Scully has scientific explanations for all of them , but Mulder — at the crime scene with an attractive bug expert — suspects the insects may not be organic , or earthly . 
 " War of the Coprophages " was Darin Morgan 's third episode , after the second season episode " Humbug " and season three 's " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " . In order to achieve the effect of a cockroach infestation , the show used around three hundred cockroaches for the episode in addition to extremely detailed rubber cockroach props and " piles and piles " of faux @-@ dung . The episode 's title is a reference to the famous novel The War of the Worlds by H.G. Wells , as well as its 1938 radio adaptation by Orson Welles . The character Dr. Berenbaum is named for entomologist May Berenbaum . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Miller 's Grove , Massachusetts , an exterminator inspects the basement of Dr. Jeff Eckerle , having been hired to eradicate a cockroach infestation . The exterminator sprays a roach , knocks it down to the ground , and attempts to crush it underfoot . However , upon doing so , he begins to succumb to anaphylaxis , clutching his heart and collapsing against a wall , while the roach crawls out from under his boot , unscathed . When Eckerle returns , he finds the exterminator 's body covered with roaches . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is coincidentally nearby , investigating reported UFO sightings in Miller 's Grove . While on the phone with Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , Mulder is approached by the local sheriff , Frass , who reveals that a series of " roach attacks " have taken place in the town . Frass allows Mulder onto the scene at Eckerle 's residence . 
 Elsewhere in town , a trio of teenagers drink beer and huff fumes generated from heated manure . One of them sees a roach crawl into an open wound on his wrist , and in an attempt to extricate the insect , he begins to frantically slice his skin with a razor , leading him to sever an artery and ultimately bleed to death . At the scene , Mulder talks over the phone with Scully , who explains that it is likely a case of drug @-@ induced delusional parasitosis , though Mulder finds a cockroach on the underside of a piece of furniture , indicating that roaches were at least present . When he attempts to capture it for analysis , the insect crumbles in his hand and the sharp pieces cut his fingers in the process , leading him to believe that the brittle casing was made of metal . Sheriff Frass purports that the government , under the guise of the USDA , has been breeding killer cockroaches in a nearby facility . Immediately afterwards , the medical examiner is found dead in a bathroom stall , initially covered with cockroaches that disappear from the scene before more than one person can witness them . Scully attributes the medical examiner 's death to a cerebral aneurysm induced by <unk> while defecating . Mulder and Sheriff Frass find a seemingly dead cockroach on a sink in the bathroom , and Mulder again attempts to capture it ( albeit more gingerly this time ) , but it proves to be alive and escapes down the drain . 
 Mulder goes to investigate the facility Sheriff Frass mentioned . Before breaking in , he and Scully discuss the odd behavior of the roaches , with Scully hypothesizing that the roaches could be an invasive species . Inside the facility , which resembles a typical house , Mulder sees the walls rippling and is quickly surrounded by roaches . He is then confronted by Dr. Bambi Berenbaum ( Bobbie Phillips ) , a researcher from the Department of Agriculture who is studying cockroaches to develop more effective methods of pest control . Berenbaum has great interest in insects and , incidentally , believes that some UFOs are actually insect swarms flying through electrically charged <unk> . Yet another death occurs in Mulder 's hotel , with the individual being found covered in roaches that quickly flee . At this point , Mulder believes that the individual simply died of fright , though Scully begins to wonder what is going on and decides to head up there herself . 
 Mulder brings a cockroach from the hotel room to Berenbaum , who thinks it may be mechanical . Mulder then visits the nearby Dr. Ivanov , a wheelchair @-@ bound scientist who works on insect @-@ like robots . The two discuss the possibility that extraterrestrial intelligences could send robotic probes to study other planets . After inspecting the Mulder 's specimen , Ivanov is rendered speechless ; he informs Mulder that the specimen is , technology @-@ wise , vastly superior to anything he 's ever seen . Scully arrives in the town at a convenience store , finding the residents succumbing to panic over the roaches . She attempts to calm the people down , however the store @-@ goers frantically flee after two scuffling patrons knock over a display of chocolate candies , believing them to be more roaches . Meanwhile , Mulder , while departing Ivanov 's lab , catches another roach to bring to Berenbaum , but this time , she concludes that it is a seemingly normal cockroach . Scully finds out that Eckerle was researching dung @-@ derived methane as an alternative fuel source , and had been importing animal dung that may have introduced the roaches to the area . Upon hearing this , Mulder speculates that the roaches are actually extraterrestrial robotic probes that are capable of consuming dung — an abundant resource already exploited by some species of roaches — to generate methane as a source of fuel . 
 Mulder goes with Berenbaum to see Eckerle at his facility . He finds Eckerle in a hysterical , paranoid state , having been unable to escape the roaches that he feels are following him . Eckerle pulls a gun on Mulder , thinking that even he may somehow be a cockroach . Scully arrives on the scene and meets Berenbaum . She calls Mulder , and when Mulder 's phone rings , Eckerle believes it to be Mulder making a tone like the rest of the unusual roaches . Eckerle fires at Mulder , and his shots rupture and ignite pipes containing methane gas . The agents flee , and the facility explodes with Eckerle still inside . The next day , Dr. Ivanov arrives to talk with Mulder at the scene of the explosion and meets Berenbaum . The two leave with one another , discussing their interests in insects and robots . That night Mulder writes his report on the case , wondering how humanity would react if insect @-@ like robots visited Earth . Mulder finds a bizarre looking bug by his food , and crushes it with an X @-@ File . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Darin Morgan was inspired to write the episode when he saw a cover of a magazine featuring insect like robots created by <unk> Rodney Brooks . Mass hysteria was also a key element to the episode , with many references to Orson Welles 's famous radio play of War of the Worlds . Most notably , the episode 's title is a reference to The War of the Worlds and the town this episode takes place in — Miller 's Grove — is a play on Grover 's Mill , the setting of Orson Welles 's 1938 radio adaptation . Originally , a scene featuring the sheriff discussing a noted case of hysteria from the 1930s was planned to be included in the final episode , but was cut due to time . The episode , like Morgan 's previous effort , the second season 's " Humbug , " used a great deal of humor , including an in @-@ joke where Scully reads Breakfast at Tiffany 's , referencing David Duchovny 's Final Jeopardy ! question when he appeared on Jeopardy ! . The last part of the episode 's title , <unk> , refers to a dung eater . 
 The show 's animal trainer , Debbie Cove , used around three hundred cockroaches for this episode . Cove later noted that only one of the cockroaches died during the filming , due to old age . Director Kim Manners was very pleased with the way the cockroaches behaved , noting that " every shot I wanted to get , they got . " Cast and crew members later recalled that Manners began giving orders to the roaches . Cinematographer John Bartley explained , " when I saw Kim Manners talking to a bucket of cockroaches , that was a highlight for me . " Several " incredibly detailed " rubber cockroaches were created for the episode . These props were extremely detailed : prop master Ken Hawryliw explained that , " you could put one next to a real roach and no one would know the difference . " In addition , the " piles and piles " of faux @-@ dung were created for the show by using an organic , feces @-@ free substance . 
 The episode came under heavy criticism by the standards and practices department at parent network Fox , who took exception to the initial script 's heavy use of words such as " crap " to refer to the excrement that episode 's cockroaches fed upon . Darin Morgan later attacked and parodied this approach in the twenty @-@ first episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium called " Somehow , Satan Got Behind Me " . In the episode , a network censor again targets the use of the word " crap " and storms onto the set of a show resembling The X @-@ Files being taped , featuring lookalikes of Mulder and Scully with those series ' theme music playing in the background . 
 The episode marks a rare occasion in the series in which the fourth wall is broken : Although no character addresses the audience , a cockroach is made to appear to " walk across the viewer 's screen " during one scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " War of the Coprophages " premiered on the Fox network on January 5 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 16 @.@ 32 million viewers . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave " War of the Coprophages " an A- , and wrote , " Irreverent camp that 's infested with laughs ( and creepy @-@ crawlies ) but throws credibility out the window . " Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A and compared it to the previously Morgan @-@ penned " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " , writing , " So ! This is the second Darin Morgan episode I 've had to write about , and once again , I 'm not sure I 've done it justice . [ ... ] The comedy here can be broad , but there 's always enough self @-@ aware commentary buried in it that it never becomes simplistic . While " Bruckman " dealt with the misery of knowing all the answers , " Coprophages " looks at how easy it is to convince yourself you know what 's going on , even when you don 't . It 'd be better to believe in a bunch of bugs from outer space coming down to earth to mess with our minds , than it would be to accept the more likely truth that bugs like shit — and around here , there 's always plenty to go around . " Critical Myth 's John Keegan gave the episode an 8 / 10 and praised the episode 's self @-@ parodying style , saying , " Overall , this episode was a rare self @-@ contained parody , well written by Darin Morgan . By standing on its own outside of continuity , the episode gives itself plenty of room to send @-@ up the series premise and its early internet fandom . There ’ s no real sense of resolution , but that ’ s really incidental to the point of the parody . " Author Phil Farrand rated the episode as his second favorite episode of the first four seasons in his book The Nitpickers Guide to the X @-@ Files . 
 The cast and the crew of the show enjoyed the episode , for the most part . Co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin said that the episode had some of the funniest material in The X @-@ Files as well as some of the most horrific , such as the scene where a cockroach crawled into someone 's arm . Gillian Anderson rated the episode one of her favorite episodes of the third season . On a more negative note , writer Darin Morgan ended up being unhappy with the final product , saying " The other day , my girlfriend was saying , ' I never understood that episode , ' and I guess I don 't either . It was an episode that had a lot of what I thought were really good ideas and never quite got it to work . I was really disappointed with that episode . Some people love it . " 
 = Rudyard Kipling ( ship ) = 
 The Rudyard Kipling was a British steam trawler launched in 1920 that undertook fishing operations off the coasts of Great Britain and Ireland for almost 20 years . On 16 September 1939 , shortly after the outbreak of World War II , the trawler was captured 40 miles west of Clare Island by the German submarine U @-@ 27 . After removing food , equipment , and the crew from the ship , the Germans sunk her with the use of scuttling charges . Several hours later the crew of the Rudyard Kipling were cast adrift 5 nautical miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) off the coast of Ireland . They eventually landed their lifeboats at <unk> . 
 The Rudyard Kipling was the 27th merchant ship , the 26th British merchant ship , and the second British trawler to be sunk by a German U @-@ boat in World War II . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 The Rudyard Kipling was constructed in the town of Selby by the shipbuilder Cochrane & Sons Ltd . The trawler was launched from yard number 686 on 11 November 1920 . Named the Rudyard Kipling by the ship 's owner Newington Steam Trawling Co Ltd . , she was registered in the port of Hull on 4 February 1921 and completed later that month . Her official number was <unk> . She had a net tonnage of 140 and her gross tonnage was 333 . The trawler was 138 @.@ 8 feet ( 42 @.@ 3 m ) from bow to stern with a draught of 12 @.@ 9 feet ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) and a breadth of 23 @.@ 7 feet ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) . Her engine was a <unk> @-@ cylinder from C. D. Holmes & Co Ltd . , also of Hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 Following completion and registration , the Rudyard Kipling began fishing off of the coast of Ireland and Great Britain . In May 1934 , the trawler was sold to The Sun Steam Trawling Co Ltd . On 10 May , her registry from Hull was closed and on 16 May , she was registered in the English port town of Fleetwood , where her new owners were based . The Rudyard Kipling remained with the Sun Steam Trawling Co Ltd. for the rest of her career . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 On 16 September 1939 , the Rudyard Kipling left Fleetwood for a routine fishing trip to an area off the west coast of Ireland . The trawler , under the command of Skipper Charles Robinson and with a crew of 12 men , was about 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) west of the Irish town of Donegal when U @-@ 27 came alongside and ordered them to pull over to the submarine and surrender . The German crew then took the Rudyard Kipling 's food , including sugar , bread and fish , as well as the trawler 's wireless radios , and transferred them over to the U @-@ boat . Timed explosive charges were then placed on the trawler and three minutes later , at 15 : 53 , the trawler exploded and sank . 
 While raiding the trawler , the Germans took the crew of the Rudyard Kipling on board and provided them with food and warm clothes . Eight hours later , in the early hours of 17 September , the Germans allowed the crew of the Rudyard Kipling to reboard their lifeboats and set them adrift 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of the port town of Donegal . Sometime later the crew landed at <unk> to the west of the town . The Rudyard Kipling was the 27th merchant ship ( the 26th one to be British ) and the second British trawler to be sunk by a German U @-@ boat in World War II . 
 = Shapley – Folkman lemma = 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma is a result in convex geometry with applications in mathematical economics that describes the Minkowski addition of sets in a vector space . Minkowski addition is defined as the addition of the sets ' members : for example , adding the set consisting of the integers zero and one to itself yields the set consisting of zero , one , and two : 
 { 0 , 1 } + { 0 , 1 } 
 = { 0 + 0 , 0 + 1 , 1 + 0 , 1 + 1 } = 
 { 0 , 1 , 2 } . 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma and related results provide an affirmative answer to the question , " Is the sum of many sets close to being convex ? " A set is defined to be convex if every line segment joining two of its points is a subset in the set : For example , the solid disk <formula> is a convex set but the circle <formula> is not , because the line segment joining two distinct points <formula> is not a subset of the circle . The Shapley – Folkman lemma suggests that if the number of summed sets exceeds the dimension of the vector space , then their Minkowski sum is approximately convex . 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma was introduced as a step in the proof of the Shapley – Folkman theorem , which states an upper bound on the distance between the Minkowski sum and its convex hull . The convex hull of a set Q is the smallest convex set that contains Q. This distance is zero if and only if the sum is convex . The theorem 's bound on the distance depends on the dimension D and on the shapes of the summand @-@ sets , but not on the number of summand @-@ sets N , when N > D. The shapes of a subcollection of only D summand @-@ sets determine the bound on the distance between the Minkowski average of N sets 
 1 ⁄ N ( Q1 + Q2 + ... + <unk> ) 
 and its convex hull . As N increases to infinity , the bound decreases to zero ( for summand @-@ sets of uniformly bounded size ) . The Shapley – Folkman theorem 's upper bound was decreased by Starr 's corollary ( alternatively , the Shapley – Folkman – Starr theorem ) . 
 The lemma of Lloyd Shapley and Jon Folkman was first published by the economist Ross M. Starr , who was investigating the existence of economic equilibria while studying with Kenneth Arrow . In his paper , Starr studied a convexified economy , in which non @-@ convex sets were replaced by their convex hulls ; Starr proved that the convexified economy has equilibria that are closely approximated by " quasi @-@ equilibria " of the original economy ; moreover , he proved that every quasi @-@ equilibrium has many of the optimal properties of true equilibria , which are proved to exist for convex economies . Following Starr 's 1969 paper , the Shapley – Folkman – Starr results have been widely used to show that central results of ( convex ) economic theory are good approximations to large economies with non @-@ convexities ; for example , quasi @-@ equilibria closely approximate equilibria of a convexified economy . " The derivation of these results in general form has been one of the major achievements of postwar economic theory " , wrote Roger Guesnerie . The topic of non @-@ convex sets in economics has been studied by many Nobel laureates , besides Lloyd Shapley who won the prize in 2012 : Arrow ( 1972 ) , Robert Aumann ( 2005 ) , Gérard Debreu ( 1983 ) , Tjalling Koopmans ( 1975 ) , Paul Krugman ( 2008 ) , and Paul Samuelson ( 1970 ) ; the complementary topic of convex sets in economics has been emphasized by these laureates , along with Leonid Hurwicz , Leonid Kantorovich ( 1975 ) , and Robert Solow ( 1987 ) . 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma has applications also in optimization and probability theory . In optimization theory , the Shapley – Folkman lemma has been used to explain the successful solution of minimization problems that are sums of many functions . The Shapley – Folkman lemma has also been used in proofs of the " law of averages " for random sets , a theorem that had been proved for only convex sets . 
 = = Introductory example = = 
 For example , the subset of the integers { 0 , 1 , 2 } is contained in the interval of real numbers [ 0 , 2 ] , which is convex . The Shapley – Folkman lemma implies that every point in [ 0 , 2 ] is the sum of an integer from { 0 , 1 } and a real number from [ 0 , 1 ] . 
 The distance between the convex interval [ 0 , 2 ] and the non @-@ convex set { 0 , 1 , 2 } equals one @-@ half 
 1 / 2 
 = | 1 − 1 / 2 | = 
 | 0 − 1 / 2 | 
 = | 2 − 3 / 2 | = 
 | 1 − 3 / 2 | . 
 However , the distance between the average Minkowski sum 
 1 / 2 ( { 0 , 1 } + { 0 , 1 } ) = { 0 , 1 / 2 , 1 } 
 and its convex hull [ 0 , 1 ] is only 1 / 4 , which is half the distance ( 1 / 2 ) between its summand { 0 , 1 } and [ 0 , 1 ] . As more sets are added together , the average of their sum " fills out " its convex hull : The maximum distance between the average and its convex hull approaches zero as the average includes more summands . 
 = = Preliminaries = = 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma depends upon the following definitions and results from convex geometry . 
 = = = Real vector spaces = = = 
 A real vector space of two dimensions can be given a Cartesian coordinate system in which every point is identified by an ordered pair of real numbers , called " coordinates " , which are conventionally denoted by x and y . Two points in the Cartesian plane can be added coordinate @-@ wise 
 ( x1 , y1 ) + ( x2 , y2 ) 
 = ( x1 + x2 , y1 + y2 ) ; 
 further , a point can be multiplied by each real number λ coordinate @-@ wise 
 λ ( x , y ) = 
 ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 More generally , any real vector space of ( finite ) dimension D can be viewed as the set of all D @-@ tuples of D real numbers { ( v1 , v2 , . . . , vD ) } on which two operations are defined : vector addition and multiplication by a real number . For finite @-@ dimensional vector spaces , the operations of vector addition and real @-@ number multiplication can each be defined coordinate @-@ wise , following the example of the Cartesian plane . 
 = = = Convex sets = = = 
 In a real vector space , a non @-@ empty set Q is defined to be convex if , for each pair of its points , every point on the line segment that joins them is a subset of Q. For example , a solid disk <formula> is convex but a circle <formula> is not , because it does not contain a line segment joining its points <formula> ; the non @-@ convex set of three integers { 0 , 1 , 2 } is contained in the interval [ 0 , 2 ] , which is convex . For example , a solid cube is convex ; however , anything that is hollow or dented , for example , a crescent shape , is non @-@ convex . The empty set is convex , either by definition or <unk> , depending on the author . 
 More formally , a set Q is convex if , for all points v0 and v1 in Q and for every real number λ in the unit interval [ 0 @,@ 1 ] , the point 
 ( 1 − λ ) v0 + <unk> 
 is a member of Q. 
 By mathematical induction , a set Q is convex if and only if every convex combination of members of Q also belongs to Q. By definition , a convex combination of an indexed subset { v0 , v1 , . . . , vD } of a vector space is any weighted average <unk> + <unk> + . . . + <unk> , for some indexed set of non @-@ negative real numbers { <unk> } satisfying the equation <unk> + λ1 + . . . + <unk> = 1 . 
 The definition of a convex set implies that the intersection of two convex sets is a convex set . More generally , the intersection of a family of convex sets is a convex set . In particular , the intersection of two disjoint sets is the empty set , which is convex . 
 = = = Convex hull = = = 
 For every subset Q of a real vector space , its convex hull Conv ( Q ) is the minimal convex set that contains Q. Thus Conv ( Q ) is the intersection of all the convex sets that cover Q. The convex hull of a set can be equivalently defined to be the set of all convex combinations of points in Q. For example , the convex hull of the set of integers { 0 @,@ 1 } is the closed interval of real numbers [ 0 @,@ 1 ] , which contains the integer end @-@ points . The convex hull of the unit circle is the closed unit disk , which contains the unit circle . 
 = = = Minkowski addition = = = 
 In a real vector space , the Minkowski sum of two ( non @-@ empty ) sets Q1 and Q2 is defined to be the set Q1 + Q2 formed by the addition of vectors element @-@ wise from the summand sets 
 Q1 + Q2 
 = { q1 + q2 : q1 ∈ Q1 and q2 ∈ Q2 } . 
 For example 
 { 0 , 1 } + { 0 , 1 } = 
 { 0 + 0 , 0 + 1 , 1 + 0 , 1 + 1 } 
 = { 0 , 1 , 2 } . 
 By the principle of mathematical induction , the Minkowski sum of a finite family of ( non @-@ empty ) sets 
 { Qn : Qn ≠ Ø and 1 ≤ n ≤ N } 
 is the set formed by element @-@ wise addition of vectors 
 ∑ Qn = 
 { ∑ qn : qn ∈ Qn } . 
 = = = Convex hulls of Minkowski sums = = = 
 Minkowski addition behaves well with respect to " convexification " — the operation of taking convex hulls . Specifically , for all subsets Q1 and Q2 of a real vector space , the convex hull of their Minkowski sum is the Minkowski sum of their convex hulls . That is , 
 Conv ( Q1 + Q2 ) 
 = Conv ( Q1 ) + Conv ( Q2 ) . 
 This result holds more generally , as a consequence of the principle of mathematical induction . For each finite collection of sets , 
 Conv ( ∑ Qn ) = 
 ∑ Conv ( Qn ) . 
 = = Statements = = 
 The preceding identity Conv ( ∑ Qn ) 
 = ∑ Conv ( Qn ) implies that if a point x lies in the convex hull of the Minkowski sum of N sets 
 x ∈ Conv ( ∑ Qn ) 
 then x lies in the sum of the convex hulls of the summand @-@ sets 
 x ∈ ∑ Conv ( Qn ) . 
 By the definition of Minkowski addition , this last expression means that x = 
 ∑ qn for some selection of points qn in the convex hulls of the summand @-@ sets , that is , where each qn ∈ Conv ( Qn ) . In this representation , the selection of the summand @-@ points qn depends on the chosen sum @-@ point x . 
 = = = <unk> of Shapley and Folkman = = = 
 For this representation of the point x , the Shapley – Folkman lemma states that if the dimension D is less than the number of summands 
 D < N 
 then convexification is needed for only D summand @-@ sets , whose choice depends on x : The point has a representation 
 <formula> 
 where <unk> belongs to the convex hull of Qd for D ( or fewer ) summand @-@ sets and qn belongs to Qn itself for the remaining sets . That is , 
 <formula> 
 for some re @-@ indexing of the summand sets ; this re @-@ indexing depends on the particular point x being represented . 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma implies , for example , that every point in [ 0 , 2 ] is the sum of an integer from { 0 , 1 } and a real number from [ 0 , 1 ] . 
 = = = = Dimension of a real vector space = = = = 
 Conversely , the Shapley – Folkman lemma characterizes the dimension of finite @-@ dimensional , real vector spaces . That is , if a vector space obeys the Shapley – Folkman lemma for a natural number D , and for no number less than D , then its dimension is exactly D ; the Shapley – Folkman lemma holds for only finite @-@ dimensional vector spaces . 
 = = = Shapley – Folkman theorem and Starr 's corollary = = = 
 Shapley and Folkman used their lemma to prove their theorem , which bounds the distance between a Minkowski sum and its convex hull , the " convexified " sum : 
 The Shapley – Folkman theorem states that the squared Euclidean distance from any point in the convexified sum Conv ( ∑ Qn ) to the original ( unconvexified ) sum ∑ Qn is bounded by the sum of the squares of the D largest <unk> of the sets Qn ( the radii of the smallest spheres enclosing these sets ) . This bound is independent of the number of summand @-@ sets N ( if N > D ) . 
 The Shapley – Folkman theorem states a bound on the distance between the Minkowski sum and its convex hull ; this distance is zero if and only if the sum is convex . Their bound on the distance depends on the dimension D and on the shapes of the summand @-@ sets , but not on the number of summand @-@ sets N , when N > D. 
 The <unk> often exceeds ( and cannot be less than ) the inner radius : 
 The inner radius of a set Qn is defined to be the smallest number r such that , for any point q in the convex hull of Qn , there is a sphere of radius r that contains a subset of Qn whose convex hull contains q . 
 Starr used the inner radius to reduce the upper bound stated in the Shapley – Folkman theorem : 
 Starr 's corollary to the Shapley – Folkman theorem states that the squared Euclidean distance from any point x in the convexified sum Conv ( ∑ Qn ) to the original ( unconvexified ) sum ∑ Qn is bounded by the sum of the squares of the D largest inner @-@ radii of the sets Qn . 
 Starr 's corollary states an upper bound on the Euclidean distance between the Minkowski sum of N sets and the convex hull of the Minkowski sum ; this distance between the sum and its convex hull is a measurement of the non @-@ convexity of the set . For simplicity , this distance is called the " non @-@ convexity " of the set ( with respect to Starr 's measurement ) . Thus , Starr 's bound on the non @-@ convexity of the sum depends on only the D largest inner radii of the summand @-@ sets ; however , Starr 's bound does not depend on the number of summand @-@ sets N , when N > D. For example , the distance between the convex interval [ 0 , 2 ] and the non @-@ convex set { 0 , 1 , 2 } equals one @-@ half 
 1 / 2 
 = | 1 − 1 / 2 | = 
 | 0 − 1 / 2 | 
 = | 2 − 3 / 2 | = 
 | 1 − 3 / 2 | . 
 Thus , Starr 's bound on the non @-@ convexity of the average 
 1 ⁄ N ∑ Qn 
 decreases as the number of summands N increases . For example , the distance between the averaged set 
 1 / 2 ( { 0 , 1 } + { 0 , 1 } ) = { 0 , 1 / 2 , 1 } 
 and its convex hull [ 0 , 1 ] is only 1 / 4 , which is half the distance ( 1 / 2 ) between its summand { 0 , 1 } and [ 0 , 1 ] . The shapes of a subcollection of only D summand @-@ sets determine the bound on the distance between the average set and its convex hull ; thus , as the number of summands increases to infinity , the bound decreases to zero ( for summand @-@ sets of uniformly bounded size ) . In fact , Starr 's bound on the non @-@ convexity of this average set decreases to zero as the number of summands N increases to infinity ( when the inner radii of all the summands are bounded by the same number ) . 
 = = = Proofs and computations = = = 
 The original proof of the Shapley – Folkman lemma established only the existence of the representation , but did not provide an algorithm for computing the representation : Similar proofs have been given by Arrow and Hahn , Cassels , and Schneider , among others . An abstract and elegant proof by Ekeland has been extended by <unk> . Different proofs have appeared in unpublished papers , also . In 1981 , Starr published an iterative method for computing a representation of a given sum @-@ point ; however , his computational proof provides a weaker bound than does the original result . An elementary proof of the Shapley – Folkman lemma in finite @-@ dimensional space can be found in the book by <unk> together with applications in estimating the duality gap in separable optimization problems and zero @-@ sum games . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma enables researchers to extend results for Minkowski sums of convex sets to sums of general sets , which need not be convex . Such sums of sets arise in economics , in mathematical optimization , and in probability theory ; in each of these three mathematical sciences , non @-@ convexity is an important feature of applications . 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 In economics , a consumer 's preferences are defined over all " baskets " of goods . Each basket is represented as a non @-@ negative vector , whose coordinates represent the quantities of the goods . On this set of baskets , an indifference curve is defined for each consumer ; a consumer 's indifference curve contains all the baskets of commodities that the consumer regards as equivalent : That is , for every pair of baskets on the same indifference curve , the consumer does not prefer one basket over another . Through each basket of commodities passes one indifference curve . A consumer 's preference set ( relative to an indifference curve ) is the union of the indifference curve and all the commodity baskets that the consumer prefers over the indifference curve . A consumer 's preferences are convex if all such preference sets are convex . 
 An optimal basket of goods occurs where the budget @-@ line supports a consumer 's preference set , as shown in the diagram . This means that an optimal basket is on the highest possible indifference curve given the budget @-@ line , which is defined in terms of a price vector and the consumer 's income ( endowment vector ) . Thus , the set of optimal baskets is a function of the prices , and this function is called the consumer 's demand . If the preference set is convex , then at every price the consumer 's demand is a convex set , for example , a unique optimal basket or a line @-@ segment of baskets . 
 = = = = Non @-@ convex preferences = = = = 
 However , if a preference set is non @-@ convex , then some prices determine a budget @-@ line that supports two separate optimal @-@ baskets . For example , we can imagine that , for zoos , a lion costs as much as an eagle , and further that a zoo 's budget suffices for one eagle or one lion . We can suppose also that a zoo @-@ keeper views either animal as equally valuable . In this case , the zoo would purchase either one lion or one eagle . Of course , a contemporary zoo @-@ keeper does not want to purchase half of an eagle and half of a lion ( or a griffin ) ! Thus , the zoo @-@ keeper 's preferences are non @-@ convex : The zoo @-@ keeper prefers having either animal to having any strictly convex combination of both . 
 When the consumer 's preference set is non @-@ convex , then ( for some prices ) the consumer 's demand is not connected ; a disconnected demand implies some discontinuous behavior by the consumer , as discussed by Harold Hotelling : 
 If indifference curves for purchases be thought of as possessing a wavy character , convex to the origin in some regions and concave in others , we are forced to the conclusion that it is only the portions convex to the origin that can be regarded as possessing any importance , since the others are essentially unobservable . They can be detected only by the discontinuities that may occur in demand with variation in price @-@ ratios , leading to an abrupt jumping of a point of tangency across a chasm when the straight line is rotated . But , while such discontinuities may reveal the existence of chasms , they can never measure their depth . The concave portions of the indifference curves and their many @-@ dimensional generalizations , if they exist , must forever remain in <unk> obscurity . 
 The difficulties of studying non @-@ convex preferences were emphasized by Herman Wold and again by Paul Samuelson , who wrote that non @-@ convexities are " shrouded in eternal darkness ... " , according to <unk> . 
 Nonetheless , non @-@ convex preferences were illuminated from 1959 to 1961 by a sequence of papers in The Journal of Political Economy ( JPE ) . The main contributors were Farrell , Bator , Koopmans , and Rothenberg . In particular , Rothenberg 's paper discussed the approximate convexity of sums of non @-@ convex sets . These JPE @-@ papers stimulated a paper by Lloyd Shapley and Martin Shubik , which considered convexified consumer @-@ preferences and introduced the concept of an " approximate equilibrium " . The JPE @-@ papers and the Shapley – Shubik paper influenced another notion of " quasi @-@ equilibria " , due to Robert Aumann . 
 = = = = Starr 's 1969 paper and contemporary economics = = = = 
 Previous publications on non @-@ convexity and economics were collected in an annotated bibliography by Kenneth Arrow . He gave the bibliography to Starr , who was then an undergraduate enrolled in Arrow 's ( graduate ) advanced mathematical @-@ economics course . In his term @-@ paper , Starr studied the general equilibria of an artificial economy in which non @-@ convex preferences were replaced by their convex hulls . In the convexified economy , at each price , the aggregate demand was the sum of convex hulls of the consumers ' demands . Starr 's ideas interested the mathematicians Lloyd Shapley and Jon Folkman , who proved their eponymous lemma and theorem in " private correspondence " , which was reported by Starr 's published paper of 1969 . 
 In his 1969 publication , Starr applied the Shapley – Folkman – Starr theorem . Starr proved that the " convexified " economy has general equilibria that can be closely approximated by " quasi @-@ equilibria " of the original economy , when the number of agents exceeds the dimension of the goods : Concretely , Starr proved that there exists at least one quasi @-@ equilibrium of prices popt with the following properties : 
 For each quasi @-@ equilibrium 's prices popt , all consumers can choose optimal baskets ( maximally preferred and meeting their budget constraints ) . 
 At quasi @-@ equilibrium prices popt in the convexified economy , every good 's market is in equilibrium : Its supply equals its demand . 
 For each quasi @-@ equilibrium , the prices " nearly clear " the markets for the original economy : an upper bound on the distance between the set of equilibria of the " convexified " economy and the set of quasi @-@ equilibria of the original economy followed from Starr 's corollary to the Shapley – Folkman theorem . 
 Starr established that 
 " in the aggregate , the discrepancy between an allocation in the fictitious economy generated by [ taking the convex hulls of all of the consumption and production sets ] and some allocation in the real economy is bounded in a way that is independent of the number of economic agents . Therefore , the average agent experiences a deviation from intended actions that vanishes in significance as the number of agents goes to infinity " . 
 Following Starr 's 1969 paper , the Shapley – Folkman – Starr results have been widely used in economic theory . Roger Guesnerie summarized their economic implications : " Some key results obtained under the convexity assumption remain ( approximately ) relevant in circumstances where convexity fails . For example , in economies with a large consumption side , preference <unk> do not destroy the standard results " . " The derivation of these results in general form has been one of the major achievements of postwar economic theory " , wrote Guesnerie . The topic of non @-@ convex sets in economics has been studied by many Nobel laureates : Arrow ( 1972 ) , Robert Aumann ( 2005 ) , Gérard Debreu ( 1983 ) , Tjalling Koopmans ( 1975 ) , Paul Krugman ( 2008 ) , and Paul Samuelson ( 1970 ) ; the complementary topic of convex sets in economics has been emphasized by these laureates , along with Leonid Hurwicz , Leonid Kantorovich ( 1975 ) , and Robert Solow ( 1987 ) . The Shapley – Folkman – Starr results have been featured in the economics literature : in microeconomics , in general @-@ equilibrium theory , in public economics ( including market failures ) , as well as in game theory , in mathematical economics , and in applied mathematics ( for economists ) . The Shapley – Folkman – Starr results have also influenced economics research using measure and integration theory . 
 = = = Mathematical optimization = = = 
 The Shapley – Folkman lemma has been used to explain why large minimization problems with non @-@ convexities can be nearly solved ( with iterative methods whose convergence proofs are stated for only convex problems ) . The Shapley – Folkman lemma has encouraged the use of methods of convex minimization on other applications with sums of many functions . 
 = = = = Preliminaries of optimization theory = = = = 
 Nonlinear optimization relies on the following definitions for functions : 
 The graph of a function f is the set of the pairs of arguments x and function evaluations f ( x ) 
 Graph ( f ) 
 = { ( x , f ( x ) ) } 
 The epigraph of a real @-@ valued function f is the set of points above the graph 
 Epi ( f ) = 
 { ( x , u ) : f ( x ) ≤ u } . 
 A real @-@ valued function is defined to be a convex function if its epigraph is a convex set . 
 For example , the quadratic function f ( x ) 
 = x2 is convex , as is the absolute value function g ( x ) = 
 | x | . However , the sine function ( pictured ) is non @-@ convex on the interval ( 0 , π ) . 
 = = = = Additive optimization problems = = = = 
 In many optimization problems , the objective function f is separable : that is , f is the sum of many summand @-@ functions , each of which has its own argument : 
 f ( x ) 
 = f ( ( x1 , ... , xN ) ) = 
 ∑ fn ( xn ) . 
 For example , problems of linear optimization are separable . Given a separable problem with an optimal solution , we fix an optimal solution 
 xmin = ( x1 , ... , xN ) min 
 with the minimum value f ( xmin ) . For this separable problem , we also consider an optimal solution ( xmin , f ( xmin ) ) to the " convexified problem " , where convex hulls are taken of the graphs of the summand functions . Such an optimal solution is the limit of a sequence of points in the convexified problem 
 ( xj , f ( xj ) ) ∈ ∑ Conv ( Graph ( fn ) ) . 
 Of course , the given optimal @-@ point is a sum of points in the graphs of the original summands and of a small number of convexified summands , by the Shapley – Folkman lemma . 
 This analysis was published by Ivar Ekeland in 1974 to explain the apparent convexity of separable problems with many summands , despite the non @-@ convexity of the summand problems . In 1973 , the young mathematician Claude Lemaréchal was surprised by his success with convex minimization methods on problems that were known to be non @-@ convex ; for minimizing nonlinear problems , a solution of the dual problem problem need not provide useful information for solving the primal problem , unless the primal problem be convex and satisfy a constraint qualification . Lemaréchal 's problem was additively separable , and each summand function was non @-@ convex ; nonetheless , a solution to the dual problem provided a close approximation to the primal problem 's optimal value . Ekeland 's analysis explained the success of methods of convex minimization on large and separable problems , despite the non @-@ convexities of the summand functions . Ekeland and later authors argued that additive <unk> produced an approximately convex aggregate problem , even though the summand functions were non @-@ convex . The crucial step in these publications is the use of the Shapley – Folkman lemma . The Shapley – Folkman lemma has encouraged the use of methods of convex minimization on other applications with sums of many functions . 
 = = = Probability and measure theory = = = 
 Convex sets are often studied with probability theory . Each point in the convex hull of a ( non @-@ empty ) subset Q of a finite @-@ dimensional space is the expected value of a simple random vector that takes its values in Q , as a consequence of Carathéodory 's lemma . Thus , for a non @-@ empty set Q , the collection of the expected values of the simple , Q @-@ valued random vectors equals Q 's convex hull ; this equality implies that the Shapley – Folkman – Starr results are useful in probability theory . In the other direction , probability theory provides tools to examine convex sets generally and the Shapley – Folkman – Starr results specifically . The Shapley – Folkman – Starr results have been widely used in the probabilistic theory of random sets , for example , to prove a law of large numbers , a central limit theorem , and a large @-@ deviations principle . These proofs of probabilistic limit theorems used the Shapley – Folkman – Starr results to avoid the assumption that all the random sets be convex . 
 A probability measure is a finite measure , and the Shapley – Folkman lemma has applications in non @-@ probabilistic measure theory , such as the theories of volume and of vector measures . The Shapley – Folkman lemma enables a refinement of the Brunn – Minkowski inequality , which bounds the volume of sums in terms of the volumes of their summand @-@ sets . The volume of a set is defined in terms of the Lebesgue measure , which is defined on subsets of Euclidean space . In advanced measure @-@ theory , the Shapley – Folkman lemma has been used to prove Lyapunov 's theorem , which states that the range of a vector measure is convex . Here , the traditional term " range " ( alternatively , " image " ) is the set of values produced by the function . A vector measure is a vector @-@ valued generalization of a measure ; for example , if p1 and p2 are probability measures defined on the same measurable space , then the product function p1 p2 is a vector measure , where p1 p2 is defined for every event ω by 
 ( p1 p2 ) ( ω ) = ( p1 ( ω ) , p2 ( ω ) ) . 
 Lyapunov 's theorem has been used in economics , in ( " bang @-@ bang " ) control theory , and in statistical theory . Lyapunov 's theorem has been called a continuous counterpart of the Shapley – Folkman lemma , which has itself been called a discrete analogue of Lyapunov 's theorem . 
 = David W. Mullins , Jr . = 
 David Wiley Mullins , Jr . ( born April 28 , 1946 ) is an American economist and former vice @-@ chairman of the Federal Reserve . He also served as an assistant Secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance in the administration of United States President George H. W. Bush . Mullins left the Federal Reserve in 1994 to join the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management and remained in private finance following its collapse in 1998 . 
 = = Early life = = 
