 David Mullins was born on April 28 , 1946 to David Wiley Mullins and his wife Eula in Memphis , Tennessee . His father worked for Auburn University until 1960 , when he became the president of the University of Arkansas . David Jr. was raised in Fayetteville , Arkansas , along with his brother Gary and sister Carolyn . Mullins left Arkansas for Yale and went on to study finance at the MIT Sloan School of Management . In 1974 he earned his Ph.D. from MIT and accepted a position in the faculty of Harvard Business School as an expert in financial crises . 
 = = Career = = 
 Immediately after the market crash in 1987 , President Reagan tapped Nicholas F. Brady , a former United States senator and then chairman of Dillon , Read , to chair the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms , later known as the Brady Commission . Brady recruited Harvard Business School professor Robert R. Glauber as the commission 's executive director , and Glauber in turn enlisted Mullins , a Harvard faculty colleague , as associate director . < Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms , p. ii > The commission was to be an inquiry into the stock market crash of October 19 , 1987 , known as Black Monday . In two months , Mullins helped assemble nearly 50 people to produce the report , which provided the first official record of what caused the crash and offered recommendations on how to fix the deficiencies in the market . The Brady Report laid some of the blame on derivatives trading and portfolio insurance mechanisms , with much of that focus being generated by Mullins . 
 Brady went on to serve as Secretary of the Treasury . As the savings and loan crisis deepened , he turned to Mullins , now an assistant Secretary of the Treasury , to develop a plan to resolve the crisis . The plan was enacted by Congress on August 8 , 1989 as <unk> ( The Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 ) which created the RTC to dispose of failed thrift assets . The RTC ultimately sold $ 394 billion in assets of 747 failed <unk> . This approach became a model for banking resolution plans in Sweden , Thailand and elsewhere . Mullins remained popular with Congress and the President . In 1989 , Mullins was appointed by President Bush as assistant Secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance . While at the Treasury , Mullins co @-@ wrote a paper on high @-@ yield debt defaults which received the inaugural Smith Breeden Prize . 
 On May 21 , 1990 , Bush nominated Mullins to a 14 @-@ year term on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors to fill a vacancy left by the resignation of H. Robert Heller . Mullins was seen as the Fed 's " resident intellectual " due to his background as a professor in finance and economics . In 1994 , Mullins resigned to join John Meriwether 's new hedge fund , Long Term Capital Management ( LTCM ) . Although his term was to come to a close , the resignation was viewed as unexpected . 
 At LTCM , Mullins joined what Business Week termed a " dream team " of financial experts and academics , including Nobel laureates Myron Scholes and Robert C. Merton . Roger Lowenstein , author of When Genius Failed : The Rise and Fall of Long @-@ Term Capital Management , argued that some prospective investors in LTCM were swayed by the presence of Mullins . Just as the celebrity of Scholes and Merton caused investors and trading partners to exercise less diligence , Mullins ' addition as a " marquee " name added gravitas to the firm . Following that fund 's collapse in 1998 and dissolution in 2000 , Mullins left LTCM and worked for financial services companies . Mullins ' career in government was effectively ended by the collapse . In 2008 he was chief economist of the hedge fund Vega Asset Management . 
 = Brill railway station = 
 Brill railway station was the terminus of a small railway line in Buckinghamshire , England , known as the Brill Tramway . Built and owned by the 3rd Duke of Buckingham , it was later operated by London 's Metropolitan Railway , and in 1933 briefly became one of the two north @-@ western termini of the London Underground , despite being 45 miles ( 72 km ) and over two hours ' travelling time from the City of London . 
 Approximately 3 ⁄ 4 of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) north of Brill , the station was opened in March 1872 as the result of lobbying from local residents and businesses . As the line was cheaply built and ungraded and the locomotives were of poor quality , services were very slow , initially taking 1 hour 45 minutes to traverse the six miles ( 10 km ) from Brill to the junction station with main line services at Quainton Road . Although serving a lightly populated area and little @-@ used by passengers , the station was a significant point for freight traffic , particularly as a carrier of milk from the dairy farms of Buckinghamshire to Aylesbury and London . A brickworks was also attached to the station , but it proved unable to compete with nearby rivals and closed within a few years of opening . 
 During the 1890s , plans were made to extend the tramway to Oxford , but the scheme was abandoned . Instead , the operation of the line was taken over by the Metropolitan Railway in 1899 , and the line became one of the railway 's two north @-@ western termini . It was upgraded and better @-@ quality locomotives were introduced making the journey time three times faster . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership and became the Metropolitan line of London Transport . The management of London Transport aimed to reduce goods services , and it was felt that there was little chance of the more distant parts of the former Metropolitan Railway ever becoming viable passenger routes . The line was closed on 30 November 1935 , and all buildings and infrastructure at Brill associated with the line were sold at auction . Most of the infrastructure was subsequently demolished , though three station cottages survive . 
 = = Wotton Tramway = = 
 On 23 September 1868 the small Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & BR ) opened , linking the Great Western Railway 's station at Aylesbury to the London and North Western Railway 's Oxford to Bletchley line at Verney Junction . On 1 September 1894 , London 's Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) reached Aylesbury , and shortly afterwards connected to the A & BR line , with local MR services running to Verney Junction from 1 April 1894 . Through trains from the MR 's London terminus at Baker Street began on 1 January 1897 . 
 Richard Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos , had long had an interest in railways , and had served as chairman of the London and North Western Railway from 1852 until 1861 . In the early 1870s he decided to build a light railway to transport freight from his estates in Buckinghamshire to the A & BR 's line at Quainton Road . The first stage of the route , known as the Wotton Tramway , was a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) line from Quainton Road via Wotton to a coal siding at Kingswood , and opened on 1 April 1871 . Intended for use by horse trams , the line was built with longitudinal sleepers , to avoid horses tripping . 
 = = = Extension to Brill = = = 
 Lobbying from the nearby town of Brill for the introduction of passenger services on the line led to an extension from Wotton to a new terminus at the foot of Brill Hill , north of the hilltop town of Brill itself , in March 1872 . Two mixed trains each day ran in each direction . With the extension to Brill opened the line was renamed the Brill Tramway . The Duke bought two Aveling and Porter traction engines modified to work as locomotives , each with a top speed of 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) , although a speed limit of 5 miles per hour ( 8 km / h ) was enforced . 
 The Duke died in 1889 . In 1894 , the trustees of his estate set up the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company ( O & ATC ) with the intention of extending the line from Brill to Oxford , but the extension beyond Brill was never built . The MR leased the Brill Tramway from 1 December 1899 , although the line continued to be owned by the O & ATC . 
 = = Services and facilities = = 
 Brill was a small town of 1 @,@ 400 people when the line opened , and owing to the town 's hilltop setting the station was 3 ⁄ 4 of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) from Brill itself . Brill railway station was small , with a single low platform . At its opening there was one station building , which served as the freight depot , passenger terminal , and ticket office . Next to it was a siding that led to a cattle pen . Two cottages for station staff were built near the station in 1871 . A third cottage across the road from the station was built in 1885 , possibly to serve as an office . After the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the MR introduced a single Brown Marshall passenger carriage on the line ; at this time , a small wooden hut was added to the station to serve as a ticket office and waiting room and a short section of platform was raised to conventional height to allow access to the higher doors on the new carriage . 
 = = = Passenger services = = = 
 From 1872 to 1894 the station was served by two passenger trains per day , and from 1895 to 1899 the number was increased to three per day . Following the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the station was served by four trains per day until its closure in 1935 . Limited by poor @-@ quality locomotives and ungraded , cheaply laid track which followed the contours of the hills , and with five intermediate stops to pick up and set down goods , passengers and livestock , trains ran very slowly ; in 1887 trains needed 1 hour 45 minutes to travel the six miles from Brill to the junction station at Quainton Road . Improvements to the line carried out at the time of the transfer to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad , and the use of the MR 's better @-@ quality rolling stock , reduced the journey time from Brill to Quainton Road to between 32 and 36 minutes . 
 Serving a lightly populated area , and with trains travelling only marginally quicker than walking pace , Brill station saw relatively little use by passengers ; in 1932 , the last year of private operation , Brill station ( and the nearby halt at Wood Siding ) saw only 3 @,@ 272 passenger journeys and raised only £ 191 ( about £ 12 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . 
 = = = Goods facilities = = = 
 Although little @-@ used by passengers , Brill station was valuable as a relatively rapid link between the dairy farms of Buckinghamshire and the markets of Aylesbury and London ; around 30 carts per day would deliver milk to Brill station for the first train each morning . There was also a small amount of coal traffic to the station ; Brill coal dealer George Green received three coal wagons per month . In addition , a storehouse at the station held beer supplied by the breweries of Brackley and Aylesbury . Bricks and tiles from the brick and tile factories of Brill were used in the construction of Waddesdon Manor , near the eastern end of the Brill Tramway , between 1874 and 1889 . 
 In 1885 the Duke of Buckingham opened a modern brickworks near Brill station , with a dedicated siding , and in 1895 his heir William Temple @-@ Gore @-@ Langton , 4th Earl Temple of Stowe , expanded the brickworks , which became the Brill Brick & Tile Works , using the Brill Tramway to deliver bricks to the main line at Quainton Road . With the connection to Oxford and the upgrading of the rail line abandoned , Brill Brick & Tile Works was unable to compete with the nearby brickworks at Calvert , and soon closed . The building was taken over by the Fenemore workshop , making hay loaders , before being converted into a timber yard in the 1920s . 
 = = Closure = = 
 On 1 July 1933 the Metropolitan Railway , along with London 's other underground railways except for the small Waterloo & City Railway , was taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . Thus , despite it being 45 miles ( 72 km ) and over two hours ' travel from the City of London , Brill station became a terminus of the London Underground network . Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , aimed to move the network away from freight services , and saw the lines beyond Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes , concluding that over £ 2 @,@ 000 ( about £ 130 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) would be saved by closing the Brill Tramway . As a consequence , the LPTB decided to withdraw all passenger services beyond Aylesbury . The Brill Tramway was closed on 1 December 1935 ; the last services ran on 30 November . 
 Upon the withdrawal of London Transport services the lease expired , and the railway and stations reverted to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company . With no funds and no rolling stock of its own , the O & ATC was unable to operate the line , and on 2 April 1936 the entire infrastructure of the line was sold at auction . The former goods shed at Brill sold for £ 7 10s ( about £ 1 @,@ 070 in 2016 ) , and a railway @-@ owned house attached to Brill station fetched £ 350 ( about £ 21 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) . All buildings in Brill associated with the railway station have been demolished , with the exception of the station cottages , one of which is now called " Sleepers " . The station site is now largely open fields , and the site of the brickworks is a light industrial park known as the " Tramway Business Park " . 
 = Sony / ATV Music Publishing = 
 Sony / ATV Music Publishing is a music publishing company , presently co @-@ owned by Sony Music Entertainment and the estate of Michael Jackson . 
 The company was originally founded as a division of Associated Television ( ATV ) in 1955 by Lew Grade . In 1985 , Michael Jackson acquired ATV Music Publishing for $ 47 @.@ 5 million . Paul McCartney , who had told Jackson about the importance of owning publishing , admitted he felt somewhat undercut by the purchase , because ATV Music Publishing owned the publishing rights to most of the Beatles ' songs , although he did not enter the bidding when it came up for sale in 1984 . 
 In December 1995 , Michael Jackson agreed to merge ATV Music Publishing with Sony Music Publishing , a division of Sony Corporation , to form Sony / ATV Music Publishing . In 2012 an investor consortium led by Sony / ATV Music Publishing acquired EMI Music Publishing for approximately $ 2 @.@ 2 billion . Sony / ATV Music Publishing and EMI Music Publishing now operate as one company , with the former entity administering the catalog of the latter under a complex business structure . Following the acquisition , the company became the largest music publisher in the world , with a library of over 2 million songs under its administration . 
 On March 14 , 2016 , Sony announced that it had reached a deal to acquire the Jackson estate 's stake in the company . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 Sony / ATV was originally founded as a subsidiary of the UK 's Associated Television ( ATV ) . ATV operated a commercial television company , broadcasting from 1955 in London ( until 1968 ) and the English Midlands as part of the Independent Television ( ITV ) network . 
 Business tycoon Louis Benjamin was involved with Lew Grade as part of one of the three major record companies in the UK at the time . The company was Pye Records which , along with EMI and ( the British ) Decca Records , accounted for the vast majority of music records sold in the UK . In 1959 , ATV acquired 50 % of Pye Records . Between them , Grade and Benjamin held most of the shares . ATV Music Publishing was created to exploit the catalogue of songs written by artists on the Pye Record label , and for the themes to ITC and ATV television programmes . The UK rights to some of the rock ' n ' roll music from the US were also bought by ATV . Grade established ATV 's headquarters alongside those of Pye Records ; off Edgware Road , beside the Marble Arch in central London . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The 1950s / 1960s was a good period for Grade and his brothers , Bernard Delfont and Leslie Grade , and their companies . Pye Records had major artists of the period under contract . The Searchers , The Kinks , Donovan , Mungo Jerry , and Petula Clark were some of the artists that recorded for Pye Records . Pye also had contracts with several US companies , allowing them to manufacture and distribute records in the UK . Chess Records was among those , and counted Chuck Berry as one of its top artists . 
 ATV Music acquired the rights to the Lennon – McCartney song catalog , Northern Songs , in 1968 . The catalog featured almost every song written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney until The Beatles ' legal split in 1971 . Northern Songs had been co @-@ owned and administered by Brian Epstein and Dick James . Following Epstein 's death in 1967 , James put the company up for sale . Lennon and McCartney , upset that the songs they had written were not theirs legally , attempted to gain ownership of the publishing rights . Their bid to gain control , part of a long and acrimonious fight , failed . The financial clout of Grade , their adversary in the bidding war , ensured that the music written by the two Beatles passed into the control of ATV . 
 ATV Music Publishing remained a successful organization in the music industry throughout the 1970s . Len Beadle , the company 's chief executive , signed up many songwriters and bought numerous song catalogs . The catalog acquisitions , along with the continuing royalties from Lennon and McCartney , ensured that large amounts of money were frequently coming in for ATV Music Publishing . Despite the success of the music publishing organization , other ventures formed by Grade were not performing as well . Pye Records , which continued to distribute music from artists such as Carl Douglas and Barry White , was failing to bring in large amounts of money . The main television arm of ATV lost its government @-@ granted license in its then @-@ current form and was restructured into Central Independent Television . 
 = = = Acquisition = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s , ATV Music Publishing and Pye Records were both up for sale . The companies were bought relatively cheaply by Australian businessman Robert Holmes à Court , who acquired Associated Communications Corporation ( the parent company ) in 1982 , asset @-@ stripped the subsidiaries , and sacked many long serving employees before selling the companies on again . During this time , American singer Michael Jackson was recording " Say Say Say " for Paul McCartney 's Pipes of Peace album . Jackson stayed at the home of McCartney and his wife Linda during the recording sessions , becoming friendly with both . One evening whilst at the dining table , McCartney brought out a thick , bound notebook displaying all the songs to which he owned the publishing rights . Jackson grew more excited as he examined the pages . He inquired about how to buy songs and what the songs were used for . McCartney explained that music publishing was a way to make big money . Jackson replied by telling McCartney that he would buy The Beatles ' songs one day . McCartney laughed , saying " Great . Good joke . " 
 Jackson was first informed that the ATV catalog was up for sale in Sept . 1984 by his attorney , John Branca , who had put together Jackson 's earlier catalog acquisitions . Warned of the competition he would face in buying such popular songs , Jackson remained resolute in his decision to purchase them . Branca approached McCartney 's attorney to query whether the Beatle was planning to bid . The attorney stated he wasn 't ; it was " too pricey . " According to Bert Reuter , who negotiated the sale of ATV Music for Holmes à Court , " We had given Paul McCartney first right of refusal but Paul didn 't want it at that time . " Lennon 's widow , Yoko Ono had been contacted as well but also did not enter bidding . 
 McCartney had previously attempted to purchase the catalog alongside Ono in 1981 . He was offered the catalog for £ 20 million ( $ 40 million USD ) and proposed the pair would each pay £ 10 million . Ono refused as she thought it was too high a price . McCartney spoke about the offer at a press conference in April 1990 , explaining that Ono " actually said ' I think we can get it for 5 . ' So I said , ' Well ok , you know , let 's see what we can do . ' And we couldn 't . " Not wanting to buy the songs himself and potentially be seen as being " <unk> " for " owning John Lennon 's bit of the songs , " McCartney let the offer fall through . 
 The competitors in the 1984 sale of ATV Music included Charles Koppelman and Marty Bandier 's New York @-@ based The Entertainment Co . , Virgin Records , New York real estate tycoon Samuel J. <unk> , and financier Charles Knapp . On November 20 , 1984 , Jackson sent a bid of $ 46 million to Holmes à Court . Branca suggested the amount of the bid after having spent time evaluating the earnings of the catalog and learning of another bid for $ 39 million . Jackson was only interested in the music copyrights , but the package also included buildings , a recording studio , some studio equipment and life insurance policies on Beatles members ( presumably Lennon 's was collected in 1980 ) . The two sides signed a non @-@ binding memorandum of mutual interest in Dec. 1984 and Jackson 's team began a four @-@ month process of verifying ATV Music 's legal documents , financial reports , and every significant composition in the nearly 4000 @-@ song catalog . 
 The two sides began drafting contracts in Jan. 1985 and follow @-@ through meetings began on Mar. 16 . Jackson 's team described the negotiations as frustrating , with frequent shifts of position by the other side . One Holmes à Court rep described the negotiations as a " game of poker . " Jackson 's team thought they had reached a deal several times , but new bidders would enter the picture or they would encounter new areas of debate . The prospective deal went through eight drafts . In May 1985 , Jackson 's team walked away from negotiations after having spent hundreds of hours and over $ 1 million . In June 1985 , they learned Koppelman / Bandier had made a tentative agreement with Holmes à Court to buy the catalog for $ 50 million . 
 But in early Aug. , Holmes à Court contacted Jackson and talks resumed . Jackson only raised his bid to $ 47 @.@ 5 million , but he had the advantage of being able to close the deal faster , having completed due diligence of ATV Music prior to any formal agreement . He also agreed to visit Australia as a guest of Holmes à Court and appear on the Channel Seven Perth Telethon . Holmes à Court included some more assets and agreed to establish a scholarship in Jackson 's name at a U.S. university . Branca closed the deal and purchased ATV Music on Jackson 's behalf for $ 47 @.@ 5 million on Aug. 10 . 1985 . In Oct. 1985 , Jackson fulfilled his contract provision to visit Perth , Western Australia and appear on the telethon , where he spoke briefly and met with two children . 
 In an analysis of the acquisition , the Los Angeles Times noted that if " Yesterday " were to earn $ 100 @,@ 000 a year in royalties , the Lennon estate and McCartney would divide 50 % of the income ; $ 25 @,@ 000 each . The publisher , Jackson , would receive the other 50 % ; $ 50 @,@ 000 . It was mentioned that " Yesterday " probably earns more than $ 100 @,@ 000 a year . The publisher would also control the use of the song in films , commercials and stage productions . Jackson went on to use the Beatles ' songs in numerous commercials , feeling that it would enable a new generation of fans to enjoy the music . McCartney , who had himself used the Buddy Holly song catalogue in commercials , felt saddened . Privately , Jackson was reported to have expressed exasperation at McCartney 's attitude ; he felt that the musician should have paid for the songs he had written . At the time , McCartney was one of the richest entertainers in the world , with a net worth of $ 560 million and a royalty income of $ 41 million . Jackson stated , " If he didn 't want to invest $ 47 @.@ 5 million in his own songs , then he shouldn 't come crying to me now " . 
 Appearing on the Late Show with David Letterman shortly after Jackson died in 2009 , McCartney spoke about Jackson 's acquisition of the Beatles songs and the impact of it on their relationship : 
 And which was , you know , that was cool , somebody had to get it , I suppose . What happened actually was then I started to ring him up . I thought , OK , here 's the guy historically placed to give Lennon – McCartney a good deal at last . Cuz we got signed when we were 21 or something in a back alley in Liverpool . And the deal , it 's remained the same , even though we made this company the most famous … hugely successful . So I kept thinking , it was time for a raise . Well you would , you know . [ David Letterman : Yes , I think so . ] And so it was great . But I did talk to him about it . But he kind of blanked me on it . He kept saying , " That 's just business Paul . " You know . So , " yeah it is , " and waited for a reply . But we never kind of got to it . And I thought , mmm … So we kind of drifted apart . It was no big bust up . We kind of drifted apart after that . But he was a lovely man , massively talented , and we miss him . 
 Ono was pleased that Jackson had acquired Northern Songs and called it a " blessing . " Speaking in November 1990 , Ono stated , " Businessmen who aren 't artists themselves wouldn 't have the consideration Michael has . He loves the songs . He 's very caring . " She added that if she and McCartney were to own the songs , there would certainly be arguments . Ono explained that neither she or McCartney needed that . " If Paul got the songs , people would have said , ' Paul finally got John . ' And if I got them , they 'd say , ' Oh , the dragon lady strikes again . ' " 
 = = = Merger with Sony = = = 
 After Jackson 's acquisition of ATV Music Publishing , his record label 's owner , CBS , was negotiating the sale of its record division in an unrelated deal . The record company was renamed Sony Music Entertainment in 1991 . Following hurriedly arranged meetings and disagreements over the selling price , a deal was sealed by Jackson during a concert in Tokyo . Upon seeing the success of this sale , Japanese corporation Sony sought to break away from its core business of hardware manufacturing and diversify into music , films and games . Looking for further opportunities , the company aimed to expand its music publishing interests . The Japanese corporation , since it wanted to diversify in the media , offered Jackson $ 90 million for a 50 % stake in the ATV catalogue via a merger with Sony Music . Through the agreement , Jackson would become one of the most important shareholders in Sony . Jackson gladly accepted ; he had essentially acquired half ownership of the Beatles ' songs for a large profit . Jackson 's own songs were not included in the deal . Sony and ATV having merged , the new company was named Sony / ATV Music Publishing and became the second largest music publisher in the world . Michael P. <unk> , President and CEO of Sony Corporation of America , welcomed the merger and praised Jackson for his efforts in the venture . " Michael Jackson is not only the most successful entertainer in history ; he is also an astute businessman . Michael understands the importance of copyrights and the role they play in the introduction to new technologies . " He added that Jackson recognises Sony 's " leadership in developing and realizing new technologies that serve to expand the creative horizon of artists such as himself " . Administrative expertise was provided by Sony , who installed Paul Russell as chairman . Jackson was a company director and attended board meetings regularly . As each party in the arrangement held the power of veto , both sides would have to agree on a decision before it could be made . If neither party agreed on a decisions , they would not be implemented . 
 In May 2001 , Jackson denied rumours that he was planning to sell the Beatles ' song catalogue . Rumours had circulated that the singer was to sell them in order to finance the upkeep of Neverland Ranch and to cover legal bill expenses . The singer announced in a statement , " I want to clarify a silly rumour – The Beatles catalogue is not for sale , has not been for sale and will never be for sale . " Sony / ATV Music Publishing continued to acquire song catalogues in the 21st century . In November 2001 , the company signed country singer Tony Martin to an exclusive songwriting and co @-@ publishing deal . Through the deal , they acquired Martin 's Baby Mae Music catalog of 600 songs , which includes Joe Diffie 's " Third Rock from the Sun " and Jeff Carson 's " Not on Your Love " . In July 2002 , Sony / ATV Music Publishing bought veteran country music publisher Acuff @-@ Rose for $ 157 million . The venture included music publishing rights to 55 @,@ 000 country music songs , including the music of Hank Williams , The Everly Brothers and Roy Orbison , as well as the master recordings of the defunct label Hickory Records . Sony / ATV revived Hickory Records as the in @-@ house record label imprint in 2007 , with distribution handled by Sony Music 's RED Distribution . Sony / ATV also owns the masters of Dial Records , Four Star Records and Challenge Records . 
 In 2006 , Sony gained operational control of Sony / ATV and obtained an option to buy half of Jackson 's stake in the company at any time for a fixed price of $ 250 million . 
 Digital sheet music provider Musicnotes.com announced in June 2006 that it had signed a long @-@ term distribution agreement with Sony / ATV Music Publishing . Musicnotes.com would produce and sell digital sheet music and guitar <unk> for songs from Sony / ATV 's extensive catalog . " As a music publisher , we are always looking for new and innovative ways to promote our songs and songwriters , " Sony / ATV chairman and chief executive David <unk> announced in a statement . 
 Another company acquisition was made in 2007 , when Sony / ATV purchased Famous Music , a music publishing business with song catalogue of more than 125 @,@ 000 songs including " Moon River " and " Footloose . " The deal , sought by Viacom , included the assumption of around $ 30 million of debt . The company purchased the business for $ 370 million . The song catalogue also includes the hits of Eminem , Akon , Linda Perry , Björk , Shakira and Beck . With this acquisition , Sony / ATV acquired the rights to publish music from films released by Viacom 's Paramount Pictures subsidiary , which had founded Famous Music in 1928 to publish music from its films . This also included films released by DreamWorks , which Viacom acquired in 2006 . 
 = = = Death of Michael Jackson , takeover of EMI Publishing = = = 
 Following Jackson 's death in June 2009 , there were reports that Jackson had left the Beatles catalog to McCartney in his will , having added it just five months before . ( Jackson was reportedly expecting to die before McCartney despite being 16 years his junior due to various health problems . ) However , it was later revealed that Sony / ATV Music Publishing would keep control of the Beatles ' songs . Upon his death , Jackson 's entertainment attorney , Joel Katz , commented on the singer 's work as a businessman . " Michael Jackson was a perfectionist and his business affairs are worldwide . Many of them are quite ongoing and will be dealt with appropriately . " Ivan Thornton , a private @-@ wealth adviser who worked with Jackson and his family , also commended the business side of the musician . " His business mind was fascinating . We 'd go to meetings with bankers and Wall Street people and once I explained the language to him , he totally got it . There was no formal education there , but his natural knack was off the charts . " 
 In November 2011 , Citigroup announced a tentative deal to sell EMI , with the recorded music arm going to Vivendi 's Universal Music Group for $ 1 @.@ 9 billion and the publishing business going to a Sony / ATV @-@ led consortium for around $ 2 @.@ 2 billion . Other members of the Sony consortium include Blackstone and Abu Dhabi @-@ owned investment fund Mubadala . In March 2012 , concessions were offered to the European Union to help win approval of the consortium 's purchase . The deal won European Union approval on April 19 , 2012 . As part of the deal , Sony / EMI divested the publishing rights for Famous Music UK and Virgin Music . These catalogues were acquired by BMG Rights Management in December 2012 for $ 150 million . 
 In August 2013 , it was reported that McCartney and Ono would be able to begin to reclaim the rights to Beatles songs in 2018 , as a result of the Copyright Act of 1976 , in which the ownership of songs written before 1978 reverts to the songwriter after 56 years . McCartney and Ono ( or their estates ) will be able to claim full rights to all Beatles songs by 2026 . 
 = = = Sale of Jackson stake = = = 
 In October 2015 , it was reported that a clause had been triggered in the agreement between Sony and the estate of Michael Jackson , allowing Sony to make a takeover bid for the Sony / ATV stake held by the estate of Michael Jackson , or vice versa . Billboard felt that Sony acquiring the estate 's stake was the most likely outcome , noting the potential revenue the library could bring in regards to licensing for on @-@ demand music streaming services . 
 On March 14 , 2016 , Sony announced that it would acquire the Jackson estate 's stake in Sony / ATV in a deal valued at around $ 750 million , pending regulatory approval . The estate will retain a 10 % stake in EMI Music Publishing , as well as a stake in Mijac Music , which holds the rights to Michael Jackson 's songs and master recordings . Sony Entertainment CEO Michael Lynton stated that the purchase would " enable Sony to more quickly adapt to changes in the music publishing business , while at the same time continuing to be an unparalleled leader in the industry and a treasured home for artists and writers . " The revenue will primarily be used to pay off the estate 's $ 500 million in debt , with the remainder to be placed in trust for Jackson 's children . The deal is slated to be completed by late @-@ 2016 or early @-@ 2017 . 
 = = Value = = 
 The value of Sony / ATV Music Publishing has varied in reports . In 2002 , Forbes magazine estimated Jackson 's 50 % stake in the company , along with other music publishing ventures , to be worth $ 450 million . The organization was valued at $ 700 million in 2003 . Industry experts valued the catalogue at between $ 600 million and $ 1 billion in 2004 , based on the sales of rival catalogues . Charles Koppelman , a veteran music industry executive , stated that $ 1 billion was more reflective of Sony / ATV Music Publishing 's worth . " Buyers would be lining up around the block if it were ever put up for sale , " he said . " And I 'd be in the front of the line . " The value of the company was further estimated by Ryan <unk> , chief of Platinum Rye , to be $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . 
 In 2005 , Jackson 's defense attorney , Thomas Mesereau , claimed that the song catalogue had been valued at between $ 4 billion and $ 5 billion . Jackson 's own financial documents stated that his 50 % share of the catalogue was worth $ 390 @.@ 6 million as of 2007 , which would have made the entire catalogue worth $ 781 @.@ 2 million . When Sony / ATV led the consortium that acquired EMI Music Publishing in 2012 ( with Sony / ATV becoming administrator and 38 % shareholder ) , it became the largest publishing company in the world , with more than 2 million songs and estimated revenues of over 1 @.@ 25 billion dollars per year . As of 2012 , Sony / ATV administers Jackson 's other publishing firm , Mijac , which includes songs written by Jackson himself ( amongst others ) , and which used to be administered by competitor Warner / Chappell Music . 
 = Percy Chapman = 
 Arthur Percy Frank Chapman ( 3 September 1900 – 16 September 1961 ) , usually known as Percy Chapman , was an English cricketer who captained the England cricket team between 1926 and 1931 . A left @-@ handed batsman , he played 26 Test matches for England , captaining the side in 17 of those games . Chapman was appointed captain for the final , decisive Test of the 1926 series against Australia ; under his captaincy , England defeated Australia to win the Ashes for the first time since 1912 . An amateur cricketer , Chapman played Minor Counties cricket for Berkshire and first @-@ class cricket for Cambridge University and Kent . Never a reliable batsman , Chapman nevertheless had a respectable batting record . He could score runs very quickly and was popular with spectators . As a fielder , contemporaries rated him extremely highly . Although opinions were divided on his tactical ability as a captain , most critics accepted he was an inspirational leader . 
 Born in Reading , Berkshire and educated at Uppingham School , Chapman established a reputation as a talented school cricketer and was named one of Wisden 's schoolboy Cricketers of the Year in 1919 . He went to Pembroke College , Cambridge and represented the University cricket team with great success ; his fame reached a peak when he scored centuries against Oxford University and in the Gentlemen v Players match within the space of a week . Chapman made his Test debut in 1924 , although he had yet to play County Cricket . Having qualified for Kent , he was the surprise choice to take over from Arthur Carr as England captain in 1926 . He achieved victory in his first nine matches in charge but lost two and drew six of his remaining games . Perceived tactical deficiencies and possibly growing concerns over his heavy drinking meant that Chapman was dropped from the team for the fifth Test against Australia in 1930 . He captained England on one final tour in 1930 – 31 , after which he never played another Test . After he assumed the Kent captaincy in 1931 , his career and physique declined until he resigned the position in 1936 ; he retired altogether in 1939 , by which time he was drinking heavily . 
 Chapman 's fame as a cricketer made him a popular public figure ; he and his wife , whom he married in 1925 , were well known figures in fashionable society and their appearances were followed closely in the press . Outside of cricket , he worked for a brewery . In his later years , Chapman increasingly suffered from the effects of alcoholism and was often seen drunk in public . He and his wife divorced in 1942 ; he spent his final years , mainly alone , suffering from depression , arthritis and a continued dependence on alcohol . Following a fall at his home and a subsequent operation , Chapman died in 1961 , aged 61 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chapman was born on 3 September 1900 in Reading , Berkshire , the son of Frank Chapman , a schoolteacher , and his wife Bertha Finch . Chapman 's father encouraged him to play cricket and coached him personally . Chapman was first educated at his father 's preparatory school , <unk> House , and by the age of eight was in the school 's first eleven . In September 1910 , he joined Oakham School and scored his first century , dominating the cricket and football teams . From 1914 to 1918 , he attended Uppingham School . Although his academic performance was undistinguished , he soon established a cricketing reputation . By 1916 , he was in the Uppingham first team ; he achieved second place in the school 's batting averages , bringing him to the attention of the wider public . Chapman improved his record in 1917 , scoring 668 runs at an average of 111 @.@ 33 ; he hit two fifties , two centuries and a double century in his last five innings . 
 In 1918 , Chapman scored 472 runs at 52 @.@ 44 and took 15 wickets ; the following year , he captained the team , scored 637 runs at an average of 70 @.@ 77 and took 40 wickets . As a consequence of his achievements , he was chosen as one of the Cricketers of the Year for 1919 in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack . In both 1918 and 1919 he was selected for prestigious school representative matches at Lord 's Cricket Ground ; although his weak defensive play drew comment , he was regarded as one of the most promising cricketers of his generation when he left Uppingham in 1919 . 
 = = University cricket = = 
 In 1919 , Chapman entered Pembroke College , Cambridge . He failed in two trial games , organised prior to the 1920 cricket season to inform the selection of the Cambridge team , and despite his reputation , was omitted from the University 's opening first @-@ class match against Essex . But on the day of the match , a player withdrew from the Cambridge team and Chapman replaced him . Making his first @-@ class debut on 15 May 1920 , he scored 118 in a rapid innings and kept his place in the team for the remainder of the season . After a century and two fifties , he was selected for the University Match against Oxford . Chapman scored 27 in this final game of the university season to aggregate 613 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 86 , second in the Cambridge batting averages . Unusually for someone in their first year of University cricket , he was subsequently selected for the prestigious Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . Although not particularly successful with the bat , critics singled him out for his effective fielding . During August , he played second @-@ class Minor Counties cricket for Berkshire as an amateur and headed the team 's batting averages ; he later appeared in three end @-@ of @-@ season first @-@ class games at the Scarborough Festival where he scored 101 in a Gentlemen and Players game against a bowling attack containing three internationals . In all first @-@ class matches in 1920 , Chapman scored 873 runs at 39 @.@ 68 . 
 In 1921 , Chapman averaged over 50 for the University and scored three centuries , although his growing reputation meant some critics felt he had underachieved . He once again played in the University match against Oxford , and for the Gentlemen against the Players , and impressed commentators . Some critics suggested he , along with other promising University players , should play for England ; the Test side were in the middle of a series against Australia which was lost 3 – 0 , in the course of which an unusually large number of players were selected . Chapman once more appeared for Berkshire in August , scoring 468 runs and taking 19 wickets . At the end of the season , he was selected by Archie MacLaren in a match at Eastbourne , playing for an all @-@ amateur non @-@ representative England team against the undefeated Australian touring team . In a match which became famous in later years , MacLaren 's team became the first to defeat the tourists , although Chapman was not successful personally . Chapman finished the season with 954 runs at 39 @.@ 75 . 
 That winter , The Cricketer magazine named Chapman as a young cricketer of the year . However , at the beginning of the 1922 season , his form was so poor that critics suggested leaving him out of the University Match . He had scored 300 runs from 14 innings , but retained his place partially on the strength of his fielding . After Cambridge batted very slowly on the first day , Chapman attacked the bowling on the second morning to score 102 not out . Cambridge won easily , concluding Chapman 's cricket at the university , but his innings impressed critics to the extent that he was again selected for the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . There , he scored 160 and shared century partnerships with Arthur Carr and Frank Mann . Chapman earned praise for his aggression and his stroke @-@ play on the off side . The Times described it as " one of the great innings in the history of the game " . Shortly after this , Sydney Pardon wrote in The Times : " In the cricket field the most interesting figure at the moment is , beyond all comparison , Mr. A. P. F. Chapman . A fortnight ago we were all lamenting his ill @-@ success this season and wondering whether he would ever do justice to his great gifts and fulfil the hopes entertained of him in 1920 . Most effectually he has put his critics to shame ... [ he is ] in such a position that if an England eleven had to meet Australia next week he would be picked at once with acclamation . " Prior to this , only R. E. Foster had scored centuries in both the University Match and the Gentlemen v Players match in the same year . Chapman ended his season by scoring 805 runs and taking 19 wickets for Berkshire , and playing in festival games . He aggregated 607 runs at 33 @.@ 72 in first @-@ class matches for the season . 
 Chapman was popular at Cambridge and enjoyed his time there . He took part in a variety of social engagements and became involved in other sports . These included fives , tennis , rugby union , golf and football . He captained Pembroke College at rugby and was close to playing for the full university side . Chapman continued to play rugby for Berkshire Wanderers until he was nearly 30 years old . Also for Pembroke , he played as goalkeeper in the football team and may have played for the university at hockey had he taken the sport seriously . In later years , he also displayed proficiency at tennis , in which critics thought he could have reached a high standard if motivated to do so , and golf . 
 = = Cricket career in the mid @-@ 1920s = = 
 = = = MCC tour to Australia and New Zealand = = = 
 During the English winter of 1922 – 23 , the MCC selected a team to tour Australia and New Zealand . This side , captained by Archie MacLaren and composed mainly of amateurs , was not particularly strong and contained several players chosen for their social standing rather than cricketing ability . The team played four first @-@ class games in Australia against state teams ; the first was drawn and the others were lost . After scores of 75 and 58 against Western Australia , Chapman played consecutive innings of 53 , 73 and 69 against South Australia and Victoria , followed by 100 in the most eagerly awaited match of the tour against a strong New South Wales side . The press and public praised his attacking batting and his fielding , although Frank Iredale , a former Test cricketer , noticed some flaws in his technique . When the team moved on to New Zealand , after an uncertain start Chapman scored 533 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 45 , including two centuries . The tourists returned to Australia for the last leg of the tour ; Chapman scored 91 against New South Wales and 134 in 142 minutes against South Australia . In all the Australian games , he totalled 782 runs at 65 @.@ 16 ; in all the matches on tour he had 1 @,@ 315 runs at an average of 57 @.@ 15 . 
 = = = Qualifying for Kent = = = 
 When Chapman returned to England , he began to work for a brewery based in Kent , H & G Symonds ; his residence in that county allowed him to qualify for Kent County Cricket Club . There were few opportunities for Chapman to appear in first @-@ class cricket until he qualified . His cricket was mainly restricted to club level in 1923 , with some further games for Berkshire . In addition , he played 12 first @-@ class games for a variety of teams ; he was selected for the Gentlemen v Players matches at Lord 's and The Oval , scoring 83 in the latter game , and played in two trial matches for players on the verge of England selection , although no Tests were played that year . In total , he scored 615 first @-@ class runs at 29 @.@ 28 . 
 The focus of attention during the 1924 season was selection of a team to contest the Ashes during a Test @-@ playing tour of Australia the following winter . Critics regarded Chapman as a certainty for the team . Continuing to play as an amateur , he made his first appearance for Kent in a non @-@ Championship match , as he was still qualifying , and was very successful in early season club matches . That summer , England played South Africa in a Test series and Chapman was selected for a trial game before the first Test . He scored 64 not out and 43 for " The Rest " , and following the withdrawal of a batsman owing to injury before the first Test , Chapman made his Test debut against South Africa on 14 June . He became one of the few cricketers to represent England while playing for a minor county rather than a team playing in the County Championship . Chapman batted once and scored eight runs ; he drew praise from Wisden for an " amazing " catch on the last day as South Africa were heavily beaten . He retained his place for the second Test but did not bat : only four English batsmen were needed in the game which the home side won by an innings . Although selected for the third game , Chapman did not play owing to a motorbike accident . He was not seriously hurt but missed the remainder of the Test series and the Gentlemen v Players game at Lord 's . Upon recovering , he returned to play for Berkshire without much success and played several festival games at the end of the season . By this stage , he had already been selected to tour Australia . In the final match of the season , he was selected for " The Rest " to play the County Champions , Yorkshire . He scored 74 in 50 minutes and hit three sixes , two of them from consecutive deliveries from Wilfred Rhodes . This was his highest score of the season , in which he made 561 first @-@ class runs at 31 @.@ 16 . 
 = = = Second tour to Australia = = = 
 The MCC team to Australia was led by Arthur Gilligan . In the opening matches , Chapman was cheered by the crowds who remembered his achievements on the last tour , but failed to make any significant scores . His first big innings came against Victoria ; he made 72 runs out of 111 scored while he was batting and played a large part in a win for the MCC . Against Queensland in the following match , he scored 80 in 70 minutes and then hit 93 against a representative Australian XI . He was selected for the first four Tests of the five @-@ match series . Batting aggressively , he made several substantial scores but only once passed fifty — in the third Test , he scored 58 , his first Test half century . During the same Test , Gilligan strained a muscle while bowling and had to leave the field ; Chapman took over as captain . England lost the first three matches , giving Australia an insurmountable lead in the series , but won the fourth . Chapman was left out of the side for the final Test . In the series , he scored 185 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 83 , and critics were divided as to his ability and effectiveness . The former Australian captain Monty Noble believed Chapman could be a good batsman if he curbed his aggression but The Cricketer considered his technique to be faulty . Wisden did not judge Chapman a complete failure and noted that he " made useful scores at times " . In all first @-@ class games , Chapman scored 625 runs at 34 @.@ 72 . Although Chapman had a mixed time on the cricket field , the tour was a success for him socially . 
 Now qualified to play county cricket for Kent , Chapman played only four times in the County Championship in 1925 , preferring to establish himself in his new career in the brewery trade . Not sufficiently wealthy to play cricket full @-@ time as an amateur , Chapman 's business commitments frequently restricted his appearances on the cricket field . During his limited first @-@ class appearances in 1925 , he scored 207 runs at 25 @.@ 87 and Wisden said that he " did nothing out of the common " . 
 = = England captain = = 
 = = = Ashes series of 1926 = = = 
 By the beginning of the 1926 season , Chapman was no longer the star of English cricket . Although still respected for his earlier achievements , he had a modest record in Test and first @-@ class cricket . During the season , the Australians toured England for another Ashes series . Chapman did not play any early season games and his first match for Kent was against the touring side . He scored 51 , his first first @-@ class fifty since January 1925 . A week later , he scored 159 in the County Championship , bringing him back into contention for an England place , then scored 89 in a Test trial match played against the Australians . Chapman 's appearances for Kent were sporadic for the rest of the season , but he scored 629 runs in his nine County Championship games at an average of 57 @.@ 18 to lead the Kent averages . He also scored a century for the Gentlemen against the Players at Lord 's . 
 Early in the season , Arthur Carr was named as England captain for the start of the series ; Carr was a popular choice and the only other serious contender at the time was Percy Fender . Chapman played in two of the three trial matches and was chosen for the first Test but did not bat in a match ruined by rain . The second Test was drawn but Chapman scored fifty . Australia dominated most of the third Test but England saved the game ; Chapman scored 15 and 42 not out in the match . However , Carr 's tactical approach during the match was heavily criticised and he dropped a crucial catch on the first morning . Chapman was omitted from the side for the fourth Test , but fielded as substitute when Carr became ill during the game . 
 As the first four matches of the series were drawn , the final Test , played at The Oval , was decisive . Aware that England had beaten Australia only once in 19 matches , the selectors made several changes to the team ; Chapman , at the time fourth in the national batting averages , replaced Carr as captain . This decision was controversial ; the press favoured Carr , particularly as Chapman was young , unproven as captain and not fully established in the team . When the match began on 14 August , Chapman won the toss and decided that England should bat first . When it was his turn to bat , he was given a good reception by the crowd . During his innings , Wisden noted , Chapman " hit out in vigorous fashion " , but once he was dismissed for 49 , the remaining batsmen were out quickly , leaving England with a disappointing total of 280 . Australia replied with 302 . On a pitch affected by rain , England then scored 436 , mainly because of a large partnership between opening batsmen Jack Hobbs and Herbert Sutcliffe . Australia needed to score 415 to win , which was unlikely given the condition of the pitch . The team were bowled out for 125 , and at least one of Chapman 's tactical decisions resulted in Australia losing a wicket . Wisden reported that " not a catch was missed nor was a run given away , the whole England side rising gallantly to the occasion . Naturally a scene of tremendous enthusiasm occurred at the end , the crowd swarming in thousands in front of the pavilion , and loudly cheering the players , both English and Australian . " The correspondent also commented " Chapman ... despite lack of experience in leading a first @-@ class team in the field , turned out a very happy nomination for the post of captain , the young amateur , for the most part , managing his bowling with excellent judgement , and in two or three things he did , showing distinct imagination . " Throughout the match , Chapman chose to follow his own tactics rather than rely on the veteran players in the team for advice . In the series , he scored 175 runs at 58 @.@ 33 . 
 = = = Aftermath and success = = = 
 Following the match , Chapman was lauded as a cricketing hero , and among those who sent congratulatory messages were George V and Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin . In all first @-@ class matches in the season , he scored 1 @,@ 381 runs at an average of 51 @.@ 14 , the first time he had passed four figures in a season . In his history of the England cricket captaincy , Alan Gibson notes that the controversy over Chapman 's appointment was soon forgotten following his success . He writes : " English cricket had a new hero who looked the part ... Every selector was a champion ! " 
 In its summary of the 1927 season , Wisden named him as Kent 's best batsman and noted an improvement in his defensive technique . Against Lancashire , who retained the County Championship , he scored 260 in three hours ' batting , the highest score of his career . The Lancashire bowling attack included former Australian Test bowler Ted McDonald , regarded as the fastest bowler in the world at the time and feared by most county batsmen . Many critics praised Chapman 's innings as one of the best ever played . He was selected to lead the Gentlemen against the Players at Lord 's for the first time , and led representative sides in two of the three Test trials held that season ; the press judged his captaincy to be good . He totalled 1 @,@ 387 runs in first @-@ class games at an average of 66 @.@ 04 , the highest aggregate and average of his career . The Kent captaincy became available at the end of the season , but Chapman was not appointed ; according to Chapman 's biographer , David Lemmon , he was probably approached but was unable to dedicate the necessary time to the position . 
 Chapman was unavailable for the Test series in South Africa in the winter of 1927 – 28 , but was a certainty to lead the MCC team to Australia in 1928 – 29 . The selectors wished him to play more regularly , so he played more often in 1928 than any other season . He began in good form , but was never as effective as in 1927 . Although his captaincy continued to be highly regarded , there were concerns in the press over his increasing weight , although these were offset by his impressive fielding in that season 's Tests . He captained England to a 3 – 0 series win over West Indies , who were playing their first Test matches , and scored one fifty . In total , he scored 967 first @-@ class runs at 37 @.@ 19 . 
 As expected , Chapman was named as captain for the Australian tour . The MCC touring team was regarded as a strong one by commentators ; the only controversy was the omission of Frank Woolley which was not fully explained . Rumours in later years said that Chapman was responsible for leaving Woolley out as he was jealous of his county team @-@ mate , but Lemmon regards this as unlikely . 
 = = = Tour of Australia 1928 – 29 = = = 
 According to Douglas Jardine 's biographer , Christopher Douglas , " [ Chapman ] hardly put a foot wrong during the tour and , even though he gave Australia their biggest hiding to date , he was and probably remains ... one of the most popular English captains to tour Australia . " From the opening games , England followed a strategy of accumulating large totals . For the first Test , to strengthen the team 's batting , Chapman and the tour selection committee chose only three specialist bowlers ; as the Tests were " timeless " — played to a finish with no time limit — he believed batting to be the key to victory . England batted first and scored 521 ; Chapman scored 50 , but critics believed he should have batted more cautiously . When Australia began their innings , he held a catch from Bill Woodfull in the gully which several observers rated as among the best they had seen . Sydney Southerton , writing of the English fielding , said : " The high note was struck by Chapman himself at Brisbane when , with a catch that will be historic , he dismissed Woodfull ... It is my opinion that catch had a pronounced effect on the course of events in the three subsequent Tests ... [ Chapman 's fielding ] exercised a most restraining influence on the Australian batsmen . " Australia were bowled out for 122 ; Chapman did not ask Australia to follow @-@ on but batted again , to the crowd 's displeasure , and his batsmen relentlessly built up the England lead . When Chapman became the first captain to declare an innings closed in a timeless Test match , Australia needed 742 to win . On a rain @-@ affected pitch , Australia were bowled out for 66 ; England 's win by 675 runs remains in 2016 the largest margin of victory by runs in Tests . 
 Chapman 's team won the second Test comfortably after scoring 636 in their first innings , the highest team total in Tests at that time . In the third Test , England began the fourth innings requiring 332 to win on a rain @-@ damaged pitch , a task critics believed impossible . A large opening partnership from Hobbs and Sutcliffe gave England a chance , and Hobbs sent a message to the England dressing room suggesting a tactical change in the batting order . But the team could not find Chapman , who according to Percy Fender , in attendance as a journalist , spent most of his time socialising with guests in the Ladies ' Stand . Consequently , the team followed Hobbs ' plan without the approval of the captain . England 's batsmen took the total to within 14 of victory when the fourth wicket fell . Chapman came in and batted in an unusual way ; after attempting some big shots , he played ultra @-@ defensively , possibly in an attempt to allow Patsy Hendren to reach fifty runs before England won . Hendren was out soon after , then Chapman tried to hit a six and was caught . The batsmen continued to play recklessly and a further wicket fell to a run out . Douglas describes the end of the match : " Meanwhile , [ England batsman George Geary ] was quite unruffled by the sudden upsets . He wound up for the next delivery and thumped it through mid @-@ on for 4 , bellowing , ' Dammit , we 've done ' em ! ' It was an appropriate way for a side under Chapman to win the Ashes . " England 's victory in the third Test ensured the Ashes were retained , and the team also won the fourth Test to take a 4 – 0 lead in the series . 
 Up to this time , Chapman had enjoyed a harmonious relationship with the Australian crowds . However , in the match against Victoria which followed the fourth Test , the crowd barracked the MCC team when Chapman brought on Harold Larwood , a fast bowler , to bowl against Bert Ironmonger , the number eleven , a tactic regarded as unsporting . As the team returned to the pavilion , Chapman was insulted by members of the crowd in the midst of a minor scuffle . Possibly influenced by these events , he withdrew from the final Test ; illness and his poor form may also have been factors . According to Lemmon , it was suggested in later years that Chapman did not play owing to his heavy drinking . In his absence , Australia won the fifth Test . After the fifth day of play and having played both his innings , Jardine left to catch a boat to India , for reasons which are unclear , and Chapman acted as his substitute in the field . Douglas notes that it looked like England " were trying to pull a fast one by picking their strongest batting side ( which meant dropping Chapman ) without weakening the fielding ( since Chapman was Jardine 's substitute ) . " The Australians agreed to the substitution on the condition that Chapman did not field near the batsmen . 
 In the Tests , Chapman scored 165 runs at 23 @.@ 57 , and in all first @-@ class matches he reached 533 runs and averaged 33 @.@ 31 . Southerton summarised his performance : " Chapman himself began well in batting but in the later matches was too prone to lash out at the off ball and , as the tour progressed , the Australian bowlers discovered his weakness . " On his captaincy , Southerton wrote : " Chapman captained the side uncommonly well , improving out of all knowledge as the tour progressed . " Socially , Chapman enjoyed the tour ; he attended many functions and events ; Bill Ferguson , the team scorer , only saw him annoyed once on the tour : when his accustomed drink was not waiting for him at a lunch interval . 
 = = = Ashes series of 1930 = = = 
 Following the end of the 1928 – 29 tour , Chapman did not return to England until July , midway through the cricket season ; Jack White and Arthur Carr captained England in his absence . Chapman resumed playing for Kent shortly after his return home but appeared in only seven matches , with a top @-@ score of 28 . His season was curtailed when he fell awkwardly while fielding in a match against Sussex at the beginning of August . He also missed the two MCC tours that winter to New Zealand and West Indies , neither of which involved a full @-@ strength team . 
 In 1930 , Australia toured England once more . Before the Test series , Chapman was not a unanimous choice among press correspondents ; several critics believed he should not be in the team on account of his rapidly increasing weight — former England captain Pelham Warner suggested he needed to lose at least two stone — and concern over his poor batting form . However , Chapman began the season well , impressing commentators with his batting , fielding and captaincy , and was named as England captain for the first Test match . In the first innings , he scored 52 in 65 minutes , and England won the match by 93 runs on the fourth day . The Wisden correspondent wrote : " Chapman , with his resources limited , managed his bowling well and himself fielded in dazzling fashion . " This was Chapman 's sixth successive victory over Australia and he had won all nine of the Tests in which he was captain . However , it was to be his last Test victory . 
 England lost the second Test by seven wickets , and Gibson describes the match as the " turning point in Chapman 's fortunes " . Wisden observed : " Briefly , the Englishmen lost a match , which , with a little discretion on the last day , they could probably have saved . " England scored 425 in their first innings , but Donald Bradman hit 254 runs and Australia reached 729 for six declared . When Chapman came in to bat in the second innings , England still trailed by 163 runs and had lost four wickets — a fifth fell soon after . He attacked the bowling immediately , and shared a large partnership with Gubby Allen . When the latter was out , Chapman began to score even faster . He took England into the lead , hitting out at almost every delivery to reach his only Test century after 140 minutes ' batting . Wisden commented : " It was about this time that , with a little care and thoughtfulness , England might have saved the game ... So far from devoting their energies to defence they continued hitting away , adding another 113 runs in an hour and a quarter afterwards but losing their last five wickets . " Chapman was finally dismissed for 121 , after batting for 155 minutes and striking 12 fours and 4 sixes . England were all out for 375 , leaving Australia needing to score 72 runs to win . Although Chapman held a difficult catch from Bradman which was praised by commentators , Australia won comfortably . Chapman 's century made him the first batsman to score centuries at Lord 's in the University match , in the Gentlemen v Players game and for England in a Test match ; only Martin Donnelly later performed a similar feat , though his Test century was scored for New Zealand . As the Gentlemen v Players match ceased in 1962 , the feat will never be repeated . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the game , Chapman was praised for his batting ; the team and selectors , rather than Chapman , were blamed for the defeat . However , his captaincy and tactics were later criticised , by Pelham Warner among others . In particular , his placement of fielders and his refusal to play defensively were questioned . Gibson notes that historians regard this match as a turning point in Test matches ; afterwards , captains became more concerned to avoid defeat rather than follow Chapman 's policy of playing entertaining , attacking cricket whatever the result . Chapman 's unwillingness to play for a draw was in later years held up as " the last sporting gesture by an England captain " . 
 In the third Test , Bradman made the highest individual score in a Test match by scoring 334 out of Australia 's 566 . Assisted by rain that shortened the available playing time , England drew the match . Chapman scored 45 in his only innings . The fourth Test match was also badly affected by rain which brought about another draw . Chapman now faced further criticism of his captaincy . His field placings were again queried ; Warner noted that Chapman 's tactics were poor and that he was slow to react to the opposition . According to cricket writer Leo McKinstry , the selectors lost faith in Chapman on account of his inconsistent , risky batting and his increased tactical shortcomings . However , McKinstry also writes that the selectors and other influential members of the cricketing establishment were privately concerned by Chapman 's heavy drinking which they felt was affecting his leadership . There were also rumours that he was drunk during some sessions of the fourth Test . Following an extended meeting of the selectors , Chapman was left out of the side and replaced as captain by Bob Wyatt . The press were united in attacking the decision , praising Chapman 's batting and captaincy while denigrating Wyatt 's lack of experience . Gibson observes : " In 1930 , despite the occasional criticisms , Chapman 's position did not seem in any danger . He was still the popular , boyish , debonair hero . He had been having his most successful series with the bat , and as a close fieldsman England still did not contain his equal . He could not seriously be blamed because the English bowlers could not get Bradman out ( though this was perhaps more apparent in retrospect than at the time ) . Wyatt , though nothing was known against him ... was a figure markedly lacking in glamour . " 
 In the final Test , Bradman scored another century and England lost the match and series , although Wyatt played a substantial innings , and Wisden conceded Chapman could have made little difference except as a fielder . The two men remained friends during and after the controversy . In comparing circumstances of Chapman 's appointment with those of his replacement by Wyatt , Gibson writes : " In 1926 , England won : in 1930 , England lost . That is why the echoes took so long to die down and why the selectors remained villains . " He concludes that , even though Wyatt did relatively well , " It does seem , after all these years , an odd decision to have taken . " In the series , Chapman scored 259 runs at 43 @.@ 16 . In all first @-@ class cricket , he passed four figures for the final time , reaching 1 @,@ 027 runs at an average of 29 @.@ 34 . 
 = = = South Africa tour 1930 – 31 = = = 
 Already chosen as tour captain before the final 1930 Ashes Test , Chapman led an MCC team to a 1 – 0 series defeat in South Africa the following winter . Several first @-@ choice players were not selected and the team suffered from injuries and illness . Chapman was popular with the crowds but made a poor start to the tour with the bat until he scored more substantially in the lead @-@ up to the Test series . England lost the opening match of the series by 28 runs and the other four were drawn . Needing to win the final match to level the series , England were frustrated when the start of the match was delayed . Chapman won the toss and chose to bowl on a damp pitch which would have favoured his bowlers . However , the umpires discovered the bails were the wrong size and would not start the game until new ones could be made ; in the 20 minutes which were lost , the pitch dried out and England lost much of the advantage of bowling first . Chapman made an official protest before leading his team onto the field . In the series , he scored 75 runs at 10 @.@ 71 , and 471 runs at 27 @.@ 70 in all first @-@ class games . Wisden observed that " without finding his full powers as a punishing hitter , Chapman occasionally batted well " . Socially , the tour was more successful . Chapman was accompanied by his wife , and his parents joined the tour for a time . He took part in many social events and visited several whiskey firms which were associated with his employers in England . 
 Chapman played no further Test cricket ; in 26 Tests , he scored 925 runs at an average of 28 @.@ 90 and held 32 catches . He captained England in 17 matches , winning nine and losing two with the others drawn . Under him the team achieved seven consecutive victories , equalling the English record , which was not surpassed until 2004 . His nine victories came in his first nine games as captain . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Kent captain = = = 
 Although Chapman lost the England captaincy after the South African tour , he became official captain of Kent in 1931 , having previously captained the side occasionally . Wisden commented that Chapman " exercised an invigorating influence " on the side . Before Chapman assumed the Kent captaincy , the county team was sharply divided along social lines and the amateur leadership was aloof from and often dismissive of the professional players . Members of the team felt that he improved the atmosphere within the side and made the game enjoyable . Critics and players thought that he was past his best by the time he became captain , and already affected by alcoholism , but Chapman was successful as leader . His fielding remained influential . However , his batting form was poor : in 1931 , he scored 662 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 38 . Sections of the press thought he should remain England captain , but he was replaced as Test captain by Jardine , who was not a popular choice ; the selectors chose Jardine to exercise more discipline on the team than Chapman had done . At the end of the season , Chapman toured Jamaica in a team captained by Lord Tennyson and scored 203 runs in first @-@ class matches at 33 @.@ 83 . 
 Chapman began the 1932 season in good form and appeared fitter than he had for many seasons . There were further calls in the press for him to captain England . Jardine 's captaincy in 1931 left critics unimpressed and C. Stewart Caine , the editor of Wisden , wrote that " the impression appears to be widely entertained that Chapman , were he in [ batting ] form , would again be given charge of the [ England ] team . " Christopher Douglas believes that the difference between Jardine and Chapman in captaincy style made it harder for the press to accept Jardine . He writes : " Chapman 's was just the kind of daredevil approach that is remembered with affection and , even though it was barely a year since he had lost the leadership , his reign was being regarded through rose @-@ coloured specs . " However , it is unlikely that the selectors ever considered returning to him . During the season , Chapman scored 951 runs , averaged 29 @.@ 71 , and led Kent to third place in the County Championship for the second year in succession . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 In 1933 , he scored 834 runs but his average fell to 21 @.@ 94 and he never again averaged over 23 in any season in which he played regularly . Owing to his increasing weight and lack of physical fitness , he found batting much harder . As his physique declined , he was unable to produce the same batting feats he had managed previously . In the field , although still catching effectively , his inability to chase the ball meant he fielded closer to the batsmen ; he also took fewer catches . In both 1934 and 1935 , he averaged around 22 with the bat and scored under 800 runs . In 1935 , he scored his final first @-@ class century , against Somerset , having not reached the landmark since 1931 . Team @-@ mates and observers noticed that in the final years of his career , Chapman frequently left the field during matches , and they suspected he was drinking in the pavilion . 
 Chapman played infrequently in 1936 , and the captaincy was shared between him and two others . He was reluctant to bat , to the extent of dropping down the batting order to avoid doing so , and his friends believed that his nerve had gone . At the end of the season , he announced that business commitments forced him to give up the captaincy . Over the following three seasons , Chapman played for Kent in three more matches : against the New Zealand touring side in 1937 and in two Championship games in 1938 . He also captained a non @-@ representative England XI in a festival game against the New Zealanders in 1937 , batting at number ten in the order and scoring 61 . His remaining first @-@ class matches were low @-@ profile games against Oxford and Cambridge Universities ; he played 13 games in his final three seasons . In his last first @-@ class game , in 1939 , he captained MCC against Oxford , scoring 12 and 0 . In all first @-@ class cricket , Chapman scored 16 @,@ 309 runs in 394 matches at an average of 31 @.@ 97 , and held 356 catches . By the time his career ended , his weight had increased even further , and Lemmon believes that he had become an embarrassment to other cricketers . Subsequently , Chapman faded away without much comment . 
 = = Technique and critical judgements = = 
 Writer Neville Cardus described Chapman as " the schoolboy 's dream of the perfect captain of an England cricket eleven . He was tall , slim , always youthful , and pink and chubby of face . His left @-@ handed batting mingled brilliance and grace ... His cricket was romantic in its vaunting energy but classic in shape . " While batting , Chapman always tried to attack the bowling ; although this meant he made mistakes which resulted in his dismissal , it meant that he could change the course of a game in a short time . Cricket writer R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow described him as : " Tall , strong , and lithe , he was a left @-@ handed hitter with orthodox defence , much of which was rendered unnecessary by a vast reach , and an ability to drive good @-@ length balls over the head of mid @-@ off , bowler , and mid @-@ on . His cover @-@ driving , too , was immensely strong . " Gibson notes that Chapman 's career batting figures were good , but that critics believed that , with his talent , he should have scored more runs . Gibson writes : " When Chapman was going well , he looked quite as good as Woolley [ his Kent and England team @-@ mate ] at the other end , and in the mid @-@ 1920s there was no other English left @-@ hander , possibly no other England batsman at all except Hobbs , of whom that could be said . " His increased weight in the 1930s robbed him of confidence and slowed him down to the point where his batting declined . When batting , Chapman usually wore the <unk> cap . 
 Commentators claimed that Chapman was not a subtle captain and lacked tactical astuteness . Even so , his record is better than most others who led England during Chapman 's career . Pelham Warner believed that Chapman started well , but that in the later stages of 1930 , his tactical sense markedly deteriorated . On the other hand , several of Chapman 's contemporaries believed him to be one of the best captains . Arthur Gilligan , one of Chapman 's predecessors , considered him to be a model for the role , and Bert Oldfield , who played against Chapman as Australia 's wicket @-@ keeper , thought that Chapman possessed an " aptitude " for leadership . Chapman 's teams were usually harmonious and his sympathetic handling of his players often brought out the best in them . Writing in 1943 , Robertson @-@ Glasgow said : " He knew his men as perhaps no other captain of modern times has known them . " Cricket writer E. W. Swanton believes that Chapman 's cavalier reputation was misleading in assessing his effectiveness , and that " underlying the boyish facade was both a shrewd cricket brain and the good sense to ask advice from those of greater experience . " 
 Robertson @-@ Glasgow described Chapman as among the greatest fielders of all time , and The Times observed that " at his best he had been one of the finest fielders ever to play for England " . In his earlier years , he fielded in the deep but when he played for Kent and England , he was positioned closer to the batsmen — usually at gully or silly point . The Cricketer commented that his " capacious hands made him a brilliant close @-@ to @-@ the @-@ wicket fielder , and some of his catches were miraculous " . In his youth , Chapman bowled quite regularly , but his negative experience bowling for Berkshire lessened his enthusiasm , and he did not take it seriously . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage and fame = = = 
 During May 1921 , Chapman met Gertrude ( " Beet " or " <unk> " ) Lowry , the sister of Tom Lowry , a cricketer from New Zealand who played for Cambridge and Somerset and went on to captain his country . The couple met again when Chapman toured New Zealand in 1922 – 23 , and became engaged . At the end of the 1924 – 25 Australia tour , they married and returned to England together . The wedding was widely reported and until the end of the decade the couple were heavily involved in social events . They were popular guests at functions , and became notable figures in the fashionable society of the upper classes . In 1923 , Chapman joined a Kent brewery , H & G Symonds . His wife believed that his choice of a career working in the alcohol trade made his life difficult and contributed to his heavy drinking . The social duties associated with his job also contributed to his increased weight and failing fitness in the later part of his cricket career . Further problems arose through his fame ; as he wanted to keep people happy , he drank frequently and attended many social functions . Cricket writer Ivo Tennant believes that Chapman 's " taste for conviviality was his undoing " . He always appeared happy , but Gibson observes " that is the way some men disguise their unhappiness " , and Lemmon suggests that Chapman was seeking acceptance and felt lonely at heart . According to Lemmon , by the end of the Second World War , Chapman was largely living in the past , and that " mentally he was still in the happy days of University cricket . " 
 = = = Later struggle = = = 
 E. W. Swanton observes that " from the war onwards [ Chapman 's ] life went into a sad eclipse . " In 1942 , Chapman was divorced from his wife ; according to Lemmon , " Beet had stood much , but there is a point for all relationships beyond which one must not go " . She returned to live in New Zealand in 1946 . After 1946 , Chapman shared a house with the steward of West Hill Golf Club , Bernard Benson , and his health continued to deteriorate . He was frequently observed to be drunk in public , although his appearance and manners remained impeccable ; the cricket establishment ignored him , regarding him as an embarrassment , particularly on the occasions he watched matches at Lord 's . By the end of his life , he was unable to attend any cricket matches . In addition to his alcoholism , Chapman became increasingly isolated , suffering from loneliness and depression . By the 1950s , he had developed arthritis , probably as a result of his sporting activities . On one occasion in 1955 , Chapman was invited to a dinner organised by Kent ; he was later discovered in the car park on the bumper of a car in a distressed state and had to be assisted back inside . 
 In September 1961 , Chapman fractured his knee when he fell at his home . He was taken to hospital for an operation but died on 16 September 1961 . The newspapers reported that he had been ill for a long time ; his former wife later commented that " he must have died a very sad man " . Tributes focused on his successes as a cricketer and appealing personality . Summing up Chapman 's life , Gibson writes : " But just as a good end can redeem a sad life , so a good life can redeem a sad end , and he had known his hours , his years of glory . " Swanton concluded his obituary of Chapman in 1961 : " The elderly and the middle @-@ aged will recall him rather in his handsome sunlit youth , the epitome of all that was gay and fine in the game of cricket . " 
 = Battle of Gonzales = 
 The Battle of Gonzales was the first military engagement of the Texas Revolution . It was fought near Gonzales , Texas , on October 2 , 1835 , between rebellious Texian settlers and a detachment of Mexican army troops . 
 In 1831 , Mexican authorities gave the settlers of Gonzales a small cannon to help protect them from frequent Comanche raids . Over the next four years , the political situation in Mexico deteriorated , and in 1835 several states revolted . As the unrest spread , Colonel Domingo de Ugartechea , the commander of all Mexican troops in Texas , felt it unwise to leave the residents of Gonzales with a weapon and requested the retrieval of the cannon . 
 When the initial request was refused , Ugartechea sent 100 dragoons to retrieve the cannon . The soldiers neared Gonzales on September 29 , but the colonists used a variety of excuses to keep them from the town , while secretly sending messengers to request assistance from nearby communities . Within two days , up to 140 Texians gathered in Gonzales , all determined not to give up the cannon . On October 1 , settlers voted to initiate a fight . Mexican soldiers opened fire as Texians approached their camp in the early hours of October 2 . After several hours of desultory firing , the Mexican soldiers withdrew . 
 Although the skirmish had little military significance , it marked a clear break between the colonists and the Mexican government and is considered to have been the start of the Texas Revolution . News of the skirmish spread throughout the United States , where it was often referred to as the " Lexington of Texas " . The cannon 's fate is disputed . It may have been buried and rediscovered in 1936 , or it may have been seized by Mexican troops after the Battle of the Alamo . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Mexican Constitution of 1824 liberalized the country 's immigration policies , allowing foreigners to settle in border regions such as Mexican Texas . In 1825 , American Green DeWitt received permission to settle 400 families in Texas near the confluence of the San Marcos and Guadalupe Rivers . The DeWitt Colony quickly became a favorite raiding target of local Karankawa , Tonkawa , and Comanche tribes , and in July 1826 they destroyed the capital city , Gonzales . The town was rebuilt the following year , after DeWitt negotiated peace treaties with the Karankawa and Tonkawa . The Comanche continued to stage periodic raids of the settlement over the next few years . Unable to spare military troops to protect the town , in 1831 the region 's political chief instead sent the settlers of Gonzales a six @-@ pounder cannon , described by historian Timothy Todish as " a small bored gun , good for little more than starting horse races " . 
 During the 1830s , the Mexican government wavered between federalist and centralist policies . As the pendulum swung sharply towards centralism in 1835 , several Mexican states revolted . In June , a small group of settlers in Texas used the political unrest as an excuse to rebel against customs duties , in an incident known as the Anahuac Disturbances . The federal government responded by sending more troops to Texas . Public opinion was sharply divided . Some communities supported the rebellion for a variety of reasons . Others , including Gonzales , declared their loyalty to Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna 's centralist government . Local leaders began calling for a Consultation to determine whether a majority of settlers favored independence , a return to federalism , or the status quo . Although some leaders worried that Mexican officials would see this type of gathering as a step toward revolution , by the end of August most communities had agreed to send delegates to the Consultation , scheduled for October 15 . In the interim , many communities formed militias to protect themselves from a potential attack by military forces . 
 On September 10 , a Mexican soldier bludgeoned a Gonzales resident , which led to widespread outrage and public protests . Mexican authorities felt it unwise to leave the settlers with a weapon . Colonel Domingo de Ugartechea , commander of all Mexican troops in Texas , sent a corporal and five enlisted men to retrieve the cannon that had been given to the colonists . Many of the settlers believed Mexican authorities were manufacturing an excuse to attack the town and eliminate the militia . In a town meeting , three citizens voted to hand over the gun to forestall an attack ; the remainder , including alcalde Andrew Ponton , voted to stand their ground . According to historian Stephen Hardin , " the cannon became a point of honor and an unlikely rallying symbol . Gonzales citizens had no intention of handing over the weapon at a time of growing tension . " The soldiers were escorted from town without the cannon . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Ponton anticipated that Ugartechea would send more troops to force the handover of the cannon . As soon as the first group of soldiers left Gonzales , Ponton sent a messenger to the closest town , Mina , to request help . Word quickly spread that up to 300 soldiers were expected to march on Gonzales . Stephen F. Austin , one of the most respected men in Texas and the de facto leader of the settlers , sent messengers to inform surrounding communities of the situation . Austin cautioned Texians to remain on the defensive , as any unprovoked attacks against Mexican forces could limit the support Texians might receive from the United States if war officially began . 
 On September 27 , 1835 , a detachment of 100 dragoons , led by Francisco de Castañeda , left San Antonio de Béxar , carrying an official order for Ponton to surrender the cannon . Castañeda had been instructed to avoid using force if possible . When the troops neared Gonzales on September 29 , they found that the settlers had removed the ferry and all other boats from the Guadalupe River . On the other side of the swiftly moving river waited eighteen Texians . Albert Martin , captain of the Gonzales militia , informed the soldiers that Ponton was out of town , and until his return the army must remain on the west side of the river . 
 With no easy way to cross the river , Castañeda and his men made camp at the highest ground in the area , about 300 yards ( 300 meters ) from the river . Three Texians hurried to bury the cannon , while others traveled to nearby communities to ask for assistance . By the end of the day , more than 80 men had arrived from Fayette and Columbus . Texian militias generally elected their own leaders , and the men now gathered in Gonzales invoked their right to choose their own captain rather than report to Martin . John Henry Moore of Fayette was elected leader , with Joseph Washington Elliot Wallace and Edward Burleson , both of Columbus , respectively elected second and third in command . 
 On September 30 , Castañeda reiterated his request for the cannon and was again rebuffed . Texians insisted on discussing the matter directly with Ugartechea . According to their spokesman , until this was possible " the only answer I can therefore give you is that I cannot now [ and ] will not deliver to you the cannon " . Castañeda reported to Ugartechea that the Texians were stalling , likely to give reinforcements time to gather . 
 In San Antonio de Béxar , Ugartechea asked Dr. Launcelot Smither , a Gonzales resident in town on personal business , to help Castañeda convince the settlers to follow orders . When Smither arrived on October 1 , he met with militia captain Mathew Caldwell to explain that the soldiers meant no harm if the settlers would peacefully relinquish the cannon . Caldwell instructed Smither to bring Castañeda to the town the following morning to discuss the matter . At roughly the same time , Moore called a war council , which quickly voted to initiate a fight . It is unclear whether the war council was aware that Caldwell had promised Castañeda safe passage to Gonzales the next morning . 
 Texians dug up the cannon and mounted it on cart wheels . In the absence of cannonballs , they gathered metal scraps to fill the cannon . James C. Neill , who had served in an artillery company during the War of 1812 , was given command of the cannon . He gathered several men , including Almaron Dickinson , together to form the first artillery company of Texians . A local Methodist minister , W. P. Smith , blessed their activities in a sermon which made frequent reference to the American Revolution . 
 As the Texians made plans for an attack , Castañeda learned from a Coushatta Indian that about 140 men were gathered in Gonzales , with more expected . The Mexican soldiers began searching for a safe place to cross the river . At nightfall on October 1 they stopped to make camp , 7 miles ( 11 km ) upriver from their previous spot . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Texians began crossing the river at about 7 pm . Less than half of the men were mounted , slowing their progress as they tracked the Mexican soldiers . A thick fog rolled in around midnight , further delaying them . At around 3 am , Texians reached the new Mexican camp . A dog barked at their approach , alerting the Mexican soldiers , who began to fire . The noise caused one of the Texian horses to panic and throw his rider , who suffered a bloody nose . Moore and his men hid in the thick trees until dawn . As they waited , some of the Texians raided a nearby field and <unk> on watermelon . 
 With the darkness and fog , Mexican soldiers could not estimate how many men had surrounded them . They withdrew 300 yards ( meters ) to a nearby bluff . At about 6 am , Texians emerged from the trees and began firing at the Mexican soldiers . Lieutenant Gregorio Pérez counterattacked with 40 mounted soldiers . The Texians fell back to the trees and fired a volley , injuring a Mexican private . According to some accounts , the cannon fell out of the wagon upon the shot . Unable to safely maneuver among the trees , the Mexican horsemen returned to the bluff . 
 As the fog lifted , Castañeda sent Smither to request a meeting between the two commanders . Smither was promptly arrested by the Texians , who were suspicious of his presence among the Mexican soldiers . Nevertheless , Moore agreed to meet Castañeda . Moore explained that his followers no longer recognized the centralist government of Santa Anna and instead remained faithful to the Constitution of 1824 , which Santa Anna had repudiated . Castañeda revealed that he shared their federalist leanings , but that he was honor @-@ bound to follow orders . 
 As Moore returned to camp , the Texians raised a homemade white banner with an image of the cannon painted in black in the center , over the words " Come and Take It " . The makeshift flag evoked the American Revolutionary @-@ era slogan " Don 't Tread on Me " . Texians then fired their cannon at the Mexican camp . Realizing that he was outnumbered and outgunned , Castañeda led his troops back to San Antonio de Béxar . The troops were gone before the Texians finished reloading . In his report to Ugartechea , Castañeda wrote " since the orders from your Lordship were for me to withdraw without compromising the honor of Mexican arms , I did so " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Two Mexican soldiers were killed in the attack . The only Texian casualty was the bloody nose suffered by the man bucked off his horse . Although the event was , as characterized by Davis , " an inconsequential skirmish in which one side did not try to fight " , Texians soon declared it a victory over Mexican troops . Despite its minimal military impact , Hardin asserts that the skirmish 's " political significance was immeasurable " . A large number of Texians had taken an armed stand against the Mexican army , and they had no intention of returning to their neutral stance towards Santa Anna 's government . Two days after the battle , Austin wrote to the San Felipe de Austin Committee of Public Safety , " War is declared — public opinion has proclaimed it against a Military despotism — The campaign has commenced " . News of the skirmish , originally called " the fight at Williams ' place " , spread throughout the United States , encouraging many adventurers to come to Texas and assist in the fight against Mexico . Newspapers referred to the conflict as the " Lexington of Texas " ; as the Battles of Lexington and Concord began the American Revolution , the Gonzales skirmish launched the Texas Revolution . 
 Before fighting had officially erupted , Santa Anna had realized that stronger measures were needed to ensure calm in Texas . He ordered his brother @-@ in @-@ law , General Martín Perfecto de Cos to bring approximately 500 soldiers to Texas . Cos and his men arrived in Goliad on October 2 . Three days later , after learning of the events at Gonzales , the soldiers left for San Antonio de Béxar . 
 Gonzales became a rallying point for Texians opposed to Santa Anna 's policies . On October 11 , they unanimously elected Austin their commander , despite his lack of military training . The following day , Austin led the men on a march towards San Antonio de Béxar to lay siege to Cos 's troops . By the end of the year , the Texians had driven all Mexican troops from Texas . 
 The cannon 's fate is disputed . According to the memoirs ( written in the 1890s ) of Gonzales blacksmith Noah Smithwick , the cannon was abandoned after the cart 's axles began to smoke during a march to San Antonio de Béxar to assist in Austin 's siege . Smithwick reported that the cannon was buried near a creek not far from Gonzales . A small iron cannon was exposed during a June 1936 flood near Gonzales . In 1979 , this cannon was purchased by Dr. Patrick Wagner , who believed it matched Smithwick 's descriptions of the cannon used in the battle . The Curator of Military History at the Smithsonian Institution verified that Wagner 's cannon was a type of small swivel gun used in America through 1836 . The Conservation Laboratory at the University of Texas confirmed that Wagner 's cannon had been buried in moist ground for an extended time period . 
 Writing in the Handbook of Texas , historian Thomas Ricks Lindley maintains that the Wagner cannon does not match the Smithwick account . The Wagner gun is made of iron and is smaller than a six @-@ pounder . Historians such as Lindley think it more likely that the Gonzales cannon was taken to San Antonio de Béxar , where it was used during the Battle of the Alamo and captured by Mexican troops in March 1836 . It was likely melted down with many of the other cannons when the Mexican army retreated . 
 The battle is re @-@ enacted during the Come and Take It celebration in Gonzales every October . In and around Gonzales are nine Texas historical markers which commemorate various locations used in the prelude to the battle . 
 = HMS Implacable ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Implacable was an Implacable @-@ class aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy during World War II . Upon completion in 1944 , she was initially assigned to the Home Fleet and attacked targets in Norway for the rest of the year . She was subsequently assigned to the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) where she attacked the Japanese naval base at Truk and targets in the Japanese Home Islands in 1945 . The ship was used to repatriate liberated Allied prisoners of war ( PoWs ) and soldiers after the Japanese surrender , for the rest of the year . Implacable returned home in 1946 and became the Home Fleet 's deck @-@ landing training carrier , a role that lasted until 1950 . She briefly served as the flagship of Home Fleet in 1950 . During this time she participated in many exercises and made a number of port visits in Western Europe . She was placed in reserve in 1950 and converted into a training ship in 1952 , and served as flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron . The ship was considered for a major modernisation in 1951 – 52 , but this was rejected as too expensive and time @-@ consuming . Implacable was decommissioned in 1954 and sold for scrap the following year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Implacable class had its origin as an improved version of the Illustrious @-@ class aircraft carriers for the 1938 Naval Programme . They were designed to be 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) faster , and to carry an additional dozen aircraft at the expense of reduced armour protection to remain within the 23 @,@ 000 long tons ( 23 @,@ 000 t ) available from the tonnage allowed by the Washington Naval Treaty . Implacable was 766 feet 6 inches ( 233 @.@ 6 m ) long overall and 730 feet ( 222 @.@ 5 m ) at the waterline . Her beam was 95 feet 9 inches ( 29 @.@ 2 m ) at the waterline and she had a draught of 29 feet 4 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . The Implacable @-@ class ships were significantly overweight and displaced 32 @,@ 110 long tons ( 32 @,@ 630 t ) at deep load . The ships had metacentric heights of 4 @.@ 06 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) at light load and 6 @.@ 91 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load as completed . Implacable 's complement was approximately 2 @,@ 300 officers and enlisted men in 1945 . 
 The ships had four Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one shaft , using steam supplied by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 148 @,@ 000 shp ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) , enough to give them a maximum speed of 32 @.@ 5 knots ( 60 @.@ 2 km / h ; 37 @.@ 4 mph ) . On sea trials , Implacable reached speeds of 31 @.@ 89 knots ( 59 @.@ 06 km / h ; 36 @.@ 70 mph ) with 151 @,@ 200 shp ( 112 @,@ 700 kW ) . She carried a maximum of 4 @,@ 690 long tons ( 4 @,@ 770 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 6 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 450 km ; 7 @,@ 730 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 The 760 @-@ foot ( 231 @.@ 6 m ) armoured flight deck had a maximum width of 102 feet ( 31 @.@ 1 m ) . A single hydraulic aircraft catapult was fitted on the forward part of the flight deck . The Implacable @-@ class carriers were equipped with two lifts on the centreline , the forward of which measured 45 by 33 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 by 10 @.@ 1 m ) and served only the upper hangar , and the aft lift ( 45 by 22 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) ) which served both hangars . The upper hangar was 458 feet ( 139 @.@ 6 m ) long and the lower hangar was 208 feet ( 63 @.@ 4 m ) long ; both had a maximum width of 62 feet ( 18 @.@ 9 m ) . Both hangars had a height of only 14 feet which precluded storage of Lend @-@ Lease Vought F4U Corsair fighters as well as many post @-@ war aircraft and helicopters . Designed to stow 48 aircraft in their hangars , the use of a permanent deck park allowed the Implacable class to accommodate up to 81 aircraft . The additional crewmen , maintenance personnel and facilities needed to support these aircraft were housed in the lower hangar . The ships were provided with 94 @,@ 650 imperial gallons ( 430 @,@ 300 l ; 113 @,@ 670 US gal ) of aviation gasoline . 
 = = = Armament , electronics and protection = = = 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of sixteen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) dual @-@ purpose guns in eight twin @-@ gun turrets , four in sponsons on each side of the hull . Unlike the Illustrious @-@ class ships , the roofs of the gun turrets were flat and flush with the flight deck . The gun had a maximum range of 20 @,@ 760 yards ( 18 @,@ 980 m ) . Her light anti @-@ aircraft defences included five octuple mounts for QF 2 @-@ pounder ( " pom @-@ pom " ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , two on the flight deck forward of the island , one on the aft part of the island and two in sponsons on the port side of the hull . A single quadruple 2 @-@ pounder mount was also fitted on the port side of the hull . The 2 @-@ pounder gun had a maximum range of 6 @,@ 800 yards ( 6 @,@ 200 m ) . The ship was also fitted with 61 Oerlikon 20 mm autocannon in 19 single and 21 twin @-@ gun mounts . These guns had a maximum range of 4 @,@ 800 yards ( 4 @,@ 400 m ) , but some were replaced by 40 mm Bofors AA guns when the ships were transferred to the Pacific Theater as the 20 mm shell was unlikely to destroy a kamikaze before it hit the ship . The Bofors gun had a maximum range of 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) . Two additional quadruple " pom @-@ pom " mounts were added to Implacable before she joined the British Pacific Fleet in 1945 . By the end of the war , she had 4 single Bofors guns , plus 17 twin and 17 single Oerlikon mounts . By April 1946 these had been reduced to 12 Bofors guns , 8 twin and 14 single Oerlikon guns . 
 The specifics of the Implacable @-@ class ships ' radar suite are not readily available . They were fitted with the Type 277 surface @-@ search / height @-@ finding radar on top of the bridge and a Type 293 target indicator radar on the foremast . The ships probably carried Type 279 and Type 281B early @-@ warning radars , based on the radars fitted aboard the Illustrious @-@ class carrier Victorious late in the war . In addition , Type 282 and Type 285 gunnery radars were mounted on the fire @-@ control directors . 
 The Implacable @-@ class ships had a flight deck protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour . The sides of the hangars were either 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) or 2 inches ( 51 mm ) . The ends of the hangars were protected by 2 @-@ inch bulkheads and the armour of the hangar deck ranged from 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 to 64 mm ) in thickness . The waterline armour belt was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick , but only covered the central portion of the ship . The belt was closed by 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The underwater defence system was a layered system of liquid- and air @-@ filled compartments as used in the Illustrious class . The magazines for the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns lay outside the armoured citadel and were protected by 2 to 3 @-@ inch roofs , 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch sides and 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @-@ inch ends . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Implacable was laid down by Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Co. at their shipyard in Clydeside on 21 February 1939 , as Yard Number 672 . Her construction was temporarily suspended in 1940 – 41 , in favour of higher @-@ priority ships needed to fight in the Battle of the Atlantic , before she was launched on 10 December 1942 by Queen Elizabeth . Captain Lachlan Mackintosh was appointed to command the ship in November 1943 . She was commissioned on 22 May 1944 , and began sea trials which revealed a significant number of problems that required rectification , so the ship was not formally completed until 28 August . Implacable was assigned to the Home Fleet and was working up over the next several months while the Fairey Fireflies of 1771 Squadron flew aboard on 10 September . The squadron was followed by the Fairey Barracuda torpedo bombers of 828 and 841 Squadrons that made up No. 2 Naval Torpedo @-@ Bomber Reconnaissance Wing later that month . 
 Her first mission was to locate the German battleship Tirpitz which had left its anchorage in Kaafjord in early October . Implacable departed Scapa Flow on 16 October , and a section of her Fireflies spotted the battleship off Håkøya Island near Tromsø two days later . No attack was mounted because the carrier lacked any single @-@ seat fighters aboard to escort the strike aircraft , although they did damage a cargo ship before returning home . On 16 October , the Supermarine Seafires of 887 and 894 Squadrons of No. 24 Naval Fighter Wing landed aboard . In late October she participated in Operation Athletic off the Norwegian coast , where her aircraft sank six ships and damaged a German submarine for the loss of one Barracuda , while conducting the Royal Navy 's last wartime torpedo attack . On 1 November Captain Charles Hughes @-@ Hallett relieved Mackintosh and assumed command of the ship . 
 The Barracudas were replaced by the Seafires of No. 30 Naval Fighter Wing , which consisted of 801 and 880 Squadrons , on 8 November and the Seafires provided air cover for minelaying operations by escort carriers from 11 to 21 November . The next day , Admiral Sir Henry Ruthven Moore , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Home Fleet , hoisted his flag in Implacable and the ship set sail to hunt for a convoy that had been reported near <unk> Island ( Operation Provident ) with the Seafires and Fireflies of 801 , 880 , and 1771 Squadrons aboard . Bad weather prevented aircraft from being launched until 27 November , but they located the convoy and sank two merchantmen , including MS Rigel , and damaged six others . Upon her return to Scapa on 29 November , Moore lowered his flag , but Vice Admiral Sir Frederick Dalrymple @-@ Hamilton , second in command of Home Fleet , hoisted his flag on 6 December for Operation Urbane , another minelaying operation during which her Fireflies helped to sink a German minesweeper . Dalrymple @-@ Hamilton transferred his flag off Implacable when she returned to Scapa on 9 December . On 15 December she began a refit at Rosyth preparatory to her transfer to the British Pacific Fleet , which included augmenting her light AA armament . 
 Upon its completion on 10 March 1945 , 801 , 828 , 880 , and 1771 Squadrons reembarked with a total strength of 48 Seafires , 21 Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bombers and a dozen Fireflies , the largest air group aboard a British carrier thus far . Implacable departed six days later to join the BPF and arrived at Port Said , Egypt , on 25 March . While passing through the Suez Canal , a strong gust of wind forced her ashore and it took her escorting tugboats five hours to pull her off . Undamaged , she proceeded on her voyage and reached Sydney on 8 May 1945 ( V @-@ E Day ) . 
 Implacable arrived at the BPF 's main operating base at Manus Island , in the Admiralty Islands , on 29 May . A week later Rear Admiral Sir Patrick Brind hoisted his flag in preparation for Operation Inmate , an attack on the Japanese naval base at Truk in the Caroline Islands that began on 14 June . Having flown 113 offensive sorties over the two days of the attack , with only one loss of a Seafire to enemy action , the carrier and her escorts returned to Manus Island on 17 June . On 30 June No. 8 Carrier Air Group was formed , absorbing No. 24 Naval Fighter Wing , to control all of the air units aboard Implacable . 
 After working up , she sailed to join the main body of the BPF off the Japanese coast on 6 July , and rendezvoused with them ten days later . Implacable flew off eight Fireflies and a dozen Seafires against targets north of Tokyo on 17 July , but only the Fireflies were able to locate their targets because of bad weather . Eight Fireflies and twenty Seafires attacked targets near Tokyo the next day , before more bad weather halted flying operations until 24 – 25 July , when the BPF 's aircraft attacked targets near Osaka and the Inland Sea , crippling the escort carrier Kaiyo . After replenishing , airstrikes resumed on 28 and 30 July , the British sinking the escort Okinawa near Maizuru . A combination of bad weather , refuelling requirements and the atomic bombing of Hiroshima delayed the resumption of air operations until 9 August . During the day , Implacable 's Seafires flew 94 sorties and her Fireflies flew 14 against targets in northern Honshu and southern Hokkaido for the loss of two Seafires . The attacks were repeated the next day , sinking two warships , numerous small merchantmen and destroying numerous railroad locomotives and parked aircraft . The BPF had been scheduled to withdraw after 10 August to prepare for Operation Olympic , the invasion of Kyushu scheduled for November , and the bulk of the force , including Implacable , departed for Manus on 12 August . Her aircraft flew over 1 @,@ 000 sorties since her arrival the previous month . 
 = = = Post War = = = 
 She arrived at Sydney on 24 August , and had her hangars refitted to accommodate Allied PoWs and soldiers for repatriation . Having left her air group behind to maximize the numbers of passengers she could carry , the ship arrived at Manila on 25 September , where she loaded over 2 @,@ 000 American and Canadian PoWs . She dropped off the Americans at Pearl Harbor on 5 October and continued on to deliver her Canadian passengers at Vancouver six days later . Opened for public tours , Implacable remained for a week before sailing to Hong Kong to pick up several hundred PoWs and continued onwards to Manila to load 2 @,@ 114 more passengers . She delivered them to Balikpapan , Borneo for transhipment to Britain . In their place the carrier embarked 2 @,@ 126 men of the 7th Australian Division , and their equipment , to return to Australia . She arrived at Sydney on 17 November and sailed on 8 December to load more returning troops from Papua New Guinea . Arriving back at Sydney before Christmas , the ship had her additional bunks , etc . , removed to return her to operational status . 
 In January 1946 her air group flew aboard , minus the disbanded 880 Squadron , and with 1790 Squadron replacing 1771 Squadron . After several days of flying exercises , Implacable made a port visit to Melbourne together with her sister Indefatigable and several other ships . She became the flagship of Vice Admiral Sir Philip Vian , the newly appointed second in command of the BPF on 31 January . She continued a relaxed schedule of training and port visits until she began a refit on 15 March in Sydney , that lasted until 29 April , when she put to sea to fly on her aircraft and to dump overboard the 16 Lend @-@ Lease Avengers belonging to 828 Squadron ( Britain had to either pay for them or dispose of them with the end of the war , and lacked the means to do the former ) . She sailed for home on 5 May and reached Devonport on 3 June , where Vian struck his flag . 
 Implacable became the deck @-@ landing training carrier for the Home Fleet when she next put to sea in August . On 25 September Captain Aubrey Mansergh assumed command of the ship . Two months later she participated in an exercise with the Home Fleet and was lightly damaged when she collided with the light carrier Vengeance while docking in Devonport on 7 November . On 1 February 1947 , she joined the other ships of the Home Fleet as they rendezvoused with the battleship Vanguard , which was serving as the royal yacht to escort King George VI as he set out for the first royal tour of South Africa . Implacable hosted the king and his family on 7 February , staging a small air show for them after which the queen addressed the crew . After leaving the royals , she made ports visits at Freetown , Sierra Leone , and Dakar , Senegal before arriving in the Western Mediterranean for more training . Arriving home on 7 March , she began a lengthy refit at Rosyth on 17 April . 
 Upon its completion in October 1947 she embarked 813 Squadron , flying Blackburn Firebrand <unk> , and resumed training . Captain John Stevens relieved Mansergh on 9 February 1948 , as the latter had been promoted . In June and July , the ship participated in a series of demonstrations for students in the Royal Navy 's staff college . Among these was the first carrier landing by a Gloster Meteor jet @-@ powered fighter , flown by Lieutenant @-@ Commander Eric Brown , landings by prototypes of the Westland Wyvern and Short Sturgeon , rocket firing by Fireflies and an " attack " on Implacable by motor torpedo boats . She completed a 10 @-@ week refit on 10 November and resumed deck @-@ landing practices . She sailed for Gibraltar on 27 February 1949 and 801 Squadron flew aboard on 5 March with its de Havilland Sea Hornets , the day after she arrived there . Admiral Sir Rhoderick McGrigor , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Home Fleet , hoisted his flag aboard the carrier on 6 March before beginning a short exercise with some of the other ships of Home Fleet . She made port visits in Oslo and Bergen , Norway in June , hosting King Haakon VII . While berthed at Portsmouth , King Abdullah I of Jordan visited on 19 August and the Prime Minister , Clement Attlee visited 10 days later . 702 Squadron flew aboard with seven de Havilland Sea Vampires in September to conduct carrier evaluations with the new fighter jets that lasted until 11 November . McGrigor was relieved by Admiral Vian ten days later . 
 Implacable spent February and March 1950 training in the Western Mediterranean and Captain H. W. Briggs assumed command on 1 April . She resumed flight training in the Irish Sea and off the western coast of Scotland until she made a port visit to Copenhagen in mid @-@ July . King Frederick IX of Denmark inspected the ship on 18 July and Admiral Vian transferred his flag to Vanguard on 11 September . Two days later she was placed in reserve and slowly converted into a training ship by the addition of extra accommodation and classrooms . During this time she was considered for a major reconstruction that would combine her two hangars into a single hangar with a height of 17 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 33 m ) and allow her to operate 30 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 14 @,@ 000 kg ) aircraft . In addition her armament would be modernised and the fuel supply for her aircraft would be more than doubled . A similar reconstruction was then in progress for Victorious , but it proved to be much more expensive than planned and also took more time than had been estimated . Short of both time and money for the project , the Admiralty cancelled the modernisation in June 1952 . 
 Implacable was recommissioned on 16 January 1952 as the flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron . On 13 February she arrived at Dover to serve as the port 's guard ship before and after the state funeral of King George VI , to salute royalty and heads of state arriving by sea . After its conclusion , the ship sailed for the western Mediterranean to rendezvous with her sister for exercises . In June the two sisters represented a fast troop convoy being attacked by aircraft during an air defence exercise . They visited Copenhagen in the next month before returning home . Implacable sailed for Gibraltar on 25 September and made a port visit to Lisbon , Portugal before returning to Devonport for a refit . On 16 November she had an oil fire in her galley that damaged her electrical wiring badly enough to require extending her refit to 20 January 1953 . She spent most of February and March in the western Mediterranean together with her sister , participating in exercises before sailing to Southampton for a brief refit . 
 For the Coronation Fleet Review of Queen Elizabeth II on 15 June , she flew the flag of Vice Admiral John Stevens , her former commanding officer , now Flag Officer , Home Fleet Training Squadron . On 5 September Rear Admiral H. L. F. Adams relieved Stevens and the ship joined Indefatigable for fleet exercises off the Scilly Isles and in the Bristol Channel the following month . She ferried the 1st Battalion , Argyll & Sutherland Highlanders from Devonport to Trinidad in response to a crisis in British Guiana , and transported a battalion of the Royal Welch Fusiliers from Trinidad to Jamaica in October , returning home on 11 November . On 19 August 1954 , she was relieved as flagship by the light carrier Theseus . 
 = = = Decommissioning and disposal = = = 
 Implacable decommissioned on 1 September 1954 and was sold to Thomas W. Ward Ltd for breaking up on 27 October 1955 after being towed to Gareloch . Implacable was scrapped at Inverkeithing beginning the following month . 
 = = Squadrons embarked = = 
 = Combine ( Half @-@ Life ) = 
 The Combine is a multidimensional empire which serves as the primary antagonistic force in the video game Half @-@ Life 2 , developed by Valve Corporation . The Combine consist of alien , synthetic , and human elements , and dominate Earth . They are regularly encountered throughout Half @-@ Life 2 and its episodic expansions as hostile non @-@ player characters as the player progresses through the games in an effort to overthrow the Combine occupation of Earth . 
 The Combine are frequently shown as harsh rulers over the citizens of Earth , suppressing dissent with brutality , policing using violence and using invasive surgery to transform humans into either soldiers or slaves . Throughout the games , the player primarily battles with transformed humans as well as synthetic and mechanical enemies that are the product of Combine technology . The atmosphere generated by the dystopian Combine state has been praised by reviewers , although the artificial intelligence of the transhuman Combine characters was thought to be inferior to that of other characters in Half @-@ Life 2 . In addition to their role within the Half @-@ Life series , the Combine have been adapted for machinima productions and one Combine character type has been made into plush toys by Valve . 
 = = Design = = 
 Some elements of the Combine 's appearance , such as that of the Advisor , are inspired by the works of Frank Herbert . The name " Combine " itself is a tribute to Ken Kesey 's novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest , which features a collection of authorities which mechanistically manipulate and process individuals . 
 During Half @-@ Life 2 's development , various concepts for Combine non @-@ player characters were created and later cut . Female Combine assassins , similar to black operations assassins featured in the first game , were planned but later abandoned , although they appear in the Half @-@ Life 2 : Survivor arcade game . Another non @-@ player character , the cremator , was conceptualized as a Combine laborer who cleaned the streets of bodies after a battle with an acid gun and although removed from the game , its head was featured in Eli Vance 's laboratory . Other cuts included a variety of alien Combine soldiers that would have complemented the transhuman soldiers in the game and a number of synthetic combat machines . Many of Half @-@ Life 2 's Combine characters went through multiple redesigns ; the Combine Overwatch soldier was subjected to at least twelve redesigns before the final appearance was settled on . 
 Opera singer and actress Ellen McLain provides the voice for the Combine Overwatch announcer and dispatcher in Half @-@ Life 2 and its episodic expansions , while the various Combine soldiers throughout the games are voiced by John Patrick Lowrie . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 = = = Society = = = 
 Little is revealed of the Combine 's role outside of Earth , but dialogue in Half @-@ Life 2 states that they control worlds in different dimensions and inhabited by a range of species . The Combine occupation of Earth , however , is shown to be a brutal police state . In City 17 , an Eastern European city , Civil Protection units are seen frequently , often conducting random searches of apartment blocks , interrogating human citizens and engaging in random police brutality . The military Overwatch forces of the Combine are shown attacking human resistance bases in an effort to further solidify their control . The citizens themselves are all clad in blue uniforms and live in designated apartment blocks . Citizens are shown to be moved around to different cities or locales at the Combine 's will , using passenger trains . Vortigaunts , alien creatures from the original Half @-@ Life , are also shown to have been enslaved , and are observed in various jobs such as janitors . According to Half @-@ Life 2 : Raising the Bar , the Combine are draining the Earth 's oceans , minerals and resources to be used on other Combine worlds ; both the water levels along the coast of City 17 and later coastal levels are also greatly reduced . 
 At the heart of the Combine 's command structure in Half @-@ Life 2 is the Citadel , an enormous structure of Combine construction , reaching approximately 2 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 miles ) into the sky from ground level , and delving deep underground . Located within City 17 , the Citadel serves as the primary headquarters of the Combine , housing both Combine Advisors and the office of the Earth administrator , Wallace Breen . Breen is frequently seen on large screens around the city from which he spreads propaganda . The Citadel projects an energy field that is able to prevent human reproduction , as well as a field that keeps dangerous alien wildlife out of the city . In addition , the Citadel contains a trans @-@ dimensional teleporter which allows the Combine to travel between their native universe and Earth . The Citadel also contains construction facilities for various synthetic Combine combat machines . 
 = = = Depiction = = = 
 The Combine is composed of various species and machines . The most commonly encountered enemies throughout Half @-@ Life 2 and its expansions are the transhuman Overwatch soldiers and human Civil Protection officers . A variety of combat machines and synths are also encountered . 
 = = = = Advisors = = = = 
 Advisors are large larvae @-@ like creatures which are virtually featureless , with no visible eyes , ears or limbs , though they do possess an eye @-@ like mechanical device attached to the left side of their heads , and detachable mechanical arms . Their faces are covered by a form of respirator , which is able to lift to reveal a mouth @-@ like orifice from which extends a long flexible proboscis . With this , they can examine objects , or attack and kill enemies . Advisors appear to be feeding upon their victim during their attacks . It is implied that Advisors are the original master race behind the Combine , with the Earth administrator Wallace Breen answering directly to them . Although Advisors are usually seen in protective pods guarded by Combine soldiers , they also possess telekinetic powers with which they are able to float through the air and immobilize enemies so that their proboscis can examine their victims without interference . Their appearance was based on the Guild Navigators from the film Dune . 
 = = = = Civil Protection = = = = 
 Civil Protection is the Combine 's law enforcement agency on Earth , consisting of humans who have agreed to work on behalf of the Combine . Also referred to as <unk> , Civil Protection units wear light armor and gas masks . They are usually armed with electroshock batons and pistols , and are occasionally seen using submachine guns . <unk> are brutal in their methods , keeping the local populace in line via intimidation and physical force . Interrogations , inspections , raids , random beatings , summary executions and acts of extreme police brutality are all used as a means of policing their respective jurisdictions ; their methods are justified by their role as " protectors of the civilians ' well @-@ being " . On the outskirts of City 17 , Civil Protection units are observed patrolling for escapees from the city . Civil Protection officers are in constant contact with Combine Overwatch headquarters , which gives them objectives and situation updates . On the death of an officer , that officer 's armor detects that its wearer is no longer alive and automatically informs headquarters of the fatality and advises nearby units as to the place of death . 
 = = = = Overwatch = = = = 
 The Combine Overwatch is the primary military force of the Combine on Earth . It consists of <unk> enhanced humans , who wear heavily padded long @-@ sleeve body armor and gas masks . The markings on the suit change depending on each individual unit 's assignment and rank . Elite Combine soldiers wear bright white armor , while the majority of soldiers wear variations of blue or brown armor . They are armed with a variety of firearms , including shotguns , submachine guns , sniper rifles and pulse rifles . Overwatch soldiers usually operate in small groups , using squad tactics and grenades to flush out and flank the player . They occasionally provide support to Combine synths , and often travel to areas by use of dropships . They use radios to communicate with each other and with Overwatch headquarters . Combine Overwatch soldiers are usually encountered outside City 17 , and only appear in the city after " The Uprising " near the end of Half @-@ Life 2 . 
 = = = = Combine technology = = = = 
 The Combine use a large array of science fiction technology . They have access to teleportation technology , which takes them from their dimension to Earth . However , their teleporter technology is restrictive in comparison to that developed by Eli Vance , Isaac Kleiner and Judith Mossman in that it cannot be used to teleport to other locations on Earth without significant modification . Throughout the games , various futuristic computer consoles , doors , power sources and weapon emplacements are encountered . In addition , the Combine employ the use of small airborne robots , scanners , to observe the citizens of Earth . The city variant merely moves about the streets , monitors individuals , and takes photographs , while the combat equivalent is capable of dropping mines into an area . Civil Protection makes use of smaller airborne robots called <unk> , which fly using razor @-@ sharp rotating blades with which they attack their targets to cause laceration injuries . These are often deployed in closed @-@ in areas . The Combine also use two types of land mines ; hopper mines throw themselves into the air and detonate when an enemy is detected nearby , while the spherical <unk> roll towards vehicles or other enemies , attach themselves and deliver damaging electrical attacks . Combine technology is also used to transform humans into Overwatch soldiers or stalkers , deformed and mutilated humans with no memory of their past selves who act as slaves and maintenance workers in Combine facilities . Transformation into a Stalker is considered among the Combine 's worst punishments for dissidents . 
 Militarily , the Combine make use of both synthetic machines — machines powered by organic components — and traditional mechanical machines such as armored personnel carriers and attack helicopters . The most prominent of the synthetic machines are the insect @-@ like gunships ; and Striders , 50 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 15 m ) armored creatures that walk upon three legs , which are armed with a high powered <unk> cannon and a head @-@ mounted pulse turret . In Episode Two , a smaller equivalent to the Strider , the Hunter , is introduced . These 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 ft ) tall , tripodal assault machines fire explosive flechettes at targets and are small enough to maneuver indoors . Other synths are seen near the end of the Half @-@ Life 2 , although their roles are not elaborated on . Sentry turrets are also used by the Combine . The Combine also use headcrabs as a biological weapon against dissidents , firing artillery shells loaded with the creatures into areas and allowing them to infest the vicinity . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Half @-@ Life series = = = 
 According to the backstory presented during Half @-@ Life 2 , the Combine appear on Earth after the death of the Nihilanth , the boss character at the end of Half @-@ Life . The death of the Nihilanth , a powerful creature controlling the dimensional rip between Xen and the Black Mesa Research Facility on Earth , causes the rip to worsen , resulting in " portal storms " which spread the hostile wildlife of Xen across Earth . The Combine manipulate this tear in the spacetime continuum , widening it to allow access to Earth from their dimension . When it is sufficiently wide , the Combine invade in force , and in the subsequent Seven Hour War quickly defeat the forces of Earth and destroy the United Nations Secretariat Building in New York City . Earth 's surrender is negotiated by Wallace Breen , who is then made the Combine puppet administrator of Earth , and uses City 17 as his base of operations . 
 The Combine 's first appearance is in Half @-@ Life 2 . Through the early stages of the game , Combine Civil Protection units pursue Gordon Freeman through City 17 after he accidentally reveals his presence to Wallace Breen . Due to Freeman 's actions in Half @-@ Life , Breen sees Freeman as a major threat . As Freeman escapes the city , Civil Protection units raid the resistance base of Black Mesa East and capture resistance leader Eli Vance , who is transferred to holding facilities at Nova Prospekt . Freeman and Vance 's daughter Alyx break into the facility to rescue him , but Eli Vance is teleported to the Combine Citadel by double agent Judith Mossman . However , the strike against Nova Prospekt is seen as the start of a revolution by the citizens of Earth , who take up arms against the Combine . In response , Combine Overwatch are deployed to City 17 , and heavy street fighting takes place . Freeman manages to infiltrate the Citadel but is captured and taken to Breen . Mossman allows Freeman to break free of his captivity , and Breen flees to the Citadel 's trans @-@ dimensional teleporter , intent on escape . However , Freeman destroys the teleporter 's reactor before Breen can escape , causing a large explosion that destroys the top of the Citadel . 
 In Episode One , the destruction of the top of the Citadel has caused its primary reactor to begin to melt down , forcing Gordon Freeman and Alyx Vance to journey back into the Citadel to temporarily stabilize it while the city 's inhabitants are evacuated . The Combine , however , attempt to accelerate the meltdown to send a message to their native universe for reinforcements . After Alyx acquires an encrypted copy of the data to be sent , Overwatch forces desperately attempt to stop the pair from escaping the city , spurred on by Combine Advisors . As the pair escape on a train at the end of the game , the Citadel sends the message and detonates , destroying City 17 . 
 Episode Two opens with Alyx and Freeman discovering that the Citadel 's destruction has resulted in the formation of a super portal to the Combine dimension , which is slowly progressing to a stage where it can send overwhelming reinforcements . They also discover that the data packet they retrieved from the Citadel contains codes that can be used to close the portal , and so traverse the countryside to deliver the packet to the resistance headquarters at White Forest . As they progress , it becomes evident that the Combine Advisors escaped the Citadel 's destruction , and that remaining Combine forces are regrouping , albeit under occasional attacks by Vortigaunts . Aware of the resistance 's plans to close the super portal , the Combine attack White Forest in force , but are repelled . The super portal is destroyed after the resistance launch a satellite containing the appropriate data . However , in the game 's closing scenes , two Advisors attack Freeman , Alyx and Eli Vance , and kill Eli before being driven off by Dog . 
 = = = Appearances in other media = = = 
 The use of sandbox applications like Garry 's Mod have allowed for Combine non @-@ player characters to be used in a variety of webcomics and machinima productions . In one webcomic , Concerned , the Combine are portrayed as a highly bureaucratic and often inept organization . One issue shows a Civil Protection briefing for attempting to capture the comic 's protagonist Gordon Frohman , in which officers are instructed to cluster around explosive barrels , seek cover on unstable structures and rappel down from bridges in front of fast moving vehicles . In another example , the machinima series Combine Nation follows Civil Protection officers in a similar style to police procedural documentaries . The officers perform their duties with various twists , such as the team 's medical officer having an obsession with adhesive bandages and the legal consultant , an Overwatch soldier , favoring dramatic entries , such as throwing flashbangs , which often backfire on him . Another web series , called The Combine , parodies the TV show The Office . This series attempts to portray the combine as an intergalactic corporation that suffers from everyday office issues and problems . One episode shows the soldiers attempting to bypass a <unk> so they can watch videos online instead of working . Other media portray the Combine with more serious overtones , such as the live @-@ action video The Combine Interview , which parodies an interview with Tom Cruise discussing Scientology . The video , described by ActionTrip as " eerie , to say the least " and by both Joystiq and Kotaku as " creepy " , instead presents an interview with a Civil Protection officer discussing the Combine 's rule of Earth , adapting Cruise 's words to fit the Combine theme . PC Gamer UK noted that " the suggestion , of course , is that Scientology 's purpose or self @-@ image in some way resembles that of the <unk> intergalactic murderous alien collective " . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The Combine have inspired the creation of several items of merchandise for the Half @-@ Life series . A plush toy was created by Valve , based on the synthetic tripod Hunters introduced in Episode Two . Sold and distributed via Valve 's online store , the toy was released in February 2008 . In addition , Valve has produced t @-@ shirts depicting the Combine 's idea of humanity 's evolution , from ape to Combine Overwatch soldier , and a lithograph displaying twelve pieces of concept art for the Combine soldier . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Combine have received a positive reaction from critics . 1UP.com praised the " epic feel " built up by the Combine and their harsh rule of City 17 in Half @-@ Life 2 , stating that this created " a world governed by <unk> , decorated with urban decay , and lacking any hope " . GameSpot echoed this praise , saying that the " vision of a dystopian police state is chillingly effective " . PC Zone described the appearance of the Combine 's soldiers as " stormtrooper @-@ like " , but although stating that overall the artificial intelligence for the game was " extremely competent " , the Combine non @-@ player characters " could have used better survival instincts " , citing their reluctance to take cover and tendency to charge at the player and into a shotgun blast . A number of reviews of Episode One were disappointed by the lack of new characters for the Combine , although GameSpot praised the improved AI for Combine soldiers and the addition of new abilities , such as rappelling down buildings . The addition of the Hunter in Episode Two was particularly well received by critics ; Computer and Video Games stated that they were challenging to fight and were " a very welcome addition " to the series , while IGN stated that the Hunters were " impressively designed ... [ they are ] sleek and powerful all at once and reek of malicious alien intelligence . " 
 The Combine were ranked at # 22 in IGN 's ' Top 100 Videogame Villains ' list . 
 = Tropical Storm Alma = 
 Tropical Storm Alma of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season was the easternmost forming Pacific tropical cyclone on record . It formed within the monsoon trough just off the coast of Costa Rica on May 29 . Initially forecast to remain a weak tropical storm , the cyclone rapidly strengthened and developed an eye before making landfall in Nicaragua near León with peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Alma was the first tropical storm on record to strike the Pacific coast of Nicaragua . In Costa Rica , heavy rainfall caused flooding and landslides , killing two and causing $ 35 million ( USD ) in damage . Three people were killed in Nicaragua , one from drowning and two others from electrocution . Five others died in Honduras from an aviation accident likely related to the storm and one other was swept away in floodwaters . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Towards the end of May 2008 , computer hurricane models forecast the development of a broad low pressure area to the southwest of Central America . On May 26 , a large trough extended from the southwestern Caribbean Sea across Costa Rica into the eastern Pacific Ocean , forming a broad low pressure area across the region . A scattered area of strong convection developed , partially in association with the Intertropical Convergence Zone . Located within an area of weak steering currents , the disturbance remained nearly stationary , and on May 27 its shower activity increased in organization . Initially the system consisted of several cyclonic swirls , of which the most pronounced one was located about 340 miles ( 550 km ) west @-@ southwest of San José , Costa Rica . The system gradually became better organized , and with a sufficiently well @-@ developed circulation and convective structure , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified the system as Tropical Depression One @-@ E at 0300 UTC on May 29 , about 105 miles ( 165 km ) west @-@ northwest of Cabo Blanco , Costa Rica . 
 With a mid @-@ level ridge located in the Gulf of Mexico , the depression drifted generally northward through an area of warm water temperatures and low wind shear . Initially its convection was weak and confined to a few rainbands far from the center . As such , intensification was not expected beyond minimal tropical storm status . However , the system quickly developed intense thunderstorms near the center with increased banding in its southern semicircle , and at 1500 UTC on May 29 the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Alma , about 55 miles ( 85 km ) southwest of Managua , Nicaragua . Its intensity was set at 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , and the storm was forecast to intensity only slightly more before moving ashore . However , one hour after it was upgraded to tropical storm status , the NHC re @-@ assessed the intensity as 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , citing updated observations from satellite imagery and QuikSCAT . An eye feature formed , surrounded by a very tight ring of convection , and at around 1900 UTC on May 29 Alma made landfall near León , Nicaragua as a strong tropical storm . The storm quickly weakened after moving ashore , though a small area of thunderstorms persisted as it crossed into the mountainous region of southern Honduras . After passing near Tegucigalpa Alma weakened to tropical depression status , and at 1500 UTC on May 30 the cyclone dissipated near the border of Honduras and Guatemala . On May 31 , after crossing Central America as a low pressure area , Alma 's remnants moved into the Gulf of Honduras and spawned Tropical Storm Arthur . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Coinciding with the first advisory on the depression , the government of Costa Rica issued a tropical storm warning for the entire Pacific coast of the country . About four hours prior to landfall , when Alma was named , a tropical storm warning was in effect for the entire coastlines of Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Honduras , and El Salvador . When it was realized the storm was much stronger than previously thought , a hurricane warning was issued for the coasts of Nicaragua and Honduras , and Alma was forecast to attain hurricane status . Prior to moving ashore , the NHC warned that the storm could produce up to 20 inches ( 500 mm ) of rainfall , resulting in mudslides and flash flooding . The National Emergency Commission of Costa Rica activated emergency shelters prior to the arrival of the storm ; 250 people in <unk> evacuated from their homes . In Nicaragua , officials evacuated about 5 @,@ 000 people , while 3 @,@ 000 troops were mobilized to assist in the aftermath of the storm . 
 When Tropical Storm Alma made landfall it produced moderate to heavy rainfall across Central America . The city of David , Chiriquí in western Panama reported 5 @.@ 75 inches ( 141 mm ) of precipitation in 48 hours . Additionally , the capital city of San José , Costa Rica reported 3 @.@ 07 inches ( 78 mm ) of rainfall in a 48 ‑ hour period . In Costa Rica , the precipitation caused river flooding , threatening 17 communities . It also caused widespread mudslides , which closed at least eight roads . The storm downed trees and power lines , leaving about 42 @,@ 000 people without electricity in the country . Two deaths were reported in the country , and damage in Costa Rica was estimated at about ₡ 20 billion <unk> ( $ 35 million 2008 USD ) . 
 In León near where it moved ashore in Nicaragua , the passage of Alma left the city without power . Several buildings were destroyed in the city , and some roads were damaged . Much of the departments of León and Chinandega experienced power outages , due to the strong winds . One person died from electrocution , due to a downed high @-@ tension cable , and another person died in a similar manner . Offshore , one person drowned when he rode out the storm in his boat . In Tegucigalpa , TACA Flight 390 skidded off a runway sodden by torrential rain , killing three passengers ( plus two more on the ground ) and injuring over eighty . One other fatality was reported in Honduras when a young girl was swept away in a raging stream . 
 = = Records and retirement = = 
 Forming at <unk> , Alma developed farther east than any other Pacific tropical cyclone on record . Excluding systems crossing in from the Atlantic , only seven other systems , Francesca in 1970 , Bridget and Priscilla in 1971 , Jimena in 1979 , Paul in 1982 , Cristina in 1996 , and Rosa in 2000 , developed east of <unk> . Alma made landfall farther east than any other Pacific tropical cyclone , and it was the only to do so on the Pacific coast of Nicaragua . When the storm formed on May 29 , it marked the ninth year in a row when a Pacific tropical cyclone formed in May , which was the most consecutive years in which storms formed in May . Alma 's remnants contributed to the formation of Tropical Storm Arthur in the Atlantic ; although not strictly speaking the same cyclone due to the circulation of Alma dissipating , 
 Despite its low death toll and low damage , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Alma from the list of Pacific hurricane names and replaced it with Amanda for the 2014 Pacific hurricane season . This makes Alma the first tropical storm to be retired in the Eastern Pacific since Hazel in 1965 . 
 = Types of volcanic eruptions = 
 Several types of volcanic eruptions — during which lava , tephra ( ash , lapilli , volcanic bombs and blocks ) , and assorted gases are expelled from a volcanic vent or fissure — have been distinguished by volcanologists . These are often named after famous volcanoes where that type of behavior has been observed . Some volcanoes may exhibit only one characteristic type of eruption during a period of activity , while others may display an entire sequence of types all in one eruptive series . 
 There are three different types of eruptions . The most well @-@ observed are magmatic eruptions , which involve the decompression of gas within magma that propels it forward . Phreatomagmatic eruptions are another type of volcanic eruption , driven by the compression of gas within magma , the direct opposite of the process powering magmatic activity . The third eruptive type is the phreatic eruption , which is driven by the superheating of steam via contact with magma ; these eruptive types often exhibit no magmatic release , instead causing the granulation of existing rock . 
 Within these wide @-@ defining eruptive types are several subtypes . The weakest are Hawaiian and submarine , then Strombolian , followed by Vulcanian and Surtseyan . The stronger eruptive types are <unk> eruptions , followed by Plinian eruptions ; the strongest eruptions are called " Ultra @-@ Plinian . " Subglacial and phreatic eruptions are defined by their eruptive mechanism , and vary in strength . An important measure of eruptive strength is Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) , an order of magnitude scale ranging from 0 to 8 that often correlates to eruptive types . 
 = = Eruption mechanisms = = 
 Volcanic eruptions arise through three main mechanisms : 
 Gas release under decompression causing magmatic eruptions 
 Thermal contraction from chilling on contact with water causing phreatomagmatic eruptions 
 Ejection of entrained particles during steam eruptions causing phreatic eruptions 
 There are two types of eruptions in terms of activity , explosive eruptions and effusive eruptions . Explosive eruptions are characterized by gas @-@ driven explosions that propels magma and tephra . Effusive eruptions , meanwhile , are characterized by the outpouring of lava without significant explosive eruption . 
 Volcanic eruptions vary widely in strength . On the one extreme there are effusive Hawaiian eruptions , which are characterized by lava fountains and fluid lava flows , which are typically not very dangerous . On the other extreme , Plinian eruptions are large , violent , and highly dangerous explosive events . Volcanoes are not bound to one eruptive style , and frequently display many different types , both passive and explosive , even the span of a single eruptive cycle . Volcanoes do not always erupt vertically from a single crater near their peak , either . Some volcanoes exhibit lateral and fissure eruptions . Notably , many Hawaiian eruptions start from rift zones , and some of the strongest Surtseyan eruptions develop along fracture zones . Scientists believed that pulses of magma mixed together in the chamber before climbing upward — a process estimated to take several thousands of years . But Columbia University volcanologists found that the eruption of Costa Rica ’ s <unk> Volcano in 1963 was likely triggered by magma that took a nonstop route from the mantle over just a few months . 
 = = = Volcano explosivity index = = = 
 The volcanic explosivity index ( commonly shortened to VEI ) is a scale , from 0 to 8 , for measuring the strength of eruptions . It is used by the Smithsonian Institution 's Global Volcanism Program in assessing the impact of historic and prehistoric lava flows . It operates in a way similar to the Richter scale for earthquakes , in that each interval in value represents a tenfold increasing in magnitude ( it is logarithmic ) . The vast majority of volcanic eruptions are of <unk> between 0 and 2 . 
 Volcanic eruptions by VEI index 
 = = Magmatic eruptions = = 
 Magmatic eruptions produce juvenile clasts during explosive decompression from gas release . They range in intensity from the relatively small lava fountains on Hawaii to catastrophic Ultra @-@ Plinian eruption columns more than 30 km ( 19 mi ) high , bigger than the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 that buried Pompeii . 
 = = = Hawaiian = = = 
 Hawaiian eruptions are a type of volcanic eruption , named after the Hawaiian volcanoes with which this eruptive type is hallmark . Hawaiian eruptions are the calmest types of volcanic events , characterized by the effusive eruption of very fluid basalt @-@ type lavas with low gaseous content . The volume of ejected material from Hawaiian eruptions is less than half of that found in other eruptive types . Steady production of small amounts of lava builds up the large , broad form of a shield volcano . Eruptions are not centralized at the main summit as with other volcanic types , and often occur at vents around the summit and from fissure vents radiating out of the center . 
 Hawaiian eruptions often begin as a line of vent eruptions along a fissure vent , a so @-@ called " curtain of fire . " These die down as the lava begins to concentrate at a few of the vents . Central @-@ vent eruptions , meanwhile , often take the form of large lava fountains ( both continuous and sporadic ) , which can reach heights of hundreds of meters or more . The particles from lava fountains usually cool in the air before hitting the ground , resulting in the accumulation of <unk> scoria fragments ; however , when the air is especially thick with clasts , they cannot cool off fast enough due to the surrounding heat , and hit the ground still hot , the accumulation of which forms spatter cones . If eruptive rates are high enough , they may even form splatter @-@ fed lava flows . Hawaiian eruptions are often extremely long lived ; Puʻu ʻŌʻō , a cinder cone of Kilauea , has been erupting continuously since 1983 . Another Hawaiian volcanic feature is the formation of active lava lakes , self @-@ maintaining pools of raw lava with a thin crust of semi @-@ cooled rock ; there are currently only 5 such lakes in the world , and the one at Kīlauea 's <unk> vent is one of them . 
 Flows from Hawaiian eruptions are basaltic , and can be divided into two types by their structural characteristics . <unk> lava is a relatively smooth lava flow that can be billowy or ropey . They can move as one sheet , by the advancement of " toes , " or as a snaking lava column . A 'a lava flows are denser and more viscous then pahoehoe , and tend to move slower . Flows can measure 2 to 20 m ( 7 to 66 ft ) thick . A 'a flows are so thick that the outside layers cools into a rubble @-@ like mass , insulating the still @-@ hot interior and preventing it from cooling . A 'a lava moves in a peculiar way — the front of the flow <unk> due to pressure from behind until it breaks off , after which the general mass behind it moves forward . <unk> lava can sometimes become A 'a lava due to increasing viscosity or increasing rate of shear , but A 'a lava never turns into pahoehoe flow . 
 Hawaiian eruptions are responsible for several unique volcanological objects . Small volcanic particles are carried and formed by the wind , chilling quickly into teardrop @-@ shaped glassy fragments known as Pele 's tears ( after Pele , the Hawaiian volcano deity ) . During especially high winds these chunks may even take the form of long drawn @-@ out strands , known as Pele 's hair . Sometimes basalt <unk> into <unk> , the lowest density rock type on earth . 
 Although Hawaiian eruptions are named after the volcanoes of Hawaii , they are not necessarily restricted to them ; the largest lava fountain ever recorded formed on the island of Izu Ōshima ( on Mount Mihara ) in 1986 , a 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 249 ft ) gusher that was more than twice as high as the mountain itself ( which stands at 764 m ( 2 @,@ 507 ft ) ) . 
 Volcanoes known to have Hawaiian activity include : 
 Puʻu ʻŌʻō , a parasitic cinder cone located on Kilauea on the island of Hawaiʻi which has been erupting continuously since 1983 . The eruptions began with a 6 km ( 4 mi ) -long fissure @-@ based " curtain of fire " on 3 January . These gave way to centralized eruptions on the site of Kilauea 's east rift , eventually building up the still active cone . 
 For a list of all of the volcanoes of Hawaii , see List of volcanoes in the Hawaiian - Emperor seamount chain . 
 Mount Etna , Italy . 
 Mount Mihara in 1986 ( see above paragraph ) 
 = = = Strombolian = = = 
 Strombolian eruptions are a type of volcanic eruption , named after the volcano Stromboli , which has been erupting continuously for centuries . Strombolian eruptions are driven by the bursting of gas bubbles within the magma . These gas bubbles within the magma accumulate and coalesce into large bubbles , called gas slugs . These grow large enough to rise through the lava column . Upon reaching the surface , the difference in air pressure causes the bubble to burst with a loud pop , throwing magma in the air in a way similar to a soap bubble . Because of the high gas pressures associated with the lavas , continued activity is generally in the form of episodic explosive eruptions accompanied by the distinctive loud blasts . During eruptions , these blasts occur as often as every few minutes . 
 The term " Strombolian " has been used indiscriminately to describe a wide variety of volcanic eruptions , varying from small volcanic blasts to large eruptive columns . In reality , true Strombolian eruptions are characterized by short @-@ lived and explosive eruptions of lavas with intermediate viscosity , often ejected high into the air . Columns can measure hundreds of meters in height . The lavas formed by Strombolian eruptions are a form of relatively viscous basaltic lava , and its end product is mostly scoria . The relative passivity of Strombolian eruptions , and its non @-@ damaging nature to its source vent allow Strombolian eruptions to continue unabated for thousands of years , and also makes it one of the least dangerous eruptive types . 
 Strombolian eruptions eject volcanic bombs and lapilli fragments that travel in parabolic paths before landing around their source vent . The steady accumulation of small fragments builds cinder cones composed completely of basaltic pyroclasts . This form of accumulation tends to result in well @-@ ordered rings of tephra . 
 Strombolian eruptions are similar to Hawaiian eruptions , but there are differences . Strombolian eruptions are noisier , produce no sustained eruptive columns , do not produce some volcanic products associated with Hawaiian volcanism ( specifically Pele 's tears and Pele 's hair ) , and produce fewer molten lava flows ( although the eruptive material does tend to form small rivulets ) . 
 Volcanoes known to have Strombolian activity include : 
 <unk> , Mexico , which erupted from a fissure in a cornfield in 1943 . Two years into its life , pyroclastic activity began to wane , and the outpouring of lava from its base became its primary mode of activity . Eruptions ceased in 1952 , and the final height was 424 m ( 1 @,@ 391 ft ) . This was the first time that scientists are able to observe the complete life cycle of a volcano . 
 Mount Etna , Italy , which has displayed Strombolian activity in recent eruptions , for example in 1981 , 1999 , 2002 @-@ 2003 , and 2009 . 
 Mount Erebus in Antarctica , the southernmost active volcano in the world , having been observed erupting since 1972 . Eruptive activity at Erebus consists of frequent Strombolian activity . 
 Stromboli itself . The namesake of the mild explosive activity that it possesses has been active throughout historical time ; essentially continuous Strombolian eruptions , occasionally accompanied by lava flows , have been recorded at Stromboli for more than a millennium . 
 = = = Vulcanian = = = 
 Vulcanian eruptions are a type of volcanic eruption , named after the volcano Vulcano . It was named so following Giuseppe Mercalli 's observations of its 1888 @-@ 1890 eruptions . In Vulcanian eruptions , highly viscous magma within the volcano make it difficult for vesiculate gases to escape . Similar to Strombolian eruptions , this leads to the buildup of high gas pressure , eventually popping the cap holding the magma down and resulting in an explosive eruption . However , unlike Strombolian eruptions , ejected lava fragments are not aerodynamic ; this is due to the higher viscosity of Vulcanian magma and the greater incorporation of crystalline material broken off from the former cap . They are also more explosive than their Strombolian counterparts , with eruptive columns often reaching between 5 and 10 km ( 3 and 6 mi ) high . Lastly , Vulcanian deposits are andesitic to dacitic rather than basaltic . 
 Initial Vulcanian activity is characterized by a series of short @-@ lived explosions , lasting a few minutes to a few hours and typified by the ejection of volcanic bombs and blocks . These eruptions wear down the lava dome holding the magma down , and it disintegrates , leading to much more quiet and continuous eruptions . Thus an early sign of future Vulcanian activity is lava dome growth , and its collapse generates an outpouring of pyroclastic material down the volcano 's slope . 
 Deposits near the source vent consist of large volcanic blocks and bombs , with so @-@ called " bread @-@ crust bombs " being especially common . These deeply cracked volcanic chunks form when the exterior of ejected lava cools quickly into a glassy or fine @-@ grained shell , but the inside continues to cool and vesiculate . The center of the fragment expands , cracking the exterior . However the bulk of Vulcanian deposits are fine grained ash . The ash is only moderately dispersed , and its abundance indicates a high degree of fragmentation , the result of high gas contents within the magma . In some cases these have been found to be the result of interaction with meteoric water , suggesting that Vulcanian eruptions are partially hydrovolcanic . 
 Volcanoes that have exhibited Vulcanian activity include : 
 Sakurajima , Japan has been the site of Vulcanian activity near @-@ continuously since 1955 . 
 <unk> , Papua New Guinea , one of several volcanoes in the Rabaul Caldera . 
 <unk> Volcano in Costa Rica exhibited Vulcanian activity in its 1965 eruption . 
 = = = Peléan = = = 
 Peléan eruptions ( or <unk> <unk> ) are a type of volcanic eruption , named after the volcano Mount Pelée in Martinique , the site of a massive Peléan eruption in 1902 that is one of the worst natural disasters in history . In Peléan eruptions , a large amount of gas , dust , ash , and lava fragments are blown out the volcano 's central crater , driven by the collapse of rhyolite , dacite , and andesite lava dome collapses that often create large eruptive columns . An early sign of a coming eruption is the growth of a so @-@ called Peléan or lava spine , a bulge in the volcano 's summit preempting its total collapse . The material collapses upon itself , forming a fast @-@ moving pyroclastic flow ( known as a block @-@ and @-@ ash flow ) that moves down the side of the mountain at tremendous speeds , often over 150 km ( 93 mi ) per hour . These massive landslides make Peléan eruptions one of the most dangerous in the world , capable of tearing through populated areas and causing massive loss of life . The 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée caused tremendous destruction , killing more than 30 @,@ 000 people and <unk> destroying the town of St. Pierre , the worst volcanic event in the 20th century . 
 Peléan eruptions are characterized most prominently by the incandescent pyroclastic flows that they drive . The mechanics of a Peléan eruption are very similar to that of a Vulcanian eruption , except that in Peléan eruptions the volcano 's structure is able to withstand more pressure , hence the eruption occurs as one large explosion rather than several smaller ones . 
 Volcanoes known to have Peléan activity include : 
 Mount Pelée , Martinique . The 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée completely devastated the island , destroying the town of St. Pierre and leaving only 3 survivors . The eruption was directly preceded by lava dome growth . 
 Mayon Volcano , the Philippines most active volcano . It has been the site of many different types of eruptions , Peléan included . Approximately 40 ravines radiate from the summit and provide pathways for frequent pyroclastic flows and mudslides to the lowlands below . Mayon 's most violent eruption occurred in 1814 and was responsible for over 1200 deaths . 
 The 1951 Peléan eruption of Mount Lamington . Prior to this eruption the peak had not even been recognized as a volcano . Over 3 @,@ 000 people were killed , and it has become a benchmark for studying large Peléan eruptions . 
 = = = Plinian = = = 
 Plinian eruptions ( or Vesuvian ) are a type of volcanic eruption , named for the historical eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 of Mount Vesuvius that buried the Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum and , specifically , for its chronicler Pliny the Younger . The process powering Plinian eruptions starts in the magma chamber , where dissolved volatile gases are stored in the magma . The gases vesiculate and accumulate as they rise through the magma conduit . These bubbles agglutinate and once they reach a certain size ( about 75 % of the total volume of the magma conduit ) they explode . The narrow confines of the conduit force the gases and associated magma up , forming an eruptive column . Eruption velocity is controlled by the gas contents of the column , and low @-@ strength surface rocks commonly crack under the pressure of the eruption , forming a flared outgoing structure that pushes the gases even faster . 
 These massive eruptive columns are the distinctive feature of a Plinian eruption , and reach up 2 to 45 km ( 1 to 28 mi ) into the atmosphere . The densest part of the plume , directly above the volcano , is driven internally by gas expansion . As it reaches higher into the air the plume expands and becomes less dense , convection and thermal expansion of volcanic ash drive it even further up into the stratosphere . At the top of the plume , powerful prevailing winds drive the plume in a direction away from the volcano . 
 These highly explosive eruptions are associated with volatile @-@ rich dacitic to rhyolitic lavas , and occur most typically at stratovolcanoes . Eruptions can last anywhere from hours to days , with longer eruptions being associated with more felsic volcanoes . Although they are associated with felsic magma , Plinian eruptions can just as well occur at basaltic volcanoes , given that the magma chamber differentiates and has a structure rich in silicon dioxide . 
 Plinian eruptions are similar to both Vulcanian and Strombolian eruptions , except that rather than creating discrete explosive events , Plinian eruptions form sustained eruptive columns . They are also similar to Hawaiian lava fountains in that both eruptive types produce sustained eruption columns maintained by the growth of bubbles that move up at about the same speed as the magma surrounding them . 
 Regions affected by Plinian eruptions are subjected to heavy pumice <unk> affecting an area 0 @.@ 5 to 50 km3 ( 0 to 12 cu mi ) in size . The material in the ash plume eventually finds its way back to the ground , covering the landscape in a thick layer of many cubic kilometers of ash . 
 However the most dangerous eruptive feature are the pyroclastic flows generated by material collapse , which move down the side of the mountain at extreme speeds of up to 700 km ( 435 mi ) per hour and with the ability to extend the reach of the eruption hundreds of kilometers . The ejection of hot material from the volcano 's summit melts snowbanks and ice deposits on the volcano , which mixes with tephra to form lahars , fast moving mudslides with the consistency of wet concrete that move at the speed of a river rapid . 
 Major Plinian eruptive events include : 
 The AD 79 eruption of Mount Vesuvius buried the Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum under a layer of ash and tephra . It is the model Plinian eruption . Mount Vesuvius has erupted several times since then . Its last eruption was in 1944 and caused problems for the allied armies as they advanced through Italy . It was the report by Pliny that Younger that lead scientists to refer to <unk> eruptions as " Plinian " . 
 The 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington , which ripped apart the volcano 's summit , was a Plinian eruption of Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) 5 . 
 The strongest types of eruptions , with a VEI of 8 , are so @-@ called " Ultra @-@ Plinian " eruptions , such as the most recent one at Lake Toba 74 thousand years ago , which put out 2800 times the material erupted by Mount St. Helens in 1980 . 
 Hekla in Iceland , an example of basaltic Plinian volcanism being its 1947 @-@ 48 eruption . The past 800 years have been a pattern of violent initial eruptions of pumice followed by prolonged extrusion of basaltic lava from the lower part of the volcano . 
 Pinatubo in the Philippines on 15 June 1991 , which produced 5 km3 ( 1 cu mi ) of dacitic magma , a 40 km ( 25 mi ) high eruption column , and released 17 megatons of sulfur dioxide . 
 = = Phreatomagmatic eruptions = = 
 Phreatomagmatic eruptions are eruptions that arise from interactions between water and magma . They are driven from thermal contraction ( as opposed to magmatic eruptions , which are driven by thermal expansion ) of magma when it comes in contact with water . This temperature difference between the two causes violent water @-@ lava interactions that make up the eruption . The products of phreatomagmatic eruptions are believed to be more regular in shape and finer grained than the products of magmatic eruptions because of the differences in eruptive mechanisms . 
 There is debate about the exact nature of phreatomagmatic eruptions , and some scientists believe that fuel @-@ coolant reactions may be more critical to the explosive nature than thermal contraction . Fuel coolant reactions may fragment the volcanic material by propagating stress waves , widening cracks and increasing surface area that <unk> lead to rapid cooling and explosive contraction @-@ driven eruptions . 
 = = = Surtseyan = = = 
 A Surtseyan eruption ( or hydrovolcanic ) is a type of volcanic eruption caused by shallow @-@ water interactions between water and lava , named so after its most famous example , the eruption and formation of the island of Surtsey off the coast of Iceland in 1963 . Surtseyan eruptions are the " wet " equivalent of ground @-@ based Strombolian eruptions , but because of where they are taking place they are much more explosive . This is because as water is heated by lava , it flashes in steam and expands violently , fragmenting the magma it is in contact with into fine @-@ grained ash . Surtseyan eruptions are the hallmark of shallow @-@ water volcanic oceanic islands , however they are not specifically confined to them . Surtseyan eruptions can happen on land as well , and are caused by rising magma that comes into contact with an aquifer ( water @-@ bearing rock formation ) at shallow levels under the volcano . The products of Surtseyan eruptions are generally oxidized palagonite basalts ( though andesitic eruptions do occur , albeit rarely ) , and like Strombolian eruptions Surtseyan eruptions are generally continuous or otherwise rhythmic . 
 A distinct defining feature of a Surtseyan eruption is the formation of a pyroclastic surge ( or base surge ) , a ground hugging radial cloud that develops along with the eruption column . Base surges are caused by the gravitational collapse of a vaporous eruptive column , one that is denser overall then a regular volcanic column . The densest part of the cloud is nearest to the vent , resulting a wedge shape . Associated with these laterally moving rings are dune @-@ shaped depositions of rock left behind by the lateral movement . These are occasionally disrupted by bomb sags , rock that was flung out by the explosive eruption and followed a ballistic path to the ground . Accumulations of wet , spherical ash known as accretionary lapilli is another common surge indicator . 
 Over time Surtseyan eruptions tend to form maars , broad low @-@ relief volcanic craters dug into the ground , and tuff rings , circular structures built of rapidly quenched lava . These structures are associated with a single vent eruption , however if eruptions arise along fracture zones a rift zone may be dug out ; these eruptions tend to be more violent then the ones forming a tuff ring or maars , an example being the 1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera . Littoral cones are another hydrovolcanic feature , generated by the explosive deposition of basaltic tephra ( although they are not truly volcanic vents ) . They form when lava accumulates within cracks in lava , <unk> and explodes in a steam explosion , breaking the rock apart and depositing it on the volcano 's flank . Consecutive explosions of this type eventually generate the cone . 
 Volcanoes known to have Surtseyan activity include : 
 Surtsey , Iceland . The volcano built itself up from depth and emerged above the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Iceland in 1963 . Initial <unk> were highly explosive , but as the volcano grew out rising lava started to interact less with the water and more with the air , until finally Surtseyan activity waned and became more Strombolian in character . 
 <unk> <unk> in Alaska , 1977 , and <unk> in the Azores , 1957 , both examples of above @-@ water Surtseyan activity . 
 Mount Tarawera in New Zealand erupted along a rift zone in 1886 , killing 150 people . 
 Ferdinandea , a seamount in the Mediterranean Sea , breached sea level in July 1831 and was the source of a dispute over sovereignty between Italy , France , and Great Britain . The volcano did not build tuff cones strongly enough to withstand erosion , and disappeared back below the waves soon after it appeared . 
 The underwater volcano <unk> Tonga in Tonga breached sea level in 2009 . Both of its vents exhibited Surtseyan activity for much of the time . It was also the site of an earlier eruption in May 1988 . 
 = = = Submarine = = = 
 Submarine eruptions are a type of volcanic eruption that occurs underwater . An estimated 75 % of the total volcanic eruptive volume is generated by submarine eruptions near mid ocean ridges alone , however because of the problems associated with detecting deep sea volcanics , they remained virtually unknown until advances in the 1990s made it possible to observe them . 
 Submarine eruptions may produce seamounts which may break the surface to form volcanic islands and island chains . 
 Submarine volcanism is driven by various processes . Volcanoes near plate boundaries and mid @-@ ocean ridges are built by the decompression melting of mantle rock that rises on an upwelling portion of a convection cell to the crustal surface . Eruptions associated with subducting zones , meanwhile , are driven by subducting plates that add volatiles to the rising plate , lowering its melting point . Each process generates different rock ; mid @-@ ocean ridge volcanics are primarily basaltic , whereas subduction flows are mostly calc @-@ alkaline , and more explosive and viscous . 
 Spreading rates along mid @-@ ocean ridges vary widely , from 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) per year at the Mid @-@ Atlantic Ridge , to up to 16 cm ( 6 in ) along the East Pacific Rise . Higher spreading rates are a probably cause for higher levels of volcanism . The technology for studying seamount eruptions did not exist until advancements in hydrophone technology made it possible to " listen " to acoustic waves , known as T @-@ waves , released by submarine earthquakes associated with submarine volcanic eruptions . The reason for this is that land @-@ based seismometers cannot detect sea @-@ based earthquakes below a magnitude of 4 , but acoustic waves travel well in water and long periods of time . A system in the North Pacific , maintained by the United States Navy and originally intended for the detection of submarines , has detected an event on average every 2 to 3 years . 
 The most common underwater flow is pillow lava , a circular lava flow named after its unusual shape . Less common are glassy , marginal sheet flows , indicative of larger @-@ scale flows . <unk> sedimentary rocks are common in shallow @-@ water environments . As plate movement starts to carry the volcanoes away from their eruptive source , eruption rates start to die down , and water erosion grinds the volcano down . The final stages of eruption caps the seamount in alkalic flows . There are about 100 @,@ 000 deepwater volcanoes in the world , although most are beyond the active stage of their life . Some exemplary seamounts are Loihi Seamount , Bowie Seamount , Davidson Seamount , and Axial Seamount . 
 = = = Subglacial = = = 
 Subglacial eruptions are a type of volcanic eruption characterized by interactions between lava and ice , often under a glacier . The nature of <unk> dictates that it occurs at areas of high latitude and high altitude . It has been suggested that subglacial volcanoes that are not actively erupting often dump heat into the ice covering them , producing meltwater . This meltwater mix means that subglacial eruptions often generate dangerous jökulhlaups ( floods ) and lahars . 
 The study of <unk> is still a relatively new field . Early accounts described the unusual flat @-@ topped steep @-@ sided volcanoes ( called tuyas ) in Iceland that were suggested to have formed from eruptions below ice . The first English @-@ language paper on the subject was published in 1947 by William Henry Mathews , describing the Tuya Butte field in northwest British Columbia , Canada . The eruptive process that builds these structures , originally inferred in the paper , begins with volcanic growth below the glacier . At first the eruptions resemble those that occur in the deep sea , forming piles of pillow lava at the base of the volcanic structure . Some of the lava shatters when it comes in contact with the cold ice , forming a glassy breccia called hyaloclastite . After a while the ice finally melts into a lake , and the more explosive eruptions of Surtseyan activity begins , building up flanks made up of mostly hyaloclastite . Eventually the lake boils off from continued volcanism , and the lava flows become more effusive and thicken as the lava cools much more slowly , often forming columnar jointing . Well @-@ preserved tuyas show all of these stages , for example <unk> in Iceland . 
 Products of volcano @-@ ice interactions stand as various structures , whose shape is dependent on complex eruptive and environmental interactions . Glacial volcanism is a good indicator of past ice distribution , making it an important climatic marker . Since they are imbedded in ice , as ice retracts worldwide there are concerns that tuyas and other structures may <unk> , resulting in mass landslides . Evidence of volcanic @-@ glacial interactions are evident in Iceland and parts of British Columbia , and it is even possible that they play a role in deglaciation . 
 <unk> products have been identified in Iceland , the Canadian province of British Columbia , the U.S. states of Hawaii and Alaska , the Cascade Range of western North America , South America and even on the planet Mars . Volcanoes known to have subglacial activity include : 
 Mauna Kea in tropical Hawaii . There is evidence of past subglacial eruptive activity on the volcano in the form of a subglacial deposit on its summit . The eruptions originated about 10 @,@ 000 years ago , during the last ice age , when the summit of Mauna Kea was covered in ice . 
 In 2008 , the British Antarctic Survey reported a volcanic eruption under the Antarctica ice sheet 2 @,@ 200 years ago . It is believed to be that this was the biggest eruption in Antarctica in the last 10 @,@ 000 years . Volcanic ash deposits from the volcano were identified through an airborne radar survey , buried under later snowfalls in the Hudson Mountains , close to Pine Island Glacier . 
 Iceland , well known for both glaciers and volcanoes , is often a site of subglacial eruptions . An example an eruption under the Vatnajökull ice cap in 1996 , which occurred under an estimated 2 @,@ 500 ft ( 762 m ) of ice . 
 As part of the search for life on Mars , scientists have suggested that there may be subglacial volcanoes on the red planet . Several potential sites of such volcanism have been reviewed , and compared extensively with similar features in Iceland : 
 Viable microbial communities have been found living in deep ( <unk> m ) geothermal groundwater at 349 K and pressures > 300 bar . Furthermore , microbes have been postulated to exist in basaltic rocks in rinds of altered volcanic glass . All of these conditions could exist in polar regions of Mars today where subglacial volcanism has occurred . 
 = = Phreatic eruptions = = 
 Phreatic eruptions ( or steam @-@ blast eruptions ) are a type of eruption driven by the expansion of steam . When cold ground or surface water come into contact with hot rock or magma it <unk> and explodes , fracturing the surrounding rock and thrusting out a mixture of steam , water , ash , volcanic bombs , and volcanic blocks . The distinguishing feature of phreatic explosions is that they only blast out fragments of pre @-@ existing solid rock from the volcanic conduit ; no new magma is erupted . Because they are driven by the cracking of rock strata under pressure , phreatic activity does not always result in an eruption ; if the rock face is strong enough to withstand the explosive force , outright eruptions may not occur , although cracks in the rock will probably develop and weaken it , furthering future eruptions . 
 Often a precursor of future volcanic activity , phreatic eruptions are generally weak , although there have been exceptions . Some phreatic events may be triggered by earthquake activity , another volcanic precursor , and they may also travel along dike lines . Phreatic eruptions form base surges , lahars , avalanches , and volcanic block " rain . " They may also release deadly toxic gas able to suffocate anyone in range of the eruption . 
 Volcanoes known to exhibit phreatic activity include : 
 Mount St. Helens , which exhibited phreatic activity just prior to its catastrophic 1980 eruption ( which was itself Plinian ) . 
 Taal Volcano , Philippines , 1965 . 
 La Soufrière of Guadeloupe ( Lesser Antilles ) , 1975 @-@ 1976 activity . 
 Soufrière Hills volcano on Montserrat , West Indies , 1995 – 2012 . 
 <unk> Volcano , has frequent geyser like phreatic eruptions from its crater lake . 
 Mount <unk> , well known for its sudden phreatic eruptions . 
 Mount Ontake , all historical eruptions of this volcano have been phreatic including the deadly 2014 eruption . 
 = Erhard Heiden = 
 Erhard Heiden ( 23 February 1901 – c . April 1933 ) was an early member of the Nazi Party and the third commander of the paramilitary wing of Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Detachment ; SA " ) . He was appointed head of the SS , an elite subsection of the SA in 1927 . At that time the SS numbered less than a thousand men and found it difficult to cope under the much larger SA . Heiden was not a success in the post , and SS membership dropped significantly under his leadership . He was dismissed from his post in 1929 , officially for " family reasons " . He was arrested after the Nazis came to power in 1933 and is believed to have been executed in April , but not buried until September that same year . 
 = = Life = = 
 Erhard Heiden was born on 23 February 1901 in Weiler @-@ <unk> , a mostly Catholic city in Bavaria . In 1917 , he attended the NCO school in Fürstenfeldbruck . Little is known about his early life . 
 Following Germany 's defeat in World War I , hyperinflation , mass unemployment , poverty , crime and civil unrest plagued the country . During that time , Heiden served in a Freikorps unit . Also in 1919 , a small right @-@ wing political party known as the German Workers ' Party ( DAP ) was created and seated in Munich . In 1920 , it changed its name to the National Socialist German Workers ' Party ( Nazi Party ; NSDAP ) . It rejected the terms of the Treaty of Versailles and advocated antisemitism and anti @-@ Bolshevism . 
 In 1920 , Adolf Hitler , leader of the party , instructed Ernst Röhm , a war veteran and early associate , to organize an assault section to protect Nazi officials at rallies and disrupt those of their opponents . This was the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Detachment " ; SA ) . Röhm took advantage of the high rate of unemployed young males and quickly expanded the organization into a paramilitary force . Heiden became an early member of the Nazi Party and the SA . In 1923 , Heiden joined a small bodyguard unit for Adolf Hitler named Stoßtrupp @-@ Hitler ( " Shock Troop @-@ Hitler " ) . 
 That same year , Hitler felt strong enough to try to seize power in Munich . Inspired by Benito Mussolini 's " March on Rome " the previous year , the Nazis aimed to first establish power in Munich and then challenge the government in Berlin . On 9 November 1923 the Stoßtrupp , along with the SA and several other paramilitary units , took part in the abortive coup d 'état , resulting in the death of sixteen Nazi supporters and four police officers , an event known as the Beer Hall Putsch . After the putsch , Hitler and other Nazi leaders were incarcerated at Landsberg Prison for high treason . The Nazi Party and all associated formations , including the Stoßtrupp , were officially disbanded . 
 = = Career in the SS = = 
 After Hitler 's release from prison in December 1924 , the Nazi Party was officially refounded . In 1925 , Hitler ordered the formation of a new bodyguard unit , the Schutzkommando ( " Protection Command ; SS " ) . It was formed by Julius Schreck and included old Stoßtrupp members such as Emil Maurice and Heiden . That same year , the Schutzkommando was expanded and renamed the Sturmstaffel ( " Storm Squadron " ) , and finally the Schutzstaffel ( " Protection Squadron " ; SS ) . Heiden , described by William Shirer as " a former police stool @-@ pigeon of unsavory reputation " , joined the SS in 1925 and was an early advocate of separating the unit from the SA , its parent organization . 
 On 1 March 1927 , Joseph Berchtold transferred leadership of the SS to Heiden , who was his acting deputy . Berchtold had become disillusioned by the SA 's authority over the SS . As head of the SS , Heiden also found it difficult to function under the larger and more powerful SA . Under Heiden 's leadership a stricter code of discipline was enforced than would have been tolerated in the SA ranks . Heiden further demanded that the men under his command were not to be involved in party matters which were none of their concern . His intention was to create a small elite unit and obtain higher quality recruits . 
 Except for the Munich area , the unit was unable to maintain any momentum . The membership of the SS declined from 1000 to 280 as the SS continued to struggle under the SA . As Heiden attempted to keep the small group from dissolving , Heinrich Himmler became his deputy in September 1927 . Himmler had a great enthusiasm and vision for the SS and displayed good organisational abilities which Heiden used . Himmler became the driving force within the SS and in time eclipsed Heiden . 
 Upon the dismissal of Heiden , Himmler assumed the position of Reichsführer @-@ SS with Hitler 's approval in January 1929 . There are differing accounts of the reason for this dismissal . The party merely announced that it was for " family reasons " . It was also suggested at the time that the dismissal was due to Heiden associating with Jews . Since 1928 , Heiden was co @-@ owner of a clothing supply business that sold uniforms to the SS . Another company in Munich supplied Heiden and his partner with the pants which were used for the SS uniforms . It was discovered that this other company was owned by a Jew . Further , it was alleged that Heiden had been making large profits on the clothing sales to the SS for uniforms . This led to Heiden having to resign as head of the SS . Historian Adrian Weale says that the dismissal was probably because he was ineffective in the job , but there also were rumors that he was a police informer . Himmler 's biographer Peter Longerich says that beyond the official announcement " we have no further clues to explain either Heiden 's dismissal or Himmler 's appointment " . Under Himmler the SS greatly expanded over time , with his ultimate aim being one to turn it into the most powerful organization in Germany . 
 = = Death = = 
 After Hitler and his party came to national power in 1933 , the SA numbered almost three million men and the SS about 52 @,@ 000 . As the Nazis had now achieved power , they began to swiftly eliminate all opposition . A death list was composed which included many Nazis who fell out of favor with Hitler and included names of men that other top Nazis wanted killed . In April 1933 Heiden was arrested and murdered on orders of Himmler and Heydrich by members of the Sicherheitsdienst ( " Security Service " ; SD ) , the intelligence and counterespionage department of the SS . His corpse was found in September 1933 and he was buried on 15 September 1933 . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Speechless ( Ciara song ) = 
 " Speechless " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Ciara . The song was written by Ciara , The @-@ Dream , and Tricky Stewart , with the latter two producing the song as well . Taken from her fourth studio album Basic Instinct , the song serves as a promotional single from the album . It was released in the United States as a digital download on September 7 , 2010 , and in several European countries as the B @-@ Side of second single " Gimmie Dat . " Tricky Stewart originally confirmed the song as a Basic Instinct track in September 2009 . The @-@ Dream , who composed the track , was featured on the version that leaked in March 2010 . However , on the final cut , the song was performed by Ciara only , with background vocals performed by American songwriter , gospel singer and session artist Lauren Evans . 
 " Speechless " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B love song , which utilizes synthesized trumpets and horns as a backdrop . The lyrical content of the song centers around the protagonist saying they need more time to confess how perfect their significant other is . The song 's accompanying music video , directed by Colin Tilley , features Ciara in a menagerie of scenes . The single had no direct promotion , and reached seventy @-@ six on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In September 2009 , Tricky Stewart , confirmed via Rap @-@ Up that he and The @-@ Dream had spent the entire summer with Ciara working on her upcoming fourth studio album . He also named " Speechless " as one of two songs he hoped would appear on the album . The album version of the song leaked in March 2010 , featuring vocals from The @-@ Dream . However , following the release of its single cover on August 18 , 2010 , it was confirmed that the song would feature only Ciara . It was also revealed that The @-@ Dream will not be featured on the album version of the song when the official track listing of Basic Instinct was revealed . On the final cut , American songwriter , gospel singer , and session vocalist Lauren Evans performs background vocals . The song was planned to be released as the second official single , how was never sent to radio or released as a CD single . 
 " Speechless " is a midtempo , R & B love song , featuring trumpet @-@ sounding synths . Andy Kellman of Allmusic said that the song works a " slow motion glide " and that Ciara 's voice " hovers in a love @-@ struck daze . " The lyrical content of the song consists of the protagonist confesses how perfect her significant other is , and that they need extra time to confess this , such as lines like " I 'd need an extra month on the year , one extra holiday just to kiss you all over your face . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Praising the production of The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart on the album , Matthew Horton of BBC Music called the song " crisp " and said that it was a " trim , anthemic synth ballad . " Noting it as one of their choice picks from the album , Andy Kellman of Allmusic called the song " euphoric " and was the best of The @-@ Dream and Tricky 's seven songs on the album . A Rap @-@ Up writer noted the song as a standout track from the album . Ed Easton , Jr. of WXRK said the song " reminds all her fans that she can actually sing and be taken seriously as an actual artist rather than an over @-@ hyped dancer . " As one of the album 's " emotionally demanding cuts , " Ken Capobianco of Boston Globe said that the song " lacked conviction . " Becky Bain of Idolator was less than enthusiastic of the song , commenting , " basically , we ’ re speechless , too , but only because we can ’ t find much to rave about . " Bain also called the synth @-@ beat generic and " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill , " comparing it to her " Love Sex Magic . " 
 " Speechless " debuted on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number ninety @-@ one on the week of September 18 , 2010 . It went on to peak at number seventy @-@ four . The song was featured as the one of the A @-@ sides for " Gimmie Dat " , in the UK , where the latter peaked at number 111 on the UK Singles chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video was directed in Los Angeles , California on September 10 , 2010 by Colin Tilley . It chronicles Ciara in a menagerie of settings , in the mountains , a mansion , a reflection pool , and a warehouse . The minimalistic clip sees numerous wardrobe changes , and unlike typical Ciara videos , it does not highlight dance aspects . Several outfits she dons include low @-@ riding jeans and a shirt which reveals her abs . Becky Bain of Idolator compared Ciara to Janet Jackson in the clip , noting Ciara 's " oversized top and comfy jeans " to Jackson in " Again " and " Love Will Never Do . " Bain positively reviewed the clip , stating , " It 's a safe video , for sure , but oh @-@ so nice to look at . " A Rap @-@ Up writer stated " after watching the grown ' n ' [ sic ] sexy new Colin Tilley @-@ directed video from Ciara , you 're guaranteed to be left ' Speechless . ' " Although he appreciated Ciara for lowering down the sex appeal and relying on her vocals , Ed Easton , Jr. of WXRK gave the video seven of ten stars , and said that it was not enough to put Ciara " ahead of all the talented musical divas in the industry . " Easton went on to say that " the video is not meant to be over @-@ sexual but still gives us an intimate feel to the singer that , in the long run , may even garner better responses among all age demographics . " He also complimented the video as a whole saying , " The shots of Ciara are stunning and she is shown to be serious about her quest for love from a special someone . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Ciara Princess Harris , Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , Christopher " Tricky " Stewart 
 Production – The @-@ Dream , Tricky Stewart 
 Vocal recording and production – Kuk Harrell 
 Background vocals – Lauren Evans 
 Mixing – Jaycen Joshua 
 Engineering – Brian " B @-@ LUV " Thomas , Pat Thrall , Andrew Wuepper , assisted by Luis Navarro , Randy Urbanski , Zachariah Redding , Jason Sherwood , Steven Dennis . 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Symphony No. 5 ( Nielsen ) = 
 Symphony No. 5 , Op. 50 , FS 97 is a symphony composed by Carl Nielsen in Denmark between 1920 and 1922 . It was first performed in Copenhagen on 24 January 1922 with the composer conducting . It is one of the two of Nielsen 's six symphonies lacking a subtitle . 
 The Fifth Symphony has a non @-@ customary structure , comprising two movements instead of the common three or four . Written in a modern musical language , it draws on the theme of contrast and opposition . The post @-@ World War I composition is also described as having elements of war . 
 = = Composition = = 
 There is no documentation of what inspired Nielsen to write his Fifth Symphony or when he started to write it , but it is generally understood that the first movement was composed in Humlebæk during the winter and spring of 1921 . He stayed at his summer house at Skagen in the early summer . At the end of July he moved to a friend 's home at Damgaard to compose the cantata Springtime on Funen , and was therefore only able to resume working on the second movement of the symphony in September , during his free time from his conducting work in Gothenburg . 
 The whole symphony was finished on 15 January 1922 , as dated on the score . He dedicated the new symphony to his friends Vera and Carl Johan Michaelsen . Having insufficient rehearsal time , the premiere took place only nine days later , conducted by the composer himself at the music society <unk> in Copenhagen . 
 = = Score = = 
 A work from the early 20th century , the Fifth Symphony is regarded as a modernistic musical piece . The symphony draws on all of the " deformation procedures " suggested by James Hepokoski regarding musical modernism : breakthrough deformation , introduction @-@ coda frame , episodes within developmental space , various strophic / sonata hybrids and multi @-@ movement forms in a single movement . Its fragmented nature , unpredictable character and sudden synchronization at the ending also point towards a self @-@ conscious modernist aesthetic , though as in most of Nielsen ’ s early and middle works , non @-@ modernist devices , including <unk> and <unk> , play some essential roles . 
 As written in the original 1926 edition of the score , the Fifth Symphony is scored for 3 flutes ( third doubling piccolo ) , 2 oboes , 2 clarinets , 2 bassoons , 4 horns , 3 trumpets , 3 trombones , tuba , timpani , cymbals , triangle , tambourine , snare drum , celesta , and strings . Some optional doublings are added in the 1950 edition of the score revised by Emil Telmányi and Erik Tuxen ; these include the third flute doubling flute in G and the second bassoon doubling contrabassoon . These optional doublings are discarded in the latest 1998 Carl Nielsen Edition score , which was produced as a co @-@ operation between the Danish Royal Library and Edition Wilhelm Hansen . 
 The Fifth Symphony has two movements instead of the usual four , which is the only time Nielsen used this structure . Nielsen explained jokingly in an interview that it was not difficult to write the first three movements of a symphony but by the finale most composers had run out of ideas . The work has a craggy profile as " it is littered with false climaxes at every turn " . In summary , the first movement is a battle between the orchestra and a renegade snare @-@ drummer , who can only be silenced by the full forces of his colleagues in the final bars . The second movement continues the struggle with shivers of anxiety , building through repetitions and detours to the final victorious grand explosion . 
 = = = Tempo giusto — Adagio non troppo = = = 
 The first movement begins with violas softly oscillating between the C and A notes ; after four bars of the single , minimally @-@ inflected line , a pair of bassoons enters with the initial theme . The beginning has been described by Nielsen scholar Robert Simpson , in his own words , as like " in outer space " and the wave @-@ like line " appears from nowhere , as if one were suddenly made aware of time as a dimension " . The very first theme ends at b . 20 with a descending scale slide , followed by a fortissimo interruption from violas and a subsequent horn and flute dialogue . The prominent feature of instrumental pairing does not lead to any permanent thematic or textural stability , but contrarily grows into a persistent textural sparseness . 
 After an emotionless strings passage which encloses another brief warning from violas , woodwinds cry out amid a percussive background . While the monotonous rhythm of snare drum sustains , violins respond tortuously , only to be overwhelmed by the mood of the " savage and destructively egotistical " ( Simpson ’ s description ) clarinet and flute . The turmoil continues as the bass struggles up a dominant from C to G , invoking a new clash between snare drum and percussion ; the attempt at struggle fails as the bass is foiled at G flat when the ominous violin melody is distorted and disintegrates . The huge incongruity between harmonic and melodic parameters threatens the music with fracture and collapse . After gloomy phrases from various woodwinds , the music fades , leaving a feebly pulsing D with tiny hints of percussion sounds . 
 An oboe triplet figure then reveals the warm theme in G major of the Adagio non troppo section , a contrast to the prior cold landscape . The texture expands contrapuntally for the first time , culminates to a point where the tonality brightens to B major and , after a climax , wanes to G major again . The full strings are soon disturbed by an " evil " motif on woodwinds , playing the shivering element in Tempo giusto ; tension between wind and strings intensifies as tonality shifts within instrumental groups in their respective directions . With a further clash , the music is menaced by the snare drum at a tempo ( quarter note ♩ = 116 ) faster than that of the orchestra , and at its climax comes the instruction to the snare drummer by the composer to improvise " as if at all costs he wants to stop the progress of the orchestra " . ( This instruction is not included in the 1950 edition of the score , being replaced by a written rhythmic line and instruction " <unk> ad lib . " after a few bars . ) The warm theme eventually triumphs in a sustaining grandeur , as is affirmed by the snare drum actually joining the orchestral fanfare . When all subsides , echoes in woodwinds are heard and a solitary clarinet is left to mourn in a tragic atmosphere , recapturing ideas from the whole movements : " Who would have thought that so much could have come out of a gently waving viola line in empty space ? " 
 = = = Allegro — Presto — Andante un poco tranquillo — Allegro = = = 
 The second movement in four sections consists of an " exposition " , a fast fugue , a slow fugue and a brief coda . The music bursts in in B major and continues with great conflicts between instruments , until a broad , calm theme is found in the slow fugue . At the closure it pivots on the dominant of E flat major key ; various parameters collide and “ fall together ” into an uplifting 23 @-@ bar conclusion . 
 This movement was portrayed by Robert Simpson as arising from the ashes and ruins left by the conflict in the first movement . In the first edition of his book he expressed hesitation over analysing this part , feeling that it either requires a very deep analysis , or should be described in the fewest possible words . Jack Lawson , founder and president of The Carl Nielsen Society of Great Britain , commented that in the second movement , the listener " inhabits a world reborn , at first calm but a world which produces new struggles and menacing dangers " and " transports the listener through the depths or above the heights of more standard musical perceptions " . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Though bearing no title , Nielsen affirmed that the Fifth Symphony , like his previous symphonies , presents " the only thing that music in the end can express : resting forces in contrast to active ones . " In a statement to his student Ludvig <unk> , Nielsen described the symphony as " the division of dark and light , the battle between evil and good " and the opposition between " Dreams and Deeds " . To Hugo Seligman he described the contrast between " vegetative " and " active " states of mind in the symphony . As such , the symphony is widely stated to be a work about contrast and opposition . 
 The composer asserted that he was not conscious of the influence of World War I when composing the symphony , but added that " not one of us is the same as we were before the war . " Simon Rattle also described the Fifth Symphony , rather than the Fourth as proclaimed by the composer , as being Nielsen 's war symphony . In fact , the phrase " dark , resting forces , alert forces " can be found on the back cover of the pencil draft score . Nielsen might have considered it an encapsulation of the contrast both between and within the two movements of the symphony . Nielsen also wrote to <unk> about the presence of the " evil " motif in the first movement of the Fifth Symphony : 
 Then the " evil " motif intervenes — in the woodwind and strings — and the side drum becomes more and more angry and aggressive ; but the nature @-@ theme grows on , peaceful and unaffected , in the brass . Finally the evil has to give way , a last attempt and then it flees — and with a strophe thereafter in consoling major mode a solo clarinet ends this large idyll @-@ movement , an expression of vegetative ( idle , thoughtless ) Nature . 
 Although Nielsen asserted that the symphony is non @-@ programmatic , he once expressed his views on it thus : 
 I 'm rolling a stone up a hill , I 'm using the powers in me to bring the stone to the top . The stone lies there so still , powers are wrapped in it , until I give it a kick and the same powers are released and the stone rolls down again . But you mustn 't take that as a programme ! 
 = = Reception = = 
 The immediate reception of the press to the symphony was generally positive , especially the first movement . Axel <unk> wrote that in the Adagio section , he heard a Dream giving way to a " Dream about Deeds ... Carl Nielsen has maybe never written more powerful , beautiful , fundamentally healthy and genuine music than here . " However , critics were more hesitant towards the second movement . In August <unk> 's review , he commented that " Intellectual art is what the second part is , and it is a master who speaks . But the pact with the eternal in art which shines forth in the first part is broken here . " Musicians ' opinions were divided . Victor Bendix , a long @-@ time supporter and friend , wrote to Nielsen the day after the premiere , calling the work a " <unk> <unk> , this dirty trenches @-@ music , this impudent fraud , this clenched fist in the face of a defenceless , novelty @-@ snobbish , titillation @-@ sick public , commonplace people en masse , who lovingly lick the hand stained with their own noses ' blood ! " 
 A Swedish performance on 20 January 1924 , under the baton of Georg Schnéevoigt , caused quite a scandal ; the Berlingske Tidende reported that some in the audience could not take the modernism of the work : 
 Midway through the first part with its rattling drums and ' cacophonous ' effects a genuine panic broke out . Around a quarter of the audience rushed for the exits with confusion and anger written over their faces , and those who remained tried to hiss down the ' spectacle ' , while the conductor Georg Schnéevoigt drove the orchestra to extremes of volume . This whole intermezzo underlined the humoristic @-@ burlesque element in the symphony in such a way that Carl Nielsen could certainly never have dreamed of . His representation of modern life with its confusion , brutality and struggle , all the uncontrolled shouts of pain and ignorance — and behind it all the side drum 's harsh rhythm as the only disciplining force — as the public fled , made a touch of almost diabolic humour . 
 For decades , Nielsen 's music did not win recognition outside Denmark . The first recording was in 1933 : Georg <unk> with the Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra for <unk> . The first live recording was produced in 1950 with Erik Tuxen conducting the same orchestra at the Edinburgh Festival . An international breakthrough was made only when Leonard Bernstein recorded the symphony with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra in 1962 for CBS . This recording helped Nielsen 's music to achieve appreciation beyond his home country , and is considered one of the finest recorded accounts of the symphony . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Fanning , David ( 1997 ) . Nielsen : Symphony No. 5 . New York : Cambridge University Press. p . 127 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Lawson , Jack ( 1997 ) . Carl Nielsen . London : Phaidon Press. p . 240 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Simpson , Robert ( 1952 ) . Carl Nielsen , Symphonist , 1865 – 1931 . London : J. M. <unk> p . 236 . ASIN <unk> . See pages 84 – 104 . First edition ( reprinted by Hyperion Press ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 715 @-@ 0 ) . 
 Simpson , Robert ( 1979 ) . Carl Nielsen , Symphonist . London : Kahn & <unk> p . 260 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 46 @-@ 1 . See pages 92 – 111 . Second edition completely revised with additional chapter . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 <unk> , Michael ( 2003 ) . " <unk> and Construction in Nielsen 's Symphony No. 5 " . Carl Nielsen Studies ( Copenhagen : The Royal Library ) 1 : 18 – 26 . ISSN 1603 @-@ <unk> . 
 Grimley , Daniel M ( 2002 ) . " Modernism and Closure : Nielsen 's Fifth Symphony " . The Musical Quarterly ( United States : Oxford University Press ) 86 ( 1 ) : 149 – 173 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / <unk> / <unk> . ISSN 0027 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Scores = = = 
 Nielsen , Carl ( 1950 ) . Telmányi , Emil ; Tuxen , Erik , eds . <unk> no . V , op . 50 . Copenhagen : <unk> <unk> . 
 Nielsen , Carl ( 1998 ) . <unk> , Michael , ed . <unk> nr . 5 , opus 50 . The Carl Nielsen Edition ( Copenhagen : Hansen ) . ISBN 87 @-@ 598 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . Preface and sources of this edition of the score are available at the website of The Royal Library 
 Symphony No. 5 ( Nielsen ) : Scores at the International Music Score Library Project 
 = Crash of the Titans = 
 Crash of the Titans is a platform game published by Sierra Entertainment and developed by Vancouver @-@ based Radical Entertainment for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable ( ported by SuperVillain Studios ) , Wii and Xbox 360 . The Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions of the game were developed by Amaze Entertainment . The game was first released in North America on October 3 , 2007 , in Europe on October 12 , 2007 and in Australia on October 25 , 2007 . It is the first game in the Crash Bandicoot series not to have a Japanese release . 
 Crash of the Titans is the fourteenth installment in the Crash Bandicoot video game series and the sixth game in the main franchise , but it is the first in the Mutant series . The game 's story centers on the discovery of a substance known as " Mojo " , which the antagonist of the series , Doctor Neo Cortex , plans to use to turn the inhabitants of the Wumpa Islands into an army of loyal mutants known as " Titans " . The protagonist of the series , Crash Bandicoot , must stop Cortex by using the technique of " jacking " to take control of and destroy Cortex 's Titans while collecting the mojo . 
 The game received mixed reviews upon its release ; critics disparaged the game 's short length , and although the game 's variety was generally seen positively , reviewers noted little outstanding in the game . Despite this mediocre reception , the game was nominated for two awards . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash of the Titans is a platform game in which the player controls Crash Bandicoot , whose main objective is to rescue his sister , Coco , and save his home , the Wumpa Island , from being destroyed by the main antagonist 's gigantic robot . The player 's first goal is to rescue the sentient mask Aku Aku , who gives the player basic instructions , shields Crash from enemy attacks , and transforms into a skateboard to help Crash traverse slippery terrain . From there , each level ( known as an " episode " ) asks players to complete fights against large groups of enemies or simply progress through the episode . 
 Crash starts the game with four lives . The length of each of Crash 's lives is tied to his health meter , which decreases whenever Crash is damaged from enemy attacks or falls down a bottomless pit . The player can replenish Crash 's health meter by instructing Crash to eat Wumpa Fruit . Each time the health meter is fully depleted , Crash loses a life . However , the player can win an additional life for Crash by collecting 25 @,@ 000 units of the magical substance Mojo or by collecting a rare type of Golden Wumpa Fruit . After the last life is lost , the player can continue playing by restarting the current episode . 
 Each episode contains a portal leading to a simple mini @-@ game arena , where the player must accomplish a task in a set time . Generally the task involves collecting a specified quantity of Mojo , using an enemy animal 's attacks to snipe targets , or simply defeating a select number of enemies . At the end of each episode , the player earns a rank of a bronze , silver , or gold voodoo doll ; the rank can be improved by defeating a set number of minions , destroying three robotic toilets or inflicting a minimum number of consecutive hits in combat . All three tasks must be accomplished in an episode if a gold voodoo doll is to be obtained for that episode . Hidden voodoo dolls unlock concept art packages for each episode . 
 The Nintendo DS version of Crash of the Titans contains similar gameplay to that of previous Crash installments . The game takes place on four islands , each with two levels and a boss . When a boss is defeated , a new island is unlocked . Each island has its own " <unk> board " where players can win " on @-@ demand items " ; items that can be used to restore health , provide temporary invincibility , and set off Nitro explosions among other things . Additional content can also be won at these <unk> boards , such as gallery art , cheats and a large quantity of Mojo . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Whereas the previous games featured Crash spinning into or jumping on an enemy to attack , Crash of the Titans gives him more options for attack . Early in the game , Crash has a light @-@ powered attack and a heavy @-@ powered attack and can also block , dodge or break an enemy 's block . When he defeats an enemy or destroys an object , a magical substance known as Mojo is released . When Crash collects enough Mojo , he will earn either an ability upgrade or a new move , such as the Norris Roundhouse or the Triple Dragon . His classic spin attack , named " Old Skool " , is an unlockable move , along with an aerial variant that allows Crash to float over chasms . 
 While small minions require only a single combo attack for Crash to defeat , larger enemies , known as " Titans " , require more effort to subdue . Each of the fifteen unique Titans in the game possess a star meter that indicates how close they are to being stunned . The meter rises when Crash starts attacking a Titan , and depletes when he stops . When it is full , the Titan is stunned and susceptible to " jacking " , meaning Crash can mount the creature and control it . While controlled by the player , the Titan possesses a similar moveset to Crash , although some jacked Titans can shoot projectiles . Besides a greater health , the Titans controlled by Crash have a purple Titan Meter . When this meter is full , players can make the Titan unleash a special attack , which fully drains the meter in the process . 
 A Titan 's durability depends on its size ; larger Titans will take more effort to defeat than others and a few are immune to Crash 's attacks . To defeat them , Crash has to jack a smaller Titan to fight them . On defeating the larger Titan , he can dismount the Titan he previously jacked and directly jack the larger Titan . The dismounted Titan will then be destroyed . 
 = = = Co @-@ operative play = = = 
 A player using a second controller can join the game at any time in the form of a white @-@ furred version of Crash known as " Carbon Crash " . The second player appears in the first player 's backpack , and can usually enter or exit the pack . However , the second player has to stay in the backpack if the first player is in mid @-@ air or climbing a wall . This method of play is useful for overpowering enemies and collecting Mojo faster . There are two modes of co @-@ op play ; in " Leapfrog Mode " , the players swap control each time the front player jumps , swings , or slides , while in " <unk> Mode " , each player is equipped with their own backpack and can hide in the other player 's backpack if the action becomes too intense , such as when jumping over a chasm . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The setting of Crash of the Titans features twenty levels . Each level is referred to as an " episode " , and each has a distinctive subtitle that is usually a reference to popular culture ( such as " The Blizzard of Claws " ) . Like the first Crash Bandicoot game , episodes must be played in order , although the player can replay any episode that has been completed . The game moves through five major themes taking place on Crash 's homeland , the Wumpa Islands . The story starts in the jungle near Crash 's residence and leads to an ancient temple . Later in the game , Crash travels through a wood @-@ cutting and mining area and a land flowing with lava that features giant steel mosquitoes sucking minerals out of the ground . The next few episodes take place on an artillery @-@ bombarded beach , where Crash infiltrates Doctor N. Gin 's missile factory , which resembles the Statue of Liberty . The penultimate area is a gigantic tree located in the middle of the island . This tree holds up an entire house owned by Uka Uka , one of the major antagonists of the series . The final moments of the game take place in the antagonist 's Liberace @-@ style lair , and finally inside the Doominator . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Nine characters from previous Crash Bandicoot titles star in the home console version of Crash of the Titans , all of them given a new modern " punk " style that is distinct from other and Japanese video game characters . The protagonist of the game , Crash Bandicoot , is a bandicoot who must defeat the main antagonist Doctor Neo Cortex and use the Titans against each other while collecting Mojo to upgrade his fighting techniques . Aiding Crash is Aku Aku , an ancient wooden mask who acts as a shield , a skateboard , and a weapon . Crash 's other two allies are his genius sister Coco Bandicoot and his muscular older brother , Crunch Bandicoot , who is absent in the Nintendo DS version . 
 Doctor Neo Cortex is a mad scientist who captures Coco and Aku Aku and wants to use stolen Mojo to create an army of mutants . Uka Uka , who is also absent in the Nintendo DS version , is behind Cortex 's plot for world domination ; after tiring of Cortex 's incompetence , Uka replaces him with his cyborg niece , Nina Cortex . Aiding the <unk> are Doctor N. Gin , who is Cortex 's hysterical right @-@ hand man , and Tiny Tiger . Dingodile , another minion of Cortex , exclusively appears in the DS and Game Boy Advance versions of Crash of the Titans as a boss character . Aiding the villains are a number of small fodder enemies that attempt to hinder Crash in his journey . Each fodder is affiliated with a certain villain in the game . The first <unk> encountered are Neo Cortex 's <unk> , which appear as bipedal , chihuahua @-@ like animals dressed as laboratory researchers . These characters appear in the first four episodes of the game , and are replaced by other enemies as the game progresses . The later enemies include Tiny Tiger 's Southern @-@ accented Koo @-@ alas , Doctor N. Gin 's monkey wrench @-@ wielding Doom Monkeys , Uka Uka 's spear @-@ chucking Voodoo Bunnies , and Nina Cortex 's Brat Girls . Radical Entertainment sought to give these minor characters personalities by giving them a large number of distinctive quotations . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In the beginning of the game , Crash Bandicoot aids Coco with a butter @-@ recycling device . Doctor Neo Cortex arrives , captures Aku Aku and Coco and encases Crunch in ice . Crash throws Coco 's machine at Cortex 's airship , severing the chain holding Aku Aku 's cage , which causes the cage to fall into the nearby forest . After Crash rescues Aku Aku , they discover that Cortex and Uka Uka are stealing Mojo from a nearby temple and decide to stop them . On reaching the temple , Cortex reveals his plot to use the stolen Mojo to create an army of loyal mutants , which will be used to build a robot known as the Doominator , that will crush the Wumpa Islands and take over the world . After failing to defeat Crash with his <unk> cyborg , Cortex boasts that Crash will never find his base and flies off , leaving Crash and Aku Aku to follow him . 
 At Cortex 's base , Uka Uka derides Cortex for failing to destroy Crash and replaces Cortex with his niece , Nina Cortex , despite protests from Neo , N. Gin and Tiny Tiger . Nina has Coco brainwashed and makes her participate in the construction of the Doominator . Throughout the course of the game , Crash and Aku Aku interrogate Tiny Tiger , Doctor N. Gin and Uka Uka on the whereabouts of Coco . When they confront Nina Cortex inside the Doominator robot , Nina summons her <unk> cyborg and fights Crash . Crash eventually destroys the robot , liberating Coco and disabling the Doominator . The Doominator collapses and barely misses the Bandicoot home ( and Crunch ) , sparing much of Wumpa Island . Escaping from the collapsed Doominator , Cortex praises Nina for betraying him , and promises to be more evil in the near future . The Bandicoots decide that it is time for celebration , leading Crash to shout his first word in the series and the object of their celebration : pancakes . 
 The DS version of the game largely follows the story of the home console versions , but with minor alterations such as Nina Cortex having a greater role and the inclusion of Dingodile . Near the end of the game , Nina teams up with Crash to stop Doctor Cortex and his dancing " <unk> " . The Game Boy Advance version also includes Dingodile , some plot differences , such as the <unk> ( referred to by its old name , " <unk> " ) not being the last boss , and Cortex being reinstated after Nina 's defeat in the N. <unk> Island . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development on Crash of the Titans began after the completion of Crash Tag Team Racing . The graphics of the Wii version of the game was one of Radical Entertainment 's main focuses in the game 's development , with Radical stating that the Wii has " a lot of horsepower under the hood " and expressing their desire to make full use of it . They also considered implementing a feature to connect the Wii to DS during gameplay , but stopped due to technical issues and time . The Xbox 360 version got a few extra months of development time to improve its graphics before setting a final release date . 
 While the game was being developed , the title 's main character , Crash Bandicoot , became the new mascot of the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society 's " School and Youth " programs in an effort to promote the battle against blood cancer . In a bid to further promote the game , a Hummer ( with a Wii inside ) was painted with imagery from the game and displayed at the Annual Balloon Fiesta in Bristol , United Kingdom . A " Monster Edition " of the game was released exclusively in Europe on October 12 , 2007 for the PlayStation 2 . This special edition of the game features " Making @-@ of " videos , water @-@ on tattoos , game hints , a cheat code list , and the game 's E3 and theatrical trailers in multiple languages . Due to its " mild cartoon violence and language " , the game received a PG rating from the BBFC . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Unlike Crash Tag Team Racing , Radical did not hire the composer of the music in the previous Crash games , the a cappella band <unk> whose members Rebecca Kneubuhl and Gabriel Mann left to compose musical pieces to The Legend of Spyro : The Eternal Night and The Legend of Spyro : Dawn of the Dragon from Crash 's companion franchise Spyro the Dragon , to write the music for Crash of the Titans . Instead , they assigned the job to their in @-@ house composer Marc Baril , who took <unk> 's work on the previous games as references for Crash of the Titans . Radical Entertainment has expressed its pride with some of the music featured in the game , such as Doctor N. Gin 's polka theme . A 32 @-@ track soundtrack was made available on the iTunes Music Store on December 18 , 2007 . The music in the Nintendo DS version of the game was created by Nathaniel <unk> . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 To avoid repetitive audio , Crash of the Titans features more than 7 @,@ 000 lines of dialogue , many of which contain references to popular culture , such as the film Brokeback Mountain . To achieve a natural feel for their dialogue , the voice actors performed all their lines three times . Many of the voice actors from Crash Tag Team Racing reprised their roles , including Jess Harnell as Crash Bandicoot and Lex Lang as Doctor Neo Cortex . Characters who were regulars in the series but did not appear in Crash Tag Team Racing were given new voice actors for Crash of the Titans . These replacements include Greg Eagles as Aku Aku , Chris Williams as Tiny Tiger , and John DiMaggio as Uka Uka . The DS version features full voice acting for cutscenes and in @-@ game elements by some of the same voice actors from the home console version of the game , though some of the voice actors were substituted , such as Debi Derryberry in the role of Coco Bandicoot , and Nolan North in the role of N. Gin . Dingodile , who appears only in the DS and GBA versions , is voiced by Nolan North . 
 To make enemies memorable on their own ; Radical Entertainment scripted conversations between the enemy characters that can be overheard as the player approaches . Several voice actors provide the audio for the small enemies , including Tom Kenny from Nickelodeon 's SpongeBob SquarePants . Adding to the game 's numerous pop @-@ culture references , the voices and mannerisms of some of the characters are based upon those of real people , including Mike Tyson , Mr. T , Jerry Lewis , and Peter Lorre . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash of the Titans received mixed reviews upon its release . GameSpot credited it as a " fairly sturdy , combat @-@ heavy platformer with a good hook " , but concluded that it lacked the distinctive style of past Crash Bandicoot games . The DS version of the game was reviewed positively , with IGN naming it " one of the better handheld Crash games to hit the market " . Nintendo World Report gave the DS version a higher score than the home console version by half a point , but dismissed it as " a short game that has very little gameplay variety " . GameSpot proclaimed that " there 's plenty to do , and controlling the enemy is a neat twist " , but criticized the game 's small length of only six to eight hours . 
 The more negative reviews include those from Nintendo Power , who criticized the game for its " fixed and unforgiving " camera , which they felt made the platforming experience " frustrating " . GameSpy also criticized the game for its camera along with its unsteady framerate , but praised the game 's attractive graphics and offline co @-@ op mode . IGN described the game as " a good idea wrapped in a mediocre game " , dismissing the game 's music as " forgettable " , and hoping that the jacking concept would be refined for a possible sequel . Eurogamer was also critical of Crash of the Titans , deriding its graphics as " designed primarily with the PS2 and Wii in mind , with a fairly lazy high @-@ def makeover late in development " . The PSP version received less praise than its console counterparts , with IGN remarking that it " loses out to the consoles in a number of areas ; especially when it comes to multiplayer " . 
 Crash of the Titans was a nominee in the Writers Guild of America 's inaugural video game writing awards , competing against Dead Head Fred , The Simpsons Game , The Witcher and World in Conflict ; Dead Head Fred won the award . Crash of the Titans was also selected as a nominee in the " Best Sound Design " and " Best Character " categories of the Second Annual Elan Awards . It lost both awards to Skate and Mass Effect 's Commander Shepard respectively . 
 In Australia , Crash of the Titans was the second highest @-@ selling game in its first week below Halo 3 . The game was not as successful in the United Kingdom , where the PS2 version of the game debuted at # 32 in the sales charts . The game made £ 3 @.@ 35 million in the UK , by the end of 2007 . Despite the poor sales in the UK , the game was re @-@ released on Platinum for the PlayStation 2 and for the Xbox 360 Classics . 
 = SMS Weissenburg = 
 SMS Weissenburg was one of the first ocean @-@ going battleships of the Imperial German Navy . She was the third pre @-@ dreadnought of the Brandenburg class , along with her sister ships Brandenburg , Wörth , and Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm . She was laid down in 1890 in the AG Vulcan dockyard in Stettin , launched in 1891 , and completed in 1894 . The Brandenburg @-@ class battleships were unique for their era in that they carried six large @-@ caliber guns in three twin turrets , as opposed to four guns in two turrets , as was the standard in other navies . The British Royal Navy derisively referred to the ships as " whalers " . 
 Weissenburg saw limited active duty during her service career with the German fleet . She , along with her three sisters , saw one major overseas deployment , to China in 1900 – 01 , during the Boxer Rebellion . The ship underwent a major modernization in 1902 – 1904 . In 1910 , Weissenburg was sold to the Ottoman Empire and renamed Turgut Reis , after the famous 16th century Turkish admiral Turgut Reis . The ship saw heavy service during the Balkan Wars , primarily providing artillery support to Ottoman ground forces and taking part in two naval engagements with the Greek navy in December 1912 and January 1913 . She was largely inactive during World War I , due in part to her slow speed . In 1924 , Turgut Reis was used as a school ship , before eventually being scrapped in the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 = = Design = = 
 Weissenburg was 115 @.@ 7 m ( 379 ft 7 in ) long overall , had a beam of 19 @.@ 5 m ( 64 ft 0 in ) which was increased to 19 @.@ 74 m ( 64 ft 9 in ) with the addition of torpedo nets , and had a draft of 7 @.@ 6 m ( 24 ft 11 in ) forward and 7 @.@ 9 m ( 25 ft 11 in ) aft . The ship displaced 10 @,@ 013 t ( 9 @,@ 855 long tons ) at its designed weight , and up to 10 @,@ 670 t ( 10 @,@ 500 long tons ) at full combat load . She was equipped with two sets of 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines that provided 10 @,@ 228 metric horsepower ( 10 @,@ 088 ihp ; 7 @,@ 523 kW ) and a top speed of 16 @.@ 9 knots ( 31 @.@ 3 km / h ; 19 @.@ 4 mph ) ; steam was provided by twelve coal @-@ fired , transverse cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . Weissenburg had a cruising range of 4 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 900 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew numbered 38 officers and 530 enlisted men . 
 The ship was unusual for its time in that it possessed a broadside of six heavy guns in three twin gun turrets , rather than the four guns typical of contemporary battleships . The forward and after turrets carried 28 cm ( 11 inch ) SK L / 40 guns , while the amidships turret mounted a pair of 28 cm ( 11 inch ) with shorter L / 35 barrels . Her secondary armament consisted of eight 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing guns mounted in casemates and eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns , also casemate mounted . Weissenburg 's armament system was rounded out with six 45 cm torpedo tubes , all in above @-@ water swivel mounts . Although the main battery was heavier than other capital ships of the period , the secondary armament was considered weak in comparison to other battleships . Weissenburg was protected with nickel @-@ steel Krupp armor , a new type of stronger steel . Her main belt armor was 400 millimeters ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) thick in the central section that protected the ammunition magazines and machinery spaces . The deck was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . The main battery barbettes were protected with 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Weissenburg was the third of four ships of the Brandenburg class . She was ordered as battleship C , and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1890 under construction number 199 . She was the third ship of the class to be launched , which she was on 30 June 1891 . She was commissioned into the German fleet on 29 April 1894 , the same day as her sister Brandenburg . Upon her commissioning , Weissenburg was assigned to the I Division of the I Battle Squadron alongside her three sisters . The I Division was accompanied by the four older Sachsen @-@ class armored frigates in the II Division , though by the time the four Brandenburgs returned from China by 1901 – 2 , the Sachsens were replaced by the new Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = Boxer Rebellion = = = 
 The first major operation in which Weissenburg took part occurred in 1900 , when the I Division was deployed to China to assist in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion . The expeditionary force consisted of the four Brandenburgs , six cruisers , 10 supply ships , three torpedo boats , and six regiments of marines , under the command of Marshal Alfred von Waldersee . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz opposed the plan , which he saw as unnecessary and costly . Although the naval force arrived in China after the siege of Peking had already been lifted , the task force suppressed local uprisings around Kiaochow . In the end , the operation cost the German government more than 100 million marks . 
 = = = Service with the Ottoman navy = = = 
 In 1902 , following the return from China , Weissenburg entered the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven for a significant reconstruction . After she emerged from her refit in 1904 , the ship rejoined the active fleet . However , she and her sisters were rapidly made obsolete by the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . As a result , their service careers with the German navy were limited . On 12 September 1910 , Weissenburg and Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm , the more advanced ships of the class , were sold to the Ottoman Empire and renamed Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin , respectively ( after the famous 16th @-@ century Ottoman admirals , Turgut Reis and Hayreddin Barbarossa ) . A year later , in September 1911 , when Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire . Turgut Reis , along with Barbaros Hayreddin and the obsolete central battery ironclad Mesûdiye had been on a summer training cruise since July , and so were prepared for the conflict . Despite this , the ships spent the war in harbor . 
 = = = = Balkan wars = = = = 
 The Balkan League declared war on the Ottoman Empire in October 1912 . In the First Balkan War Turgut Reis , as with most ships of the Ottoman fleet , were in a state of disrepair . During the war , Turgut Reis conducted gunnery training along with the other capital ships of the Ottoman navy , escorted troop convoys , and bombarded coastal installations . On 17 November 1912 , Turgut Reis supported the Ottoman III Corps by bombarding the attacking Bulgarian forces . The ship was aided by artillery observers ashore . The battleship 's gunnery was largely ineffective , though it provided a morale boost for the besieged Ottoman army dug in at Çatalca . By 17 : 00 , the Bulgarian infantry had largely been forced back to their starting positions , in part due to the psychological effect of the battleships ' bombardment . 
 Late in 1912 , the Ottoman fleet attacked the Greek navy , in an attempt to disrupt the naval blockade surrounding the Dardanelles . Two engagements took place , the Naval Battle of Elli on 16 December 1912 , followed by the Naval Battle of Lemnos on 18 January 1913 . The first action was supported by Ottoman coastal batteries ; both Greek and Ottoman forces suffered minor damage during the engagement , but the Ottomans were unable to break through the Greek fleet and retired back into the Dardanelles . The Ottoman fleet , which included Turgut Reis , her sister Barbaros Hayreddin — the flagship of the fleet — two outdated ironclad battleships , nine destroyers and six torpedo boats , sortied from the Dardanelles at 9 : 30 . The smaller ships remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north , while remaining near to the coast . The Greek flotilla , which included the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and three Hydra @-@ class battleships , had been sailing from the island of Imbros to the patrol line outside the straits . When the Ottomans were sighted , the Greeks altered course to the northeast , in order to block the advance of their opponents . The Ottoman ships opened fire first , at 9 : 50 , from a range of about 15 @,@ 000 yards ; the Greeks returned fire ten minutes later , by which time the range had decreased significantly to 8 @,@ 500 yards . At 10 : 04 , the Ottoman ships completed a 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed their course , and steamed for the safety of the straits in a disorganized withdrawal . Within an hour , the routed Ottoman ships had withdrawn into the Dardanelles . 
 The Naval Battle of Lemnos resulted from an Ottoman plan to lure the faster Georgios Averof away from the Dardanelles . The protected cruiser Hamidiye evaded the Greek blockade and broke out into the Aegean Sea ; the assumption was that the Greeks would dispatch Georgios Averof to hunt down Hamidiye . Despite the threat to Greek lines of communication posed by the cruiser , the Greek commander refused to detach Georgios Averof from its position . However , presuming that the plan had worked , Turgut Reis , Barbaros Hayreddin , and other units of the Ottoman fleet departed the Dardanelles on the morning of 18 January , and sailed towards the island of Lemnos . Georgios Averof appeared approximately 12 miles from Lemnos ; when the powerful Greek ship was spotted , the Ottomans turned to retreat . Georgios Averof 's superior speed allowed the ship to close the distance between her and the fleeing Ottoman ships . A long range artillery duel that lasted for two hours began at around 11 : 25 ; towards the end of the engagement , Georgios Averof closed to within 5 @,@ 000 yards and scored several hits on the fleeing Ottoman ships . Between Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin , the ships fired some 800 rounds , mostly of their main battery 28 cm guns but without success . During the battle , barbettes on both Turgut Reis and her sister were disabled by gunfire , and both ships caught fire . 
 On 8 February 1913 , the Ottoman navy supported an amphibious assault at Şarköy . Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin , along with two small cruisers provided artillery support to the right flank of the invading force once it went ashore . The ships were positioned about a kilometer off shore ; Turgut Reis was the second ship in the line , behind her sister Barbaros Hayreddin . The Bulgarian army resisted fiercely , which ultimately forced the Ottoman army to retreat , though the withdrawal was successful in large part due to the gunfire support from Turgut Reis and the rest of the fleet . During the battle , Turgut Reis fired 225 rounds from her 10 @.@ 5 cm guns and 202 shells from her 8 @.@ 8 cm guns . 
 In March 1913 , the ship returned to the Black Sea to resume support of the Çatalca garrison , which was under renewed attacks by the Bulgarian army . On 26 March , the barrage of 28 and 10 @.@ 5 cm shells fired by Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin assisted in the repelling of advance of the 2nd Brigade of the Bulgarian 1st Infantry Division . On 30 March , the left wing of the Ottoman line turned to pursue the retreating Bulgarians . Their advance was supported by both field artillery and the heavy guns of Turgut Reis and the other warships positioned off the coast ; the assault gained the Ottomans about 1 @,@ 500 meters by nightfall . In response , the Bulgarians brought the 1st Brigade to the front , which beat the Ottoman advance back to its starting position . 
 = = = = World War I = = = = 
 In the summer of 1914 , when World War I broke out in Europe , the Ottomans initially remained neutral . In early November , the actions of the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben , which had been transferred to the Ottoman navy and renamed Yavûz Sultân Selîm , resulted in declarations of war by Russia , France , and Great Britain . Between 1914 – 15 , some of Turgut Reis 's guns were removed and employed as coastal guns to shore up the defenses protecting the Dardanelles . On 19 January 1918 , Yavûz and the light cruiser SMS Breslau , which had also been transferred to Ottoman service under the name Midilli , sailed from the Dardanelles to attack several British monitors stationed outside . The ships quickly sank HMS Raglan and HMS M28 before turning back to the safety of the Dardanelles . While en route , Midilli struck five mines and sank , while Yavûz hit three mines and began to list to port . The ship 's captain gave an incorrect order to the helmsman , which caused the ship to run aground . Yavûz remained there for almost a week , until Turgut Reis arrived on the scene on 25 January ; the old battleship took Yavûz under tow and managed to free her from the sandbank by that afternoon . 
 Turgut Reis was removed from active service after the end of World War I. By 1924 , the ship was transferred to the role of a training ship . At the time , she retained only two of her originally six 28 cm guns . Turgut Reis was converted into a hulk and stationed in the Dardanelles until 1938 . She remained afloat until she was finally broken up for scrap , between 1956 – 57 . 
 = William Sudell = 
 Major William Sudell ( 1851 – 1911 ) was an English association football player and administrator , who was the first chairman of Preston North End . He joined the Preston Nelson sports club on 3 August 1867 , aged 16 . Initially a player of several sports , by his mid @-@ twenties he had become chairman of the club . In 1880 the club decided to play football exclusively , and from the following year Sudell managed the team . 
 To aid the performances of his team , Sudell recruited several Scottish players , giving them nominal jobs in the cotton mill he managed . After a dispute arising from payments to players resulted in Preston 's withdrawal from the 1884 FA Cup , Sudell became an outspoken proponent of professionalism . His actions resulted in the acceptance of professionalism by the Football Association ( FA ) , and led to Preston becoming the leading team of the early professional era . Under Sudell 's leadership , Preston North End became founder members of the Football League , and won a league and cup double , going unbeaten for the entire season . 
 Sudell 's career as a football administrator ended in disgrace , when in 1895 he was found guilty of fraudulently redirecting funds from the mill to the football club . Sudell was sentenced to three years ' imprisonment . Upon his release , he emigrated to South Africa , where he died in 1911 . 
 = = Football career = = 
 Born in Preston in 1850 , descended from an old Preston family that included a Preston Guild Mayor , Sudell joined the Preston Nelson sports club in August 1867 , aged 17 . During this period the club were recruiting many young sportsmen from the area to play new sports , in order to relieve financial pressures . Sudell proved adept at several sports including swimming , cycling , cricket and rugby . The club played its first game of association football in 1878 , against <unk> , with Sudell a member of the team . However , Sudell did not go on to play on a regular basis ; only two other football matches featuring him as a player are known . 
 Sudell became the chairman of the sports club , which by then was known as Preston North End , in 1874 or 1875 , while still in his mid @-@ twenties . In 1880 the club voted to play football exclusively , and the following year Sudell took responsibility for the management of the team . From 1883 the club fielded several Scottish players , after Sudell went on a recruitment expedition to Scotland . The club arranged jobs for the players , and supplemented their income with off @-@ balance sheet payments . At this time professionalism was not permitted , but such payments were common among Lancashire clubs . 
 After Preston won an FA Cup match against Upton Park in 1884 , the Londoners protested , seeking the result to be overturned due to professionalism in the Preston ranks . This sparked a series of events which threatened to split the FA . Under Sudell 's instruction , Preston withdrew from the competition . Fellow Lancashire clubs Burnley and Great Lever followed suit . The protest gathered momentum , to the point where more than 30 clubs , predominantly from the north , announced that they would set up a rival British Football Association if the FA did not permit professionalism . At the FA conference called to discuss the issue , Sudell was a member of the committee . He argued passionately for the acceptance of professionalism , but met opposition from southern @-@ based amateur clubs , who viewed sport solely as a pastime . Backed by figures such as the more moderate but influential William McGregor of Aston Villa , the advocates of professionalism won the day and secured its acceptance . However , each club was permitted to only pay players who had been born or who had lived within six miles of the home stadium for at least two years . 
 With professionalism legalised , Preston flourished . Keen to make use of tactics , Sudell was the first person to use a blackboard to dictate positions and strategy to his players . In 1887 , Preston recorded the biggest win in the history of the FA Cup , beating Hyde 26 – 0 in the first round . The club progressed to the final having amassed a run of 42 consecutive wins in all competitions , but were beaten in the FA Cup Final by West Bromwich Albion . 
 During this time moves were afoot to prevent cancellation of matches by creating a new competition with a " fixity of fixtures " . The brainchild of Aston Villa 's William McGregor , the competition became known as The Football League . Sudell himself suggested the name " Football League " , as an alternative to McGregor 's suggestion , " Association Football Union " . Plans to create the competition had been ongoing for a period of months without Preston 's involvement , but as the most skilful team McGregor was keen to interest them . Once involved , Sudell was eager for the embryonic League to assert primacy in relation to other competitions , joining with J. J. Bentley to propose that " The clubs forming the League shall support each other and bind themselves to carry out in the strictest sense the arrangements for matches between them , and not allow them to be cancelled on account of any cup competition or other matches " . Sudell was more financially minded than the egalitarian McGregor , and urged the League to dispense with proposals for equal sharing of gate money and residential requirements for players . 
 The League kicked off in September 1888 , with Preston one of the 12 founder members . North End proved superior to their opponents , winning the title with several matches to spare . This allowed the club to concentrate on the FA Cup , which they duly won by defeating Wolverhampton Wanderers . In completing the League and Cup double Preston remained unbeaten for the entire season . The team , nicknamed the Invincibles , contained ten Scots , tempted south by the money on offer as professionalism was still banned in Scotland . Wishing for a grander gesture to celebrate his team 's success than the League committee 's suggestion of a flag bearing the club 's name , Sudell convinced the League to spend 50 guineas on a trophy . However , despite being responsible for the creation of the trophy , Preston North End have not won it since . 
 For the first four years of the League 's existence , Sudell acted as honorary treasurer . In 1892 , with his health declining , Sudell relinquished his position , and was succeeded by Stoke 's Harry Lockett . He left Preston North End the following year . In 1894 the League gave him £ 50 for a testimonial . 
 = = Outside football = = 
 Sudell worked in a cotton mill , where thanks to his numeracy he quickly worked his way up the ranks ; eventually he became manager . His military title came from service in the local Volunteer Force rifle unit , a precursor of the Territorial Army . He was initially commissioned as quartermaster in the 11th Lancashire Rifle Volunteer Corps in August 1874 , he resigned that commission in February 1879 , to take a commission as lieutenant in the same unit . He was promoted captain on 23 June 1886 , and was granted the honorary rank of major on 19 October 1889 ; the unit had now become part of the 1st Volunteer Battalion of the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment . He retired on 30 July 1892 , and was permitted to retain his rank , and continue wearing the battalion 's uniform . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 After his time as Preston chairman , in 1895 , Sudell was convicted of embezzling thousands of pounds from the cotton mill at which he worked , in order to fund players ' wages and expenses , though he did not gain personally . The fraud , totalling £ 5 @,@ 326 , resulted in a three @-@ year prison sentence . Upon his release , Sudell emigrated to South Africa . In Cape Town Sudell enjoyed a successful second career as a popular sports writer and footballing missionary . A member of the editorial staff of the South African News , he became one of the foremost sporting experts in the colony . < ref . David Hunt , History of Preston North End Football Club Sudell rebuilt his life . According to this account Sudell became a successful rugby journalist , dying from pneumonia on 5 August 1911 in Cape Town . 
 = Hillsgrove Covered Bridge = 
 The Hillsgrove Covered Bridge is a Burr arch truss covered bridge over Loyalsock Creek in Hillsgrove Township , Sullivan County , in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . It was built c . 1850 and is 186 feet ( 56 @.@ 7 m ) long . In 1973 , it became the first covered bridge in the county to be placed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . The bridge is named for the township and nearby unincorporated village of Hillsgrove , and is also known as <unk> Covered Bridge for an adjoining farm . 
 Pennsylvania had the first covered bridge in the United States , and has had the most such bridges since the 19th century . They were a transition between stone and metal bridges , with the roof and sides protecting the wooden structure from the weather . The Hillsgrove bridge has load @-@ bearing Burr arches sandwiching multiple vertical king posts on each side , for strength and rigidity . It was built by Sadler Rodgers , who also constructed the nearby Forksville Covered Bridge in the same year , with a similar design . 
 The Hillsgrove bridge is the longest of three covered bridges remaining in Sullivan County , and served as a landing site for lumber rafts on the creek between 1870 and 1890 . Nineteenth @-@ century regulations restricting speed , number of animals , and fire are still posted on the bridge . Restoration work was carried out in 1963 , 1968 , 2010 , and again in 2012 after serious flood damage . The bridge is still in use , with average daily traffic of 54 vehicles in 2012 . Despite these restorations , it had a " structurally deficient " rating in the 2012 National Bridge Inventory , with a 16 @.@ 5 percent structural sufficiency rating . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The covered bridge is in Hillsgrove Township on Covered Bridge Road ( Township Road 357 ) , which is 0 @.@ 1 miles ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) north of Pennsylvania Route 87 via Splash Dam Road ( TR 359 ) . The bridge crosses Loyalsock Creek 2 @.@ 6 miles ( 4 @.@ 2 km ) northeast and upstream of the unincorporated village of Hillsgrove , and is just south of <unk> Township . Its official name on the NRHP is Hillsgrove Covered Bridge . It is also known as <unk> Covered Bridge for the Rinker farm , which is located at the east end of the bridge . Sullivan County is located in north central Pennsylvania , about 123 miles ( 198 km ) northwest of Philadelphia and 195 miles ( 314 km ) east @-@ northeast of Pittsburgh . 
 The village of Hillsgrove is where Daniel Ogden became the first settler in what is now Sullivan County , c . 1786 . John Hill , who founded and named the village of Hill 's Grove ( later just Hillsgrove ) , came to the area in 1789 and bought Ogden 's land about 1794 . Sullivan County was formed from part of Lycoming County on March 14 , 1847 , and the bridge was built in 1850 . The division of Lycoming County ran through Plunketts Creek Township , so there were initially townships of this name in each of the adjoining counties . To avoid confusion , the name of the Sullivan County township was changed to Hillsgrove Township in 1856 ; the new township name was taken from the village of Hillsgrove , which was ( and is ) its largest settlement . Hillsgrove Covered Bridge is named for its township and the nearby village , and gave its name to a nearby one @-@ room school known as the Bridge View School . 
 The name Hillsgrove Covered Bridge can also refer to a now vanished covered bridge , also over Loyalsock Creek , but in the village of Hillsgrove . This stood from 1876 until 1934 , when it was condemned and replaced by a steel and concrete structure . It was the third covered bridge on the site : the first fell into the creek , and the second was torn down to make way for the third bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first covered bridge in the United States was built in 1800 over the Schuylkill River in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . According to Susan M. Zacher , author of The Covered Bridges of Pennsylvania : A Guide , the first covered bridges of the Burr arch truss design were also built in the state . Pennsylvania is estimated to have once had at least 1 @,@ 500 covered bridges and is believed to have had the most in the country between 1830 and 1875 . In 2001 , Pennsylvania had more surviving historic covered bridges than any other state ; 221 remained in 40 of its 67 counties . 
 Covered bridges were a transition between stone and metal bridges , the latter made of cast @-@ iron or steel . In 19th @-@ century Pennsylvania , lumber was an abundant resource for bridge construction , but did not last long when exposed to the elements . The roof and enclosed sides of covered bridges protected the structural elements , allowing some of these bridges to survive for well over a century . A Burr arch truss consists of a load @-@ bearing arch sandwiching multiple king posts , resulting in a stronger and more rigid structure than one made of either element alone . Although there were 30 covered bridges in Sullivan County in 1890 , only five were left by 1954 , and as of 2015 only three remain : Forksville , Hillsgrove , and Sonestown . 
 = = = Construction and description = = = 
 All three Sullivan County covered bridges were built c . 1850 with Burr arch trusses . The Hillsgrove bridge was built for Sullivan County by Sadler Rogers ( or Rodgers ) , a native of Forksville who was only 18 years old at the time . He built the Forksville bridge the same year . The Forksville and Hillsgrove bridges both cross Loyalsock Creek , with the latter about 5 miles ( 8 km ) further downstream . Although most sources do not list the builder of the Sonestown bridge , two newspaper articles on the remaining Sullivan County covered bridges reported that Rodgers had designed or possibly built it as well . 
 On July 2 , 1973 , the Hillsgrove bridge was the first covered bridge in Sullivan County to be added to the NRHP , and on July 24 , 1980 it was again included on the NRHP in a Multiple Property Submission of seven Covered Bridges of Bradford , Sullivan and Lycoming Counties . The Hillsgrove bridge is on the 2013 National Bridge Inventory ( NBI ) , which lists the covered bridge as 186 feet ( 56 @.@ 7 m ) long , with a maximum load of 5 @.@ 0 short tons ( 4 @.@ 5 t ) . However , the maximum load posted on the approaches to bridge itself is only 3 @.@ 0 short tons ( 2 @.@ 7 t ) . The 2006 NBI listed the bridge 's roadway as 12 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , while according to the NRHP , the bridge 's " road surface width " is 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) , which is only sufficient for a single lane of traffic . 
 As of 2015 , each portal has a sign with the posted clearance height of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . A sign posted on the east portal above the clearance preserves the following 19th @-@ century limits on its use : " Notice : All persons are forbidden to ride drive or lead any animal over this bridge faster than a walk or to drive more than 15 head of cattle horses or mules thereon at one time or to carry fire thereon except in a safe vessel under a penalty of not less than $ .30 for each offence . " Prior to the 2010 restoration , the west portal had a " No Trucks Allowed " sign hanging below the clearance sign . 
 The covered bridge rests on abutments of stone and mortar , which have been reinforced with concrete . There are no parapets . The bridge beams are reinforced in places with steel beams . The bridge deck is made of crosswise " narrow width laid flooring " . Wheel guards on the deck separate the roadway from the pedestrian walkways on either side and protect the sides , which are covered with " vertical board and batten siding " almost to the eaves . The interior and exterior are painted red . The bridge has long , narrow windows with wooden shutters : the south side has three windows , and the north side has two . An opening between the eaves and the siding runs the length of the bridge on both sides . The gable roof is wooden shake shingles . The bridge is supported by a Burr arch truss , and is similar in design and construction to the one in Forksville . The western end of the Hillsgrove bridge lies against a steep hillside , and those approaching the bridge from the west must make a sharp right turn to enter it . Prior to the 2010 restoration , the sides were unpainted , but the portals were painted red , while the gable roof was sheet metal which had been installed over the original wooden shake shingles . 
 Attitudes towards covered bridges in Sullivan County changed considerably in the last half of the 20th century . Two of the five bridges that remained in 1954 were razed by 1970 , when the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation considered tearing down the Forksville bridge ( but renovated it because of its historic nature and appeal to tourists ) . The Hillsgrove Covered Bridge was added to the NRHP in 1973 and the two other bridges were added in 1980 . The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission now forbids the destruction of any covered bridge on the NRHP in the state and has to approve any renovation work . 
 = = = Use and restoration = = = 
 In the 19th century the Hillsgrove Covered Bridge survived major floods on March 1 , 1865 , and June 1 , 1889 , that destroyed other bridges in the West Branch Susquehanna River valley . Between about 1870 and 1890 , logging in the Loyalsock Creek watershed produced lumber rafts that floated beneath the bridge . The bridge was the site of " Uncle Ben 's Landing " for lumber rafts , which did not travel at night . These rafts , each containing 5 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 board feet ( 11 @.@ 8 – 70 @.@ 8 m ³ ) of lumber , were carried down the Loyalsock to its mouth at Montoursville . The raft era ended when the eastern hemlock were all clearcut . 
 An April , 1963 article on covered bridges in Sullivan and Lycoming counties noted that the Hillsgrove Bridge 's deck was " a bit <unk> " , and according to the NBI data , the bridge was " reconstructed " in 1963 . T. Corbin Lewis , a retired electrical contractor from Hillsgrove Township , restored the bridge in 1968 . The concrete reinforcement on the southwest abutment of the Hillsgrove bridge is dated 1968 , but the other work done in this restoration is not documented . Lewis also restored the Forksville Covered Bridge in 1970 , with what its NRHP nomination form describes as " all kinds of odd repairs " . Lewis ' restoration work at Forksville involved cutting windows into the sides of the bridge for the first time , with four windows on the south side and three on the north . While the Hillsgrove bridge does have more windows on the south side ( three ) than the north ( two ) , it is not known when they were added . A 1936 photograph of the bridge shows no windows on the south side , and no concrete reinforcement of the eastern abutment . 
 Covered Bridge Road north of Loyalsock Creek is accessed only by the Hillsgrove Covered Bridge at the eastern end , and a bridge over Elk Creek at the western end . Sullivan County replaced the bridge over Elk Creek between March 21 and July 21 , 1989 . Without the Elk Creek bridge , access for five families , a business , and a Little League Baseball camp with 110 children was limited to the covered bridge . County officials noted that despite the covered bridge 's posted weight limit of 2 @.@ 0 short tons ( 1 @.@ 8 t ) , it could still support 5 @.@ 0 short tons ( 4 @.@ 5 t ) , sufficient for small fire trucks and ambulances . In an emergency , larger emergency vehicles could ford the creek if needed . In any case , the limited access did not cause any problems for the four @-@ month period while the Elk Creek bridge was replaced . 
 The Evans ' book describes repairs to the bridge 's northeast siding , done between 1991 and 2000 . In 2001 , the US Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration awarded $ 360 @,@ 000 for 80 percent of the restoration costs of the Hillsgrove bridge under the Historic Covered Bridge Preservation Program . It was one of two bridges in Pennsylvania and 43 nationwide selected for the program that year . In 2010 , the bridge was rehabilitated for the first time since the 1960s . Sullivan County solicited bids in February , expecting the project to cost between $ 200 @,@ 000 and $ 500 @,@ 000 . The metal roof was replaced with cedar shake shingles , repairs were made to the wooden structure , portals , and siding , the bridge and deck were cleaned , and the bridge was painted red . The rehabilitation cost $ 150 @,@ 516 , and the bridge reopened in the autumn of 2010 . 
 In 2011 , the bridge was badly damaged by historic flooding from Hurricane Irene in late August and Tropical Storm Lee in early September . Loyalsock Creek 's flood waters swept debris into the bridge , removing much of the siding on the south side , washing out the approaches , damaging the structural beams , and leaving " two trees lodged between the timber low chord and timber deck " on the north side . While the Forksville covered bridge escaped serious damage , Hillsgrove and Sonestown were both closed , and Preservation Pennsylvania issued a report that questioned whether either bridge could be restored . 
 Sullivan County applied for and received Federal Emergency Management Agency funding for repairs to both bridges . The Hillsgrove bridge was restored first , as it was the main route to a restaurant and heavily used by hunters . Repairs included replacement of broken structural beams , sections of the deck , and siding . Because Loyalsock Creek is an " Exceptional Value Stream " , the scaffolding that supported the structure on the creek bed during the $ 250 @,@ 000 @-@ restoration had to be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection . The bridge was reopened on November 21 , 2012 , just in time for deer hunting season , by one of the Sullivan County Commissioners ; the county commissioner had been married on the bridge exactly 25 years before . 
 Despite the 2010 restoration , the 2012 Federal Highway Administration National Bridge Inventory found the bridge to be " Structurally Deficient " . In addition , the sufficiency rating of the bridge structure was 16 @.@ 5 percent , and the bridge railings and approach guardrails did not meet " currently acceptable standards " . 
 As of 2015 , the bridge is still used ; its average daily traffic was 54 vehicles in 2012 . The bridge 's 2012 post @-@ flood restoration received an award for Emergency Response . A 2014 book , America 's Covered Bridges - Practical Crossings - Nostalgic Icons , included two photos of the Hillsgrove Covered Bridge ( and the nearby Forksville Covered Bridge on the book 's cover ) . According to Zacher , the " Sullivan County bridges , because of their settings , are some of the most attractive in the state " . 
 = = Bridge dimensions = = 
 The following table is a comparison of published measurements of length , width and load recorded in different sources using different methods , as well as the name or names cited . The NBI measures bridge length between the " backwalls of abutments " or pavement grooves and the roadway width as " the most restrictive minimum distance between curbs or rails " . The NRHP form was prepared by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) , which surveyed county engineers , historical and covered bridge societies , and others for all the covered bridges in the commonwealth . The Evans visited every covered bridge in Pennsylvania in 2001 and measured each bridge 's length ( portal to portal ) and width ( at the portal ) for their book . The data in Zacher 's book was based on a 1991 survey of all covered bridges in Pennsylvania by the PHMC and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation , aided by local government and private agencies . The article uses primarily the NBI and NRHP data , as they are national programs . 
 = U.S. Route 46 = 
 U.S. Route 46 ( US 46 ) is an east – west U.S. Highway completely within the state of New Jersey , running for 75 @.@ 34 mi ( 121 @.@ 25 km ) , making it the shortest signed , non @-@ spur U.S. Highway . The west end is at an interchange with Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) and Route 94 in Columbia , Warren County on the Delaware River . The east end is in the middle of the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River in Fort Lee , Bergen County while the route is concurrent with I @-@ 95 and US 1 @-@ 9 . Throughout much of its length , US 46 is closely paralleled by I @-@ 80 . US 46 is a major local and suburban route , with some sections built to or near freeway standards and many other sections arterials with jughandles . The route runs through several communities in the northern part of New Jersey , including Hackettstown , Netcong , Dover , Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , Wayne , Clifton , Ridgefield Park , Palisades Park , and Fort Lee . The road has been ceremonially named the United Spanish – American War Veterans Memorial Highway . 
 What is now US 46 was originally designated as three separate routes . Pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 was created in 1916 to follow the road from Delaware to Denville , pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 in 1917 to follow the route between Hackettstown and Paterson , and pre @-@ 1927 Route 10 in 1917 to run between Paterson and Edgewater . In 1927 , Route 6 was legislated to run from Delaware east to the George Washington Bridge , replacing portions of Routes 5 and 12 and paralleling the former Route 10 , which itself became Route 5 and Route 10N , the latter being shortly removed from the state highway system . In 1936 , US 46 was designated to run from US 611 in Portland , Pennsylvania east to the George Washington Bridge . The route replaced Pennsylvania Route 987 to the Delaware Bridge over the Delaware , and from there followed Route 6 across New Jersey . In 1953 , the Route 6 designation was removed from US 46 in New Jersey , and later that year , the route was realigned to end at US 611 in Columbia , New Jersey , replacing a part of Route 94 . US 611 had been brought into New Jersey by two new bridges over the Delaware River , following a freeway between them that became a part of I @-@ 80 . By 1969 , US 611 was aligned back into Pennsylvania , and US 46 ’ s western terminus remained as an interchange with I @-@ 80 and Route 94 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Warren County = = = 
 US 46 begins at a large interchange with I @-@ 80 and Route 94 near the Portland @-@ Columbia Toll Bridge leading to Pennsylvania Route 611 in the community of Columbia in Knowlton Township , Warren County . From this interchange , the route heads southeast along the east bank of the Delaware River as a four @-@ lane divided highway briefly before narrowing into a two @-@ lane undivided road . The road passes through wooded mountainous areas before reaching the community of Delaware . In Delaware , US 46 intersects Route 163 , the approach to the former Delaware Bridge , before passing a few commercial establishments . From here , the route continues alongside the river , passing more rural areas of woods and farms with occasional development as it enters White Township . US 46 makes a sharp turn to the east away from the Delaware River , widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway again as it bypasses the town of Belvidere and has a few businesses on it . The road turns back into a two @-@ lane undivided road and comes to a crossroads with CR 519 . Past this intersection , US 46 continues through rural sectors with some business before coming to the northern terminus of Route 31 . 
 From this point , the route continues east through dense woods prior to turning northeast into Liberty Township . The road passes through the community of <unk> before crossing into Independence Township . Here , US 46 enters more agricultural areas and turns east again , with development increasing along the road as it passes through Great Meadows @-@ Vienna . It continues southeast before entering Hackettstown , where the road becomes Main Street . In Hackettstown , the route crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line and Montclair @-@ Boonton Line before coming to an intersection with CR 517 . Here , CR 517 forms a concurrency with US 46 , and the two routes continue southeast through the downtown area . At the intersection with the northern terminus of Route 182 , CR 517 splits from US 46 by heading south on that route while US 46 continues to the east . 
 = = = Morris and Essex counties = = = 
 Shortly after the Route 182 intersection , the route crosses the Musconetcong River into Washington Township , Morris County , where it heads back into rural surroundings . About a mile into Morris County , US 46 divides and becomes a four @-@ lane highway , turning north and crossing over a mountain . It continues into Mount Olive Township , taking a sharp turn to the east before the road becomes undivided while remaining four lanes . The road passes rural areas and development as it goes through Budd Lake . In this community , the route passes to the south of the namesake lake as it begins to turn northeast and then north . The road heads northeast again before it enters Netcong and becomes a divided highway as it comes to an interchange with I @-@ 80 / US 206 . Within this interchange , the lanes of US 46 split . From this point , the route narrows back into a two @-@ lane undivided road and runs through developed areas of Netcong a short distance to the south of New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line / Montclair @-@ Boonton Line . US 46 meets Route 183 at an intersection ( formerly Netcong Circle ) before widening into a four @-@ lane undivided road and leaving Netcong for Roxbury Township . Here , the road passes through wooded areas , meeting I @-@ 80 at another interchange and briefly becoming a divided highway at the crossing under I @-@ 80 and again at the actual interchange . US 46 remains a divided highway with jughandles past this point , continuing southeast into the Ledgewood area . 
 At a three @-@ way intersection which was formerly Ledgewood Circle , Route 10 begins straight while US 46 turns left to continue east as a two @-@ lane undivided road through more development . Upon passing through <unk> , the road enters Mine Hill Township , where the road becomes three lanes with two westbound lanes and one eastbound lane . The route passes through Wharton at its southern tip before continuing into Dover . US 46 narrows back into two lanes , becoming Blackwell Street as it passes St. Clare 's Dover General <unk> road widens to four lanes as Blackwell Street splits from it at an eastbound exit and westbound entrance prior to a bridge over the Rockaway River and a New Jersey Transit line . A short distance later , US 46 passes over Route 15 , with a ramp from westbound US 46 to northbound Route 15 . From here , the route continues on <unk> Street , intersecting the southern beginning of Route 15 , which heads south from US 46 to loop back to the north . US 46 continues east , entering Rockaway Township , where there is an intersection with CR 513 . Past CR 513 , the road narrows to two lanes as it heads northeast through Rockaway Borough before turning east and crossing the Rockaway River . The route continues northeast , entering wooded residential areas as it heads into Denville and has a limited interchange with I @-@ 80 , where it can only be entered to and from the westbound lane and where US 46 east can only be entered from the eastbound lane and to the eastbound lane . As it crosses under I @-@ 80 , US 46 becomes a six @-@ lane divided highway . 
 The road is lined with a moderate amounts of businesses , most with right @-@ in / right @-@ out ( RIRO ) access , as it continues southeast through Denville , narrowing to four lanes before coming to an interchange with Route 53 . From this interchange , the route continues east before curving southeast and entering Mountain Lakes . In Mountain Lakes , US 46 crosses under the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line before continuing into Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills . Here , the road comes to US 202 / CR 511 before passing under I @-@ 287 . At this point , the westbound direction of US 46 has a ramp to northbound I @-@ 287 , with access to and from southbound I @-@ 287 provided by US 202 . Past the I @-@ 287 crossing , the road comes to another partial interchange with I @-@ 80 near the western terminus of I @-@ 280 . Past this interchange , US 46 widens to six lanes and enters Montville . In Montville , the route narrows back to four lanes , and has traffic light @-@ controlled intersections with New Road and Hook Mountain Road / Chapin Road . It then has an interchange with Route 159 and makes a turn to the northeast . Upon crossing the Passaic River , US 46 enters Essex County into Fairfield Township . A short distance into Essex County , US 46 has another interchange with Route 159 ( Clinton Road ) , providing access to that route and to its continuation as CR 627 ( Plymouth Street ) . Shortly farther along US 46 , Route 159 and CR 627 meet it at a traffic light @-@ controlled intersection , providing cross @-@ traffic and turns onto US 46 . Past this point , US 46 remains a surface road with RIRO @-@ accessed driveways , but has several intersections controlled by interchanges . Within Fairfield , US 46 has interchanges with Hollywood Avenue and Passaic Avenue as well as two trumpet interchanges providing access to Fairfield Road , which runs a short distance to the south of US 46 . 
 = = = Passaic County = = = 
 The route crosses the Passaic River again into Wayne in Passaic County . The median splits as the road passes to the north of the Willowbrook Mall , with an exit serving the mall , before reaching the Spaghetti Bowl interchange with partial access to I @-@ 80 and full access to Route 23 . Within this interchange , US 46 passes under the Montclair @-@ Boonton Line again . From here , it passes businesses and many shopping centers with RIRO access as a six @-@ lane highway , heading into Totowa . In this area , the route has interchanges with CR 640 and Route 62 / CR 646 . The road turns southeast , crossing the Passaic River a third time into Little Falls . At this point , US 46 runs along the Little Falls / Woodland Park border , interchanging CR 639 and <unk> Road . After the exit for Lower Notch Road , the route enters more wooded surroundings , interchanging with Notch Road / Rifle Camp Road before entering Clifton . Upon reaching Clifton , US 46 has an interchange with the western terminus of Route 3 and Valley Road ( CR 621 ) , with the Valley Road exit stitched into the Route 3 side of the highway fork . Prior to reconstruction of the interchanges , the Valley Road ramp exited before Route 3 began , and Route 3 branched off immediately after Valley Road . 
 Past Route 3 , the highway narrows to four lanes , continuing east @-@ northeast as a limited @-@ access divided highway with some RIRO @-@ accessed businesses still on it , though many roads are accessed through over and underpasses . US 46 has an exit for Van Houten Avenue / Grove Street before coming to a large interchange with Route 19 / CR 509 and the Garden State Parkway . After this , the road passes over the New Jersey Transit Main Line and has an exit for Hazel Street / Paulison Avenue . After the exit , US 46 begins a brief concurrence with Piaget Avenue in Clifton with a series of connector streets and three intersections controlled by stoplights . After the third , at Day Street near Christopher Columbus Middle School , the two roads split at a fork , marked as an exit , with US 46 continuing eastbound to the left and Piaget Avenue continuing to the right . Vehicles traveling west on Piaget Avenue have access to US 46 West through use of a one way underpass that carries US 46 East over it , and also have access to US 46 East by a right @-@ turn only lane near the intersection of Piaget Avenue and Fourth Street . 
 After the split , US 46 turns into a limited @-@ access road again and passes under Main Avenue / CR 601 and former Erie Railway tracks before coming to an interchange with the northern terminus of Route 21 . From this interchange , the route turns north along the west bank of the Passaic River , crossing the Garden State Parkway again before widening to six lanes and meeting the southern terminus of Route 20 at an interchange near the border of Paterson . 
 = = = Bergen County = = = 
 US 46 turns east and crosses the Passaic River a fourth and final time , entering Bergen County in Elmwood Park . Immediately after the river , the route has an interchange for CR 507 . Passing through more RIRO @-@ accessed business areas , the road narrows to four lanes and has a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway . Past the parkway , US 46 continues as a road with some jughandles and other traffic light @-@ controlled intersections ( but still largely maintaining RIRO access to driveways and side streets ) , passing through a small corner of Garfield before crossing into Saddle Brook . Within Saddle Brook , the road turns more to the southeast and crosses over New Jersey Transit ’ s Bergen County Line . Continuing east , US 46 has an exit for with <unk> Lane and crosses into Lodi . Through this area , there is no access across the median of US 46 , as it interchanges with Main Street . The route continues into Hasbrouck Heights , where it turns more south @-@ southeast , interchanging with Boulevard . A short distance later , US 46 reaches an interchange with Route 17 and crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s Pascack Valley Line near the Teterboro station . 
 From here , US 46 enters Teterboro and interchanges with Green Street before continuing southeast as a six @-@ lane highway through industrial areas , passing to the north of Teterboro Airport . The road continues into Little Ferry , where it passes suburban residential and commercial areas and narrows into a four @-@ lane undivided road called Sylvan Avenue , turning to the east and crossing CR 503 . After intersecting the Bergen Turnpike at the modified Little Ferry Circle , which US 46 runs through , the route crosses the Hackensack River into Ridgefield Park on the Route 46 Hackensack River Bridge . In Ridgefield Park , the route is called Winant Avenue and becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway before briefly becoming undivided again . Upon turning back into a divided highway , US 46 comes to a large interchange with I @-@ 95 / New Jersey Turnpike . Past this interchange , the route widens to six lanes and crosses the Overpeck Creek into Ridgefield . Upon entering Palisades Park , the road has an interchange with Route 93 before reaching a diamond interchange with US 1 @-@ 9 . 
 US 46 continues southeast as a four @-@ lane freeway , with the US 1 @-@ 9 ramps following the route a short distance before merging into the route . At this point , US 1 @-@ 9 become concurrent with US 46 and the freeway makes a sharp turn to the north @-@ northeast . The road has an interchange to the 5th Street and 6th Street frontage roads , which parallel the freeway through residential areas and provide access to CR 501 . US 1 @-@ 9 / US 46 continue into Fort Lee , where it has access to a couple commercial areas via RIRO before encountering the northern terminus of Route 63 at a westbound exit and eastbound entrance . From here , the highway becomes a surface road that continues past more businesses and homes with RIRO access , angling northeast as it comes to an exit for Main Street . Immediately past this point , the road turns east and encounters a complex interchange with I @-@ 95 , the eastern terminus of Route 4 , and the southern terminus of US 9W . Here , US 1 @-@ 9 / US 46 all join I @-@ 95 ( although US 46 is unsigned east of this interchange ) and continue to the southeast along a multilane freeway with local @-@ express lane configuration consisting of four local lanes and four express lanes in each direction , passing numerous high @-@ rise buildings . The road has an interchange with Route 67 at GWB Plaza before coming to the eastbound toll plaza for the George Washington Bridge . Past the toll plaza , there is an interchange for the Palisades Interstate Parkway . After the Palisades Interstate Parkway , the road crosses the Hudson River on the George Washington Bridge , which has eight lanes total on the upper deck ( formed from the express lanes ) and six lanes total on the lower deck ( formed from the local lanes ) . At the New Jersey / New York border on the bridge , US 46 ends while I @-@ 95 and US 1 @-@ 9 continue into the borough of Manhattan in New York City on the Trans @-@ Manhattan Expressway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Routes 5 , 10 and 12 : 1916 @-@ 1927 = = = 
 Prior to 1927 , what is today US 46 was followed by three different routes . The first route was Pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 , which was first legislated in 1916 . It began by crossing the Delaware River from Pennsylvania at the community of Delaware . Several <unk> of the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad near Delaware were bypassed with a short new road on the southwest side of the railroad . From there , Route 5 used the existing Delaware Road to north of Belvidere , then the Buttzville @-@ Belvidere Road to Buttzville , the Buttzville Road to Great Meadows , and the Danville Mountain Road to Hackettstown . 
 From Hackettstown to Denville , Routes 5 ran concurrently with Pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 , which was first legislated in 1917 . A mostly @-@ new road ( now eastbound US 46 ) was built from Hackettstown east to Netcong to avoid steep grades on the existing roads . Portions of the existing Budd 's Lake Road were used between Budd Lake and Netcong . From Netcong the route used the old Morris Turnpike to Ledgewood and the Dover Turnpike to Dover , running into Dover on Blackwell Street . Blackwell Street led to Rockaway Road , becoming Main Street in Rockaway , from which it used the old Parsippany and Rockaway Turnpike to Denville . 
 At Denville , Route 5 turned south , while Route 12 continued east along the Parsippany and Rockaway Turnpike to Pine Brook . The route left the old turnpike there to head northeast towards Paterson , starting with the Pine Brook Road ( now Fairfield Road and Little Falls Road ) to Little Falls . A bypass was planned around the south side of Little Falls , taking it under the Erie Railroad at Union Boulevard . From there Route 12 would use Union Boulevard , Totowa Road and McBride Avenue into Paterson . Pre @-@ 1927 Route 10 , which was legislated in 1917 , continued east on Market Street on the other side of Paterson to Edgewater , where it connected to the Fort Lee Ferry across the Hudson River . The new alignments were generally built as planned , except at Little Falls , where a bypass was to be built for Route 12 . 
 = = = Route 6 : 1927 @-@ 1953 = = = 
 In the 1927 renumbering , Route 6 was assigned to the route across northern New Jersey , using the old Route 5 from Delaware to Netcong , Route 12 from Hackettstown to Paterson , and a generally new alignment parallel to Route 10 from Paterson to the proposed George Washington Bridge ; the old Route 10 alignment between Paterson and Edgewater was to become Route 5 . In Paterson , Route 6 was marked along McBride Avenue , Spruce Street and Market Street . 
 Route 6 was redefined in 1929 to use none of the old road east of Paterson ( it had formerly been planned to use Market Street west of roughly where Route 17 now crosses it ) , and Route 5 was cut back to run only east from Ridgefield . The portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 10 that was bypassed by Route 6 was designated Route 10N , but was eventually removed from the state highway system . In addition , Route 6 was redefined to bypass Paterson to the south . The new route would enter Paterson just south of Market Street , but then turn south and southwest before heading back west to rejoin the old route at the east end of the Little Falls bypass at the Union Boulevard crossing . The old road along Union Boulevard towards Paterson was assigned Route S6 , as a spur of Route 6 . Route S6 became Route 62 in the 1953 renumbering , and has since been truncated to a short piece between US 46 and I @-@ 80 in Totowa . 
 By 1937 , most of Route 6 had been completed with the exception of the Paterson bypass . In 1938 , a spur of Route 6 called Route 6A was legislated to run from Route 6 in Dover north to US 206 / Route S31 in Lafayette Township ; this became Route 15 in 1953 . A realignment at the Passaic River crossing near Pine Brook was built in the 1940s , along with a new road for a short distance west from Pine Brook . Also in the 1940s , the road was widened west into Denville , and a bypass of downtown Denville , including an interchange at Route 5N ( now Route 53 ) was built . The Route 6 designation was dropped in favor of U.S. Route 46 in the 1953 renumbering . 
 = = = U.S. Route 46 : 1936 @-@ present = = = 
 In 1925 , the US 46 designation was first proposed for a route in Colorado connecting Limon to Grand Junction , but it instead became US 40S . The current US 46 was marked in 1936 between Portland , Pennsylvania and the George Washington Bridge . At the time , the new Route 6 had not been completed from Route 2 ( now Route 17 ) west to Route S6 ( now Route 62 ) , and so US 46 was marked through Paterson until this portion was completed by the 1940s . At the west end of Route 6 , US 46 continued over the Delaware River on the Delaware Bridge into Pennsylvania , replacing Pennsylvania Route 987 north to Portland , where it ended at US 611 . The Delaware Water Gap Toll Bridge and its associated freeway to Columbia ( now I @-@ 80 ) opened in December 1953 , as did the new Portland @-@ Columbia Toll Bridge . 
 Following this , US 611 was rerouted to cross the river twice in order to use the freeway through the Delaware Water Gap , and US 46 was moved to former Route 94 ( pre @-@ 1953 Route 8 ) to end at the Columbia , New Jersey side of the Portland @-@ Columbia Toll Bridge . The former approaches to the Darlington 's Bridge , which itself was dismantled by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission in 1954 , became Route 163 in New Jersey and State Route 1039 in Pennsylvania . The US 611 freeway was designated I @-@ 80 by 1960 , and US 611 was moved back to its old all @-@ Pennsylvania alignment by 1969 , leaving US 46 to end at I @-@ 80 and Route 94 . 
 In 1964 , the approach to the George Washington Bridge , shared with US 1 @-@ 9 , was rebuilt into a freeway that became a part of I @-@ 95 . Since then , many changes have occurred to US <unk> Little Ferry Circle , initially constructed in 1933 , was modified in 1985 to allow US 46 to run straight through the circle . In 1998 , the Ledgewood Circle at the western terminus of Route 10 was replaced with a signalized T @-@ intersection . In 2007 , the NJDOT announced that they would eliminate the Little Ferry Circle by turning it into a straight intersection ; work ran through 2014 . The Netcong Circle at Route 183 was replaced with a signalized intersection a cost of $ 13 @.@ 3 million in 2013 . A temporary junction opened in January of that year with the permanent configuration completed the following August . In addition , the interchange between US 46 and the western terminus of Route 3 is planned to be reconstructed . This project will reconfigure ramps , bring bridges up to standard , and will provide for three @-@ lane connections between Route 3 and U.S. Route 46 . It was announced in 2003 and is projected to cost $ 200 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Small Potatoes ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Small Potatoes " is the twentieth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States appropriately on April 20 , 1997 ( 4 / 20 , also the number of the season / episode ) . It was written by Vince Gilligan and directed by Cliff Bole . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Small Potatoes " received a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 0 and was viewed by 20 @.@ 86 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received positive reviews from critics , with many applauding the entry 's humorous tone . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , and the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , a small town is “ blessed ” by babies being born with tails . Mulder and Scully arrive only to encounter a suspect , Eddie Van Blundht ( Darin Morgan ) , who proves nearly impossible to identify . 
 " Small Potatoes " was written by Gilligan in an attempt to write a lighthearted episode ; he did not want to develop a reputation for only writing dark stories . Gilligan asked former series writer Darin Morgan , who had penned four episodes in the second and third seasons , to play Eddie Van Blundht . In fact , the role was written specifically with Morgan in mind . In the original script , the babies were born with wings instead of tails . The effect was eventually changed to tails , because , according to Gilligan , they were funnier . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate the birth of five babies in the town of Martinsburg , West Virginia , who were born with tails . The mother of the most recent baby , Amanda Nelligan , tells the agents that the father of her baby is Luke Skywalker . By researching the baby 's chromosomes it is discovered that all five share the same father . The parents of the children blame the local fertility doctor , who had used insemination to impregnate all of the mothers but Nelligan . Mulder spots a janitor nearby with signs that he formerly had a tail . When he runs Mulder chases him and catches him . The janitor , Eddie Van Blundht , is discovered to be the father of all of the children . Scully believes Eddie used a date rape drug although Mulder questions how he could be in the position to give it to the women . 
 Eddie escapes by transforming his face into that of the booking cop and knocking him out with a blow to the head . Mulder and Scully visit his father , who still has his tail and is a former circus performer . Mulder and Scully soon realize that he 's actually Eddie when he addresses Mulder by name without having been introduced . The agents give chase but Eddie escapes . He then transforms into one of the husbands of the women he had previously slept with and goes and hides out in their house . When the real husband comes home early , he next transforms into Mulder and leaves the couple seriously confused . Mulder and Scully meanwhile discover the dried up body of Eddie 's actual father hidden up in the attic , thoroughly desiccated . Performing an autopsy on the body , Scully finds that he has an extra sheet of supple muscle under his skin , which Mulder believes Eddie also inherited and can use to transform his appearance . 
 Eddie takes on the appearance of Mulder and visits Nelligan , showing him a photo of Eddie . Nelligan tells him that she went out with him in high school , but views him as rather a loser lacking in any drive or ambition . The disappointed Eddie leaves , just as the real Mulder shows up . Realizing that Eddie just visited Nelligan in his guise , Mulder searches for him down the hospital corridors . He finds the fertility doctor and a security guard nearby and handcuffs them to each other , believing one of them to be Eddie . The real Eddie , however , is hiding in a vent above . He gets the jump on Mulder and locks him up in the hospital basement . Eddie takes Mulder 's form and tells Scully that he feels the case is a waste of time and they should return to Washington . 
 Eddie returns to Washington as Mulder and , along with Scully , reports to Skinner on the case with a poorly written report . Eddie visits Mulder 's office , then his apartment , being surprised at what a loser Mulder appears to be ( though highly pleased with how attractive a man he now is in Mulder 's face - as he admires himself and practices his ' agent moves ' in the mirror ) . Later that evening Eddie visits Scully with a bottle of wine and tries to get her drunk , as well as seduce her . As a reluctant Scully is about to give in to a kiss , the real Mulder breaks in and interrupts them . Revealed , Eddie sheepishly reverts back to his actual form , as a shocked Scully just about jumps out of her own skin at the revelation . A month later , Mulder visits Eddie in a prison visitation room at Eddie 's bidding . Eddie complains at being given muscle relaxants to prevent him from turning into someone else , asking if that was Mulder 's doing . Eddie then tells Mulder that he was born a loser , but Mulder is one by choice and that he should seriously " live a little " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Vince Gilligan , who came to The X @-@ Files having written six comedy movies , decided to write a more lighthearted episode ; he did not want to develop a reputation for only writing dark stories . Gilligan also wanted to " lighten up " the fourth season , which featured many grim episodes and was the introduction for the dark point involving Scully 's cancer . After getting approval from series creator Chris Carter , Gilligan asked former series writer Darin Morgan , who had penned four episodes in the second and third seasons , to play Eddie Van Blundht . In fact , the role was written specifically with Morgan in mind , as Gilligan had seen Morgan acting in a student film he made at Loyola Marymount University and considered him a funny actor . 
 In the original script , the babies were born with wings instead of tails . While research revealed that such an occurrence was possible , the wings were changed to tails in the final version of the script because they were not considered cute enough . Gilligan later explained that " tails were just funnier " , and also that the wings would be harder to add in post @-@ production . The tails were created through computer @-@ generated imagery , with a green mark being painted on the babies ' backs as a reference . 
 The cast and the crew of the show thoroughly enjoyed the episode . David Duchovny was pleased with the script , describing it as a " great " episode that was fun to film . Gilligan complimented both Duchovny for his comedic performance and Gillian Anderson for acting as the " straight woman " in the installment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Small Potatoes " was originally broadcast in the United States on the Fox network on April 20 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on February 4 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 0 , with a 20 share , meaning that roughly 13 @.@ 0 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 20 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 20 @.@ 86 million viewers . 
 The episode has received largely positive reviews from television critics . Author Phil Farrand rated the episode as his fourth favorite episode of the first four seasons in his book The Nitpickers Guide to the X @-@ Files . Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave " Small Potatoes " an A , saying that it " isn ’ t the very best X @-@ Files episode ( though it ’ s certainly up there ) , but it ’ s perhaps the easiest episode to call your “ favorite , ” the most approachable episode , if you will " and that while Gilligan penned better X @-@ Files installments later , " he ’ s never written one as effortlessly playful and inventive as this one . VanDerWerff later called the episode one of the " 10 must @-@ see episodes " and named it " Gilligan ’ s finest comedic achievement " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it a 9 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode was a wonderful respite from the dark material of the season 's character arcs , taking a humorous look at Mulder and his complete lack of a life . Gilligan channels Darin Morgan in many scenes , especially when it comes to making scathing observations about Mulder through the soft stick of humor . " Furthermore , he praised Duchovny , saying that his " nuanced performance " was " easily one of his best . " Topless Robot named " Small Potatoes " the eighth funniest episode of the series . Starpulse listed it as the eighth best episode of the series . The episode is popular with fans , specifically for the scene where Eddie , who has changed into Mulder , tries to seduce Scully in her apartment . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five and wrote that " this is what Vince Gilligan has been working towards all season . " The two praised Gilligan 's writing , applauding his decision to critically examine Mulder rather than merely tell jokes . Furthermore , the two commended the acting of Morgan , calling his casting " apt " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a rave review and awarded it a rare four stars out of four . She described it as a " four course meal of comic riches " and praised the writing style of <unk> , calling him " the believer who writes from inside the characters ' heads " . 
 The episode , however , was not without its critics . Tor.com reviewer Meghan Deans was more critical of the episode , writing that it had a " flawed construction that diminishes what should have been one of the series ' smartest and most affectionate demonstrations of self @-@ parody " . She found the way it attempted to depict Van Blundht as a sympathetic villain and play rape for laughs to be unsettling . However , she did praise the way the episode continued the comedic tradition of making fun of Mulder . Cyriaque Lamar from i09 called Eddie Van Blundht one of " The 10 Most Ridiculous X @-@ Files Monsters " . The reviewer , however , did amend his article , writing , " Some readers are concerned that I 'm hating on ' Small Potatoes , ' which is not the case . That episode was definitely fun , but Eddie impregnated a woman while impersonating Mark Hamill . If that 's not a ridiculous monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week , I don 't know what is . " 
 = Ashton Court = 
 Ashton Court is a mansion house and estate to the west of Bristol in England . Although the estate lies mainly in North Somerset , it is owned by the City of Bristol . The mansion and stables are a Grade I listed building . Other structures on the estate are also listed . 
 Ashton Court has been the site of a manor house since the 11th century , and has been developed by a series of owners since then . From the 16th to 20th centuries it was owned by the Smyth family with each generation changing the house . Designs by Humphry Repton were used for the landscaping in the early 19th century . It was used as a military hospital in the First World War . In 1936 it was used as the venue for the Royal Show and , during the Second World War as an army transit camp . In 1946 the last of the Smyth family died and the house fell into disrepair before its purchase in 1959 by Bristol City Council . 
 The estate developed from the original deer park and is Grade II * listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . It is the venue for a variety of leisure activities , including the now @-@ defunct Ashton Court Festival , Bristol International Kite Festival and the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta . It is home to charity The Forest of Avon Trust . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Ashton Court dates back to before the 11th century . It is believed that a fortified manor stood on the site , given to Geoffrey de Montbray , Bishop of Coutances , by William the Conqueror . In the Domesday Book it is referred to as a wealthy estate owned by the Bishop of Countances , with a manor house , a great hall , and courtyards entered through gatehouses . The property passed through successive owners and at the end of the 14th century it was considerably expanded when Thomas De Lions , a nobleman originally from France , obtained a permit to enclose a park for his manor . The house was owned by the Choke family for some time . In 1506 it was sold to Sir Giles Daubeney , a knight and a Chamberlain of Henry VII . Henry VIII gave the estate to Sir Thomas Arundel in 1541 and four years later in 1545 Sir Thomas sold it to John Smyth . The Smyth family owned the property for the next 400 years . Smyth also bought the land which had been owned , until the Dissolution of the Monasteries , by Bath Abbey . He used the land to extend the deer park , bringing him into conflict with the residents of Whitchurch , who complained that he had used common land . 
 = = Thomas and Florence Smyth = = 
 Thomas Smyth ( 1609 – 1642 ) was the first member of the family to make major alterations and additions to the original manor house . He was a Member of Parliament and a successful lawyer . In 1627 at the age of only eighteen he married Florence daughter of John Poulett , 1st Baronet Poulett of Hinton St George . 
 In 1635 Thomas added a new southern front which was in the style of Inigo Jones . It was described by Collinson in 1791 in the following terms : 
 The front is in length one hundred and forty three feet and consists below of three rooms ; the western one of which is a fine apartment ninety @-@ three feet long and twenty feet wide and contains several family and other portraits . The back part of the house is very ancient and the court leading to the park westward is called Castle Court from its having been embattled and still retaining an old gateway similar to those adopted in baronial mansions . The second court contains some of the offices and its entrance from without is under a low doorway between two lofty turrets one of which contains a bell and clock . The stables and corresponding offices in the front court are of ancient date . The whole contributes to a very venerable and picturesque building . 
 Further major additions were made to the building by Sir John Hugh Smyth ( 1734 – 1802 ) . He inherited the estate in 1783 and added the new library to the north west of the house . Sir John also asked the famous landscape designer Humphry Repton for advice about the east front of the house . Repton drafted a plan but Sir John 's death halted any further work on the house . However Repton 's landscape designs were implemented by Sir John 's successor Sir Hugh Smyth . In his book Humphry Repton gave a detailed description of the old and newer parts of the house before the library additions and included a drawing of the eastern front of the house as he saw it in about 1790 . 
 = = Sir John Smyth = = 
 As reported by Esme Smyth , Ashton Court 's last resident , Sir John Smyth ( 1776 – 1849 ) was responsible for the remodeling of the house . In about 1940 she was interviewed by Raymond Gorges , who was researching a book , and she gave him an engraving of the house showing the additions that she said were made by Sir John . 
 Sir John was a bachelor . He was said , by Lady Emily Smyth , to be devoted to horses and kept an extensive stud . His importance as a major builder of Ashton Court is verified by John Evans who in 1828 wrote a book about Bristol and its surrounding area . He said : 
 This seat of Sir John Smyth is a stately edifice ... It has of late been much enlarged with stables nearly as extensive as the house and also a park enclosed by a wall which is twelve feet high in the lowest part . Two handsome lodges have also been added , one of them built from a gothic design . 
 Sir John died in 1849 , and little building work was done until Sir Greville Smyth inherited the property . 
 = = Sir Greville and Lady Emily Smyth = = 
 Sir Greville Smyth inherited the property in 1852 and remained a bachelor until he was 48 years old . During that time he undertook extensive renovations . He also kept a very impressive garden which was described in detail in gardening magazines and newspapers . 
 In 1872 he commissioned the well @-@ known architect Benjamin Ferrey to make additions which were described as follows . 
 The Western Wing has been rearranged but the principal parts of the works have been concentrated in the central portion of the buildings . This part has been raised considerably and in a great measure rebuilt and is surmounted by two octagonal towers which rise to a height of 72 ft . There is a covered passage running the south side of the courtyard which opens out into the court by the arcading of five bays . 
 Even more extensive alterations were made between 1884 and 1885 . Shortly before he married Emily , the widow of George Oldham Edwards , he employed the notable Bath architect Major Charles Edward Davis to transform the house . The work took 18 months to complete . A detailed description of the alterations was given in the Bristol <unk> in 1885 . He converted the stables in the south east wing to living areas which included a huge museum for his natural history collection . He built a grand hall with richly carved oak panels . In the west wing he built a massive carved oak staircase with twist <unk> and introduced perpendicular windows . He also built a winter garden by enclosing the clock court . This is now the Winter Garden Bar . The following description of this elaborate room with a waterfall fountain is given in this newspaper article as follows : 
 This leads through two arched entrances to one of the most charming winter gardens of which any private mansion in the western counties can boast . It has been formed out of what was formerly the open clock tower court which has been supplied with a glazed iron roof . Round the tessellated flooring have been formed the gracefully curved flower borders edged with glazed tiling surmounted with rockery . This rock work covered with moss and filled in with water plants luxuriant grasses and ferns margins an ornamental sheet of water of serpentine form from the surface of which jets of water are thrown into a huge basin shell – one of the largest of the kind we have seen . It is ingeniously constructed to form a waterfall the streams descending to a second basin shell just above the sheet of water . Around this are some the choicest ferns and palms . From the roof hang clusters of incandescent laps , interspersed with baskets filled with gracefully drooping ferns and from the surface of the water lilies modestly rise . 
 Also in the 1880s 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) of formal gardens were laid out including a terrace garden , which is now a lawn , a wilderness garden with basin fountain and a rose garden . Avenues of sequoias and cedars were planted along with other specimen trees . 
 In 1891 Lady Emily Smyth held an interview where she outlined further details of these alterations made by Sir Greville . She also gave a few details of some interesting secret rooms and passages in the medieval part of the building on the western side which she referred to as " Drax 's Kennel " and " The Fox 's Hole " . Sir Greville Smyth died in 1901 and Lady Emily Smyth died in 1914 . 
 The next and last residents of the house were Gilbert and Esme Smyth . They lived there for the next thirty years . Gilbert died in a 1940 and Esme in 1946 and the house was left to their daughter Esme Francis Cavendish . She and her husband tried to sell the house immediately in 1946 to help pay the death duties . However the Cavendish family did not succeed until thirteen years later in 1959 during which time the house was unoccupied and started to decay . It was sold at this time to Bristol City Council who still owns it today . 
 = = Archives = = 
 Archives of the Ashton Court estate ( including estate management and estate office papers ) and personal papers of the Smyth family are held by Bristol Record Office ( Ref . AC ) ( online catalogue ) . Bristol Record Office also holds photos and papers about the redevelopment of Ashton Court mansion and stables ( Ref . <unk> ) ( online catalogue ) and ( Ref . <unk> ) ( online catalogue ) . Other records relating to the Ashton Court estate are also held by Wiltshire and Swindon History Centre and the University of Bristol Special Collections . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Due to successive remodelings and enlargements the architecture at Ashton Court is complex and seldom what it seems . The core of the house , a 15th @-@ century manor , has been obliterated by later wings , which have in turn been remodelled and altered , most substantially around 1635 . Therefore , the plan of the house has evolved as irregular with many juxtapositions and little cohesion ; while the majority of the house was built in the 17th century , a time of classical architecture , remodelling and alteration to the fenestration has created an overall Gothic appearance . 
 In the early 19th century , the house was given a 300 feet ( 91 m ) long facade in an attempt to provide some uniformity and some classical grandeur . However even here , the architecture does not remain faithful to a single style . At the centre of this facade is a much altered Tudor gatehouse , probably built in the 16th century as a portal to the 14th @-@ century manor house . In order to create the long facade , the existing stables , to the right of the gatehouse , were converted to domestic use and given seven bays of Gothic mullioned windows . To the left of the gatehouse , the flanking south @-@ west wing is of a different style . 
 This classically designed wing has been attributed to Inigo Jones , but without supporting evidence ; as with a similar attribution at Brympton d 'Evercy , also in Somerset , it seems to be based solely on the alternating segmental and pointed pediments over the <unk> windows , and ignoring the irregularities in their spacings and placings , which Jones is unlikely to have countenanced . 
 To give the long facade with its two wings of contrasting architectural styles a uniting , common feature , the third story of oval windows of the left @-@ hand wings , which was then topped with a Jacobean balustrade was repeated above the Gothic right @-@ hand wing ; however , inexplicably the attempt at classical unity was broken by the use castellations instead of a balustrade on the right @-@ hand side . Overall , its length , contrasting styles , high gatehouse and lack of symmetry give the facade a collegiate rather than domestic appearance . The focal point of the facade , the gatehouse , has multi @-@ faceted turrets at its corners , In 1885 , the gatehouse was given a Gothic makeover , which included raising its height and adding the fan vaulting to the ceiling of the passage leading , not to a great base court , as such grandiose architectural feature would suggest , but to a small glazed inner courtyard ( the Winter Garden ) . 
 The north wing was included in the remodelling work of 1805 and given ogee headed windows in the delicate Strawberry Hill Gothic style , popular at turn of the 19th century ; it was a forerunner of the more medieval ecclesiastical Gothic style that was to characterise the architecture of the 19th century , and employed at Ashton Court during the 1885 alterations . Elsewhere , the castellations seemingly sprinkled at whim over various wings and juxtapositions are purely ornamental , and date from the various 19th @-@ century remodelings of the house . 
 = = Recent history = = 
 During the First World War the estate was used as a military hospital , and in the Second World War was requisitioned by the War Office and used in turn as a transit camp , RAF HQ and US Army Command HQ . The estate was the venue for the 1936 Royal Show . One of the exhibition buildings , despite its temporary nature , was an innovative piece of modernist architecture still remembered as the Gane Pavilion . It was designed by Bauhaus architect Marcel Breuer as a show house for the Bristol furniture manufacturer Crofton Gane . For most of the 20th century Ashton Court was the venue for the North Somerset Show , however this is now held in Wraxall . 
 In 1946 , the last resident of Ashton Court Dame Esme Smyth , died . After the house became derelict , it was taken over by the City in 1959 . Restoration has been an ongoing process since then , but even after extensive investment by both the council and from Heritage Lottery Fund grants , presently only about a quarter of the building is occupied or usable . The available facilities of the house are rented out for business conferences , parties and weddings . In 2013 a fire damaged the northern wing . It was contained by Avon Fire and Rescue Service , otherwise the rest of the building would have been at risk . 
 The mansion house and stables have been designated by Historic England as a Grade I listed building . The house is listed on the Heritage at Risk register and described as being in " slow decay " . The lower lodge to Ashton Court and attached gates , railings and bollards , which were built in 1805 by Henry Wood , are Grade II * listed buildings . The garden and perimeter walls and railings are also listed . 
 = = Location and surroundings = = 
 The house stands within a large estate spanning the boundary between Bristol and North Somerset , approximately 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the city centre . It is on the western side of the River Avon close to the Clifton Suspension Bridge and the suburb of Leigh Woods and the Leigh Woods National Nature Reserve which are east of Ashton Court . To the north and west are open countryside . The estate was previously much larger than it is today and included areas which are now suburbs of Bristol including Ashton Gate , Ashton Vale and <unk> where the Greville Smyth Park is located . The land for the park was donated by the Smyth family and then landscaped by the city council . 
 The estate covers 850 acres ( 340 ha ) of woods and open grassland laid out by Humphry Repton . It includes two pitch @-@ and @-@ putt golf courses , a disc golf course , an orienteering course and horse riding and mountain bike trails . Bristol 's weekly parkrun event ( a free , timed 5 km run organised by volunteers ) is held at Ashton Court . 
 There is a deer park which was started in the 14th century and extended in the 16th and 17th centuries . There are still two areas of the estate with deer enclosures . The park contains a great variety of wildlife ; much of the site ( an area of 210 @.@ 31 hectares ) was notified in 1998 as a Site of Special Scientific Interest due to the presence of rare woodland beetles including : Ctesias <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 The 2 @.@ 37 hectares of Ashton Court Meadow is managed as a nature reserve by the Avon Wildlife Trust . It contains a wide range of flowering plants , including wild carrot , yellow @-@ wort and field scabious . Some unusual parasitic plants are also found here , such as common broomrape which feeds off clovers , and yellow rattle , which feeds partly off grass . 
 <unk> Combe , at the western edge of the estate , is a woodland area with a range of plant species , including narrow @-@ lipped helleborine , which grows here in small numbers under beech . 
 In 2002 a 700 @-@ year @-@ old oak tree , called the Domesday Oak , was selected by The Tree Council as one of 50 Great British Trees . In 2011 a crack appeared in the trunk and oak support beams were fitted to support the tree . The supports were only partly successful and a section of the tree collapsed ; the remaining part of the tree was pruned to reduce the weight of the surviving section . 
 = XIII ( video game ) = 
 XIII is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Ubisoft Paris and published by Ubisoft for most platforms except for the OS X version , which was published by Feral Interactive . Loosely based on the first five volumes of the 1984 Belgian graphic novel series XIII , the protagonist Jason Fly ( XIII ) is a confused and amnesic man who searches for his identity throughout a comic book @-@ style , cel @-@ shaded world . Found stranded on a beach by a lifeguard , Fly is accused of having killed the President of the United States . The accusation later transpires as mistaken , as Fly finds himself facing a gang of 20 conspirators ( " The XX " ) who aim to overthrow the government . 
 The game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 2 , Xbox , GameCube , and OS X. A reimagining of XIII , the point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game XIII : Lost Identity , was released on 17 October 2011 for PC , Mac , iPhone and iPad . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 XIII is a first @-@ person shooter with elements of stealth and action in certain missions . The game centers on the main character , named XIII , who has awakened with amnesia . He uses a variety of weapons and gadgets to uncover the mystery of his identity throughout the 13 chapters and 54 missions . The characters and weaponry in XIII are cel @-@ shaded , giving a deliberately comic book style appearance , including onomatopoeic words contained in bubbles for sound effects . It uses the Unreal Engine 2 , the most recent engine at that time , as it was " really strong for level design " and allowed development " across all platforms using one engine " . The graphics were compared with Jet Set Radio Future and Auto <unk> . The developer felt that the appearance reflected the comic book and innovated in its portrayal of violence ; even blood splatters are shown in a cartoon manner . 
 XIII includes 16 weapons , from a knife to a bazooka , an Uzi to an M60 . Objects such as bottles , chairs , or brooms may be used as weapons . Kevlar gear , helmets and first aid boxes are scattered throughout the map . People can be taken as hostages or as human shields , preventing enemies from firing on the protagonist . Lock picks are used to unlock doors and <unk> to climb on walls . Through the " sixth sense " , XIII can hear enemies behind walls with the aid of " tap @-@ tap @-@ tap " signals . Stealth operations include strangling enemies or hiding dead bodies . Captions pop up at the top when a headshot is performed or serve as clues or tips for the player . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 The multiplayer hosts a maximum of 16 players . The game features three standard game modes along with modes exclusive to each system : Team Deathmatch , Deathmatch , Capture the Flag , Sabotage ( exclusive to Xbox and PC ) , The Hunt ( exclusive to PC , PS2 and GameCube ) , and Power @-@ Up ( exclusive to PC and PS2 ) . Depending on the platform , players in online and offline modes ( against bots ) range from 4 to 16 . The GameCube version does not have any online modes , while the PC version excludes the multi @-@ screen modes but includes a map editor . There are 13 maps on Deathmatch plus one additional on Team Deathmatch , while 5 on Capture the Flag and 3 on Sabotage . The player can choose from among 10 different character appearances , but 99 more are available in unofficial skin packs for PC players , the most recent being 2 @.@ 0 . Four additional animal skins ( shark , duck , bat , dog , seagull ) may be downloaded . As their bodies are not realistically proportioned , new or inexperienced players may face difficulty in distinguishing the skin 's exact body . Cheating in both multiplayer and <unk> is possible , as the software does not include any anti @-@ cheat protection . 
 In Deathmatch , all players compete against each other and the strongest player wins . Team Deathmatch is similar , but players form two teams . In Capture the Flag , a player must retrieve the flag from his enemy 's base , and bring it to his own team 's base . In Sabotage , one team must place a bomb in three different locations , while the opposite team must protect these areas ; the protectors win if the time limit is exceeded ( except if the time is set to infinite ) . The bomb is always found at the beginning of the team base , and the player who holds the bomb must wait 12 seconds until he may drop it and take shelter from the ensuing detonation . In The Hunt , players must shoot ghosts , which become gradually smaller after receiving hits . The player only has one weapon , the hunting gun , with which he can also shoot human opponents . Power Up is a deathmatch game , in which boxes containing special , temporary abilities , such as invisibility and higher speed , are found throughout the map . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins with an introductory sequence depicting the assassination of the President of the United States , William Sheridan . The protagonist , Jason Fly ( voiced by David Duchovny ) , awakes on Brighton Beach in Brooklyn , New York City . Badly wounded , he is rescued by a lifeguard and is brought into a beach house . He has lost all his memories and all that he possesses is a locker box key . He also has a tattoo with the Roman numeral XIII on his right shoulder . He is then attacked by unknown assailants , led by a hitman known as The Mongoose , with whom Fly does battle several times throughout the game . However , he is later instead arrested by the FBI as a chief suspect in the murder . A photo proves that he resembles the murderer . XIII succeeds in escaping the headquarters with the aid of a female soldier , Jones . One of Fly 's few other allies is Ben Carrington : an old war veteran and superior to Jones , Carrington knows valuable information about the President 's death and is willing to help XIII . However , he is arrested and brought to a military station in the Appalachian mountains to be silenced by the conspiracy . XIII must infiltrate the base and free Carrington if he is to learn about his past . 
 In the following story , the player learns that the protagonist adopted the identity of the murderer . The murder is part of a conspiracy that aims to overthrow the American government . The twenty conspirators have numbers to mask their identities , and collectively name themselves " The XX " . XIII was one of them , but was later betrayed and murdered by The XX . With the objective of preventing a coup , one of the members took on the appearance of XIII to confuse the opposite side and force it to make errors . The protagonist , in the guise of the early XIII , is successful in uncovering most of the conspirators , killing them and hindering the conspiracy . The game ends with a cliffhanger , when Fly confronts Walter Sheridan — brother of the assassinated President and apparent ( though unconfirmed in the game ) leader of the conspiracy — on a ship , followed by a promise of a sequel . 
 = = Development and promotion = = 
 Ubisoft announced on March 13 , 2002 , that it would be working on a game called XIII . Based on the comic book of the same name by Belgian Jean Van Hamme , it would create " a world so unique and enthralling that gamers will become instantly engaged " , according to president of Ubisoft Entertainment , Laurent Detoc . The game debuted at an event in Montreal , and was later submitted at the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo in May 2002 , with such games as Doom III , Max Payne 2 and Warcraft III : Reign of Chaos . On November 22 , 2002 , Ubisoft announced a delay of the game , although the company did not state a reason . Justin Calvert of GameSpot guessed that the time would be used to thoroughly check the game and implement additional features on other platforms . 
 On May 7 , 2003 , Ubisoft announced that singer , actress and model Eve would be the voice for major character Jones . Ubisoft 's vice president of marketing , Tony Kee , stated that she was the perfect choice for the role , admitting that she has " a combination of style , sexiness , and attitude — perfect attributes that describe the Jones character . " Two months later , two other major voice acts were declared : David Duchovny would play Jason Fly ( XIII ) , while Adam West , General Carrington . The official site was launched on August 19 , featuring movies and information about the gameplay . Ubisoft implemented a pre @-@ order in September 4 , promising a free demonstration version with multiplayer and soundtrack . Kee promised it " will give gamers just enough XIII to whet their appetite until the game launches in October " and " will be a record @-@ breaking preorder campaign for Ubi Soft . " 
 The game was promoted at the Fall College Tour from September to October . Beginning at Cornell University and finishing at the University of Southern California , the tour featured demonstrations of games , playable via the 50 @-@ screen <unk> system . Another demo , now multiplayer @-@ only , was issued on October 2 , but the discovery of a bug lead to its removal . A different fixed demo was released a day later . Xbox players had the opportunity from December 15 on to win one of 50 copies of the game . The campaign was dubbed " 13 Days to Xmas " : those who spent not less than 13 hours playing until Christmas were qualified for the contest . The winner was randomly selected on January 9 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Thirteen Soundtrack was composed by several artists from the San Francisco @-@ based music label Future Primitive Sound . 13 tracks were produced , all of which were initially unnamed . According to the booklet , the DJs are connected with the characters , such as DJ Faust and <unk> with XIII , DJ Zeph with Carrington or J @-@ Boogie 's <unk> Science with Mongoose . The album opens with an introduction and then includes songs in the likes of typical 70s @-@ era music such as soul , funk , jazz , but also hip @-@ hop . According to founder and " Creative Director " of the collective , Mark Herlihy , the soundtrack project began with Herlihy 's friend , Pete Jacobs , whom he met at a gig , five or six years previously . After studying the characters and the story , the group decided on a noir and futuristic style that would reflect the espionage theme . Its rhythm ranges from 105 to 120 bpm . 
 Herlihy later stated that they " wanted to capture the essence of XIII in this soundtrack by showcasing its nostalgic style while giving the beats a modern twist " and their intention was " to tell its story through the music and create a seamless head @-@ nodding mix that would complement the energy of XIII and get gamers hyped . " One reviewer of IGN gave the album 8 out of 10 stars , stating : " It 's an album that works expertly as a chill @-@ out slice of background groove , yet it also doubles as a dance floor jolt of exuberance perfect for spinning at a small party " , but also stated that the player , understandably , quickly forgets the music while playing . He concluded that the album is " <unk> electronic tripped out <unk> " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 XIII received generally mixed to positive reviews from critics . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the PlayStation 2 version 76 @.@ 62 % and 73 / 100 , the Xbox version 76 @.@ 31 % and 74 / 100 , the GameCube version 75 @.@ 65 % and 73 / 100 and the PC version 73 @.@ 83 % and 72 / 100 . 
 Reviewers often praised the game 's graphical style and presentation , while criticising the gameplay . GamePro called it a " rejuvenating , jaw @-@ dropping experience " . IGN said " XIII has a great story @-@ driven sheen , but at its core , it 's weighed down by some occasional bewildering flaws , in addition to the lackluster weapons and simple combat " . GameZone also criticised the combat , stating " If not for the graphics to carry the game through , XIII would have been a boring game . Gunfights are the best part of the gameplay . It also happens to be the most unbalanced part " . Edge said XIII had " true artistic merit : it never gets stale ; every episode has been drawn with minute care and attention . It would have been an incredible achievement if the gameplay had matched the outstanding art direction " . GameSpy criticised the graphics and the multiplayer mode , and concluded " When it comes right down to it , XIII is a fine game ... Just don 't expect the FPS of the year because , sadly , this isn 't it " . 
 GamesTM said " It 's one of those mixed @-@ bag situations – flashes of genius and genuinely enjoyable moments of success , occasionally mired by unbalanced weapon damage , clumsy AI and the odd bit of unfair level design that requires astounding feats of memory " . Eurogamer called XIII " a flawed masterpiece . A game brimming with variety and a freshness lacking from most of the factory farmed franchise exercises that pass through our offices with crushing regularity " . Game Revolution complimented the game 's story , graphical style , voice acting and soundtrack , while criticising the gameplay as " about as straightforward – and in some cases boring – as it gets for an FPS " . Electronic Gaming Monthly scored the game 6 @.@ 5 / 6 @.@ 5 / 6 @.@ 5 : Joe Fielder , the first reviewer , said , " You 'd be hard @-@ pressed to find a more visually stunning game than XIII " , but complained that " numerous frustrations pile up to make XIII more chore than thrill " . The magazine 's Greg Ford , who provided the third review , said that its " style , cut @-@ scenes , and story are all great , [ but ] the actual gameplay is pretty mundane " ; he concluded , " But if all you need is a solid shooter fix , XIII will do just fine . It has no fatal flaws , and the conspiracy @-@ laced story should keep you going " . 
 Sales performance for XIII was lower than expected , despite its positive reception . In 2010 , UGO ranked it # 7 on the list of the games that need sequels . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A reimagining of XIII , called XIII : Lost Identity , was released by <unk> Interactive for Windows , Mac , iPhone and iPad on November 15 , 2011 . The game is not a shooter , but a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game . 
 = Flight Unlimited III = 
 Flight Unlimited III is a 1999 flight simulator video game developed by Looking Glass Studios and published by Electronic Arts . It allows players to pilot reproductions of real @-@ world commercial and civilian aircraft in and around Seattle , Washington . Players may fly freely or engage in " Challenge " missions , such as thwarting a theft or locating Bigfoot . The development team built on the general aviation gameplay of Flight Unlimited II , with more detailed physics and terrain , more planes and a real @-@ time weather system . Roughly half of Flight Unlimited II 's team returned to work on the sequel , supported by new hires . 
