 Lead designer Peter James described Flight Unlimited III 's development as a struggle , thanks to a lack of interest from Electronic Arts and from Looking Glass 's management . Placed in direct competition with Microsoft Flight Simulator 2000 and Fly ! , the game failed to capture sufficient market share . It became one of Looking Glass 's biggest commercial flops , with roughly 20 @,@ 000 units sold in the United States during 1999 . This contributed to the company 's closure in 2000 . The game was well received by critics , who praised its terrain rendering and dynamic weather . Its simulated physics were lauded by several reviewers , but others felt that the physics were imprecise , and that the game 's system requirements were extremely high . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Flight Unlimited III is a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) flight simulator video game , in which the player pilots virtual reproductions of real @-@ world planes . Players may control ten aircraft : the Lake Turbo Renegade , <unk> S10 , Mooney Bravo , Fokker Dr.I , <unk> 400A and five planes first included in Flight Unlimited II . Plane cockpits feature simulated flight instruments such as <unk> and primary flight displays , and allow for both visual and instrument navigation . The main airspace is 10 @,@ 000 square miles of Seattle terrain ; eight other Western American states are modeled as well , albeit in less detail . The California scenery from Flight Unlimited II may be imported to expand the airspace . The player shares the game 's skies with artificially intelligent ( AI ) planes . Real @-@ time , interactive air traffic control monitors the player 's actions and tries to prevent mid @-@ air collisions . Before a flight , the player may select which types of weather to encounter . Weather conditions such as cold fronts and thunderstorms develop in real @-@ time . 
 In addition to the default " Quick Flight " mode , the player may play tutorial and " Challenge " missions . The game 's tutorial mode features 26 lessons , which demonstrate basic and advanced flying techniques and then allow the player to perform them . Challenge missions test the player 's flying ability with objectives such as locating Bigfoot , rescuing a stranded hiker , stopping a theft or flying through hoops . Eleven Challenges are available , but the player may create more or download them from the Internet . Flight Unlimited III includes the level editor ( " <unk> " ) used to develop the game , which allows players to use the game 's assets to create airports , AI flight paths and edited landscapes . Players may share their creations online . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the release of Flight Unlimited II in 1997 , certain members of that game 's team wanted to move on to Flight Unlimited III , while others wanted to create the combat flight simulator game Flight Combat . Looking Glass Studios chose to develop the games simultaneously : the team was split into two , both supplemented with new hires . The company then surveyed customers to determine where Flight Unlimited III should take place , among other things . In May 1998 , Electronic Arts was announced as the game 's publisher , as part of a multi @-@ title marketing and distribution deal that also included System Shock 2 . Looking Glass 's goal was to build on the foundation of Flight Unlimited II and to provide what project leader Tom Sperry called " the true joy and sensation of flight in the most realistic environment available " . The company first displayed Flight Unlimited III at the <unk> Conference in August 1998 . At the show , the game was revealed to take place in and around Seattle — a choice based on fan requests and on the varied landscape and weather of Puget Sound . Looking Glass also discussed new planes , moving objects on the ground and a real @-@ time , physics @-@ based weather system . 
 Former flight instructor Peter James , who had worked on Flight Unlimited II , assumed the role of lead designer . He was largely responsible for Flight Unlimited III 's lessons , planes and simulated flight instruments . James believed that other flight simulators had holes with regard to realism , and he hoped to create a more accurate experience . Photographs were captured of each plane 's real @-@ world counterpart , and construction of the 3D plane models was led by artist Duncan Hsu , a former car modeler at Papyrus Design Group . The flight physics were coded by Kevin Wasserman and involve real @-@ time calculations of force vectors , such as those acting against a plane 's yaw , pitch and roll . This system was more advanced than that of Flight Unlimited II , which was also based on force calculations . The physics code was informed by " real aircraft data " and the personal experience of pilots , and each of the planes was flown as research for the game . Because the plane cockpits of previous Flight Unlimited games had been criticized by pilots , the team tried to make Flight Unlimited III 's cockpits extremely authentic . Kemal <unk> recorded the planes ' sound effects , which he said involved " risking his life " by standing near jet engines and under wings . 
 The game 's terrain texture maps were made with satellite images rendered at four square meters per pixel , the highest resolution used in a flight simulator at that time . Artist Karen Wolff designed the terrain by combining large topographic maps into a " mosaic " , which recreated the elevations and depressions of the Seattle area . The satellite imagery was layered over the resultant polygonal mesh . Real elevation data was also used for the eight lower @-@ resolution Western American states outside of the Seattle area . Budget concerns and the storage limitations of the CD @-@ ROM format prevented the team from rendering the entire United States , despite fan demand . The 3D objects that move across the terrain were created by <unk> Cho , who used numerous photography books for inspiration . Flight Unlimited III 's object editor let her set these objects to " move once along the path , back and forth or cycle " . The weather system , co @-@ designed by James , generates , moves and disperses weather fronts based on real @-@ time calculations of atmospheric conditions such as humidity and orographic lift . 
 = = = Management and final months = = = 
 While visiting Looking Glass to cover Flight Unlimited III 's development , journalist Dan Linton was impressed by the team management of Tom Sperry , producer Sandra Smith and vice president of marketing Michael <unk> . He wrote that they employed " suggestion and encouragement " instead of " demands " , and he believed that their work was in large part responsible for the game " setting a new standard in the industry " . Peter James later accused the wider company 's management of being lukewarm toward Flight Unlimited III during development , since their biggest sellers were action @-@ oriented games like Thief : The Dark Project . He claimed that their lack of interest turned the optimistic team into a " grumbling group of depressed and sometimes angry [ people ] " . Although he , Smith and Perry petitioned the company 's managers to plan future add @-@ ons and third @-@ party development for the game , James felt that they were ignored . James developed concepts for a sequel in his spare time , but his ideas were shelved to wait for Flight Unlimited III 's sales figures , which had to surpass those of Microsoft Flight Simulator 2000 for Flight Unlimited IV to be greenlit . James believed that this was " foolish " , particularly because he felt that Electronic Arts <unk> the game . He wrote that Flight Unlimited III 's marketing manager had " great plans " but that his " hands seem [ ed ] tied " . 
 Flight Unlimited III 's official site was opened in March 1999 , and the game was shown alongside Flight Combat : Thunder Over Europe at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in May . Tal Blevins of IGN wrote that the game had " come a long way " since he had seen it earlier in the year , and that it was almost complete , with development of the real @-@ time weather system in its final stages . Full Throttle noted the game 's " impressive clouds " and " slick looking " HUD . Flight Unlimited III was shown again at EAA AirVenture Oshkosh in July , at which point beta testing was nearly complete and the game was " 90 % done " , according to James . He stated that the public reaction was " great " , which energized the team for a short time . The game went gold that August , nine months behind schedule . James wrote that the team celebrated with a small dinner party , and that " the next few days were spent finding out how many people [ were ] quitting . " He left after the game 's completion to join <unk> , a news and review website dedicated to flight simulators . The game was released on September 17 , 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Flight Unlimited III was placed in direct competition with flight simulators such as Fly ! and Microsoft Flight Simulator 2000 . The game failed to capture sufficient market share and became one of Looking Glass 's biggest commercial flops , with sales around 20 @,@ 000 copies in the United States during 1999 . Together with the costly development of Flight Combat , the game 's low sales used up Looking Glass 's earnings from Thief : The Dark Project and System Shock 2 , which had helped them recover from the failures of British Open Championship Golf and Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri . These events contributed to the company 's bankruptcy and closure in May 2000 . However , the game was positively received by critics , with an aggregate review score of 88 % on GameRankings . 
 Josh Nolan of Computer Gaming World wrote , " <unk> is experience @-@ oriented : it 's user @-@ friendly , graphically glamorous , and lots of fun . " While he praised its visuals and air traffic control , he considered the game to be simpler than Flight Simulator 2000 because of its less detailed lessons , interfaces and flight physics . Writing for Computer Games Magazine , Denny Atkin stated that the use of turbulence " really sets <unk> apart from the competition " , and that the game 's simulation of air traffic is " like no other sim " . He praised its graphics and dynamic weather , and he found the flight physics solid in general but " overly gentle " for aerobatic maneuvers . He concluded , " It 's not only an excellent simulation of general aviation flying , ... it 's even a good game . " PC Gamer UK 's Dean Evans wrote that the game has " a poetic grandeur " , as well as an " astonishing attention to detail " greater than that of its predecessors . He praised its flight lessons and weather , and he considered the graphics to be " unbelievably delicious " . Evans summarized the game as " the most breathtaking flying experience you can get for a PC . " 
 Simon Bradley of PC Zone wrote , " <unk> has atmosphere in a way that MS Combat Flight Sim can 't even dream of . " He praised its graphics , flight physics , and detailed flight environment . However , he complained of " <unk> slow frame rates " and warned that the game could not be played on older computers . Tony Lopez of GameSpot called the game 's environmental modeling " simply breathtaking " and noted that elevations were rendered more smoothly than in Fly ! or Microsoft Flight Simulator . He wrote that the game 's flight physics and weather simulation were superior to those of any other flight simulator , and that the " powerful , easy @-@ to @-@ use " <unk> editing tool could popularize the game . IGN writer Marc Saltzman commented that the game features " absolutely stunning terrain at all altitudes , realistic weather and lighting effects , and highly @-@ detailed planes " . Saltzman praised the accuracy of Flight Unlimited III 's physics but remarked that the game 's frame rate was " noticeably slower " than that of its rivals . 
 = Woodhull Sexual Freedom Alliance = 
 The Woodhull Sexual Freedom Alliance ( WSFA ) , previously known as the Woodhull Freedom Foundation , is an American non @-@ profit organization founded in 2003 that advocates for sexual freedom as a fundamental human right . The organization is based in Washington , D.C. , United States . Named after an influential member of the American woman 's suffrage movement , Victoria Woodhull , its focus includes analyzing groups and individuals that seek to perpetuate a culture of sexual repression . 
 Sexual Freedom Day , officially recognized in 2011 in Washington , DC , celebrates the birthday of Victoria Woodhull . The WSFA has held the Sexual Freedom Summit annually since 2010 . Organization members have included LGBT activist Jeffrey Montgomery , former chairwoman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights Mary Frances Berry , writer Eric <unk> , lawyer Lawrence G. Walters , and activist Dan Massey . 
 In the furtherance of activities relating to its goals , the organization has allied itself with groups including the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force , the American Civil Liberties Union , the Gay and Lesbian Activists Alliance , the Tully Center for Free Speech at Syracuse University , National Coalition Against Censorship , the Heartland Institute , National Association of Scholars , American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression , Accuracy in Academia , and the American Council of Trustees and Alumni . An academic paper in the Journal of Homosexuality characterized the organization as one " that addresses both international and national sexual freedom issues as well as a host of other health and human rights issues . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation : 2003 = = = 
 The organization was founded in 2003 with the name Woodhull Freedom Foundation . It began with a focus on global and domestic human rights , specifically looking at sexual freedom . It is named for Victoria Woodhull ( 1838 – 1927 ) , the first woman to own a company on Wall Street and to campaign for President of the United States . Its focus includes examining the stakeholders that maintain a climate of sexual repression . 
 The organization releases an annual report in September on " Sexual Freedom Day " called the " State of Sexual Freedom " , which describes goals towards increasing sexual freedom . Woodhull 's public relations representative Jeffrey Montgomery told the Washington Blade that their goals intersected with human rights : " Woodhull is the organization at the intersection of all sexual freedom issues because of the common core value of fundamental human rights . ... Without sexual freedom all personal freedoms are at risk . ” Woodhull tracks laws and regulations pertaining to sexual activity in the United States . 
 = = = Early activities : 2004 – 2009 = = = 
 In 2004 , Woodhull joined with the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force in devoting resources towards analyzing old regulations used to harass LGBT people . The purpose of the study was to analyze existing regulations in the United States with regards to sexual activity , and simultaneously to foster ties between those against sexual repression and LGBT organizations . In 2005 , Woodhull again coordinated with the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force in order to organize an event known as " Red , White and Leather for Independence Day " , in which over 30 leather bars in 17 cities took part . Writer Eric <unk> served on the board of Woodhull before passing away in 2006 . In 2007 , its Sexual Freedom Day was commemorated with a discussion group examining the idea of sexual freedom as a segment of human rights . Sexual Freedom Day took place in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania as the first event of its kind on October 6 , 2007 and included " a fund raiser featuring the Peek @-@ a @-@ Boo Revue and DJ Johanna Constantine and DJ Roots and Groove . " 
 In July 2008 , when the American Family Foundation called for a McDonald 's boycott after the fast food restaurant said it would join the National Gay and Lesbian Chamber of Commerce , Woodhull 's executive director announced a " <unk> " asking those interested in supporting the restaurant to purchase additional meals . Woodhull joined with the American Civil Liberties Union and other groups in 2009 on an amici curiae brief before the U.S. Supreme Court in the case , Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations . On November 29 , 2009 , the Cleveland Leather Awareness Weekend ( <unk> ) organized a leather dance reception in San Diego , California so as to raise money for charitable purposes to assist the activities of Woodhull . 
 = = = Recent work : 2010 – present = = = 
 The organization gave its 2010 Victoria Woodhull Sexual Freedom Award on September 23 of that year to <unk> Moses <unk> , an individual from Uganda who sought asylum in the United States due to his sexual orientation . Author Hardy <unk> was a board member of Woodhull in 2011 . On November 17 , 2011 , Woodhull worked with the DC Trans Coalition , the Gay and Lesbian Activists Alliance , Gender Rights Maryland , Get Equal DC , Helping Individual Prostitutes Survive ( <unk> ) , the Rainbow Response Coalition , and Transgender Health Empowerment to form a coalition sponsoring a " Transgender Day of Action " in Washington , D.C. that highlights examples of mistreatment of transgender people by law enforcement . The event served as a precursor to the Transgender Day of Remembrance which followed on November 20 . 
 In January 2012 , the organization joined with other groups including the Tully Center for Free Speech at Syracuse University , National Coalition Against Censorship , the Heartland Institute , National Association of Scholars , Alliance Defense Fund Center for Academic Freedom , Feminists for Free Expression , American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression , Accuracy in Academia , and the American Council of Trustees and Alumni to send a letter asking the U.S. Department of Education 's Office for Civil Rights to use the precedent of the 1999 Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education case to apply a definition of harassment for academic institutions ( so as not to harm freedom of speech ) . In 2012 , Buck Angel served on the organization 's Board of Directors of the organization , and sexologist Megan <unk> served as an advisory board member . Lawrence G. Walters was the general counsel for Woodhull in 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 An academic paper by Susan Wright in the Journal of Homosexuality about those who faced discrimination due to sadomasochism ( SM ) described Woodhull as an organization " that addresses both international and national sexual freedom issues as well as a host of other health and human rights issues . " Wright noted Woodhull dedicates its focus towards changing regulations and existing laws . 
 = Battle of Magdhaba = 
 The Battle of Magdhaba ( officially known by the British as the Affair of Magdhaba ) took place on 23 December 1916 during the Defence of Egypt section of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign in the First World War . The attack by the Anzac Mounted Division took place against an entrenched Ottoman Army garrison to the south and east of Bir Lahfan in the Sinai desert , some 18 – 25 miles ( 29 – 40 km ) inland from the Mediterranean coast . This Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) victory against the Ottoman Empire garrison also secured the town of El Arish after the Ottoman garrison withdrew . 
 In August 1916 , a combined Ottoman and German Empire Army had been forced to retreat to Bir el Abd , after the British victory in the Battle of Romani . During the following three months the defeated force retired further eastwards to El Arish , while the captured territory stretching from the Suez Canal was consolidated and garrisoned by the EEF . Patrols and reconnaissances were carried out by British forces , to protect the continuing construction of the railway and water pipeline and to deny passage across the Sinai desert to the Ottoman forces by destroying water cisterns and wells . 
 By December , construction of the infrastructure and supply lines had sufficiently progressed to enable the British advance to recommence , during the evening of 20 December . By the following morning a mounted force had reached El Arish to find it abandoned . An Ottoman Army garrison in a strong defensive position was located at Magdhaba , some 18 – 30 miles ( 29 – 48 km ) inland to the south east , on the Wadi el Arish . After a second night march by the Anzac Mounted Division ( Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division ) , the attack on Magdhaba was launched by Australian , British and New Zealand troops against well @-@ entrenched Ottoman forces defending a series of six redoubts . During the day 's fierce fighting , the mounted infantry tactics of riding as close to the front line as possible and then dismounting to make their attack with the bayonet supported by artillery and machine guns prevailed , assisted by aircraft reconnaissances . All the well @-@ camouflaged redoubts were eventually located and captured and the Ottoman defenders surrendered in the late afternoon . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the beginning of the First World War , the Egyptian police which had controlled the Sinai Desert were withdrawn , leaving the area largely unprotected . In February 1915 , a German and Ottoman force unsuccessfully attacked the Suez Canal . After the Gallipoli Campaign , a second joint German and Ottoman force again advanced across the desert to threaten the canal , during July 1916 . This force was defeated in August at the Battle of Romani , after which the Anzac Mounted Division , also known as the A. & N. Z. Mounted Division , under the command of the Australian Major General Harry Chauvel , pushed the Ottoman Army 's Desert Force commanded by the German General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein out of Bir el Abd and across the Sinai to El Arish . 
 By mid @-@ September 1916 the Anzac Mounted Division had pursued the retreating Ottoman and German forces from Bir el Salmana 20 miles ( 32 km ) along the northern route across the Sinai Peninsula to the outpost at Bir el Mazar . The Maghara Hills , 50 miles ( 80 km ) south west of Romani , in the interior of the Sinai Desert , were also attacked in mid @-@ October by a British force based on the Suez Canal . Although not captured at the time , all these positions were eventually abandoned by their Ottoman garrisons in the face of growing British Empire strength . 
 = = = Consolidation of British territorial gains = = = 
 The British then established garrisons along their supply lines , which stretched across the Sinai from the Suez Canal . Patrols and reconnaissances were regularly carried out to protect the advance of the railway and water pipeline , built by the Egyptian Labour Corps . These supply lines were marked by railway stations and sidings , airfields , signal installations and standing camps where troops could be accommodated in tents and huts . At this time the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) had a ration strength of 156 @,@ 000 soldiers , plus 13 @,@ 000 Egyptian labourers . 
 = = = Ottoman positions in the Sinai = = = 
 The Ottoman Army 's Desert Force commanded by Kress von Kressenstein which operated in the Sinai region was sustained and supported by their principal desert base at Hafir El Auja , located on the Ottoman side of the Egyptian @-@ Ottoman frontier . Hafir el Auja was linked to Beersheba , Gaza , and northern Palestine by road and railway . 
 This major German and Ottoman base in the central Sinai desert , supplied and supported smaller garrisons in the area with reinforcements , ammunition and rations , medical support , and periods of rest away from the front line . If left intact , the Ottoman forces at Magdhaba and Hafir el Auja could seriously threaten the advance of the EEF along the north route towards Southern Palestine . 
 = = = Problems of an advance to El Arish = = = 
 = = = = Water = = = = 
 The area of oases which extended from Dueidar , 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Kantara along the Darb es Sultani , along the old caravan route , and on to Salmana 52 miles ( 84 km ) from Kantara could sustain life . But from Salmana to Bir el Mazar , ( 75 miles ( 121 km ) from Kantara ) there was little water , and beyond the Mazar area there was no water , till El Arish was reached on the coast 95 miles ( 153 km ) from Kantara . 
 Before the British advance to El Arish could begin , the 20 miles ( 32 km ) stretch without a water supply between El Mazar and El Arish had to be thoroughly explored . By mid @-@ December 1916 , the pipeline 's eastward progress made it possible to store sufficient water at <unk> ( Kilo . 128 ) and it was also possible to concentrate sufficiently large numbers of Egyptian Camel Transport Corps camels and camel @-@ drivers to carry water forward from <unk> in support of an attacking force . 
 = = = = Conditions = = = = 
 The campaign across the Sinai desert required great determination , as well as conscientious attention to detail by all involved , to ensure that ammunition , rations and every required pint of water and bale of horse fodder was available when needed . While the Ottoman Empire 's main desert base at Hafir el Auja was more centrally located , the British Empire base was some 30 miles ( 48 km ) to the west of El Arish ; almost at the limits of their lines of communication . Mounted operations so far from base in such barren country were extremely hazardous and difficult . 
 For these long @-@ range desert operations , it was necessary for all supplies to be well @-@ organised and suitably packaged for transportation on camels , moving with the column or following closely behind . It was vital that the soldiers were well trained for these conditions . If a man was left behind in the inhospitable Sinai , he might die in the burning desert sun during the day , or bitter cold at night . If a water bottle was accidentally tipped up or leaked , it could mean no water for its owner , for perhaps 24 hours in extreme temperatures . 
 In these extreme and difficult conditions , mounted troops of the EEF worked to provide protective screens for the construction of the infrastructure , patrolling the newly occupied areas and carrying out ground reconnaissance to augment and verify aerial photographs , used to improve maps of the newly occupied areas . 
 = = = British War Office policy = = = 
 The British War Office 's stated policy in October 1916 was to maintain offensive operations on the Western Front , while remaining on the defensive everywhere else . However , the battle of attrition on the Somme , coupled with a change of Britain 's Prime Minister , with David Lloyd George succeeding H. H. Asquith on 7 December , destabilised the status quo sufficiently to bring about a policy reversal , making attacks on the Central Powers weak points away from the Western Front desirable . The commander of the EEF , General Sir Archibald Murray , was encouraged to seek success on his Eastern Frontier , but without any reinforcements . He thought that an advance to El Arish was possible , and that such an advance would threaten forces in the southern Ottoman Empire and , if not prevent , at least slow the transfer of German and Ottoman units to other theatres of war from the Levant . 
 = = = Creation of Eastern Force and Desert Column = = = 
 After the victory at Romani , Murray moved his headquarters back from Ismailia on the canal to Cairo . This move to Cairo was to enable him to be in a more central position to carry out his duties and responsibilities which extended from the Western Frontier Force , waging a continuing campaign against the Senussi in the Egyptian Western Desert , to the Eastern Force in the Sinai . Another consequence of the victory was that Major General H. A. Lawrence , who had been in command of the Northern Sector of the Suez Canal defences and Romani during the battle , was transferred to the Western Front . 
 As a consequence of pushing the German and Ottoman forces eastwards away from the Canal , during October , Lieutenant General Charles Dobell was appointed to command the newly created Eastern Force . With his headquarters at Kantara , Dobell became responsible for the security of the Suez Canal and the Sinai Peninsula . 
 Dobell 's Eastern Force consisted of two infantry divisions , the 42nd ( East Lancashire ) Division commanded by Major General W. Douglas and the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division commanded by Major General W. E. B. Smith , as well as the Anzac Mounted Division , a mounted infantry division commanded by Chauvel , the 5th Mounted Brigade commanded by Brigadier General E. A. Wiggin and the Imperial Camel Brigade commanded by Brigadier General Clement Leslie Smith . Murray considered this force to be under strength by at least a division for an advance to Beersheba , but felt he could gain El Arish and form an effective base on the coast , from which further operations eastwards could be supplied . 
 In October Chauvel was granted six weeks ' leave , and he travelled to Britain on 25 October , returning to duty on 12 December 1916 . While he was away Desert Column was formed and on 7 December 1916 , five days before Chauvel 's return , Murray appointed the newly promoted Lieutenant General Sir Phillip Chetwode commander of the Column . As a major general , Chetwode had been in command of cavalry on the Western Front , where he was involved in pursuing retreating Germans after the First Battle of the Marne . 
 On formation , Chetwode 's Desert Column consisted of three infantry divisions , the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , currently serving in the Suez Canal Defences and commanded by A. E. Dallas , the 42nd ( East Lancashire ) and the 52nd ( Lowland ) Divisions . Chetwode 's mounted force consisted of the Anzac Mounted Division , the 5th Mounted Brigade and the Imperial Camel Brigade . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By early December 1916 , construction of the railway had reached the wells at Bir el Mazar , the last water sources available to the EEF before El Arish . Bir el Mazar was about half way between Kantara on the Suez Canal and the Egyptian @-@ Ottoman territorial border . British intelligence had reported Ottoman Army plans to strengthen the garrison at Magdhaba , by extending the railway ( or light rail ) south east from Beersheba ( and Hafir el Auja ) towards Magdhaba . 
 = = = Advance to El Arish = = = 
 Mounted patrols to the outskirts of El Arish discovered 1 @,@ 600 well @-@ entrenched Ottoman troops holding the town , supported by forces based 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the south @-@ east on the banks of the Wadi el Arish at Magdhaba and Abu Aweigila . 
 On 20 December , a week after Chauvel returned from leave , the advance to El Arish began when the Anzac Mounted Division left Bir Gympie at 21 : 45 . They moved out without the 2nd Light Horse Brigade , which was in the rear assisting with patrolling the lines of communication stretching 90 miles ( 140 km ) back to Kantara on the Suez Canal . So it was the 1st and 3rd Light Horse Brigades , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , the 5th Mounted Brigade and the newly formed battalions of the Imperial Camel Brigade with the mountain guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore Camel Battery which made the 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) trek to El Arish . 
 On the day they set out , Australian airmen reported that the garrisons at El Arish and Maghara Hills , in the centre of the Sinai , appeared to have been withdrawn . 
 As the Anzac Mounted Division approached Um <unk> at 02 : 00 on 21 December , a halt was called until 03 : 30 when the column continued on to El Arish . At 07 : 45 , the advanced troops entered the town , unopposed , to contact the civil population and arrange water supplies for the mounted force . One prisoner was captured , while lines of observation were set up , which maintained a close watch over the country east and south of the town . By 16 : 00 the 1st and 3rd Light Horse , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles and the Imperial Camel Brigades were in bivouac at El Arish , the only casualties during the day being two members of the 1st Light Horse Brigade , who were blown up by a stranded mine on the beach . 
 The day after El Arish was occupied , on 22 December , the leading infantry brigade of the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division reached the town and , together with the 5th Mounted Brigade , garrisoned the town and began fortifying the area . At 10 : 00 , Chetwode landed on the beach opposite the Anzac Mounted Division Headquarters to begin his appointment as commander of Desert Column . Chetwode reported that he had arranged a special camel convoy with rations and horse feed to arrive at El Arish at 16 : 30 that day , with a view to the Anzac Mounted Division advancing on Magdhaba , 18 miles ( 29 km ) away . ( On the following day 23 December , the first supplies to be transported to El Arish by ship from Port Said were landed . ) With essential rations organised , Chauvel led the mounted division out of El Arish at 00 : 45 on the night of 22 / 23 December towards Magdhaba , after reconnaissances had established that the retreating Ottoman force from El Arish had moved to the south east along the Wadi el Arish towards Magdhaba . 
 = = = Ottoman force = = = 
 After their retreat from El Arish , the Ottoman garrison withdrew down the Wadi el Arish 25 miles ( 40 km ) south east of El Arish , to Magdhaba and Abu Aweigila , about another 15 miles ( 24 km ) further away from the coast , on the banks of the wadi . At Magdhaba the garrison had increased from 500 to about 1 @,@ 400 Ottoman soldiers ; there may have been as many as 2 @,@ 000 , consisting of two battalions of the 80th Infantry Regiment ( 27th Ottoman Infantry Division but attached to the 3rd Ottoman Infantry Division for most of 1916 ) . These two battalions , the 2nd Battalion , commanded by Izzet Bey , of about 600 men and the 3rd Battalion , commanded by <unk> Bey , were supported by a dismounted camel company and two squads from the 80th Machine Gun Company . ( The remainder squads of the 80th Machine Gun Company had been moved north to Shellal . ) The defending force was also supported by a battery of four Krupp 7 @.@ 5 cm <unk> M 1873 guns ( on loan from the 1st Mountain Regiment ) , since the 80th Regiment 's own artillery battery was stationed at <unk> . Also attached to the Ottoman garrison at Magdhaba were a number of support units , including elements of the 3rd Company of the 8th Engineer Battalion , 27th Medical Company , 43rd Mobile Hospital and the 46th Cooking Unit . The garrison was under the command of Kadri Bey , the commanding officer of the 80th Infantry Regiment . 
 The series of six well @-@ situated and developed redoubts making up the strong Ottoman garrison position at Magdhaba reflected considerable planning ; the redoubts were almost impossible to locate on the flat ground on both sides of the Wadi el Arish . Clearly , the move of the Ottoman garrison from El Arish had not been a sudden , panicked reaction ; indeed it was first noticed by Allied aerial reconnaissance planes as early as 25 October . 
 These fortified redoubts , which were situated on both sides of the wadi , were linked by a series of trenches . The whole position , extending over an area of about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from east to west , was more narrow from north to south . On 22 December 1916 , the day before the attack , the garrison had been inspected by Kress von Kressenstein , commander of the Ottoman Desert Force , who drove from his base at Hafir el Auja . At the time he expressed satisfaction with the garrison 's ability to withstand any assault . 
 Von Kressenstein 's satisfaction that the garrison could withstand any assault may have had something to do with its remoteness . Magdhaba was about 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the British railhead and 25 miles ( 40 km ) from El Arish . There were two other important pieces of information von Kressenstein did not have . Firstly , he would have been unaware of the speed , flexibility and determination of the Australian , British and New Zealand mounted force , which they were about to demonstrate . Secondly , the arrival of the new British commander , Chetwode , and his staff and their vital forward planning to organise the necessary logistical support for an immediate long range attack by the Anzac Mounted Division . 
 = = = British Empire force = = = 
 Chauvel 's force for the attack on Magdhaba consisted of three brigades of the Anzac Mounted Division ; 1st Light Horse Brigade ( 1st , 2nd and 3rd Light Horse Regiments ) , the 3rd Light Horse Brigade ( 8th , 9th and 10th Light Horse Regiments ) , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade ( Auckland , Canterbury and Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiments ) , together with three battalions from the Imperial Camel Brigade in place of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade . These nine regiments and three battalions were supported by the Inverness and Somerset Artillery Batteries , Royal Horse Artillery , and the Hong Kong and Singapore Artillery Battery . 
 This force , which may have been 7 @,@ 000 strong , moved out from El Arish just after midnight , following an unexpected delay caused by incoming infantry columns of the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , which crossed the long camel train carrying water which followed the mounted division . Nevertheless , the Anzac Mounted Division ( riding for forty minutes , dismounting and leading their horse for ten minutes and halting for ten minutes every hour ) reached the plain 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Magdhaba , at about 05 : 00 on 23 December . The column had been successfully guided by brigade scouts , until the garrison 's fires had become visible for about an hour during their trek , indicating the Ottomans did not expect an attacking force to set out on a second night march , after their 30 miles ( 48 km ) ride to El Arish . 
 = = = = Aerial support = = = = 
 Aerial reconnaissances were routinely carried out ; one carried out on 15 November by the Australian Flying Corps made a detailed reconnaissance behind enemy lines over the areas of El <unk> , Hafir el Auja and Abu Aweigila , taking 24 photographs of all camps and dumps . 
 The Royal Flying Corps 's 5th Wing under the command of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel P B Joubert de la Ferté stationed at <unk> supported the Anzac Mounted Division . The Wing was a composite formation of the No. 14 Squadron and the Australian Flying Corps 's No. 1 Squadron . It was ordered to provide close air support , long @-@ range scouting and long @-@ range bombing . One British and ten Australian planes had dropped a hundred bombs on Magdhaba on 22 December and during the battle bombed and machine gunned the area , but targets were difficult to find . 
 = = = = Medical support = = = = 
 The evacuation of wounded had been reviewed following the problems encountered during the Battle of Romani , with particular attention given to the development of transport by railway . By the time the advance to El Arish occurred in December 1916 , two additional hospital trains were available on the Sinai railway , and medical sections had been deployed at the following : 
 close to the battlefield at railhead , where the immobile sections of divisional field ambulances could accommodation 700 casualties , 
 at Bir el Abd No. 24 Casualty Clearing Station ( CCS ) , which could accommodate 400 cases , and Nos. 53 and 54 CCS could each accommodate 200 @,@ 
 at Bir el Mazar No. 26 CCS , which could accommodate 400 cases , 
 at Mahamdiyah No. 2 ( Australian ) Stationary Hospital with 800 beds , 
 at Kantara East No. 24 Stationary Hospital with 800 beds . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 06 : 30 the No. 5 Wing attacked the Ottoman defences , drawing some fire which revealed the locations of machine guns , trenches and five redoubts . The redoubts were arranged around the village , which protected the only available water supply in the area . During the day , pilots and their observers provided frequent reports ; fourteen were received between 07 : 50 and 15 : 15 , giving estimated positions , strength , and movements of the Ottoman garrison . These were most often given verbally by the observer , after the pilot landed near Chauvel 's headquarters , as the aircraft did not at this time have wireless communication . 
 The main attack , from the north and east , was to be made by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , commanded by Brigadier General Edward Chaytor , which moved in line of troop columns . The New Zealanders were supported by a machine gun squadron armed with Vickers and Lewis guns , and the 3rd Light Horse Brigade all under the command of Chaytor . This attack began near the village of Magdhaba and the Wadi El Arish , on the virtually featureless battleground , when the British Empire artillery opened fire at the same time as Chaytor 's group moved towards the Ottoman garrison 's right and rear . 
 Chauvel 's plan of envelopment quickly began to develop . Despite heavy Ottoman fire , Chaytor 's attacking mounted troops found cover and dismounted , some about 1 @,@ 600 yards ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) from the redoubts and entrenchments , while others got as close as 400 yards ( 370 m ) . At the same time , units of the Imperial Camel Brigade were moving straight on Magdhaba , in a south easterly direction , following the telegraph line , and by 08 : 45 were slowly advancing on foot , followed by the 1st Light Horse Brigade , in reserve . 
 Chauvel 's envelopment was extended at 09 : 25 , when Chaytor ordered a regiment to circle the entrenched positions and move through Aulad Ali , to cut off a possible line of retreat to the south and south east . The 10th Light Horse Regiment with two sections of the brigade Machine Gun Squadron , led by Brigadier General J. R. Royston , commander of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade , succeeded in capturing Aulad Ali and 300 prisoners . 
 The Ottoman artillery batteries and trenches were difficult to locate , but by 10 : 00 the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade was advancing towards the firing line . At this time , an aerial report described small groups of the Magdhaba garrison beginning to retreat , and as a result the still @-@ mounted reserve , the 1st Light Horse Brigade , was ordered to move directly on the town , passing the dismounted Imperial Camel Brigade battalions on their way . After meeting severe shrapnel fire as they trotted over the open plain , they were forced to take cover in the Wadi el Arish where they dismounted , continuing their advance at 10 : 30 against the Ottoman left . Meanwhile , the battalions of the Imperial Camel Brigade , continued their advance over the flat ground for 900 yards ( 820 m ) , section by section , covering fire provided by each section in turn . 
 By 12 : 00 all brigades were hotly engaged , as the 3rd Light Horse Brigade 's 10th Light Horse Regiment continued their sweep round the garrison 's right flank . An hour later , the right of the Imperial Camel Brigade battalions had advanced to reach the 1st Light Horse Brigade and 55 minutes afterwards , fierce fighting was beginning to make an impact on the Ottoman garrison . Reports continued of small numbers of Ottoman troops retreating , but by 14 : 15 the 10th Light Horse Regiment was continuing its trek after capturing Aulad Ali ; moving across the Wadi el Arish , round Hill 345 to attack the rear of Redoubt No. 4 . By 14 : 55 the frontal attack by the Imperial Camel Brigade was within 500 yards ( 460 m ) of the Ottoman defences and , together with the 1st Light Horse Brigade , at 15 : 20 , they attacked No. 2 redoubt . Ten minutes later the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , with fixed bayonets , attacked the trenches to the east of some houses and the 10th Light Horse Regiment , by now advancing from the south , captured two trenches on that side , effectively cutting off any retreat for the Ottoman garrison . 
 By 16 : 00 the 1st Light Horse Brigade had captured No. 2 redoubt , and Chaytor reported capturing buildings and redoubts on the left . After a telephone call between Chauvel and Chetwode , pressure continued to be exerted and an attack by all units took place at 16 : 30 . The Ottoman garrison held on until the dismounted attackers were within 20 yards ( 18 m ) , but by that time , there was no doubt that the Ottoman garrison was losing the fight , and they began to surrender in small groups . All organised resistance ceased ten minutes later and as darkness fell , sporadic firing petered out , while prisoners were rounded up , horses collected and watered at the captured wells . Then Chauvel rode into Magdhaba and gave the order to clear the battlefield . 
 At 23 : 30 the Anzac Mounted Division 's headquarters left Magdhaba with an escort and arrived in El Arish at 04 : 10 on 24 December 1916 . 
 = = = Casualties and captures = = = 
 Of the 146 known British Empire casualties , 22 were killed and 124 were wounded . Five officers were killed and seven wounded , and 17 other ranks were killed and 117 wounded . Included in the 146 figure , which may have been as high as 163 , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade suffered the loss of two officers and seven other ranks killed and 36 other ranks wounded . 
 No more than 200 Ottoman soldiers escaped before the surviving garrison of between 1 @,@ 242 and 1 @,@ 282 men were captured . The prisoners included the 80th Regiment 's commander <unk> Bey , and the 2nd and 3rd Battalions commanders , Izzat Bey , <unk> Bey among 43 officers . Over 300 Ottoman soldiers were killed ; 97 were buried on the battlefield , and 40 wounded were cared for . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the victory at Magdhaba the occupation of El Arish was secure . This was the first town captured on the Mediterranean coast and infantry from the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division and the 5th Mounted Yeomanry Brigade quickly began to fortify the town . The Royal Navy arrived on 22 December 1916 , and supplies began landing on the beaches near El Arish on 24 December . After the arrival of the railway on 4 January 1917 followed by the water pipeline , El Arish quickly developed into a major base for the EEF . 
 Aerial reconnaissance found Ottoman forces moving their headquarters north from Beersheba , while the garrison at their main desert base of Hafir El Auja was slightly increased . Other Ottoman outposts at El <unk> and <unk> remained , along with their strong defensive system of trenches and redoubts at El <unk> , defending Rafa , on the frontier between Egypt and the southern Ottoman Empire . 
 = = = Return to El Arish = = = 
 Chauvel 's force had left El Arish the previous night , carrying one water bottle per man . Additional water was organised by Desert Column staff and sent from El Arish to Lahfan , and a water convoy from Lahfan , ordered to move to Magdhaba at 15 : 10 on the day of battle , was reported to be on its way at 15 : 20 . 
 After filling up from the water convoy after its arrival at Magdhaba , the New Zealand Mounted Rifles and 3rd Light Horse Brigades left to ride back to El Arish in their own time . 
 Material assistance was given to the returning columns by the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , in form of the loan of camels , water <unk> , sandcarts and gun horse teams , the latter going out on the commanding generals ' initiative to meet the returning teams . 
 = = = Clearing the battleground = = = 
 At dressing station set up 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west of Magdhaba , by the New Zealand Field Ambulance Mobile Section and the 1st Light Horse Field Ambulance , 80 wounded were treated during the day of battle . Field ambulances performed urgent surgery , gave tetanus inoculations and fed patients . During the night after the battle , treated wounded were evacuated in sandcarts and on torturous cacolets to El Arish , with the No. 1 Ambulance Convoy assisting . 
 Part of the 1st Light Horse Regiment , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel C. H. Granville , with two squadrons of the Auckland Mounted Rifle Regiment , and one squadron from the 3rd Light Horse Brigade bivouacked for the night at Magdhaba . A convoy of supplies was ordered from El Arish to support these troops as they continued , the following morning , clearing the battlefield . The remaining 44 British Empire and 66 Ottoman Empire wounded , collected on 23 and 24 December , were taken to an Ottoman hospital within the Magdhaba fortifications , before being sent to the dressing station . From there , at 17 : 00 the ambulance convoy set out on its 23 miles ( 37 km ) march to the receiving station . 
 The convoys of wounded were met a few miles from El Arish by infantry with sandcarts lent by the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , so the wounded who had endured the cacolets travelled in comfort to the receiving station , arriving at 04 : 00 on 25 December . The 52nd ( Lowland ) Division supplied medical stores and personnel to assist , but although arrangements were made for evacuation to the railhead two days later , evacuation by sea was planned . This had to be postponed due to a gale with rain and hail on 27 December and it was not until 29 December that the largest single ambulance convoy organised in the campaign , 77 sandcarts , nine sledges and a number of <unk> camels , moved out in three lines along the beach with 150 wounded . A few serious cases , who had not been ready to be moved , were evacuated the following day to begin their journey to Kantara on the Suez Canal . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 In an address to the troops after the battle , Chetwode expressed his appreciation for the mounted rifle and light horse method of attack . He said that in the history of warfare he had never known cavalry to not only locate and surround the opponent 's position , but to dismount and fight as infantry with rifle and bayonet . 
 On 28 September 1917 Chauvel , who by this time had been promoted by Allenby to command three mounted divisions in Desert Mounted Corps , wrote to General Headquarters – 
 = War Tour = 
 The War Tour was a concert tour by the Irish rock band U2 , which took place in 1982 and 1983 in support of the group 's third album War . The tour took place in Western Europe , the United States , and Japan , with new material from War taking an increasing role as the tour progressed . Venues were mostly halls , but some arenas were introduced later on . U2 's performances were very well received both critically and commercially , especially in the United States where U2 broke through to become a major act . Scenes of lead singer Bono waving a white flag during the song " Sunday Bloody Sunday " became an emblematic image of this phase of U2 's career . It was their first tour as full @-@ time headlining act and their first to be profitable . 
 The live album Under a Blood Red Sky and the concert film U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky both originated from performances on the tour . The latter matched U2 's concert fervour with the spectacular natural setting of the Red Rocks Amphitheatre in the rain to produce a memorable document of the War Tour and to further increase the group 's popularity ; U2 's filming of the Red Rocks show was later selected by Rolling Stone magazine as one of the " 50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll " . 
 = = Itinerary = = 
 After War had been recorded , but three months before it was released , U2 began playing the Pre @-@ War Tour : 20 shows , and a television appearance , in halls in Western Europe , commencing on 1 December 1982 in Glasgow and finishing in the band 's home town , Dublin , on 24 December . These shows generally featured only three songs from the upcoming album – " Sunday Bloody Sunday " , " New Year 's Day " , and " Surrender " . The 20 December performance in Belfast 's <unk> Leisure Centre represented the first airing of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " in Northern Ireland ; lead singer Bono told the crowd , " We 're going to do a song for you now . If you don 't like it , we 'll never play it again . It 's called ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' . " The reception was positive , and the song stayed in . Subsequent introductions would explicitly clarify the song 's purpose : " This song is not a rebel song , this song is ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' ! " 
 On 26 February 1983 at Caird Hall in Dundee , Scotland , the War Tour proper began , with the album 's release coming two days later . The band played 29 shows and three television appearances in Scotland , England , and Wales , ending on 3 April with a single continental show at the Printemps de Bourges in Bourges , France . Three or four additional songs from War were added to these set lists , including " Two Hearts Beat As One " , and the band started their 1980 's practice of ending shows with the War song , " 40 " . 
 The next leg went to North America for 48 shows and two radio appearances , beginning on 23 April in Chapel Hill , North Carolina and ending on 26 June at the Hudson River Pier 84 facility in New York City . The War Tour was U2 's first as a full @-@ time headlining act . Most of the venues were colleges and smaller auditoriums , but they played a few arena shows , such as at the Centrum in Worcester , Massachusetts and at the Los Angeles Sports Arena . Many of the shows featured the Welsh band The Alarm as the opening act . 
 During this tour , they appeared before one of the largest audiences in US music history : on Memorial Day at the US Festival in San Bernardino , California , they appeared at noontime on the third day of the festival before a crowd of over 125 @,@ 000 . The festival was broadcast live on MTV . The performance climaxed in a grand finale where Bono scaled the proscenium of the US festival 's huge stage while singing the song " The Electric Co . " , ending up about 100 feet above the ground . 
 A week later , their 5 June 1983 performance at Red Rocks Amphitheatre ( an outdoor venue near Morrison , Colorado in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains that many travelling musicians consider the most spectacular outdoor venue in the United States ) was recorded for what turned out to be a live album entitled Under a Blood Red Sky and concert film entitled Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky . A steady rain and the surreal , torch @-@ lit natural beauty of the surroundings combined to present U2 's performance in the most dramatic of contexts . Frequently shown on MTV , the video helped to further expand the band 's American audience and rewarded the large financial risk the show had represented . The album used performances culled from the Red Rocks show as well as a 6 May show in Boston 's Orpheum Theatre and a 20 August show in St. <unk> , West Germany at the Lorelei Amphitheatre . The Orpheum Theatre performance was also recorded and broadcast on the King Biscuit Flower Hour syndicated radio program . 
 U2 then played at 5 outdoor summer festivals in Western Europe in July and August . 
 After a nearly three @-@ month interlude , U2 played a show in Honolulu , Hawaii , before their first tour of Japan for six shows , with the tour ending on 30 November 1983 at the Nakano Sun Plaza in Tokyo . While in Japan , U2 made two television appearances , one of which featured a performance of " New Year 's Day " in which Edge performed almost entirely on piano due to a guitar failure . 
 = = Shows and reception = = 
 In both UK and US publicity for the tour , the group emphasised that it opposed " wallpaper music " from artists who spent more time on their hairdos than anything else . In the US , advertisements for the tour read " U2 Declare War " and talked about " The War on Boring Music " , especially in the context of breaking up conservative radio formats . National identification also played a role ; Bono said to US audiences variants of : " We 're not just another English fashion band passing through . We 're an Irish band and we 're here to stay . " 
 War 's music , its music videos , and the War Tour separated U2 from the mass of new wave or college rock acts and into mainstream rock visibility . Shows were typically 90 minutes long . Bono was emotional and very theatrical during shows ; during songs he would climb lighting rigs , plunge into the audience , or walk out onto side balconies . As the tour progressed , band members and others became concerned that Bono 's antics – while making for good press copy and having an electric effect on some fans – were detracting from the music and might end in a disaster ( an assessment Bono later agreed with ) . " New Year 's Day " became a hit single , and in concert performances full of vitality , The Edge would rapidly switch back and forth between piano and electric guitar . Older songs such as " Gloria " and " 11 O 'Clock Tick Tock " were kept in the set list . " 40 " ' s show @-@ closing , thoughtful presence – wherein The Edge and bassist Adam Clayton swapped instruments , then three band members left one by one leaving only drummer Larry Mullen , Jr . – grew into an audience participation ritual that would continue even after the band had left the stage . At one show at Dublin 's Phoenix Park Racecourse , the fans ' singing of the refrain How long , to sing this song from the song went on for 15 minutes after the concert 's end . 
 Initial British critical reaction to the first leg of the War Tour was favourable but with some reservations . The group was already well known there , and while War debuted at the top of the UK albums chart , it had encountered some early backlash , with NME saying " the great personal fury " of U2 's early work had been replaced by " literal but sincere sloganeering " . Sounds magazine said a Birmingham show had pacing and thematic problems due to " newer numbers clumsily breaking the mood that had earlier been created " but praised many other elements of the show , saying that " their skill at breaking down barriers between band and audience has never been better . " Some poor notices for the album itself from the British pop weeklies upset Bono during the tour , and one from Sounds bothered him so much that insulted the reviewer by name during a show in Portsmouth . 
 U2 's exciting concerts earned critical praise during the American leg , where the band had not been as well @-@ known previously . Both American audiences and American critics were more open than the British to the group 's upfront emotional statements and theatricality . The New York Times ' John Rockwell wrote that : " This is a great live band . Bono is a riveting public personality , leaping and crawling all over the stage and above it into the scaffolding . " The Boston Globe wrote that the group 's performance " reached a rare , wondrous zone – where rock ' n ' roll transcended the ordinary and took the audience on a lift that was equal parts spiritual and sensual . " It said that Bono 's vocals " sound like pleas and prayers , the lyrics failure and hope " and described The Edge 's guitar playing as embodying " clear , ringing lines that were both atmospheric and jarring . " The Oregonian wrote that it was " the best concert of 1983 so far : solid music played rhythmically and well , a positive stage attitude that recognised audience input , excellent sound and lights . " The Village Voice wrote that U2 in concert evoked an " undeniable righteousness " about which " U2 was thrilled [ and ] their audience was thrilled " . Journalist Rick Miller wrote of the opening US show in Chapel Hill , " There are no words for the warmth of the thrill that U2 gave the crowd . I surrendered and I know I 'm not alone . " Contemporary Christian Music magazine said that the show avoided typical juvenile stage patter clichés and that from a Christian perspective , " It is true that U2 doesn 't preach , but that does not mean a message is not communicated . " 
 Tickets were in demand in the US , spurred by word @-@ of @-@ mouth and the breakthrough of " New Year 's Day " as a hit single there . Many of the War Tour shows sold out on the American leg . The group began booking bigger venues on the tour as a result . The tour helped War stay in or near the US albums chart Top 20 for the duration of that leg , which represented by far their best commercial performance so far in the United States . At the same time , the band had to deal with larger @-@ scale success for the first time , with more of a distance between themselves and their audience and with the audience itself changing in nature . The group was being mobbed by fans at some locations and Bono became a sex symbol to female fans . 
 The tour grossed about $ 2 million overall . It was their first venture on the road that was profitable . 
 = = Themes and legacy = = 
 The War Tour was the first U2 tour on which the lighting and stage design was done by Willie Williams , who would continue to perform that role in all of U2 's subsequent tours . While originally hired for just lighting , Williams quickly became involved in all aspects of the group 's visual presentation . Starting with the Pre @-@ War Tour , the minimalist stage design featured a red carpet @-@ covered riser on which the drums and keyboards stood . Three large white flags were placed at the back of the stage , representing the notion of " surrender " ; electric fans set the flags flying at designated moments in the show . Stage fog was also used in places . One newspaper review said that " Lighting was starkly beautiful for this concert , in tune with the occasional ominous tone of some of the songs . " 
 During " Sunday Bloody Sunday " , Bono would march waving a white flag around to illustrate his anti @-@ war and anti @-@ nationalist stances and spur audiences to shout , " No more ! No war ! " The white flags were also sometimes handed off the stage , where they would be passed around amongst the audience . Bono said that his " limited voice " compelled him to search for other ways to express a song 's meaning , and here this was the " idea of a flag drained of all colour , the idea of surrender . " This became the focal image of the tour , with Rolling Stone saying of the Red Rocks performance , " The sight of Bono singing the anti @-@ violence anthem ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' while waving a white flag through crimson mist ( created by a combination of wet weather , hot lights and the illumination of those crags ) became the defining image of U2 's warrior @-@ rock spirit . " So strong was the image that the group became somewhat ambivalent about it ; years later , bassist Adam Clayton would say , " If you had to reduce U2 down to the waving of the white flag , which is a moment from the War Tour , that would be the worst thing . At the time , I think it was in the spirit of the performance . But we weren 't very ironic people back then . We were pretty serious people , and we didn 't see that we could have been a little more subtle about things like that . But hey , as mistakes go , that 's probably not a bad one . " 
 The move upward from clubs to halls to arenas that the War Tour spanned did not faze the group . This had been their plan , and Bono said , " If we stay in small clubs , we 'll develop small minds , and then we 'll start making small music . " And early on , Bono had told Williams that someday the group would do " Pink Floyd @-@ size shows . " But the medium @-@ sized venues of the War Tour were enough at the time ; two decades later , the band 's Red Rocks performance captured on Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky was included on Rolling Stone 's list of the " 50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll " . 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = Croatian patrol boat Šolta ( OB @-@ 02 ) = 
 Šolta ( pennant number OB @-@ 02 ) is a Mirna @-@ class patrol boat in service with the Croatian Navy . Completed during the 1980s as Mukos ( PČ @-@ 176 ) , it was the sixth ship of a class that was being built for the Yugoslav Navy in the Kraljevica Shipyard . 
 During the Croatian War of Independence , Mukos was part of a tactical group tasked with enforcing a naval blockade of the city of Split . On 14 November 1991 , Croatian Navy commandos disabled the vessel with an improvised torpedo , leaving the vessel drifting and abandoned by her crew . The crippled ship was then tugged away by Croatian locals to the nearby island of Šolta . She was subsequently repaired and entered service with the Croatian Navy as Šolta . As of 2014 , Šolta remains in service with the Croatian Coast Guard , an integral part of the navy . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Šolta was laid down as Mukos ( PČ @-@ 176 ) in the Kraljevica Shipyard as the sixth ship in a class of patrol boats that were being built for the Yugoslav Navy ( JRM ) . It was launched on 18 November 1982 . She measures 32 m ( 105 ft ) in length , has a draught of 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) , a 6 @.@ 75 m ( 22 @.@ 1 ft ) beam and a standard displacement of 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) or 142 tonnes ( 140 long tons ) when full . 
 Powered by two <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> diesel engines that spin two propellers , Šolta has a maximum speed of 29 @.@ 5 – 30 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 – 55 @.@ 6 km / h ; 33 @.@ 9 – 34 @.@ 5 mph ) and a continuous speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . She has a range of 600 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ; 690 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) and an autonomy of four to five days that can be extended to eight days during wartime . 
 The ship 's original armament consisted of a single Bofors 40 mm <unk> gun mounted on the ship 's bow , a quadruple Strela 2 launcher behind the bridge and a quad 20 mm M @-@ 75 gun on the stern . Eight <unk> @-@ <unk> depth charges could be carried for anti @-@ submarine warfare duties . Located on the sides were two double @-@ barrel 128 mm illumination launchers . Sensors included a Racal Decca RM 1216 A surface search radar and a Simrad SQ 3D / SF sonar . 
 = = Service = = 
 During its service in the Yugoslav Navy , Mukos was part of the border patrol detachment . In November 1991 , during the Croatian War of Independence , Mukos was part of the " Kaštela " tactical group that was tasked with enforcing a naval blockade of the port of Split and the surrounding islands . On 14 November , at around 17 : 30 , while on patrol in the Split strait between the islands of Brač and Šolta , Mukos was hit with an improvised torpedo launched by special forces of the Croatian Navy ( HRM ) , effectively starting the Battle of the Dalmatian Channels . The HRM command constructed the torpedo from a small outboard motor boat loaded with explosives . A former missile technician from the Yugoslavian navy had , while receiving training on Saab missiles in Sweden , picked up some remote control plane parts in a hobby store . Handed over to HRM , the gear yielded the ability to remotely control the unmanned vessel . The explosion ripped a hole in the forward section of the hull , causing the bow to flood and killing three crew members . The remaining crew was rescued by a Shershen @-@ class torpedo boat Pionir II ( TČ @-@ 224 ) while Mukos itself was left adrift . 
 During the evening of 15 November the ship was tugged away by a Croatian fishing ship to the nearby Nečujam cove , where the vessel was beached to prevent her from sinking . In the early hours of the same day , the remaining JRM ships opened fire in retaliation for damaging Mukos . As Yugoslav forces left the area , the ship was towed to an overhauling shipyard in Šibenik on the night of 17 / 18 November , after being salvaged by HRM divers with the help of <unk> . The ship was repaired and renamed Šolta , entering service with the HRM on 15 May 1992 with Mile Tomas in command . 
 The Croatian Coast Guard was formed in October 2007 , and Šolta was assigned to the 1st Division , based in Split . During the same year the ship underwent a modernisation that included the installation of a new Sperry Marine radar , gyrocompass and GPS . A second refit that occurred sometime between 2007 and 2013 included the deletion of the Strela launcher and the stern 20 mm M @-@ 75 gun to create space needed for a <unk> and a hydraulic crane used to lower it into the sea . The pennant number was changed from OB @-@ 62 to OB @-@ 02 . 
 = Whitwell , Isle of Wight = 
 Whitwell is a small village located on the south of the Isle of Wight , approximately 5 kilometres north @-@ west of Ventnor , the village 's nearest town . In addition to this , it is about five minutes away from its neighbouring small villages of Godshill and Niton , the latter of which , Whitwell forms a Civil Parish . According to 2001 census data , the total population of the village was 578 . There is a variety of stone and thatched housing , as well as some more modern housing , the most recent of which was completed in 2006 . 
 Whitwell 's small size has led it to become a very close @-@ knit community with a range of amenities including a garage , a 700 @-@ year @-@ old church , the oldest pub on the island , dating back from the 15th century and a post office , which was recently re @-@ located to a new premises inside the church bell tower . A trout farm is located towards Nettlecombe , with three lakes covering 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 ha ) . The waters are well stocked with carp , roach and tench . 
 Whitwell is named after the " White Well " inside the village , and pictured below . The well was visited by many during medieval times on pilgrimages , and now well dressing occurs annually each summer . Across Whitwell , six more old water standards can be seen . They were built in 1887 by William Spindler . Half the cost of installing the wells was covered by William Spindler himself , the remainder by people of the village . The water was supplied by Mr Granville Ward from a spring on his land at Bierley . 
 = = History = = 
 " White " is derived from an Old English word meaning clean or pure , and the village of Whitwell is likely to take its name from a well or spring with a reliable supply of fresh water . The original White Well , located towards the south end of the village was once a place of veneration as a ' holy well ' and a site of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages . The waters of the well were believed to contain healing powers for the infirm . The tradition of Well Dressing was started and now occurs annually at the site of the well . Each year the well is dressed and blessed by the local vicar giving thanks for water and a blessing for the village . 
 In the village , six red iron water pumps can be seen at various intervals . These were built in 1887 by William Spindler , a prominent figure in St Lawrence whose tomb now lies in Whitwell Graveyard . One is located next to the White Well in Ventnor Road , two along <unk> Road , two along the High Street , and one on Nettlecombe Road . 
 Many of the village 's buildings such as the White Horse pub , date back to the 15th century . The Church has portions dating back to as far as the 12th century , with newer additions built in the 13th , 15th and 16th centuries . In comparison to this and the rest of the village , new housing has been built relatively recently along Bannock Road . The latest new housing was completed in 2006 . 
 In 2009 Whitwell won the award for the best kept large village , in addition to the award for the overall island 's best kept village , an award it has previously won in 2003 . Judges from the competition were impressed by maintenance of bus stops , verges seats , commercial premises and gardens and the success of the new post office . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Whitwell lies within the parliamentary constituency of the Isle of Wight with the seat held by Conservative member Andrew Turner , and within the same area of the Isle of Wight Council . Together with Niton , the village forms a civil parish , chaired by Councillor John Andrew <unk> . The Parish Council has ten members , six for the Niton ward and four for the Whitwell ward . The Council meets ten times a year alternating the venue between the two villages . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Whitwell is located in the south of the Isle of Wight , slightly to the south of Godshill , and extends to the southern shore of the island . The nearest town is Ventnor , about 5 kilometres South of the village . Niton is the nearest village about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away , which together , Whitwell and Niton form a civil parish . Also close to the village , is Nettlecombe , the site of a lost medieval village located slightly to the north east . The entire village is surrounded mainly by fields and classed as an ' Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , forming part of the Isle of Wight AONB . ' The relief is mainly flat , with some slight hills . It contains 1 @,@ 910 acres ( 7 @.@ 7 km2 ) of land , 687 acres ( 2 @.@ 78 km2 ) in 1905 being arable land , 775 ½ acres permanent grass , and 74 ½ acres woodland . 
 With the villages co @-@ ordinates at N 50 @.@ <unk> W 1 @.@ <unk> , its climate is warm , with a sea breeze coming in from the coast . It benefits from Ventnor 's micro @-@ climate as a result of being in a sheltered location on the cliff of the island 's south coast . This offers the village more sunny days than much of the British Isles , and fewer frosts . 
 The Eastern Yar , originating in the north @-@ east of the island , extends an infant tributary to Whitwell and at one point , a stone sheep wash is still present . The River Yar Trail was set up on 24 May 2002 , with a milestone outside the White Horse in Whitwell . 
 Whitwell 's built environment is characterised by its mixture of stone and thatched housing . There is a mixture of single and two @-@ story houses , with most single @-@ story housing on Bannock Road , recently developed with a small estate of bungalows . Terraced housing features in the centre of the village . The most notable house in the village is The Old Rectory , close to the church and was formerly a Bed and Breakfast . 
 = = Church = = 
 The Church of St. Mary and St. Radegund is a Church of England church , located on rising ground at the south end of the village , adjoining the rectory . It is the only church in the village . Parts of the church date back to different centuries , the earliest being 12th , with later parts added in the 13th , 15th and 16th century . In April 2007 , the village 's post office was relocated inside the church 's bell tower , the first of its kind to actually be located inside the church . 
 = = Amenities = = 
 The village used to have a wide range of facilities used by local residents . However over the years , many of these have gone . These include two shops , a playgroup , its Methodist church , the forge , a nursing home and youth hostel . The facilities left include : 
 Post Office – The village used to have its own , family owned post office . This was closed in 2006 , however later in 2007 was relocated onto a new premises inside the church . 
 Pub – The White Horse in the village centre is a popular pub across the island . It suffered a fire in 1987 , then again 20 years later in 2007 which saw its temporary closure . Prior to the two fires , the pub was thatched , however after the fire in 2007 , a tiled roof was built , in an attempt to prevent future fires . 
 Garage – The village 's garage , named Whitwell garage is one of the only garages left on the island to still sell petrol ( excluding supermarkets ) . It also sells cars , <unk> and servicing , specialising in Ford . 
 Village hall – It is used to host a variety of activities , as well as the Whitwell Village Show , which takes place annually each summer . 
 Due to the village 's small size and small population of 578 , most amenities are located outside the village . Many are located in the slightly larger neighbouring village of Niton , such as a Pharmacy and doctor 's surgery . Others are located in the nearby town of Ventnor . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Whitwell Station , on the Ventnor West branch of the Isle of Wight Central Railway , was opened along with the other stations on the branch on 20 July 1897 . It was equipped with a passing loop , two platforms , a signal box and a substantial station building . Located at the top of Nettlecombe Lane , the station is located close to the village and the community it was intended to serve , unlike any other stations on the line . 
 However the track has now closed , and the waiting rooms have now been converted into two cottages and the old up platform has been restored . The site is now a popular tourist destination and is used for holiday accommodation . An old railway tunnel just outside the village is used as a mushroom farm . Another tunnel is still present on Nettlecombe Lane ( pictured to the left ) leading to the station . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 Southern Vectis bus route 6 links the village with the towns of Newport and Ventnor , including intermediate villages . The last bus from Newport is early at 18 : 22 providing no evening service for the village . The seasonal ' Island Coaster ' also runs through the village during the summer . <unk> and Southern Vectis take students to school , which has caused some controversy over two bus companies taking a small number of students to school . 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 There are only three roads exiting the village , Ventnor Road leading to Ventnor , <unk> Road leading to Niton and the main High Street which leads to Godshill . 
 The main road leading to Ventnor has recently been widened and resurfaced to cope with the larger number of cars using it , however this has caused controversy with nearby residents with reports of many cars speeding through the village . A sign was later put up , warning motorists if their speed exceeded the 30 @-@ mile per hour speed limit . More were later put up across other parts of the village . 
 = = = Walking = = = 
 The River Yar trail runs through the village with the milestone outside the village Pub . In addition to this , bridleways are maintained , running to nearby villages <unk> and Niton . Future plans could see a pedestrian link from Whitwell to Niton along the main road . 
 = Tora Harris = 
 Tora Lian @-@ Juin Harris ( born September 21 , 1978 ) is an American high jumper . He is a Princeton University engineer of Taiwanese and African @-@ American descent . Harris is an Olympian , a four @-@ time national champion and two @-@ time bronze medalist in international competition . He represented Team USA twice in the IAAF World Championships in Athletics , three times in the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics and has served as a representative once in the IAAF Continental Cup . He spent two years as the No. 1 ranked high jumper in the United States . 
 In college , Harris was a five @-@ time All @-@ American , while earning the two individual ( 2002 indoor and outdoor ) National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) championships . He also represented Team USA at one World University Games . He is both the Ivy League indoor and outdoor high jump record holder and Princeton 's only two @-@ time NCAA individual event track and field champion . He is an eight @-@ time individual Ivy League / Heptagonal champion , winning the indoor and outdoor high jump championships four times each . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harris was born in College Park , Georgia . His mother , Susan ( Su @-@ Chen ) , is Taiwanese . His father , Tommie Lee Harris ( 1934 – 1999 ) , was African American . His parents made him take Chinese lessons when he was young , and he now speaks the language fluently . He attended first grade in Taiwan , where he was introduced to jumping . Harris high jumped 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) in high school . He placed second in the 1997 Georgia High School Association Class AAA high jump championships . Harris is a 1997 alumnus of South Atlanta High School and was a member of Princeton University 's graduating class of 2002 . Harris studied mechanical and aerospace engineering at Princeton . 
 = = College career = = 
 While at Princeton , Harris excelled at intercollegiate athletics . Harris was a four @-@ time NCAA Outdoor Track & Field All @-@ American placing 7th , 5th , 4th and 1st in 1998 , 1999 , 2001 and 2002 , respectively . He also was an NCAA Indoor All @-@ American in 2002 when he placed 1st at the NCAA Championships . He did not participate in intercollegiate competition in 2000 in order to prepare for the 2000 United States Olympic trials . He failed to make the team after finishing seventh at the Olympic trials . 
 He earned his the indoor heptagonal championships in 2001 , tying an Ivy League indoor record ( 7 feet 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 2 @.@ 22 m ) ) that still stood as of 2011 . He won the 2001 outdoor Heptagonal championships with a record jump of 7 feet 5 @.@ 25 inches ( 2 @.@ 27 m ) . That year he was the Indoor Heptagonal Championships Most Outstanding Performer and Outdoor Heptagonal Championships Most Outstanding Performer as well as the Mid @-@ Atlantic Region Male Indoor Athlete of the Year as selected by the United States Track Coaches Association . He won a bronze medal at the 2001 World University Games . His 2002 outdoor Heptagonal championships performance of 7 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 31 m ) continues to be an Ivy League outdoor record . 
 Harris concluded his collegiate career with a total of eight Ivy League / Heptagonal individual championships . He was also both the NCAA indoor and outdoor champion in 2002 . By winning both the indoor and outdoor NCAA championships , he became Princeton 's only two @-@ time NCAA individual event track and field champion . He finished second to Yasser El Halaby as Princeton 's Athlete of the 2000 – 09 Decade . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 He was a two @-@ time United States National indoor champion ( 2005 and 2007 ) and a two @-@ time United States National outdoor champion ( 2006 and 2009 ) . At the 2003 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships , Harris , Charles Austin and Charles Clinger all posted heights of 7 feet 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 2 @.@ 30 m ) , with Austin claiming gold based on fewer misses and Harris winning a jump off for silver . On two other occasions ( 2006 Indoor vs. Adam <unk> at 2 @.@ 25 m , and 2010 Outdoor vs. Jesse Williams at 2 @.@ 26 m ) he earned silver medals at the US national championships despite clearing as high a height as the gold medalist . 
 He was a member of the United States team at the 2004 Summer Olympics along with high jumpers Matt Hemingway and Jamie Nieto . Harris failed to advance past the first round when he could not clear 7 feet 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 2 @.@ 20 m ) on any of his three attempts leaving him with a best height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) and a 17th @-@ place finish . He represented the United States at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics in both 2003 and 2009 and in the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics in 2003 , 2004 and 2006 . He won a bronze medal at the 2006 IAAF World Cup . 
 Harris was the No. 1 ranked high jumper in the United States according to Track & Field News in both 2002 and 2006 and was among the top 10 every year from 2001 through 2009 . His personal best jump is 2 @.@ 33 metres ( 7 ft 7 @.@ 73 in ) , achieved in June 2006 in Indianapolis . Harris trains out of his Chula Vista , California residence . 
 He has developed , produced and marketed the electric <unk> cargo bike , under the Juiced Riders name . 
 = Four @-@ horned antelope = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope ( Tetracerus quadricornis ) , or <unk> , is a small antelope found in India and Nepal . This antelope has four horns , which distinguish it from most other bovids , which have two horns ( sparing a few such as the Jacob sheep ) . The sole member of the genus Tetracerus , the species was first described by French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville in 1816 . Three subspecies are recognised . The four @-@ horned antelope stands nearly 55 – 64 centimetres ( 22 – 25 in ) at the shoulder and weighs nearly 17 – 22 kilograms ( 37 – 49 lb ) . Slender with thin legs and a short tail , the four @-@ horned antelope has a yellowish brown to reddish coat . One pair of horns is located between the ears , and the other on the forehead . The posterior horns are always longer than the anterior horns , which might be mere fur @-@ covered studs . While the posterior horns measure 8 – 12 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) , the anterior ones are 2 – 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 97 in ) long . 
 The four @-@ horned antelope is diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) . Though solitary by nature , four @-@ horned antelopes may form loose groups of three to five – with one or more adults , sometimes accompanied by juveniles . This elusive antelope feeds on grasses , herbs , shrubs , foliage , flowers and fruits . It needs to drink water frequently ; as such it stays in places near water sources . The breeding behaviour of the four @-@ horned antelope has not been well studied . The age at which they reach sexual maturity and the season when mating occurs have not been understood well . Gestation lasts about eight months , following which one or two calves are born . They are kept concealed for the first few weeks of their birth . The young remain with the mother for about a year . 
 Four @-@ horned antelopes tend to inhabit areas with significant grass cover or heavy undergrowth , and avoid human settlements . Earlier common throughout deciduous forests in India , the antelope now occurs in widely disjunct , small populations . Most of the populations are in India , and lower numbers can be found in adjoining Nepal . The four @-@ horned antelope is threatened by the loss of its natural habitat due to agricultural expansion . Moreover , the unusual four @-@ horned skull and the horns have been a popular target for trophy hunters . The four @-@ horned antelope is classified as Vulnerable by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the four @-@ horned antelope is Tetracerus quadricornis . The generic name Tetracerus is the combination of two Greek words : tetra ( " four " ) and <unk> ( " horned " ) . The specific name quadricornis is derived from two Latin words : <unk> ( " four " ) and cornu ( " horned " ) . The four @-@ horned antelope is known by several vernacular names : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( Hindi for " four horns " ) , <unk> , <unk> ( mainly in central India ) ( Hindi ) ; <unk> <unk> ( Kannada ) ; <unk> ( Nepalese ) ; nari <unk> <unk> ( Tamil ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope is the sole member of the genus Tetracerus , and is placed under the family Bovidae . The species was first described by French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville in 1816 . The four @-@ horned antelope has only one other relative in the tribe Boselaphini , the nilgai ( Boselaphus <unk> ) . The Boselaphini have the horns with a keel on the front and lack rings as found in other antelope groups . 
 The authority for Tetracerus is variously indicated according to interpretations of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature . The name was first published in an 1825 publication by English naturalist Thomas Hardwicke but cited the English zoologist William Elford Leach – probably by an editor – as the authority in a footnote at the end of the publication . Philip Sclater and Oldfield Thomas listed Hardwicke as the genus authority by virtue of his being the author of the publication . However , Leach is now identified as the appropriate authority based on Article 50 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 of the Zoological Code . 
 A 1992 phylogenetic study showed a strong possibility of a clade consisting of Boselaphini , Bovini and Tragelaphini . Bovini consists of the genera Bubalus , Bos , <unk> ( saola ) , Syncerus ( African buffalo ) , Bison and the extinct <unk> . Tragelaphini consists of two genera : Taurotragus ( eland ) and Tragelaphus . Boselaphini and Tragelaphini were predicted to be close ; this was seconded by a similar study in 1999 . The following cladogram is based on the 1992 study : 
 Colin Groves ( 2003 ) recognizes three subspecies of the four @-@ horned antelope on the basis of distribution and physical characteristics such as coat colour , body size and the number of horns : 
 T. q. iodes ( Hodgson , 1847 ) : distributed north of the Ganges in Nepal 
 T. q. quadricornis ( de Blainville , 1816 ) : distributed in peninsular India 
 T. q. subquadricornutus ( Elliot , 1839 ) distributed in the Western Ghats and southern India 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Though Boselaphini has no African representation today , fossil evidence supports its presence in the continent during as early as the late Miocene – the two living antelopes of this tribe , in fact , have been found to have a closer relationship with the earliest bovids ( like <unk> species ) than do the other bovids . This tribe originated at least 8 @.@ 9 Mya , in much the same area where the four @-@ horned antelope occurs today , and may represent the most " primitive " of all living bovids , having changed the least since the origins of the family . The extant and extinct <unk> forms show similar development of the horn cores ( the central bony part of the horn ) . It is thought that ancestral bovids had a diploid chromosome number of 58 which has reduced in Tetracerus to 38 through a process of concatenation of some chromosomes . 
 Fossils of <unk> <unk> and <unk> eremita dating back to the late Miocene have been discovered in the <unk> formation ( Kenya ) . fossils from the same period have also been excavated in the eastern Mediterranean region . Other Miocene fossils of <unk> discovered are of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Fossils of <unk> are not apparent in Africa ( only M. <unk> has been reported from the continent ) , but have significant presence in the Shiwalik Hills in India and Pakistan , as do several <unk> species . A 2005 study suggested the migration of <unk> to eastern Asia around 8 Mya . Alan W. Gentry of the Natural History Museum reported the presence of another <unk> , <unk> , from <unk> ( South Africa ) . 
 Evidence of early humans hunting four @-@ horned antelope during the Mesolithic period ( 5 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 years ago ) have been found in the Kurnool caves of southern India and similar evidence has been found from the Chalcolithic period ( 3 @,@ 000 years ago ) in Orissa , eastern India . 
 = = Description = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope is one of the smallest Asian bovids . The number of its horns distinguishes it from most of the other bovids , that have two horns ( sparing a few such as the Jacob sheep ) . The four @-@ horned antelope stands 55 – 64 centimetres ( 22 – 25 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 17 – 22 kilograms ( 37 – 49 lb ) ; the head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 80 and 110 centimetres ( 31 and 43 in ) . Sexual dimorphism is not very notable , though only males possess horns . 
 Slender with thin legs and a short tail , the four @-@ horned antelope has a yellowish brown to reddish coat . The underparts and the insides of the legs are white . Facial features include black markings on the muzzle and behind the ears . A black stripe marks the outer surface of each leg . Females have four teats far back on the abdomen . The hair feels coarse , more like that of a deer than the glossy hair typical of antelopes . The fetlocks are marked with white patches . 
 One pair of horns is located between the ears , and the other on the forehead . The posterior horns are always longer than the anterior horns , which might be mere fur @-@ covered studs . While the posterior horns each measures 8 – 12 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) , the anterior ones measure 2 – 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 97 in ) . Horns emerge at 10 to 14 months . According to Groves , anterior horns show the poorest development in the subspecies T. q. subquadricornutus . These horns measure nearly 4 @.@ 5 – 5 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) in T. q. quadricornis , and nearly 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 – 0 @.@ 98 in ) in T. q. iodes . The posterior horn lengths for the subspecies recorded by him were : 8 – 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) for T. q. quadricornis , 6 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) in T. q. iodes and 1 @.@ 8 – 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 71 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) in T. q. subquadricornutus . 
 The four @-@ horned antelope differs greatly from the nilgai in colour , is much smaller and has an extra pair of horns . The nilgai is nearly nine times heavier and two times taller than the four @-@ horned antelope . Two deer species , the Indian muntjac and the hog deer , can be confused with this antelope . The four @-@ horned antelope , however , lacks their antlers . The chinkara , a gazelle , can be told apart by its light brown coat and larger , ringed horns . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope is diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , though it mainly rests or ruminates in dense undergrowth at noon . Though solitary by nature , the four @-@ horned antelope may form loose groups of three to five . Groups consist of one or more adults , sometimes accompanied by juveniles . Males and females hardly interact , except in the mating season . 
 The antelope is shy and elusive . When alarmed , it stands motionless and may nervously leap away from the danger or even sprint . It often conceals itself in tall grasses to escape predators . The use of alarm calls to alert others is not common because the antelope tries to avoid the attention of predators . However , in extreme cases , these calls may be used to warn predators that they have been identified . Adults mark vegetation in their territories with a colourless secretion of preorbital glands , that soon condenses to form a white film . They maintain multiple latrine sites where piles of their pellet droppings are formed by regular use . Latrine sites can be confused with those of the barking deer but the pellets are longer and larger in four @-@ horned antelopes . Submissive display consists of shrinking the body , lowering the head and pulling the ears back . Predators of four @-@ horned antelopes include tigers , leopards , and dholes . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope feeds on grasses , herbs , shrubs , foliage , flowers and fruits . A study in Mudumalai National Park ( Tamil Nadu , India ) showed that the antelope prefers grass species of the family Cyperaceae ; genera <unk> , Cynodon , Digitaria , Echinochloa , Panicum , <unk> and Sporobolus ; and the species Imperata cylindrica , <unk> nodosa , <unk> <unk> and Themeda <unk> . The shrub Grewia hirsuta is frequently eaten . Preferred herbs include Helichrysum , Indigofera and <unk> species and Leucas aspera . The four @-@ horned antelope feeds on the leaves of trees such as Cordia <unk> , <unk> officinalis , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . Grasses comprise nearly 29 percent of the diet , followed by foliage from trees ( nearly nine percent ) . Grass and browse were consumed in nearly equal proportions . A study in the Panna National Park ( Madhya Pradesh , India ) showed preference for <unk> <unk> , Acacia nilotica , A. <unk> and A. catechu . <unk> flowers were frequently eaten . The antelope often associates with langurs under fruiting trees , just as chital frequently do . Interaction with chital , a sympatric species , was infrequent . The antelope is wary when feeding , often raising its head and looking about its vicinity . The four @-@ horned antelope needs to drink water frequently ; as such it stays in places near water sources . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Breeding behaviour of the four @-@ horned antelope has not been well studied . The age at which sexual maturity is gained is doubted ; two captive females had their first parturition at less than two years . The breeding season in Panna National Park probably lasts from May to July , and from June to August in Mudumalai National Park . The male approaches the female in a relaxed gait , giving out low coughs . The two may kneel and push against each other with the necks intertwined . The male makes a few short mounting attempts ; the female may be foraging all the while without any reaction . Gestation lasts about eight months , followed by the birth of one or two calves . The newborn has a head @-@ and @-@ body length of 42 to 46 centimetres ( 17 to 18 in ) , and weighs 0 @.@ 7 to 1 @.@ 1 kg ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 4 lb ) . Juveniles are kept concealed for the first few weeks of birth . Births in Mudumalai National Park peak from February to April . Juveniles remain with their mothers for about a year . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope inhabits areas with significant cover from grasses or heavy undergrowth , and close to water bodies . It generally keeps away from human @-@ inhabited areas . Though they are habitat generalists , four @-@ horned antelopes mostly occur in open , dry , deciduous forests in hilly terrain . 
 Earlier common throughout deciduous forests in India , four @-@ horned antelopes are now found in low numbers . Their numbers were estimated at slightly above 10 @,@ 000 in 2001 , and are feared to be decreasing . In Mudumalai National Park , the populations are low and scattered . Their numbers in Gir National Park were estimated at 256 individuals in 1974 ; later estimates at waterholes in the same location put them a little above 1000 . Densities of above 0 @.@ 7 individuals per km2 have been considered as being healthy . Presently the four @-@ horned antelope is confined to the Indian subcontinent , occurring widely in disjunct and small populations . The range in India covers a vast expanse , from the foothills of the Himalayas in the north to the Deccan Plateau in the south . Most of the existing populations are in India , and lower numbers in adjoining Nepal . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The four @-@ horned antelope is threatened by the loss of its natural habitat due to agricultural expansion . Moreover , the unusual four @-@ horned skull and the horns have been a popular target for trophy hunters . In India , the species is protected under Schedule I the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and the Nepalese population is listed in CITES Appendix III . The four @-@ horned antelope is classified as Vulnerable by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . 
 Major protected areas across India where four @-@ horned antelopes occur include : Gir National Park ( Gujarat ) ; <unk> National Park , Bori Wildlife Sanctuary , <unk> National Park , <unk> Biosphere Reserve , Panna Tiger Reserve , <unk> Tiger Reserve , Sanjay National Park , Satpura National Park ( Madhya Pradesh ) ; <unk> <unk> Reserve ( Maharashtra ) ; <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary , Ranthambore National Park and Sariska Tiger Reserve ( Rajasthan ) . 
 = Touch Me I 'm Sick = 
 " Touch Me I 'm Sick " is a song by the American alternative rock band Mudhoney . It was recorded in March 1988 at Seattle 's Reciprocal Recording studio with producer Jack Endino . " Touch Me I 'm Sick " was released as Mudhoney 's debut single by independent record label Sub Pop on August 1 , 1988 . The song 's lyrics , which feature dark humor , are a sarcastic take on issues such as disease and violent sex . 
 When it was first released , " Touch Me I 'm Sick " was a hit on the indie circuit ; it remains the band 's most recognizable song . The heavily distorted and fuzzy guitars , snarling vocals , blunt bass line and energetic drumming contributed to a dirty sound that influenced many local musicians , and helped develop the nascent Seattle grunge scene . According to Allmusic , " the song 's raw , primal energy made it an instant anthem which still stands as one of [ grunge 's ] all @-@ time classics " . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 According to Mudhoney vocalist Mark Arm , " Touch Me I 'm Sick " originated from a discussion with Sub Pop owner Bruce Pavitt , who " said : ' Hey , you sing about dogs . You sing about being sick . You got a shtick , it 'll take you to the top . ' And he basically gave us five chords , but he said don 't use more than three within one song . " Arm also states that " Touch Me I 'm Sick " was a catchphrase around which the band built a song . 
 Mudhoney recorded the song at Seattle 's Reciprocal Recording studio in March 1988 , three months after the band 's formation . Producer Jack Endino was surprised by how noisy the sessions were and how dirty the band wanted the guitars to sound ; " for the most part , I just sort of stood back and let them go at it " . Guitarist Steve Turner said that the band selected two of their " <unk> " songs for the single . Initially , " Sweet Young Thing Ain 't Sweet No More " was to be the A @-@ side of the single and " Touch Me I 'm Sick " the B @-@ side , before — in drummer Dan Peters 's words — " that all got flipped around " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Touch Me I 'm Sick " has a straightforward garage punk structure with a simple repeating power chord riff played at a high tempo . This is accompanied by a blunt bass line and frenetic drumming . The song 's dirty sound was produced using an Electro @-@ Harmonix Big Muff distortion pedal , which is augmented by a second guitar providing more distortion . Music writer Brian J. Barr referred to this noisy sound as " the sonic equivalent of an amplified comb scraping against paper " . 
 Critics have noted a Stooges influence in " Touch Me I 'm Sick " , typical of Mudhoney 's early material . Turner said : " In retrospect , it 's The Yardbirds ' ' Happenings Ten Years Time Ago ' by way of The Stooges ' ' Sick of You ' . At the time I was trying for the stuttering R & B guitar of The Nights and Days . " The song is also reminiscent of the hardcore punk of Black Flag . In his book Loser : The Real Seattle Music Story , Clark Humphrey accuses the song of being a copy of " The Witch " by The Sonics . The band have dismissed this claim , and questioned the writer 's knowledge of music . 
 Arm 's lyrics , according to critic Steve Huey , are a rant about " disease , self @-@ loathing , angst , and dirty sex " . In an essay called " ' Touch Me I 'm Sick ' : Contagion as Critique in Punk and Performance Art " , Catherine J. Creswell suggests that some of the lyrics refer to AIDS . According to Creswell , " In declaring ' Well , I 'm diseased and I don 't mind ' and changing the final refrain to ' Fuck Me , I 'm Sick ! ' the speaker declares himself to be the viral , ' AIDS @-@ bearing , ' ' polluting ' person of contemporary fantasy " . Creswell , who also believes the song parodies the theme of seduction in contemporary rock music , points to lyrics that refer to impotence ( " If you don 't come , if you don 't come , if you don 't come , you 'll die alone ! " ) and violent possession or forcing ( " I 'll make you love me till the day you die ! " ) . However , Arm says that he had not put much thought into the lyrics ; while performing the song in concerts , he sometimes changes them to amuse himself . 
 Another feature of " Touch Me I 'm Sick " that has been commented upon is Arm 's vocals . Huey refers to them as a " hysterical screech " , and " snarling , demonic howls " . Journalist Joe Ehrbar says that Arm begins the song with a " burp " , before singing with a " nasally howl " . Creswell considers Arm 's " overboard " vocals to mock a variety of rock stereotypes : the punk snarl , the " woozy slur " of hard rock , garage rock " yea @-@ ahs " , R & B @-@ style wails and a " Jerry Lee Lewis shudder " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Touch Me I 'm Sick " was released on August 1 , 1988 , as a 7 " vinyl . It was Mudhoney 's debut release . Initially , Sub Pop released 800 clear coffee @-@ brown vinyl copies , 200 black vinyl copies and a few assorted vinyl color copies of the single . The limited release numbers were inspired by another indie label , Amphetamine Reptile . Sub Pop owners Bruce Pavitt and Jonathan Poneman reasoned the limited supply would increase demand , and utilized different colors of vinyl in order to rationalize further limited pressings and to increase the single 's allure as a collectible item . The record , which came in a white paper bag without a picture sleeve , had an inscription on the A @-@ side : " What does the word ' crack ' mean to you ? " . The B @-@ side sticker featured the toilet picture that later became the cover art of the sleeved second edition of the single . 
 According to Pavitt , " It was just a limited edition , maybe 800 pieces , but people all over America started raving about it . People that we really respected . " The single was an indie hit in Seattle , and " Touch Me I 'm Sick " became Mudhoney 's most recognizable song . When asked in an interview about the sales figures of the single , Turner replied , " The first [ pressing sold ] 1 @,@ 000 , then 3 @,@ 000 of the reissue , then it was out of print for a while ; then they made 2 @,@ 000 more and those are probably gone . " The single 's success caught the band by surprise ; Arm had initially dismissed the song as a " B @-@ side toss off " . " Touch Me I 'm Sick " and B @-@ side " Sweet Young Thing Ain 't Sweet No More " were later included on the Mudhoney compilation albums <unk> <unk> Plus Early Singles ( 1990 ) and March to Fuzz ( 2000 ) . 
 = = = Sonic Youth cover = = = 
 Prior to the release of the " Touch Me I 'm Sick " single , Pavitt sent a five @-@ song Mudhoney tape to New York alternative rock band Sonic Youth for the members ' opinions . Sonic Youth immediately proposed a split single where each band covered the other . Sonic Youth covered " Touch Me I 'm Sick " while Mudhoney covered Sonic Youth 's " Halloween " . " Touch Me I 'm Sick / Halloween " was released as a limited edition 7 " vinyl by Sub Pop in December 1988 . The cover was included in the deluxe edition of Daydream Nation ( 2007 ) , and offers a female perspective of the song with bassist Kim Gordon handling the vocals . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the success of the " Touch Me I 'm Sick " single in the Seattle area , Sub Pop positioned Mudhoney as the flagship band of their roster and undertook heavy promotion for the group . The band 's early material received airplay on college radio and influenced many local musicians , including Kurt Cobain of Nirvana . In a few years , many Seattle grunge bands signed to major labels and broke into the mainstream , achieving mass popularity . Although Mudhoney never attained this level of mainstream acceptance , according to Allmusic 's Mark Deming , the band 's " indie @-@ scene success laid the groundwork for the movement that would ( briefly ) make Seattle , WA , the new capital of the rock & roll universe " . 
 Since its release , " Touch Me I 'm Sick " has been accorded classic status within the grunge genre . Writing for Allmusic , Steve Huey described the song as " the ultimate grunge anthem " and " a crucial and vastly influential touchstone in the evolution of the grunge movement , virtually defining the term " . For its northwestern rock exhibit , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame requested the song 's original lyrics sheet . Since it did not exist — Arm briefly considered making a fake one by writing down the lyrics , crumpling the sheet , and then burning the edges — the band instead donated Turner 's old Big Muff pedals . 
 " Touch Me I 'm Sick " remains Mudhoney 's most popular song . Joe Ehrbar called it " the song most of us would come to know [ the band ] by " . Arm considers the track to be Mudhoney 's highwater mark , 
 There 's something special about that first single , we were never quite able to recapture that sound . I don 't know if it was the guitars or the recording . It was just a really gnarly , gnarly guitar sound . We 've gotten some since , but they 've been a different kind . I think it had more to do with the actual electromagnetic chemistry of what was going through our amps that day . It was just a cool , fried @-@ out sound . 
 The song was referenced in the 1992 film Singles , which is set against the backdrop of the Seattle grunge scene . The fictional band in the film , Citizen Dick , perform a song called " Touch Me I 'm Dick " — a wordplay on Mudhoney 's song . In 2003 , Charles Peterson published a book of photography titled Touch Me I 'm Sick . It features black @-@ and @-@ white photographs of bands ( including Mudhoney ) and concerts , and focuses on the alternative music scene of the 1980s and 1990s . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " single ( <unk> ) 
 Both songs credited to Mark Arm , Steve Turner , Dan Peters and Matt Lukin . 
 " Touch Me I 'm Sick " – 2 : 23 
 " Sweet Young Thing Ain 't Sweet No More " – 3 : 35 
 = 1999 Sydney hailstorm = 
 The 1999 Sydney hailstorm was the costliest natural disaster in Australian insurance history , causing extensive damage along the east coast of New South Wales . The storm developed south of Sydney on the afternoon of 14 April 1999 and struck the city 's eastern suburbs , including the central business district , later that evening . 
 The storm dropped an estimated 500 @,@ 000 tonnes of hailstones in its path . Insured damages caused by the storm were over A $ 1 @.@ 7 billion , with the total damage bill ( including uninsured damages ) estimated to be around A $ 2 @.@ 3 billion . It was the costliest in Australian history in insured damages , surpassing the A $ 1 @.@ 1 billion in insured damages caused by the 1989 Newcastle earthquake . Lightning also claimed one life during the storm , and the event caused approximately 50 injuries . 
 The storm was classified as a supercell following further analysis of its erratic nature and extreme attributes . During the event , the Bureau of Meteorology was constantly surprised by the frequent changes in direction , as well as the severity of the hail and the duration of the storm . The event was also unique as the time of year and general conditions in the region were not seen as conducive for extreme storm cell formation . 
 = = Conditions and climatology = = 
 The conditions around Sydney on 14 April were calm , although a slight instability in atmospheric conditions was recorded by the Bureau of Meteorology in the region . Two instability events had been identified in the greater Sydney area , but both were considered minor by the meteorological agencies . A weak cold front was moving north along the coast , and moderate precipitation was falling over the Blue Mountains , southwest of the city . The meteorological reports and figures , however , suggested that the general atmospheric conditions were " not conducive " to support the formation of a major thunderstorm in the region . 
 Historical records show that the formation of severe thunderstorms for the time of day and year had been rare , and it was improbable that they would maintain their intensity and cause significant damage . This long @-@ standing belief contributed to the Bureau of Meteorology 's decision not to issue warnings in the early part of the storm 's development . The 1999 event was only the second time in recorded history that hail larger than 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) had fallen in the Sydney metropolitan area in the month of April , and only the fifth hailstorm to strike Sydney during April in the 200 years of meteorological records for the city . 
 Hailstorms have had a history of significant damage in Australia . Since records on insured losses by the Insurance Disaster Response Organisation began in 1967 three other hailstorms — Sydney in 1986 and 1990 , as well as Brisbane in 1985 — feature on the top @-@ ten list of most insured damages caused by a single natural disaster , in addition to the 1999 storm . Hailstorms have caused more than 30 % of all insured damages inflicted as a result of natural disasters in Australia during this period , and around three quarters of all hailstorm damage has occurred in New South Wales . 
 = = Development of the storm = = 
 = = = Formation and southern Sydney = = = 
 The storm cell formed at 4 : 25 pm AEST to the north of Nowra , roughly 115 km ( 71 mi ) <unk> of Sydney . After forming , it initially headed towards the coast in a northeasterly direction . The cell passed just to the west of Kiama at around 5 : 15 pm and gained a ' severe ' classification from the Bureau of Meteorology at the same time . ' Severe ' is a classification used by the Bureau of Meteorology for thunderstorms which meet a specific criteria , namely producing hailstones with a diameter of 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) or more , wind gusts of 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) or greater and flash flooding , or tornadoes . This classification is also used by the Bureau to classify the attributes of a storm at any given time during its life . 
 The storm continued to move in a northeasterly direction , crossing the coast just north of Kiama at 5 : 25 pm . It was downgraded from a severe thunderstorm and proceeded to move further off the coast for another 15 minutes while gaining speed to around 37 km / h ( 23 mph ) . The storm then veered northward at 5 : 40 pm and continued parallel to the coast . Around 6 : 00 pm , directly east of Wollongong , the storm changed direction again , this time to <unk> , and continued parallel to the coastline . Moderate hailstones were recorded falling in Wollongong as the western edge of the storm passed over the area , and the storm was reclassified as severe . 
 The storm moved parallel to the coast in a <unk> direction for the next fifty minutes . It maintained a severe classification though did not impact heavily on the coastal suburbs , because it was entirely offshore . The western edge of the storm , however , recrossed the coastline just east of Helensburgh , 40 km ( 25 mi ) <unk> of Sydney , at about 7 : 00 pm . Ten minutes later the direction of the storm veered slightly more northward and the centre of the storm crossed back onto land at <unk> at around 7 : 20 pm . 
 = = = Immediate Sydney region = = = 
 The Bureau of Meteorology had not issued warnings for Sydney Airport , located on the northern shore of Botany Bay , or the rest of the eastern suburbs to prepare for large hail . They were not expecting the storm to veer northward again , but rather to continue to head further out into the Tasman Sea in a consistent <unk> direction . 
 After crossing the coast , the storm continued to move northward , crossing Botany Bay at 7 : 40 pm and reaching the Airport five minutes later . It travelled across the eastern suburbs between Botany Bay and Sydney Harbour between 7 : 45 pm and 8 : 05 pm , dropping massive hailstones on both houses and businesses in the eastern suburbs district and the central business district . Some of the largest hailstones ever to be recorded in the Sydney region fell on the eastern suburbs during this storm . There were reports of 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) diameter hailstones in the eastern suburbs , although the largest confirmed hailstone was 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter . It was the first time in 52 years that stones greater than 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) had fallen in Sydney , with the last reported event being the 1947 hailstorm . 
 The storm continued across Sydney Harbour and changed direction slightly to be heading north . It weakened after travelling over the Harbour , and was downgraded from a severe storm at 8 : 15 pm . The Bureau of Meteorology had concluded that the storm would weaken after heading across Sydney Harbour , believing it was dissipating and would therefore not produce any more substantial hail as it moved northward ; therefore it did not issue warnings for the northern suburbs . 
 = = = Northern Suburbs and dissipation = = = 
 The storm then continued north for twenty minutes over the North Shore suburbs of Sydney before regaining strength and veering <unk> again , redeveloping severe thunderstorm characteristics . The storm 's redevelopment again caught the Bureau of Meteorology off @-@ guard , who had expected the storm to dissipate and move out to sea without causing further substantial damage . 
 It proceeded to drop large amounts of hail on the northern beach suburbs of Mona Vale and Palm Beach around 8 : 50 pm , and the centre of the storm again crossed the coast and back out to sea just after 9 : 00 pm . The storm maintained its intensity , however , and continued to move in a northwesterly direction across Broken Bay . The western edge of the storm had a minor impact on southern suburbs of the Central Coast between 9 : 15 pm and 9 : 30 pm . 
 The storm moved entirely off the coastline and into open water at around 9 : 45 pm . It then dissipated rapidly around 9 : 55 pm , directly east of Gosford . It was subsequently downgraded from severe status and the storm cell had faded completely by 10 : 00 pm . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Secondary storm cell = = = 
 A second , far smaller storm cell passed along a similar route to the first later in the evening of 14 April . This cell was never given the classification of ' severe ' by the Bureau of Meteorology , nor did it develop into a supercell like its predecessor . Therefore , the route of the second cell was more direct and predictable than the first , following the general movement of the cold front ( see conditions and climatology ) , and the Bureau of Meteorology issued warnings to all residents in the second cell 's projected path to expect further storm activity . 
 The secondary cell passed through Sydney two hours later than the first , just after 10 : 00 pm , having been approximately 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Sydney when the supercell struck . It dropped hail up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , as well as producing heavy rainfall . Damage caused by the second cell was mostly due to rain coming in through roofs already damaged by hail from the first cell . Hail from the second cell also contributed to the damage . 
 = = = Damage caused = = = 
 The downpour of an estimated 500 @,@ 000 tonnes of hail across Sydney suburbia resulted in widespread damage on the coastal suburbs in its path . Insured losses due to the disaster reached roughly A $ 1 @.@ 7 billion , with total costs estimated to be around A $ 2 @.@ 3 billion . The storm was the costliest natural disaster ever to hit Australia in terms of insured losses , surpassing the 1989 Newcastle earthquake by around A $ 600 million . The areas that incurred the most damage were between Lilli <unk> and Darling Point , located 25 km ( 16 mi ) apart on the coastline of Sydney . 
 The vast majority of damage was done by hail and rain . Approximately 24 @,@ 000 houses were significantly damaged , with many suffering water damage through the holes in roofs that the large hailstones created . The stones were estimated as travelling at up to 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) in some periods of the storm , causing indentation damage to around 70 @,@ 000 vehicles . Twenty @-@ three airplanes and helicopters at Sydney Airport were reported as having incurred notable damage from the hail , caused by the inability to place them under hangars in time to avoid the storm . This has been significantly attributed to a lack of warnings from the Bureau of Meteorology , who had expected the storm to continue moving further out into the Tasman Sea in the north @-@ northeasterly direction in which it had previously been travelling . 
 The most significant insurance costs were in the areas of residential property damage with 31 @.@ 8 % of total payments , motor vehicle damage with 28 @.@ 6 % and for properties which service the commercial and industrial sectors at 27 @.@ 5 % . Damage to aviation property , mainly planes at the vulnerable Sydney Airport , amounted to 5 @.@ 9 % of the claims , while 5 @.@ 8 % of all insurance payments were made for ' business interruption ' and 0 @.@ 4 % for damage to boats as well as other miscellaneous claims . 
 The storm caused one fatality ; a 45 @-@ year @-@ old man , who was fishing about 100 metres ( 300 ft ) from the north shore of <unk> Bay in the Port Hacking estuary , was killed when his boat was struck by lightning . Fifty injuries were recorded , caused by flying objects , road accidents due to poor visibility and smashed windscreens and other factors . 
 = = = Emergency response = = = 
 Owing to the magnitude of the storm , the State Emergency Service were aided by the New South Wales Rural Fire Service , the New South Wales Fire Brigades and the Australian Capital Territory Emergency Service in recovery work . Within hours of the storm striking the city , all affected areas were declared as ' disaster zones ' and the New South Wales Government , under Premier Bob Carr , invoked a state of emergency , which gave control and co @-@ ordination of the response to the State Emergency Service . In the days following the storm , John Moore ( Minister for Defence ) approved a request for 300 Australian Defence Force personnel to assist recovery operations , although their assistance was only for one week while resources were stretched . The government , one week later , " unexpectedly " removed complete control from the State Emergency Service and placed certain suburbs and areas under the control of the Rural Fire Service and Fire Brigade . 
 In the five hours following the storm striking Sydney , the State Emergency Service received 2 @,@ 000 emergency calls to 1 @,@ 092 separate incidents . In total , the State Emergency Service received 25 @,@ 301 calls for assistance to 15 @,@ 007 incidents , with the New South Wales Rural Fire Service also receiving 19 @,@ 437 . The recovery and clean @-@ up mission used an estimated A $ 10 million worth of tarpaulin covers while waiting for permanent repairs . 
 After 9 days , approximately 3 @,@ 000 buildings ( out of a total of 127 @,@ 947 initially damaged ) were still waiting for assistance and temporary fixes to shattered roofs and windows , while a similar number still required assistance a further week later ( as a number of tarpaulins became detached or otherwise ineffective ) . One month after the disaster , the main priority of the emergency services was ensuring that temporary fixes remained in place , as Sydney suffered further adverse weather in the period immediately following the storm . 
 A study of a sample taken of affected areas suggested that roughly 62 % of buildings in the affected areas suffered damage to roofs , around 34 % to windows and 53 % to vehicles . Construction of infrastructure for 2000 Sydney Olympics in the city 's west at the time meant there was a deficiency of tradespeople who could be contracted to repair roofs and windows . Estimates put between 45 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 tradespeople in Sydney at the time of the storm , yet owing to high demand " companies were quoting householders [ A ] $ 14 @,@ 000 or more for roof repairs which would normally cost $ 3 @,@ 000 . " The situation led to a warning from Minister for Fair Trade John Watkins on the day following the storm , urging homeowners to ensure that tradespeople working to repair homes were fully qualified and legitimate . 
 = Newark , New Jersey = 
 Newark ( / <unk> / or also locally / <unk> / ) is the largest city ( by population ) in the U.S. state of New Jersey , and the county seat of Essex County . One of the nation 's major air , shipping , and rail hubs , the city had a population of 277 @,@ 140 in 2010 , making it the nation 's 67th most @-@ populous municipality , after being ranked 63rd in the nation in 2000 . For 2015 , the Census Bureau 's Population Estimates Program calculated a population of 281 @,@ 944 , an increase of 1 @.@ 7 % from the 2010 enumeration . 
 Located in the heart of New Jersey 's Gateway Region , Newark is the second @-@ largest city in the New York metropolitan area , approximately 8 miles ( 13 km ) west of Manhattan . Port Newark , the major container shipping terminal in the Port of New York and New Jersey , is the largest on the East Coast . Newark Liberty International Airport was the first municipal commercial airport in the United States , and today is one of its busiest . 
 Newark is headquarters to numerous corporations , such as Prudential Financial , Audible.com , Panasonic Corporation of North America and <unk> . It is also home to several universities , such as Rutgers – Newark ( including the law school and medical school ) , the New Jersey Institute of Technology , and Seton Hall University 's Law School . Among others , its cultural and sports venues include the New Jersey Performing Arts Center , the Prudential Center , and the Bears & Eagles Riverfront Baseball Stadium . 
 Newark is divided into five political wards , and contains neighborhoods ranging in character from bustling urban districts to quiet suburban enclaves . Newark 's Branch Brook Park is the oldest county park in the United States and is home to the nation 's largest collection of cherry blossom trees , numbering over 5 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 Newark was originally founded in 1666 by Connecticut Puritans led by Robert Treat from the New Haven Colony . It was conceived as a theocratic assembly of the faithful , though this did not last for long as new settlers came with different ideas . 
 The name of the city is thought to derive from Newark @-@ on @-@ Trent , England . This is on the grounds that the name was influenced by the original pastor , Abraham Pierson , who came from Yorkshire but may have ministered in Newark , Nottinghamshire . But Pierson is also supposed to have said that the community reflecting the new task at hand should be named " New Ark " for " New Ark of the Covenant and some of the colonists saw it as " New @-@ Work " , the settlers ' new work with God . Whatever the origins , the name was shortened to Newark , although references to the name " New Ark " are found in preserved letters written by historical figures such as David Ogden in his claim for compensation , and James McHenry , as late as 1787 . 
 The city saw tremendous industrial and population growth during the 19th century and early 20th century , and experienced racial tension and urban decline in the second half of the 20th century , culminating in the 1967 Newark riots . The city has experienced revitalization during the 1990s and early 21st century . 
 Newark was originally formed as a township on October 31 , 1693 , based on the Newark Tract , which was first purchased on July 11 , 1667 . Newark was granted a Royal charter on April 27 , 1713 . During the American Revolutionary War there were several incidents when British troops made raids into the town . 
 Established on February 21 , 1798 , it was incorporated by the New Jersey Legislature 's Township Act of 1798 , as one of New Jersey 's initial group of 104 townships . During its time as a township , portions were taken to form Springfield Township ( April 14 , 1794 ) , Caldwell Township ( February 16 , 1798 ; now known as Fairfield Township ) , Orange Township ( November 27 , 1806 ) , Bloomfield Township ( March 23 , 1812 ) and Clinton Township ( April 14 , 1834 , remainder reabsorbed by Newark on March 5 , 1902 ) . Newark was reincorporated as a city on April 11 , 1836 , replacing Newark Township , based on the results of a referendum passed on March 18 , 1836 . The previously independent Vailsburg borough was annexed by Newark on January 1 , 1905 . In 1926 , South Orange Township changed its name to Maplewood . As a result of this , a portion of Maplewood known as Ivy Hill was re @-@ annexed to Newark 's Vailsburg . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city had a total area of 26 @.@ 107 square miles ( 67 @.@ 617 km2 ) , including 24 @.@ 187 square miles ( 62 @.@ 644 km2 ) of land and 1 @.@ 920 square miles ( 4 @.@ 973 km2 ) of water ( 7 @.@ 35 % ) was water . It has the third @-@ smallest land area among the 100 most populous cities in the U.S. , behind neighboring Jersey City and Hialeah , Florida . The city 's altitude ranges from 0 ( sea level ) in the east to approximately 230 feet ( 70 m ) above sea level in the western section of the city . Newark is essentially a large basin sloping towards the Passaic River , with a few valleys formed by meandering streams . Historically , Newark 's high places have been its wealthier neighborhoods . In the 19th century and early 20th century , the wealthy congregated on the ridges of Forest Hill , High Street , and Weequahic . 
 Until the 20th century , the marshes on Newark Bay were difficult to develop , as the marshes were essentially wilderness , with a few dumps , warehouses , and cemeteries on their edges . During the 20th century , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was able to reclaim 68 acres ( 28 ha ) of the marshland for the further expansion of Newark Airport , as well as the growth of the port lands . 
 Newark is surrounded by residential suburbs to the west ( on the slope of the Watchung Mountains ) , the Passaic River and Newark Bay to the east , dense urban areas to the south and southwest , and middle @-@ class residential suburbs and industrial areas to the north . The city is the largest in New Jersey 's Gateway Region , which is said to have received its name from Newark 's nickname as the " Gateway City " . 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 Newark is New Jersey 's largest and second @-@ most racially diverse city ( after neighboring Jersey City ) . It is divided into five political wards , which are often used by residents to identify their place of habitation . In recent years , residents have begun to identify with specific neighborhood names instead of the larger ward appellations . Nevertheless , the wards remain relatively distinct . Industrial uses , coupled with the airport and seaport lands , are concentrated in the East and South Wards , while residential neighborhoods exist primarily in the North , Central , and West Wards . 
 State law requires that wards be compact and contiguous and that the largest ward may not exceed the population of the smallest by more than 10 % of the average ward size . Ward boundaries are redrawn , as needed , by a board of ward commissioners consisting of two Democrats and two Republicans appointed at the county level and the municipal clerk . <unk> of ward lines in previous decades have shifted traditional boundaries , so that downtown currently occupies portions of the East and Central Wards . The boundaries of the wards are altered for various political and demographic reasons and sometimes gerrymandered , especially the northeastern portion of the West Ward . 
 Newark 's Central Ward , formerly known as the old Third Ward , contains much of the city 's history including the original squares Lincoln Park , Military Park and Washington Park . The Ward contains the University Heights , The Coast / Lincoln Park , Government Center , Springfield / Belmont and Seventh Avenue neighborhoods . Of these neighborhood designations only University Heights , a more recent designation for the area that was the subject of the 1968 novel Howard Street by Nathan Heard , is still in common usage . The Central Ward extends at one point as far north as 2nd Avenue . 
 In the 19th century , the Central Ward was inhabited by Germans and other white Catholic and Christian groups . The German inhabitants were later replaced by Jews , who were then replaced by Blacks . The increased academic footprint in the University Heights neighborhood has produced gentrification , with landmark buildings undergoing renovation . Located in the Central Ward is the largest health sciences university in the nation , <unk> @-@ New Jersey Medical School . It is also home to three other universities – New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) , Rutgers University - Newark , and Essex County College . The Central Ward forms the present @-@ day heart of Newark , and includes 26 public schools , two police precincts , including headquarters , four firehouses , and one branch library . 
 The North Ward is surrounded by Branch Brook Park . Its neighborhoods include Broadway , Mount Pleasant , Upper Roseville and the affluent Forest Hill section . Forest Hill contains the Forest Hill Historic District , which is registered on state and national historic registers , and contains many older mansions and colonial homes . A row of residential towers with security guards and secure parking line Mt . Prospect Avenue in the Forest Hill neighborhood . The North Ward has lost geographic area in recent times ; its southern boundary is now significantly further north than the traditional boundary near Interstate 280 . The North Ward historically had a large Italian population ; demographics have transitioned to Latino in recent decades , though the ward as a whole remains ethnically diverse . 
 The West Ward comprises the neighborhoods of Vailsburg , Ivy Hill , West Side , Fairmount and Lower Roseville . It is home to the historic Fairmount Cemetery . The West Ward , once a predominately Irish @-@ American , Polish , and Ukrainian neighborhood , is now home to neighborhoods composed primarily of Latinos , African Americans , and Caribbean Americans . The West Ward has struggled in recent years with elevated rates of crime , particularly violent crime . 
 The South Ward comprises the Weequahic , Clinton Hill , Dayton , and South Broad Valley neighborhoods . The South Ward , once home to residents of predominately Jewish descent , now has ethnic neighborhoods made up primarily of African Americans and Hispanics . The South Ward is represented by Council Member John Sharpe James . The city 's second @-@ largest hospital , Newark Beth Israel Medical Center , can be found in the South Ward , as can 17 public schools , five daycare centers , three branch libraries , one police precinct , a mini precinct , and three fire houses . 
 The East Ward consists of much of Newark 's Downtown commercial district , as well as the Ironbound neighborhood , where much of Newark 's industry was located in the 19th century . Today , due to the enterprise of its immigrant population , the Ironbound ( also known as " Down Neck " and " The Neck " ) is a destination for shopping , dining , and nightlife . A historically immigrant @-@ dominated section of the city , the Ironbound in recent decades has been termed " Little Portugal " and " Little Brazil " due to its heavily Portuguese and Brazilian population ; Newark being home to one of the largest Portuguese speaking communities in the United States . In addition , the East Ward has become home to various Latin Americans , African Americans , and commuters to Manhattan . Public education in the East Ward consists of East Side High School and six elementary schools . The ward is largely composed of densely packed housing , primarily large apartment buildings and rowhouses . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Newark lies in the transition between a humid subtropical and humid continental climate ( Köppen Cfa / Dfa ) , with cold , damp winters and hot , humid summers . The January daily mean is 31 @.@ 6 ° F ( − 0 @.@ 2 ° C ) , and although temperatures below 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) are to be expected in most years , sub @-@ 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) readings are rare ; conversely , some days may warm up to 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) . The average seasonal snowfall is 29 @.@ 5 inches ( 75 cm ) , though variations in weather patterns may bring sparse snowfall in some years and several major Nor 'easters in others , with the heaviest 24 @-@ hour fall of 25 @.@ 9 inches ( 66 cm ) occurring on December 26 , 1947 . Spring and autumn in the area are generally unstable yet mild . The July daily mean is 77 @.@ 4 ° F ( 25 @.@ 2 ° C ) , and highs exceed 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on an average 27 days per year , not factoring in the oft @-@ higher heat index . 
 The city receives precipitation ranging from 2 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 8 inches ( 74 to 122 mm ) per month , usually falling on 8 to 12 days per month . Extreme temperatures have ranged from − 14 ° F ( − 26 ° C ) on February 9 , 1934 to 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) on July 22 , 2011 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The city had a population of 277 @,@ 140 as of the 2010 Census , retaining its position as the largest city in the state and making it the nation 's 67th most @-@ populous municipality . After reaching a peak of 442 @,@ 337 residents counted in the 1930 Census , the city 's population saw a decline of nearly 40 % as residents moved to surrounding suburbs , with the increase in 2010 of 3 @,@ 594 ( + 1 @.@ 3 % ) from the 273 @,@ 546 counted in the 2000 Census marking the second census in 70 years in which the city 's population had grown from the previous enumeration . 
 " White flight " from Newark to the suburbs , which started in the 1940s accelerated in the 1960s . The 1967 riots resulted in a significant population loss of the city 's middle class , many of them Jewish , which continued from the 1970s through to the 1990s . The city lost about 130 @,@ 000 residents between 1960 and 1990 . 
 From the 1950s to 1967 , white population shrank from 363 @,@ 000 to 158 @,@ 000 , its black population grew from 70 @,@ 000 to 220 @,@ 000 . The percentage of Non @-@ Hispanic whites declined from 82 @.@ 8 % in 1950 to 11 @.@ 6 % by 2010 . The percentage of Latinos in Newark grew between 1980 and 2010 , from 18 @.@ 6 % to 33 @.@ 8 % while that of Blacks decreased from 58 @.@ 2 % to 52 @.@ 4 % . 
 Poverty remains a consistent problem in Newark , despite its revitalization in recent years . As of 2010 , roughly one @-@ third of the city 's population was impoverished . 
 In advance of the 2000 United States Census , city officials made a push to get residents to respond and participate in the enumeration , citing calculations by city officials that as many as 30 @,@ 000 people were not reflected in estimates from the Census Bureau , which resulted in the loss of government aid and political representation . It is believed that heavily immigrant areas of Newark were significantly undercounted in the 2010 Census , especially in the East Ward . Many households refused to participate in the census , with immigrants often reluctant to submit census forms because they believed that the information could be used to justify their deportation . 
 = = = 2010 Census = = = 
 At the 2010 United States Census , there were 277 @,@ 140 people , 94 @,@ 542 households , and 61 @,@ 641 families residing in the city . The population density was 11 @,@ 458 @.@ 3 per square mile ( 4 @,@ 424 @.@ 1 / km2 ) . There were 109 @,@ 520 housing units at an average density of 4 @,@ 528 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 1 @,@ 748 @.@ 3 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 26 @.@ 31 % ( 72 @,@ 914 ) White , 52 @.@ 35 % ( 145 @,@ 085 ) Black or African American , 0 @.@ 61 % ( 1 @,@ 697 ) Native American , 1 @.@ 62 % ( 4 @,@ 485 ) Asian , 0 @.@ 04 % ( 118 ) Pacific Islander , 15 @.@ 22 % ( 42 @,@ 181 ) from other races , and 3 @.@ 85 % ( 10 @,@ 660 ) from two or more races . Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 33 @.@ 83 % ( 93 @,@ 746 ) of the population . 
 There were 94 @,@ 542 households , of which 33 @.@ 7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 28 @.@ 0 % were married couples living together , 28 @.@ 9 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 34 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . 27 @.@ 9 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 8 @.@ 2 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 76 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 36 . 
 In the city , 25 @.@ 6 % of the population were under the age of 18 , 11 @.@ 9 % from 18 to 24 , 31 @.@ 9 % from 25 to 44 , 22 @.@ 1 % from 45 to 64 , and 8 @.@ 6 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 32 @.@ 3 years . For every 100 females there were 97 @.@ 9 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96 @.@ 3 males . 
 The Census Bureau 's 2006 @-@ 2010 American Community Survey showed that ( in 2010 inflation @-@ adjusted dollars ) median household income was $ 35 @,@ 659 ( with a margin of error of + / - $ 1 @,@ 009 ) and the median family income was $ 41 @,@ 684 ( + / - $ 1 @,@ 116 ) . Males had a median income of $ 34 @,@ 350 ( + / - $ 1 @,@ 015 ) versus $ 32 @,@ 865 ( + / - $ 973 ) for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 17 @,@ 367 ( + / - $ 364 ) . About 22 @.@ 0 % of families and 25 @.@ 0 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 34 @.@ 9 % of those under age 18 and 22 @.@ 4 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = = 2000 Census = = = 
 Newark was the 63rd @-@ most @-@ populous city as of the 2000 Census . 
 As of the 2000 United States Census there were 273 @,@ 546 people , 91 @,@ 382 households , and 61 @,@ 956 families residing in the city . The population density was 11 @,@ 495 @.@ 0 per square mile ( 4 @,@ 437 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . There were 100 @,@ 141 housing units at an average density of 4 @,@ 208 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 1 @,@ 624 @.@ 6 / / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city as of the 2000 Census was 53 @.@ 46 % ( 146 @,@ 250 ) African American , 26 @.@ 52 % ( 72 @,@ 537 ) White , 1 @.@ 19 % ( 3 @,@ 263 ) Asian , 0 @.@ 37 % ( 1 @,@ 005 ) Native American , 0 @.@ 05 % ( 135 ) Pacific Islander , 14 @.@ 05 % ( 38 @,@ 430 ) from other races , and 4 @.@ 36 % ( 11 @,@ 926 ) from two or more races . 29 @.@ 47 % ( 80 @,@ 622 ) of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . 
 As of the 2000 Census , 49 @.@ 2 % of the city 's 80 @,@ 622 residents who identified themselves as Hispanic or Latino were from Puerto Rico , while 9 @.@ 4 % were from Ecuador and 7 @.@ 8 % from the Dominican Republic . There is a significant Portuguese @-@ speaking community concentrated in the Ironbound district . 2000 Census data showed that Newark had 15 @,@ 801 residents of Portuguese ancestry ( 5 @.@ 8 % of the population ) , while an additional 5 @,@ 805 ( 2 @.@ 1 % of the total ) were of Brazilian ancestry . 
 There were 91 @,@ 382 households out of which 35 @.@ 2 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 31 @.@ 0 % were married couples living together , 29 @.@ 3 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 32 @.@ 2 % were non @-@ families . 26 @.@ 6 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 8 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 40 . 
 In the city the population was spread out with 27 @.@ 9 % under the age of 18 , 12 @.@ 1 % from 18 to 24 , 32 @.@ 0 % from 25 to 44 , 18 @.@ 7 % from 45 to 64 , and 9 @.@ 3 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 31 years . For every 100 females , there were 94 @.@ 2 males . For every 100 females of age 18 and over , there were 91 @.@ 1 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 26 @,@ 913 , and the median income for a family was $ 30 @,@ 781 . Males had a median income of $ 29 @,@ 748 versus $ 25 @,@ 734 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 13 @,@ 009 . 28 @.@ 4 % of the population and 25 @.@ 5 % of families were below the poverty line . 36 @.@ 6 % of those under the age of 18 and 24 @.@ 1 % of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . The city 's unemployment rate was 8 @.@ 5 % . 
 = = Economy = = 
 More than 100 @,@ 000 people commute to Newark each workday , making it the state 's largest employment center with many white @-@ collar jobs in insurance , finance , import @-@ export , health @-@ care , and government . As a major courthouse venue including federal , state , and county facilities , it is home to more than 1 @,@ 000 law firms . The city is also a " college town " , with nearly 50 @,@ 000 students attending the city 's universities and medical and law schools . Its airport , maritime port , rail facilities , and highway network make Newark the busiest transshipment hub on the East Coast in terms of volume . 
 Though Newark is not the industrial colossus of the past , the city does have a considerable amount of industry and light manufacturing . The southern portion of the Ironbound , also known as the Industrial Meadowlands , has seen many factories built since World War II , including a large Anheuser @-@ Busch brewery that opened in 1951 and distributed 7 @.@ 5 million barrels of beer in 2007 . The service industry is also growing rapidly , replacing those in the manufacturing industry , which was once Newark 's primary economy . In addition , transportation has become a large business in Newark , accounting for more than 17 @,@ 000 jobs in 2011 . 
 Newark is one of nine cities in New Jersey designated as eligible for Urban Transit Hub Tax Credits by the state 's Economic Development Authority . Developers who invest a minimum of $ 50 million within 0 @.@ 5 miles of a train station are eligible for pro @-@ rated tax credit . After the election of Cory Booker , millions of dollars of public @-@ private partnership investment were made in Downtown development but persistent underemployment continue to characterize many of the city 's neighborhoods . Poverty remains a consistent problem in Newark . As of 2010 , roughly one @-@ third of the city 's population was impoverished . 
 Newark is the third @-@ largest insurance center in the United States , after New York City and Hartford . The Prudential Financial , Mutual Benefit Life , Fireman 's Insurance , and American Insurance Company all originated in the city . The first , one of the largest insurance companies in the world , has its " home office in Newark . Many other companies are headquartered in the city , including IDT Corporation , NJ Transit , Public Service Enterprise Group ( <unk> ) , <unk> , Horizon Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New <unk> and <unk> In 2013 Panasonic moved its North American headquarters to a new 250 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 23 @,@ 000 m2 ) office building . 
 Portions of Newark are part of an Urban Enterprise Zone . In addition to other benefits to encourage employment within the Zone , shoppers can take advantage of a reduced 3 ½ % sales tax rate ( versus the 7 % rate charged statewide ) at eligible merchants . 
 While for years Newark was a food desert with a dearth of supermarkets , several new ones have opened or are planning to open since 2000 , including a <unk> supermarket and the upscale Whole Foods . 
 = = = Port Newark = = = 
 Port Newark is the part of Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth Marine Terminal and the largest cargo facility in the Port of New York and New Jersey . Located on Newark Bay , it is run by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and serves as the principal container ship facility for goods entering and leaving the New York metropolitan region and the northeastern quadrant of North America . The Port moved over $ 100 billion in goods in 2003 , making it the 15th busiest in the world at the time , but was the number one container port as recently as 1985 . Plans are underway for billions of dollars of improvements - larger cranes , bigger railyard facilities , deeper channels , and expanded wharves . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 = = = Architecture and sculptures = = = 
 There are several notable Beaux @-@ Arts buildings , such as the Veterans ' Administration building , the Newark Museum , the Newark Public Library , and the Cass Gilbert @-@ designed Essex County Courthouse . Notable Art Deco buildings include several 1930s era skyscrapers , such as the National Newark Building and Eleven 80 , the restored Newark Penn Station , and Arts High School . Gothic architecture can be found at the Cathedral of the Sacred Heart by Branch Brook Park , which is one of the largest gothic cathedrals in the United States . It is rumored to have as much stained glass as the Cathedral of Chartres . Newark also has two public sculpture works by Gutzon Borglum — Wars of America in Military Park and Seated Lincoln in front of the Essex County Courthouse . Moorish Revival buildings include Newark Symphony Hall and the Prince Street Synagogue , one of the oldest synagogue buildings in New Jersey . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The New Jersey Performing Arts Center , located near Military Park opened in 1997 , is the home of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra and the New Jersey State Opera , The center 's programs of national and international music , dance , and theater make it the nation 's sixth @-@ largest performing arts center , attracting over 400 @,@ 000 visitors each year . 
 Prior to the opening of the performing arts center , Newark Symphony Hall was home to the New Jersey Symphony , the New Jersey State Opera , and the Garden State Ballet , which stills maintains an academy there . The 1925 neo @-@ classic building , originally built by the Shriners , has three performance spaces , including the main concert named in honor of famous <unk> Sarah Vaughan , offering rhythm and blues , rap , hip @-@ hop , and gospel music concerts , and is part of the modern @-@ day Chitlin ' Circuit . 
 The Newark Boys Chorus , founded in 1966 , performs regularly in the city . The African Globe Theater Works presents a new works seasonally . The biennial Geraldine R. Dodge Poetry Festival took place in Newark for the first time in 2010 . 
 Venues at the universities in the city are also used to present professional and semi @-@ professional theater , dance , and music . Since its opening , the Prudential Center in 2007 has presented Diana Ross , Katy Perry , Lady Gaga , Britney Spears , The Eagles , Hannah Montana / Miley Cyrus , Spice Girls , Jonas Brothers , Metro Station , Metallica , Alicia Keys , Demi Lovato , David Archuleta , Taylor Swift and American Idol Live ! , among others . Bon Jovi performed a series of ten concerts to mark the venue 's opening . 
 = = = Museums , libraries , and galleries = = = 
 The Newark Museum is the largest in New Jersey . Highlights of its collection include American and Tibetan art . The museum also contains science galleries , a planetarium , a gallery for children 's exhibits , a fire museum , a sculpture garden and an 18th @-@ century schoolhouse . Also part of the museum is the historic John Ballantine House , a restored Victorian mansion which is a National Historic Landmark . The museum co @-@ sponsors the Newark Black Film Festival , which has premiered numerous films since its founding in 1974 . 
 The city is also home to the New Jersey Historical Society , which has rotating exhibits on New Jersey and Newark . The Newark Public Library , the state 's largest system with 11 locations , also produces a series of historical exhibits . The library houses more than a million volumes and has frequent exhibits on a variety of topics , many featuring items from its Fine Print and Special Collections . 
 Since 1962 , Newark has been home to the Institute of Jazz Studies , the world 's foremost jazz archives and research libraries . Located in the John Cotton Dana Library at Rutgers @-@ Newark , the Institute houses more than 200 @,@ 000 jazz recordings in all commercially available formats , more than 6 @,@ 000 monograph titles , including discographies , biographies , history and criticism , published music , film and video ; over 600 periodicals and serials , dating back to the early 20th century ; and one of the country 's most comprehensive jazz oral history collections , featuring more than 150 jazz oral histories , most with typed transcripts . 
 In February 2004 , plans were announced for a new Smithsonian Institution @-@ affiliated Museum of African American Music to be built in the city 's Coast / Lincoln Park neighborhood . The museum will be dedicated to black musical styles , from gospel to rap . The new museum will incorporate the façade of the old South Park Presbyterian Church , where Abraham Lincoln once spoke . 
 On December 9 , 2007 , the Jewish Museum of New Jersey , located at 145 Broadway in the Broadway neighborhood , held its grand opening . The museum is dedicated to the cultural heritage of New Jersey 's Jewish people . The museum is housed at <unk> Sholom , the last continually operating synagogue in Newark . By the 1950s there were 50 synagogues in Newark serving a Jewish population of 70 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 , once the sixth @-@ largest Jewish community in the United States . 
 Newark is also home to numerous art galleries including the Paul Robeson Galleries at Rutgers University – Newark , as well as <unk> , a Center for Contemporary Art , City Without Walls , Gallery <unk> and <unk> Arts Center . 
 In April 2010 , plans were announced for a new Children 's Museum of New Jersey to be created across from Newark Penn Station . These plans have yet to be realized . According to planners , due to a reported lack of funding and a poor economy , " the project went to sleep " . 
 = = = Newark Murals = = = 
 Since 2009 , the Newark Planning Office , in collaboration with local arts organizations , has sponsored Newark Murals , and seen the creation of 21 outdoor murals about significant people , places , and events in the city . New initiatives through private sponsorship were announced in 2014 . 
 = = = Festivals and parades = = = 
 Festivals and parades held annually or bi @-@ annually include the Cherry Blossom Festival ( April ) in Branch Brook Park , the Portugal Day Festival ( June ) in The Ironbound , the McDonald 's <unk> ( June ) at Prudential Center , the Lincoln Park Music Festival ( July ) at Lincoln Park , the Newark Black Film Festival ( Summer ) and Paul Robeson Awards ( biennial ) , the Geraldine R. Dodge Poetry Festival ( October , biennial ) at various venues and the city @-@ wide Open Doors ( October ) . 
 = = Media and communications = = 
 Newark is within the metro New York media market . 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 The state 's leading newspaper , The Star @-@ Ledger , owned by Advance Publications , is based in Newark . The newspaper sold its headquarters in July 2014 , with the offices of the publisher , the editorial board , columnists , and magazine relocating to the Gateway Center . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 Pioneer radio station WOR was started by Bamberger Broadcasting Service in 1922 and broadcast from studios at its retailer 's downtown department store . Today the building serves telecom , <unk> , and computer support industries . 
 Radio station WJZ ( now WABC ) made its first broadcast in 1921 from the Westinghouse plant near Broad Street Station . It moved to New York City in the 1920s . Radio station WNEW @-@ AM ( now WBBR ) was founded in Newark in 1934 and later moved to New York City . <unk> , a National Public Radio affiliate with a format of standard and contemporary jazz , is at 54 Park Place in downtown Newark . <unk> AM @-@ 1430 ( formerly WNJR ) and WQXR ( which was formerly <unk> and later <unk> ) 105 @.@ 9 FM are also licensed to Newark . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 New Jersey 's first television station , <unk> Channel 13 , signed @-@ on May 15 , 1948 , from studios at the Mosque Theater known as the " Television Center Newark . " The studios were home to WNTA @-@ 13 beginning in 1958 and <unk> @-@ 47 until 1989 . 
 WNET , a flagship station of the Public Broadcasting Service , and Spanish @-@ language <unk> @-@ TV , a <unk> owned @-@ and @-@ operated station , are licensed to Newark . Tempo Networks , producing for the pan @-@ Caribbean television market , is based in the city . <unk> has been the city 's government access channel since 2009 and broadcast on as Channel 78 on Cablevision . The company has a high @-@ tech call center in Newark , employing over 500 people . PBS Network <unk> Main Broadcasting Studios are also located in the Gateway Center Office Complex . 
 = = = Filming in the city = = = 
 Numerous movies , television programs , and music videos have been shot in Newark , its period architecture and its streetscape seen as an ideal " urban setting " . The Jersey Motion Picture and Television Commission is located in the city . In 2011 , the city created the Newark Office of Film and Television in order to promote the making of media productions . Some months earlier the Ironbound Film & Television Studios , the only , " stay and shoot " facility in the metro area opened , its first production being Bar Karma . In 2012 the city hosted the seventh season of the reality show competition America 's Got Talent . 
 There have been several film and TV productions depicting life in Newark . Life of Crime , was originally produced in 1988 and was followed by a 1998 sequel . New Jersey Drive , a 1995 film about the city when it was considered the " car theft capital of the world " . Street Fight is an Academy Award @-@ nominated documentary film which covered the 2002 mayoral election between incumbent Sharpe James and challenger Cory Booker . In 2009 , the Sundance Channel aired Brick City , a five @-@ part television documentary about Newark , focusing on the community 's attempt to become a better and safer place to live , against a history of nearly a half century of violence , poverty and official corruption . The second season premiered January 30 , 2011 . Revolution ' 67 is an award winning documentary which examines the causes and events of the 1967 Newark riots . The HBO television series The Sopranos filmed many of its scenes in Newark , and is partially based on the life of Newark mobster Richard <unk> . The Once and Future Newark ( 2006 ) is documentary travelogue about places of cultural , social and historical significance by Rutgers History Professor Clement Price . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Newark has hosted many teams , though much of the time without an MLB , NBA , NHL , or NFL team in the city proper . Currently , the city is home to just one , the NHL 's New Jersey Devils . As the second largest city in New York metropolitan area Newark is part the regional professional sports and media markets . 
 Two venues in the northeastern New Jersey metro region are in Downtown Newark : Prudential Center , a multi @-@ purpose indoor arena designed by HOK Sport that opened in October 2007 with a Bon Jovi concert and a hockey game . Known as " The Rock " , the arena is the home of the National Hockey League 's New Jersey Devils and the NCAA 's Seton Hall Pirates men 's basketball team , seating 18 @,@ 711 for basketball and 16 @,@ 514 for hockey . Riverfront Stadium was a 6 @,@ 200 @-@ seat baseball park that was home to the baseball teams of the Rutgers @-@ Newark Scarlet Raiders , who play in the New Jersey Athletic Conference as part of NCAA Division III , and the NJIT Highlanders , who play in the Atlantic Sun Conference as part of NCAA Division I. The stadium opened in July 1999 as the home of the Newark Bears , who played in the stadium until the team folded in 2014 . 
 Red Bull Arena , home of the New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer , opened in 2010 just across the Passaic River in Harrison . The Meadowlands Sports Complex is less than 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Downtown and can be reached with the Meadowlands Rail Line via Newark Penn Station or Broad Street Station . 
 The New Jersey Nets played two seasons ( 2010 @-@ 2012 ) at the Prudential Center until moving to the Barclays Center . The New York Liberty of the Women 's National Basketball Association ( WNBA ) also played there for three seasons ( 2011 @-@ 2013 ) during renovations of Madison Square Garden . The center has hosted 2012 Stanley Cup Finals , the 2011 NBA Draft , the 2011 NBA Draft , the 2013 NHL Entry Draft . <unk> : Primetime , a mixed martial arts ( MMA ) event which took place on May 31 , 2008 , was the first MMA event aired in primetime on major American network television . 
 Newark was a host city and its airport a gateway for Super Bowl XLVIII which was played on February 2 , 2014 . The game took place at Met Life Stadium , home of the hosting teams New York Giants and New York Jets . Media Day , the first event leading up to the game , took place on January 28 at the Prudential Center . The original Vince Lombardi Trophy , produced by Tiffany & Co. in Newark in 1967 and borrowed from the Green Bay Packers , was being displayed at the Newark Museum from January 8 until March 30 , 2014 . Ultimate Fighting Championship 's annual Super Bowl weekend mixed martial arts event , UFC 169 : Cruz vs. <unk> , took place on February 1 at the Prudential Center . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 The city is governed within the Faulkner Act , formally known as the Optional Municipal Charter Law , under the Mayor @-@ Council Plan C form of local government , which became effective as of July 1 , 1954 , after the voters of the city of Newark passed a referendum held on November 3 , 1953 . There are nine council members elected on a nonpartisan basis at the regular municipal election or at the general election for terms of four years : one council member from each of five wards and four council members on an at @-@ large basis . The mayor is also elected for a term of four years . 
 The Mayor of Newark is Ras Baraka , who is serving a term of office ending on June 30 , 2018 . After becoming acting mayor on October 31 , 2013 , Luis A. Quintana , born in Añasco , Puerto Rico , was sworn in as Newark 's first Latino mayor on November 4 , 2013 , assuming the unexpired term of Cory Booker , who vacated the position to become the junior U.S. Senator from New Jersey . Quintana 's term ended on June 30 , 2014 . He was selected unanimously at a council meeting to replace the previously elected Booker , who resigned and was sworn in on October 31 , 2013 after winning the October 16 special election for U.S. Senator to replace the seat held by Frank Lautenberg until his death . The Newark mayoral election took place on May 13 , 2014 , and was won by Baraka , who was sworn in as Newark 's 40th Mayor on July 1 , 2014 . 
 As of 2016 , Newark 's Municipal Council consists of the following members , all serving concurrent terms of office ending June 30 , 2018 : 
 Council President Mildred C. Crump ( At @-@ Large ) 
 Augusto Amador ( East Ward ) 
 Gayle <unk> @-@ Jenkins ( Central Ward ) 
 Carlos M. Gonzalez ( At @-@ Large ) 
 John Sharpe James ( South Ward ) 
 Joe McCallum ( West Ward ) 
 Eddie Osborne ( At @-@ Large ) 
 Luis A. Quintana ( At @-@ Large ) 
 Anibal Ramos , Jr . ( North Ward ) 
 = = = Federal , state , and county representation = = = 
 Newark is split between the 8th and 10th Congressional Districts and is part of New Jersey 's 28th and 29th state legislative districts . Prior to the 2011 reapportionment following the 2010 Census , Newark had been split between the 27th , 28th and 29th state legislative districts . Prior to the 2010 Census , Newark had been split between the 10th Congressional District and the 13th Congressional District , a change made by the New Jersey Redistricting Commission that took effect in January 2013 , based on the results of the November 2012 general elections . As part of the split that took effect in 2013 , 123 @,@ 763 residents in two non @-@ contiguous sections in the city 's north and northeast were placed in the 8th District and 153 @,@ 377 in the southern and western portions of the city were placed in the 10th District . 
 New Jersey 's Eighth Congressional District is represented by <unk> Sires ( D , West New York ) . New Jersey 's Tenth Congressional District is represented by Donald Payne Jr . ( D , Newark ) . New Jersey is represented in the United States Senate by Cory Booker ( D , Newark , term ends 2021 ) and Bob Menendez ( D , Paramus , 2019 ) . 
 For the 2016 – 2017 session ( Senate , General Assembly ) , the 28th Legislative District of the New Jersey Legislature is represented in the State Senate by Ronald Rice ( D , Newark ) and in the General Assembly by Ralph R. Caputo ( D , Nutley ) and Cleopatra Tucker ( D , Newark ) . For the 2016 – 2017 session ( Senate , General Assembly ) , the 29th Legislative District of the New Jersey Legislature is represented in the State Senate by Teresa Ruiz ( D , Newark ) and in the General Assembly by Eliana <unk> Marin ( D , Newark ) and L. Grace Spencer ( D , Newark ) . The Governor of New Jersey is Chris Christie ( R , Mendham Township ) . The Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey is Kim Guadagno ( R , Monmouth Beach ) . 
 Essex County is governed by a directly @-@ elected County Executive , with legislative functions performed by the Board of Chosen Freeholders . As of 2014 , the County Executive is Joseph N. <unk> , Jr . The county 's Board of Chosen Freeholders consists of nine members , four elected on an at @-@ large basis and one from each of five wards , who serve three @-@ year terms of office on a concurrent basis , all of which end December 31 , 2014 . Essex County 's Freeholders are Freeholder President <unk> R. Watson ( at large ; Newark ) , Freeholder Vice President Patricia Sebold ( at large ; Livingston ) , Rufus I. Johnson ( at large ; Newark ) , Gerald W. Owens ( At large ; South Orange , filling the vacant seat after the resignation of Donald Payne , Jr . ) Rolando Bobadilla ( District 1 - Newark 's North and East Wards , parts of Central and West Wards ; Newark ) , D. Bilal Beasley ( District 2 - Irvington , Maplewood and Newark 's South Ward and parts of West Ward ; Irvington ) , Carol Y. Clark ( District 3 - East Orange , Newark 's West and Central Wards , Orange and South Orange ; East Orange ) and Leonard M. Luciano ( District 4 - Caldwell , Cedar Grove , Essex Fells , Fairfield , Livingston , Millburn , North Caldwell , Roseland , Verona , West Caldwell and West Orange ; West Caldwell ) , and Brendan W. Gill ( District 5 - Belleville , Bloomfield , Glen Ridge , Montclair and Nutley ; Montclair ) . Constitutional elected countywide are County Clerk Christopher J. Durkin ( West Caldwell , 2015 ) , Sheriff Armando B. <unk> ( 2015 ) and Surrogate Theodore N. Stephens , II ( 2016 ) . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 On the national level , Newark leans strongly toward the Democratic Party . As of March 23 , 2011 , out of a 2010 Census population of 277 @,@ 140 in Newark , there were 136 @,@ 785 registered voters ( 66 @.@ 3 % of the 2010 population ages 18 and over of 206 @,@ 253 , vs. 77 @.@ 7 % in all of Essex County of the 589 @,@ 051 ages 18 and up ) of which , 68 @,@ 393 ( 50 @.@ 0 % vs. 45 @.@ 9 % countywide ) were registered as Democrats , 3 @,@ 548 ( 2 @.@ 6 % vs. 9 @.@ 9 % countywide ) were registered as Republicans , 64 @,@ 812 ( 47 @.@ 4 % vs. 44 @.@ 1 % countywide ) were registered as Unaffiliated and there were 30 voters registered to other parties . 
 In the 2012 presidential election , Democrat Barack Obama received 95 @.@ 0 % of the vote ( 78 @,@ 352 cast ) , ahead of Republican Mitt Romney with 4 @.@ 7 % ( 3 @,@ 852 votes ) , and other candidates with 0 @.@ 4 % ( 298 votes ) , among the 82 @,@ 030 ballots cast by the city 's 145 @,@ 059 registered voters for a turnout of 56 @.@ 5 % . In the 2008 presidential election , Democrat Barack Obama received 90 @.@ 8 % of the vote ( 77 @,@ 112 ballots cast ) , ahead of Republican John McCain who received 7 @.@ 0 % of the vote ( 5 @,@ 957 votes ) , with 84 @,@ 901 of the city 's 140 @,@ 946 registered voters participating , for a turnout of 60 @.@ 2 % of registered voters . In the 2004 presidential election , Democrat John Kerry received 85 @.@ 9 % of the vote ( 62 @,@ 700 ballots ) , outpolling Republican George W. Bush , who received 12 @.@ 8 % ( 9 @,@ 344 ) , with 72 @,@ 977 of 127 @,@ 049 registered voters participating , for a turnout percentage of 57 @.@ 4 % . 
 In the 2013 gubernatorial election , Democrat Barbara Buono received 80 @.@ 8 % of the vote ( 29 @,@ 039 cast ) , ahead of Republican Chris Christie with 17 @.@ 9 % ( 6 @,@ 443 votes ) , and other candidates with 1 @.@ 2 % ( 437 votes ) , among the 37 @,@ 114 ballots cast by the city 's 149 @,@ 778 registered voters ( 1 @,@ 195 ballots were spoiled ) , for a turnout of 24 @.@ 8 % . In the 2009 Gubernatorial Election , Democrat Jon Corzine received 90 @.@ 2 % of the vote ( 36 @,@ 637 ballots cast ) , ahead of Republican Chris Christie who received 8 @.@ 3 % of the vote ( 5 @,@ 957 votes ) , with 40 @,@ 613 of the city 's 134 @,@ 195 registered voters ( 30 @.@ 3 % ) participating . 
 = = = Political corruption = = = 
 Newark has been marred with episodes of political corruption throughout the years . Five of the previous seven mayors of Newark have been indicted on criminal charges , including the three mayors before Cory Booker : Hugh Addonizio , Kenneth Gibson and Sharpe James . As reported by Newsweek : " ... every mayor since 1962 ( except one , Cory Booker ) has been indicted for crimes committed while in office " . 
 Addonizio was mayor of Newark from 1962 to 1970 . A son of Italian immigrants , a tailor and WWII veteran , he ran on a reform platform , defeating the incumbent , Leo Carlin , whom , ironically , Addonizio characterized as corrupt and a part of the political machine of the era . During the 1967 riots , it was found that Addonizio and other city officials were taking kickbacks from city contractors . Addonizio was convicted of extortion and conspiracy in 1970 , and was sentenced to ten years in federal prison . 
 His successor was Kenneth Gibson , the city 's first African American mayor , elected in 1970 . He pleaded guilty to federal tax evasion in 2002 as part of a plea agreement on fraud and bribery charges . During his tenure as mayor in 1980 , Gibson was tried and acquitted of giving out no @-@ show jobs by an Essex County jury . 
 Sharpe James , who defeated Gibson in 1986 and declined to run for a sixth term in 2006 , was indicted on 33 counts of conspiracy , mail fraud , and wire fraud by a federal grand jury sitting in Newark . The grand jury charged James with spending $ 58 @,@ 000 on city @-@ owned credit cards for personal gain and orchestrating a scheme to sell city @-@ owned land at below @-@ market prices to his companion , who immediately re @-@ sold the land to developers and gained a profit of over $ 500 @,@ 000 . James pleaded not guilty on 25 counts at his initial court appearance on July 12 , 2007 . On April 17 , 2008 , James was found guilty for his role in the conspiring to rig land sales at nine city @-@ owned properties for personal gain . The former mayor was sentenced to serve up to 27 months in prison , and was released on April 6 , 2010 , for good behavior . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Colleges and universities = = = 
 Newark is the home of the multiple institutions of higher education , including : a Berkeley College campus , the main campus of Essex County College , New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) , the Newark Campus of Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences ( formerly University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey ) , Rutgers University – Newark and Seton Hall University School of Law . Most of Newark 's academic institutions are located in the city 's University Heights district . The colleges and universities have worked together to help revitalize the area , which serves more than 50 @,@ 000 students and faculty . 
 = = = Public schools = = = 
 As of the 2006 – 2010 American Community Survey , 16 @.@ 0 % of Newark residents ages 25 and over had never attended high school and 15 @.@ 9 % didn 't graduate , while 68 @.@ 1 % had at least graduated from high school , including the 12 @.@ 3 % who had earned a bachelor 's degree or higher . The total school enrollment in Newark city was 75 @,@ 025 in the 2006 – 2010 ACS , with pre @-@ primary school enrollment of 10 @,@ 560 , elementary or high school enrollment of 46 @,@ 691 and college enrollment of 17 @,@ 774 . 
 The Newark Public Schools , a state @-@ operated school district , is the largest school system in New Jersey . The district is one of 31 former Abbott districts statewide , which are now referred to as " SDA Districts " based on the requirement for the state to cover all costs for school building and renovation projects in these districts under the supervision of the New Jersey Schools Development Authority . As of the 2013 @-@ 14 school year , the district 's 73 schools had an enrollment of 34 @,@ 976 students and 3 @,@ 057 classroom teachers ( on an FTE basis ) , for a student – teacher ratio of 11 @.@ 4 : 1 . 
 Science Park High School , which was the 69th @-@ ranked public high school in New Jersey out of 322 schools statewide , in New Jersey Monthly magazine 's September 2010 cover story on the state 's " Top Public High Schools " , after being ranked 50th in 2008 out of 316 schools . Technology High School has a <unk> rating of 9 / 10 was ranked 165th in New Jersey Monthly 's 2010 rankings . Newark high schools ranked in the bottom 10 % of the New Jersey Monthly 2010 list include Central ( 274th ) , East Side ( 293rd ) , Newark Vocational ( 304th ) , Weequahic ( 310th ) , Barringer ( 311th ) , Malcolm X Shabazz ( 314th ) and West Side ( 319th ) . Facebook co @-@ founder Mark Zuckerberg donated a challenge grant of $ 100 million to the district in 2010 , choosing Newark because he stated he believed in Mayor Cory Booker and Governor Chris Christie 's abilities . 
 Charter schools in Newark include the Robert Treat Academy Charter School , a National Blue Ribbon School drawing students from all over Newark . It remains one of the top performing K @-@ 8 schools in New Jersey based on standardized test scores . University Heights Charter School is another charter school , serving children in grades K @-@ 5 , recognized as a 2011 Epic Silver Gain School . Gray Charter School , like Robert Treat , also won a Blue Ribbon Award . Also , Newark Collegiate Academy ( NCA ) opened in August 2007 and currently serves 420 students in grades 9 – 12 . It will ultimately serve over 570 students , mostly matriculating from other charter schools in the area . 
 = = = Private schools = = = 
 The city hosts three high schools as part of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark : the coeducational Christ The King Prep , founded in 2007 , is part of the Cristo Rey Community ; Saint Benedict 's Preparatory School is an all @-@ boys Roman Catholic high school founded in 1868 and conducted by the Benedictine monks of Newark Abbey , whose campus has grown to encompass both sides of MLK Jr . Blvd. near Market Street and includes a dormitory for boarding students ; and Saint Vincent Academy , is an all @-@ girls Roman Catholic high school founded and sponsored by the Sisters of Charity of Saint Elizabeth and operated continuously since 1869 . 
 Link Community School is a non @-@ denominational coeducational day school located serving approximately 128 students in seventh and eighth grades . The Newark Boys Chorus School was founded in the 1960s . University Heights Charter School , which opened in 2006 , taught 614 students in grades PK @-@ 8 in 2014 – 2015 . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Newark is a hub of air , road , rail , and ship traffic , making it a significant gateway into the New York metropolitan area and the northeastern United States . Newark Liberty International Airport , the second @-@ busiest airport in the New York region and the 14th @-@ busiest in the United States ( in terms of passenger traffic ) , had 403 @,@ 429 plane movements , transported 33 @,@ 107 @,@ 041 passengers , 860 @,@ 845 tons of cargo and processed 82 @,@ 479 tons of airmail in 2010 . Newark Airport was the New York City area 's first commercial airport , opened in 1928 on land reclaimed by the Port Authority . 
 Just east of the airport lies Port Newark , the fifteenth @-@ busiest port in the world and the largest container port on the East Coast of the United States . In 2003 , the port moved over $ 100 billion in goods . 
 = = = = Early modes of transport = = = = 
 The Morris Canal , stretching 102 miles ( 164 km ) to Newark from Phillipsburg on the Delaware River , was completed in 1831 and allowed coal and other industrial and agricultural products from Pennsylvania to be transported cheaply and efficiently to the New York metropolitan area . The canal 's completion led to increased settlement in Newark , vastly increasing the population for years to come . After the canal was decommissioned , the its right of way was converted into the Newark City Subway , now known as the Newark Light Rail . Many of the subway stations still portray the canal in its original state , in the form of mosaic works . 
 As the city became increasingly congested further means of transportation were sought , eventually leading to horse @-@ drawn trolleys . These , in turn , were replaced by electric trolleys that traveled down the main streets of downtown Newark , including Broad Street , and up Market Street near the courthouse The trolley cars did not last long as the personal motor vehicle quickly gained popularity and slowly made the trolley system seem like a burden . 
 = = = = Roads and highways = = = = 
 As of May 2010 , the city had a total of 368 @.@ 21 miles ( 592 @.@ 58 km ) of roadways , of which 318 @.@ 77 miles ( 513 @.@ 01 km ) were maintained by the municipality , 17 @.@ 61 miles ( 28 @.@ 34 km ) by Essex County and 22 @.@ 66 miles ( 36 @.@ 47 km ) by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and 9 @.@ 17 miles ( 14 @.@ 76 km ) by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority . 
 Newark is served by numerous highways including the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) , Interstate 280 , Interstate 78 , the Garden State Parkway , U.S. Route 1 / 9 , U.S. Route 22 , and Route 21 . Newark is connected to the Holland Tunnel and Lower Manhattan by the Pulaski Skyway , spanning both the Passaic and Hackensack Rivers , which was first constructed in 1938 and will be undergoing a $ 900 million renovation project . 
 Local streets in Newark conform to a quasi @-@ grid form , with major streets radiating outward ( like spokes on a wheel ) from the downtown area . Some major roads in the city are named after the towns to which they lead , including South Orange Avenue , Springfield Avenue , and Bloomfield Avenue , as well as Broadway , which had been renamed from Belleville Avenue . 
 In a city extensively served by mass transit , 44 @.@ 2 % of Newark residents did not have a car as of the 2000 Census , ranked second in the U.S. to New York City in the proportion of households without an automobile among cities with more than 250 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = = Public transportation = = = = 
 Newark Penn Station , situated just east of downtown , is the city 's major train station . It is served by the interurban PATH train ( which links Newark to Jersey City and Manhattan ) , three NJ Transit ( NJT ) commuter rail lines , and Amtrak service . It was designed by McKim , Mead & White and completed in 1935 . One mile north , the Newark Broad Street Station is served by two NJT commuter rail lines . The two train stations are linked by the Newark Light Rail system , which also provides services from Newark Penn Station to Newark 's northern communities and into the neighboring towns of Belleville and Bloomfield . Built in the bed of the Morris Canal , the light rail cars run underground in Newark 's downtown area . The city 's third train station , Newark Liberty International Airport , connects the Northeast Corridor to the airport via AirTrain Newark . Bus service in Newark is provided by New Jersey Transit , <unk> contract operators and DeCamp in North Newark . 
 Newark is served by NJ Transit bus routes 1 , 5 , 11 , 13 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 34 , 37 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 59 , 62 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 78 , 79 , 90 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 96 , 99 , 107 , and 108 . Bus route 308 is an express bus route to Six Flags Great Adventure from Newark Penn Station while 319 is an express service to Atlantic City . 
 The go bus 25 and go bus 28 are bus rapid transit lines through the city to Irvington , Bloomfield and Newark Liberty International Airport . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Newark is home to five hospitals . University Hospital , an independent institution that is a teaching hospital of Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences , has been the busiest Level I trauma center in the state . Newark Beth Israel Medical Center is the largest hospital in the city and is a part of Barnabas Health , the state 's largest system of hospital and health care facilities . Beth Israel is also one of the oldest hospitals in the city , dating back to 1901 . This 669 @-@ bed regional facility is also home to the Children 's Hospital of New Jersey . Catholic Health East operates Saint Michael 's Medical Center . Columbus Hospital <unk> is a longterm acute care hospital designed to focus on patients with serious and complex medical conditions that require intense specialized treatment for an extended period of recovery time . Hospitals which have been closed in recent years include the Saint James Hospital , Mount Carmel Guild Hospital and the United Hospitals Medical Center . 
 = = Public safety = = 
 = = = Emergency Medical Services = = = 
 University Hospital EMS ( UH @-@ EMS ) operates the EMS system for the city . The department operates a fleet of six BLS units staffed with two EMTs 24 / 7 , four 12 @-@ hour power trucks , and five ALS units staffed with two paramedics ( one of which is stationed at Newark Airport and covers the airport and Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth , and frequently responds into the City of Elizabeth ) . With distinction they also staff the only hospital based heavy rescue truck in the country . The EMS system is the busiest system per unit in the nation . On average , a BLS unit may be sent to 20 @-@ 25 dispatches in a 12 @-@ hour shift . They also provide the medical staffing for Northstar , with one of the two NJ State Police medevac helicopters , staffing one flight nurse and a flight medic around the clock . The EMS system in Newark handles upwards of 125 @,@ 000 requests for service annually . 
 = = = Fire Department = = = 
 The city is protected by more than 700 full @-@ time , paid firefighters of the Newark Fire Department ( NFD ) . Founded in 1863 , the NFD operates out of 20 firehouses , located throughout the city , organized into 5 battalions . The NFD operates 20 engine companies , 10 ladder companies , 2 rescue companies , an Urban search and rescue ( USAR ) Collapse Rescue Unit , 2 fire boats , a scuba diving unit , a foam unit , a mobile command unit , a <unk> unit , and numerous special , support , and reserve units . The NFD responds to approximately 45 @,@ 000 emergency calls annually . In 2006 , the NFD responded to 2 @,@ 681 fire and hazardous condition calls . 
 = = = Law enforcement = = = 
 The Newark Police Department is a city @-@ operated law enforcement agency . As of January 2014 , the force had 1 @,@ 006 officers in its ranks . 
 The Essex County Sheriff 's Office , New Jersey Transit Police Department ( headquartered in Penn Plaza East ) and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Police Department are also within their jurisdiction in the city , as are the New Jersey State Police . In April 2014 , it was announced that the State Police would play a more prominent role in patrolling the streets of the city under the " <unk> @-@ TAG " program . The Essex County College Police Department , New Jersey Institute of Technology Police Department and Rutgers University Police Department patrol their respective college campuses in the city . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 In 1996 , Money magazine ranked Newark " The Most Dangerous City in the Nation . " By 2007 , the city recorded a total of 99 homicides for the year , representing a significant drop from the record of 161 murders set in 1981 . The number of murders in 2008 dropped to 65 , a decline of 30 % from the previous year and the lowest in the city since 2002 when there were also 65 murders . 
 In 2010 , Newark recorded 90 homicides . March 2010 was the first calendar month since 1966 in which the city did not record a homicide . Overall , there was a 6 % increase in crime numbers over the previous year , including a rise in <unk> for the third straight year , with the 337 incidents raising concerns that the city was returning to its status as the " car theft capital of the world " . Along with the increase in crime , the Newark Police Department increased its recovery of illegally owned guns in 2011 to 696 , up from 278 in 2010 . The Federal Bureau of Investigation recorded 94 homicides in 2011 and 95 in 2012 . In 2012 <unk> ranked Newark as the 6th most dangerous city in the United States based on numbers by FBI Crime in the United States 2011 report . The city had 10 murders in 10 days during the period ending September 6 , 2013 , a statistic largely attributed to the reduction of the police force . In 2013 Newark recorded 111 homicides , the first year ending in triple digits in seven years and the highest tally since 1990 and accounting for 27 % of all murders statewide . In 2014 , the total number of homicides in Newark was 93 , while Essex County as a whole had 117 murders . The Star @-@ Ledger reported that there were 105 homicides in the city in 2015 . 
 = = International relations = = 
 The Consulate @-@ General of Ecuador in New Jersey is located on the 4th Floor at 400 Market Street . The Consulate @-@ General of Portugal in Newark is located at the main floor of the Newark Legal Center at One Riverfront Plaza . The Consulate @-@ General of Colombia is located at 550 Broad Street . The Vice Consulate of Italy , was located at 1 Gateway Center , until it was closed in 2014 for economic reasons . 
 Pope John Paul II visited the city in 1995 at which time he elevated the city 's cathedral to a basilica to become the Cathedral Basilica of the Sacred Heart . In 2011 , the Dalai Lama was guest of honor at the Newark Peace Education Summit . 
 = = = Twin towns — sister cities = = = 
 Newark has 15 sister cities , as listed by Sister Cities International : 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = Black and Blue ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " Black and Blue " is the third episode of the second season of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street , and the twelfth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 20 , 1994 . In the episode , Pembleton aggressively investigates what he believes to be a police @-@ related shooting . Amid pressure from Gee to pursue civilian suspects , Pembleton elicits a successful confession from an innocent man , leaving Gee feeling conflicted . Directed by Chris Menaul , the episode 's teleplay was written by James Yoshimura based on a story by series executive producer Tom Fontana . 
 Yoshimura considered " Black and Blue " the favorite script he wrote for Homicide . Pembleton 's investigation was based on a real @-@ life investigation into a suspicious shooting featured in David Simon 's non @-@ fiction book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , on which the Homicide series was based . However , fictional elements like Howard 's romantic interest in the perpetrator were added so more cast members could be part of the story . Detectives from the Baltimore Police Department wrote a letter of formal protest to executive producer Barry Levinson over the negative portrayal of police in the episode . 
 " Black and Blue " featured Julianna Margulies as a waitress who befriends Bolander and Isaiah Washington as an innocent man who Pembleton tricks into confessing to murder . Mel Proctor , home team sports announcer for the Washington Bullets , also reprised his recurring role as reporter Grant Besser . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 10 @.@ 83 million household viewers , a drop from the previous episode " See No Evil " . It received generally positive reviews , with critics particularly praising the performance of Andre Braugher . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) continues his investigation into the shooting death of small @-@ time drug peddler Charles Courtland Cox , who he suspects was killed by police during a botched crackhouse raid . As the involved police officers turn over their guns for testing , the press reports heavily on the story , which results in pressure from the department heads to solve the case . Pembleton aggressively questions several officers , but none are cooperative . Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) is angry with Pembleton 's focus on the police and demands civilian suspects be pursued . Howard ( Melissa Leo ) and Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) canvas the neighborhood of the shooting and find most residents do not trust the police , who they feel are responsible for the death of one of their own . However , one woman named Dale ( June Thorne ) tells Bayliss her grandson , Lane Staley ( Isaiah Washington ) witnessed the shooting . Staley is brought in to the station for questioning and , while Pembleton plans to question him as an eyewitness , Gee demands he be treated as a suspect . 
 Frustrated that Gee refuses to consider the possibility of a police shooting , Pembleton assures him he will get a confession out of Staley , whether he did it or not . Pembleton starts the interrogation calm and polite , but gradually becomes angrier , frightening Staley . Pembleton makes him feel responsible for allowing Cox to be at the crackhouse , and uses that guilt to break Staley down and confess , even though he is obviously innocent . Pembleton gives the confession to Gee , who is conflicted , especially when Pembleton compares it to past police practices of white detectives getting confessions from black suspects no matter what the cost . Ultimately , Gee tears up the confession and instead visits Staley at jail . Staley admits to Gee that Lt. Jimmy Tyron ( Michael S. Kennedy ) shot Cox in the back without warning while Cox was running away . Pembleton and Bayliss arrest Tyron at his home , where they confiscate a gun and bullets that appear to match those used against Cox . The arrest deeply saddens Howard , who had previously had an affair with Tyron . The affair ended because Tyron was married with children , but Howard continues to harbor romantic feelings for him . 
 Meanwhile , in a B story , Munch ( Richard Belzer ) repeatedly and loudly declares his love for his girlfriend Felicia , much to the annoyance of his lonely partner Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) . The two confiscate a live tropical fish from the murder scene of a dead drug dealer . Upon learning it will not used as evidence , Munch decides to give it as a gift to Felicia , who loves fish . However , she breaks up with Munch after the fish , a Jack Dempsey , ends up eating all her other fish . The now lonely Munch turns to Bolander for comfort , but finds the tables have turned and that Bolander has met a local waitress named Linda ( Julianna Margulies ) . The two get along very well and bond over their mutual love of music . The episode ends with Linda and Bolander getting together to play music : Linda plays the violin , while Bolander plays the cello . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Black and Blue " was written by James Yoshimura and directed by series executive producer Tom Fontana . Like the other three second season episodes , the script was already finished by the time the first season ended , but due to poor Nielsen ratings throughout the duration of the show , NBC executives asked for several refinements – including fewer episode subplots and less camera movements and jump cuts – before approving a second season . Although Yoshimura continued working on Homicide throughout the entire life of the show , he considered " Black and Blue " his favorite script . Braugher also complimented the writing , particularly during the interrogation scene with his character : 
 " I didn 't dare judge my character before I did that scene . Andre Braugher doesn 't judge Frank Pembleton about being right or wrong . It 's a way for me to remain blessedly free of conscience . But for me the beauty of that scene was that we really dared to get into it . Typically in TV shows we skim over the edges of issues like water spiders , spouting platitudes and spouting unearned ' clarifying ' emotions . But there were no violins strumming in ' Black and Blue ' . " 
 Pembleton 's investigation of fellow police officers for a suspicious shooting was based on a real @-@ life investigation chronicled in David Simon 's 1991 non @-@ fiction book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , from which the Homicide series was adapted . Baltimore Police Department Detective Donald Worden , on whom the Bolander character is based , handled the actual real @-@ life investigation in 1988 . However , Howard 's affair with the perpetrator was not part of the real @-@ life incident , but rather was added by Yoshimura as part of the show 's efforts to ensure as many detectives were personally involved in the storylines as possible . Several members of the Baltimore Police Department publicly criticized Homicide for its negative portrayal of the police in the episode , and 22 detectives wrote a formal letter of protest to executive producer Barry Levinson over the matter . Cellist <unk> Bailey served as a body double for Ned Beatty in the scenes with Bolander playing cello . Bailey was studying at Baltimore 's Peabody Conservatory at the time , and his appearance on Homicide led to further collaborations with Tom Fontana , including a recurring guest appearance for Bailey on Fontana 's drama series Oz . 
 The episode featured guest appearances by Isaiah Washington , who went on to play Preston Burke on the medical drama series Grey 's Anatomy , and Julianna Margulies , who started her long @-@ running lead role as nurse Carol Hathaway on the medical drama series ER a few months after " Black and Blue " aired . She was cast in the part after having worked with Fontana on the unaired pilot of Philly Heat , an ABC miniseries he worked on about members of the Philadelphia Fire Department . Fontana offered Margulies a recurring role on Homicide , but she turned it down in favor of ER . Michael S. Kennedy , an actor from Richmond , Texas , reprised his role of Lt. Jimmy Tyron from the previous episode , " See No Evil " . A struggling actor , Kennedy received a call from a casting director he knew , in the middle of an all @-@ night Virginia Beach shoot for a small role in Assault at West Point : The Court @-@ Martial of Johnson Whittaker , giving him one day 's notice of the audition for Homicide . He so enjoyed working on the show that he wrote a Homicide script himself , with the Tyron character playing a major part , although it was ultimately never used . " Black and Blue " also featured the second of five guest appearances by Mel Proctor , then the home team sports announcer for the Washington Bullets , as Grant Besser , a recurring reporter character in Homicide . 
 The songs " Slow Fire " by Just Like Jane , and " Up on the Roof " by Gerry Goffin and Carole King , were featured in " Black and Blue " . During the final scene , Bolander and Linda perform a movement of " Passacaglia " , a classical music song composed by George Frideric Handel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 While the season premiere episode , " Bop Gun " , opened with an extremely high rating due to a guest appearance by Robin Williams , the ratings had declined since then and Tom Fontana said a future decision about whether Homicide would be renewed depended heavily on the ratings performance of " Black and Blue " : " I hope the numbers level off now . This Thursday night is do @-@ or @-@ die . It will tell the tale . " In its original American broadcast on January 20 , 1994 , the episode was watched by 10 @.@ 83 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode an 11 @.@ 5 rating . That constituted a drop from the previous week 's episode , " See No Evil " , which was seen by 12 @.@ 53 million households . Although a drop from the previous episode , " Bop Gun " , which drew 16 @.@ 3 million household viewers and was the 31st highest @-@ rated show of the week . " Black and Blue " was the 47th highest rated show the week it aired , tying with the CBS drama series Picket Fences and the ABC comedy series Thea . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Black and Blue " received generally positive reviews , with critics particularly praising the performance of Andre Braugher . David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street - The Unofficial Companion , praised the script of " Black and Blue " , writing : " Yoshimura has written some of the series ' most memorable installments , but the scene of Pembleton extracting a ' confession ' from an innocent man is one of his greatest achievements . " Kalat also complimented the performance by Margulies , who he said " exhibits the same charm and charisma that made her a star on ER " . Kinney Littlefield of The Orange County Register praised Braugher , particularly during the " excruciating " interrogation scene , and wrote , " <unk> , ' Black and Blue ' didn 't earn Braugher an Emmy nomination . " Greg Paeth of Scripps Howard News Service called it an " exceptional cop drama " and complimented the dramatic tension between Pembleton and Gee . Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Lon Grahnke gave the episode four stars and said " Anyone who likes NYPD Blue should give Homicide a try . " 
 Tom Shales of The Washington Post strongly praised both " Black and Blue " and " See No Evil " in part because they showcased Braugher , who he called the finest actor in the ensemble cast . Shales said : " Braugher manages to be utterly compelling whether slamming doors and throwing chairs , reducing a murder suspect to quivering tears , having furious arguments with Lt. Giardello ( rock @-@ solid Yaphet Kotto ) or simply lurking about . " The Baltimore Sun writer David Bianculli called it a superb episode with a " lyrical , beautiful climax " , praising the <unk> 's performance , particularly during the intense interrogation scene with Isaiah Washington . " Black and Blue " " was among a 1999 Court TV marathon of the top 15 Homicide episodes , as voted on by 20 @,@ 000 visitors to the channels website . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Black and Blue " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = Ain 't No Other Man = 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her fifth studio album , Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . It was released on June 6 , 2006 by RCA Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Aguilera , DJ Premier , Charles Martin Roane , Kara DioGuardi , and Harold Beatty , and was produced by Premier . " Ain 't No Other Man " is described as a pop / R & B and funk song that incorporates elements of soul , blues and jazz music . Lyrically , the song was inspired by her marriage to Jordan Bratman in 2005 . 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented the track 's musical style and deemed it as a standout on Back to Basics . It won a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 2007 ceremony . Commercially , the track peaked at number 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of one million copies . Elsewhere , the song reached the top five of record charts of several countries including Australia , Italy , New Zealand , and United Kingdom . 
 A music video for " Ain 't No Other Man " was directed by Bryan Barber . The video jumps back in time and depicts Aguilera as her then newly established alter ego Baby Jane . The visual was praised for the " mature " image that Aguilera adopted . It earned four nominations at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards , including Video of the Year . Aguilera performed " Ain 't No Other Man " during several television performances , including the 2006 MTV Movie Awards and the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Game . The track was also included in the set list of her Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Following the release of her fourth studio album , Stripped ( 2002 ) , and several collaborations , Aguilera decided to incorporate elements of 1930s and 1940s musical styles in her follow @-@ up album project . She commented that she wished to revolve as an artist and a visionary in between production of the records . Aguilera sent letters to various producers that she hoped could help her with the direction she was taking for the project , encouraging them to experiment , re @-@ invent and create a modern soul feel . 
 The final product , her fifth album Back to Basics , comprises two discs . For the first half disc , Aguilera collaborated with " more beat @-@ driven " producers including DJ Premier and Mark Ronson , who incorporated musical samples into many of the recordings . She described it as " kind of a throwback with elements of jazz , blues and soul music combined with a modern @-@ day twist , like hard @-@ hitting beats " . The contents of the second disc were written and produced solely by Linda Perry , Aguilera 's longtime collaborator . Aguilera had first collaborated with DJ Premier after hearing his jazz @-@ influenced work with Gang Starr . She revealed that she was impressed , and she also wanted to make jazz @-@ influenced materials . Aguilera stated that she was unsure if DJ Premier would accept the offer , having been his first time working with pop music . Premier later agreed and commented , 
 I was surprised I got that call ' cause of our differences in the audiences we hit , but I 'm always up for challenges and trying something new ... She described what her album is about and then she sent me some CDs of what type of stuff 's been inspiring her to make the record , and it happened to be a lot of stuff that I grew up on in the early ' 70s , ' cause I 'm 40 . Aretha Franklin , Etta James , Marvin Gaye , Esther Williams , all kinds of different things . Once I saw that 's the vibe she wanted , I still had to make it sound like the way my beats thump and stuff but still give her the atmosphere she 's trying to bring out on the singing side . 
 = = Release = = 
 While writing " Ain 't No Other Man " , Aguilera drew inspiration from her husband Jordan Bratman , whom she wedded in 2005 . DJ Premier described the track as a " sassy " and " old @-@ Aretha [ Franklin ] ' Respect ' " recording . He further commented that its pace was " too fast " , " like 130 beats per minute " and different from his earlier projects . Though lyrics had yet to be written , Aguilera was " in love " with the " high energy " track when she first heard it . Consequentially , she chose to service " Ain 't No Other Man " as the lead single from Back to Basics . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " was written and produced by Aguilera , DJ Premier , and Charles Roane , with additional songwriting provided by Harold Beatty and Kara DioGuardi . It is a pop , R & B and funk song with elements of old @-@ school soul , blues and jazz . Thus , the song is a mixture between old @-@ school and contemporary materials , according to Aguilera herself . The track contains a brass sample from " Hippy Skippy Moon Strut " by Dave Cortez & The Moon People , and a vocal sample " The Cissy 's Thang " by The Soul Seven . Its instrumentation incorporates keyboards , guitar , drums , percussion , and horns . The arrangement of the instruments on " Ain 't No Other Man " was described as " raw " and " ass @-@ shaking " . Several critics complimented the mixture between old and modern materials ; Jody Rosen from Entertainment Weekly claimed that the jazzy melody from the track suited Aguilera perfectly , while Jody Rosen of The Guardian deemed the melody of " Ain 't No Other Man " " fun " and " crispy " . 
 Although the sheet music , published on Musicnotes.com by BMG Music , shows " Ain 't No Other Man " in the key of F minor , the recording suggests is in F # minor . The song has a moderate fast tempo of 132 beats per minute . Aguilera 's vocal range on the track spans from A ♭ 3 to F ♯ 5 . Dorian Lyskey of The Guardian noted that the beats of the song are " brassy " and have the same " aerobic oomph " as Beyoncé 's " Crazy in Love " , while Jody Rosen from Entertainment Weekly deemed the track " exhilarating " . According to Aguilera ; lyrically , " Ain 't No Other Man " is not a love song , but actually intertwines with the events that she experienced in real life . The song seems to be about Aguilera 's husband , Jordan Bratman , but is really simply about feeling good . During an interview with MTV News , Aguilera said of the song , " I wanted to make it light and easy for people to dance to and sing along to ... Lyrically , I just got married , so it 's about someone in particular , but it 's all about feeling good and not taking anything too seriously " . 
 = = = Sampling lawsuit = = = 
 In 2011 , American publishing company <unk> sued Sony Music for the brass sample of Dave Cortez & The Moon People 's " Hippy Skippy Moon Strut " ( 1968 ) on " Ain 't No Other Man " . According to a federal lawsuit filed in New York , <unk> purchased the exclusive rights to the track in 2004 ; nevertheless , Sony Music made a deal with <unk> Music and Clyde Otis Music Group to acquire the sample . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Dan Gennoe of UK Yahoo ! Music called it an " ass @-@ shaking " and " <unk> back @-@ in @-@ the @-@ day soul " song . John Murphy for musicOMH compared Aguilera 's vocals on the track to Carey 's . He further wrote that the song makes " you sit up and take notice " and deemed " Ain 't No Other Man " " the best pop / R & B crossover " since Beyoncé 's " Crazy in Love " . Jody Rosen from Entertainment Weekly wrote that the track " whizzes past at such a furious pace " , while Kelefa Sanneh for The New York Times praised the song as " the album 's glorious , mile @-@ a @-@ minute hit single , which proves once again that no one can roar like Ms. Aguilera " . Allmusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine deemed " Ain 't No Other Man " as one of the best tracks on Back to Basics in his album review for Back to Basics . Jenny Eliscu for Rolling Stone was positive toward the song , selected the track as one of the best materials throughout the first disc . Writing for The Morning Call , Len Righi commented that " Ain 't No Other Man " , " Understand " and " Slow Down Baby " " put her at Aretha Franklin 's doorstep " . 
 Stylus Magazine critic Thomas Inskeep praised the mixture between the old @-@ school and contemporary style on the song . He also called it a " sexy , sassy " song and " one of the year 's best pop singles " . Sean Daly for Tampa Bay Times labelled the song as a " club @-@ scorching marvel of dance @-@ club breathlessness and brassy blasts " . Dorian Lyskey from The Guardian provided Back to Basics a negative review , however Lyskey was positive toward " Ain 't No Other Man " , calling it " the tune of summer " , a " brilliant " song and comparing the track to Beyoncé 's " Crazy in Love " . Rolling Stone ranked " Ain 't No Other Man " at number 18 on their list " Top 100 Best Songs of 2006 " . Charles Aaron for Spin placed the song as the third best single of 2006 , deeming it " <unk> @-@ blasting " . At the 2007 Grammy Awards , " Ain 't No Other Man " earned Aguilera a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . The song also earned a BMI Award in 2008 . The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll voted " Ain 't No Other Man " as the third best single of 2006 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " debuted at number 19 on the US Billboard Hot 100 during the week of June 24 , 2006 . In the following week , it raised to number 13 . On July 8 , 2006 , " Ain 't No Other Man " reached number nine on the chart . In its fourth week charting , the song reached number six , which became its peak . It became Aguilera 's first top @-@ ten hit on the chart since " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) . At the end of 2006 , Billboard ranked " Ain 't No Other Man " the 32nd most successful hit of the year . On the Billboard Pop Songs chart , the track peaked at number eight and remained there for a total of 20 weeks . The song was a major hit on the US dance market , peaking atop the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . " Ain 't No Other Man " was recognized as the eighth best @-@ charting single on the Hot Dance Club Songs of 2006 by Billboard . On August 15 , 2006 , the track was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping more than one million digital download copies in the country . It was also certified gold for 500 @,@ 000 master ringtones sold in the region . As of August 2014 , " Ain 't No Other Man " has sold 1 @,@ 783 @,@ 000 copies in the United States alone . 
 In Canada , the song peaked at number four on the Canadian Hot 100 and was certified platinum by Canadian Recording Industry Association for 80 @,@ 000 digital sales . It was also certified gold for selling 20 @,@ 000 ringtones in the country . In the United Kingdom , " Ain 't No Other Man " debuted at number 18 on the UK Singles Chart during the week of July 29 , 2006 . In the following week , the song jumped to number two , just behind Shakira 's " Hips Don 't Lie " featuring Wyclef Jean . The song also gained chart success in countries around Europe , peaking at number two in Norway , number three in Hungary ( both <unk> Top 100 chart and Single Top 100 chart ) and Ireland , number four in Slovakia , number five in Denmark , Finland , Germany , Italy and Switzerland , number seven in Austria , and number ten in Belgium ( Flanders ) . Throughout Europe , " Ain 't No Other Man " peaked at number three on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . The song was certified gold in Denmark by IFPI Denmark for shipping more than 7 @,@ 500 copies there . 
 On the Australian Singles Chart , " Ain 't No Other Man " debuted at number six on August 13 , 2006 and remained on its peak for two weeks . In 2006 , the song stayed on the chart for a total of 16 weeks . On January 14 , 2007 , the track re @-@ entered the chart at number 46 . Due to the commercial success in Australia , " Ain 't No Other Man " was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipping 35 @,@ 000 copies in the country . In New Zealand , the single peaked at number five on the New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Ain 't No Other Man " was directed by Bryan Barber and choreographed by Jeri <unk> . After seeing a trailer of Barber 's film project , Idlewild , Aguilera wanted to make a video directed by him , explained : " It intrigued me that this man , Bryan Barber , had been very locked into and had surrounded himself with this whole world of the ' 20s and ' 30s era , and it made me think that he could understand what I 'm trying to do conceptually . I needed to get the right director who shared my vision " . At first Aguilera planned to make a black @-@ and @-@ white video and shot it in her living room for Barber and <unk> . " I had acted out the entire video in my living room . I used my fireplace as a makeshift stage and the staircase as the pool table where I would stand " , said Aguilera . According to Barber , Aguilera was very involved in the making of the <unk> . The whole team seemed like they were doing a movie more than a music video . On June 21 , 2006 , the music video for " Ain 't No Other Man " was premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 Throughout the music video , Aguilera portrays her alter ego Baby Jane , a nickname that Nelly once gave her . The narrative scenes are punctuated by shots of two <unk> playing the Dave Cortez brass sample in unison . The video depicts a mix of styles from the 1920s , as well as modern . 
 The video begins with a car , with a license plate reading " Baby Jane " , stopped in front of a club in a dark street in California . In front of the bar , a man is smoking a cigarette . The melody of Aguilera 's song " I Got Trouble " , is played in the background , as if over a radio with transmission noise . <unk> steps from the car with high heels a classic outfit with a hat . After the car door is closed , the song begins , and Aguilera starts dancing , in the club , with her male and female dancers while singing the song . On the first chorus , Aguilera is in a dressing room , wearing a camisole and fur @-@ trimmed silk dressing @-@ gown , making up with the help of her dancers , and receiving flowers from a stranger . 
 During the second verse , Aguilera appears in a red 1960 's style outfit and listens to music with silver spangled headphones while a gramophone plays . While singing the second chorus , Aguilera is in front of photographers , and she continues to sing , in an inter @-@ cut scene , wearing silver and gold outfits , one trimmed with fur . In the next sequence , Aguilera wears a white and black outfit with a black @-@ sequined beret , and continues dancing through the chorus . At the bridge , she walks through the bar and finds her lover . She pushes him down on a chair and pushes him away across the polished dance @-@ floor . She is then lifted onto the billiard table and continues to sing while the chandelier above her head begins to explode and spark fireworks . At the chorus she appears with sparkling silver dress and makes the whole club come alive in a riot of dancing . There a brief funk outro . As the video ends , with the club now empty , Aguilera gently sings " I Got Trouble " again , lying on the piano while the people in the club watch her . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jody Rosen for Entertainment Weekly noted , " She 's revamped [ ... ] her look , sporting an Andrews Sister bouffant and jazz @-@ age <unk> in the video " . Michael Slezak , another editor from Entertainment Weekly , complimented " Ain 't No Other Man " video . He wrote that Aguilera " rocks seven classy @-@ sexy looks in just under five minutes , each more flawless than the one before it ( especially that final silver dress and <unk> wild mane ) " . Its choreography was also praised , " [ it ] is at once modern and totally in keeping with the whole Cotton Club vibe brought to life " , " and just as important , Christina looks like she 's having a blast throughout " . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone praised the video , calling it one of the best clips from the album . James Montgomery from MTV News wrote : " Aguilera kicked off her Back to Basics reinvention with this appropriately anachronistic clip , where she vamps through Prohibition @-@ era Harlem " . The music video was nominated for four MTV Video Music Awards in 2006 , they are : Video of the Year , Best Female Video , Best Pop Video and Best Choreography ; however , the video did not win any of them . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To promote " Ain 't No Other Man " and Back to Basics , Aguilera performed the song on a number of shows and venues . On June 8 , 2006 , Aguilera performed " Ain 't No Other Man " for the first time at the 2006 MTV Movie Awards , which was held at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City , California . MTV praised the performance , calling her vocals during the show " vibrant " . On July 20 , 2006 , Aguilera performed the track at the Koko jazz club in London , which was held in front of 1 @,@ 500 fans and invited guests . The 40 @-@ minute concert comprised songs from the then @-@ upcoming Back to Basics and other songs , including " Lady Marmalade " ( 2001 ) and " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) . MTV UK was positive toward the performance , wrote , " The gig reflected the jazz club mood of Christina 's new album , with a swinging brass @-@ heavy backing band and fit dancers bounding sexily around the stage " . During the Late Show with David Letterman on August 16 , 2006 , Aguilera also performed the track live . On January 20 , 2007 , Aguilera performed " Ain 't No Other Man " at the 2007 NRJ Music Awards in Cannes , France . On February 18 , 2007 , Aguilera performed " Ain 't No Other Man " and " Candyman " during the halftime show of the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Game in Las Vegas . 
 Aguilera performed " Fighter " , " Hurt " and " Ain 't No Other Man " at the 2007 Muz @-@ TV Awards on June 1 , 2007 . " Ain 't No Other Man " was later performed during the worldwide Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) . It was selected as the show 's opener . The performance was supported by a nine @-@ piece band and eight back @-@ up dancers . The tour was preceded by newspapers headlines that flashed across a big screen , such as , " Christina goes from ' dirrty ' to demure " and " Christina cleans up her act " . The performance is included on the video release Back to Basics : Live and Down Under ( 2008 ) . On November 23 , 2008 , while supporting her compilation album Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits , Aguilera performed a medley of her six hits at the American Music Awards of 2008 , which was held at Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles , California , including " Ain 't No Other Man " . On May 5 , 2010 , while promoting her sixth studio album , Bionic , Aguilera performed all of her hits on VH1 Storytellers , including " Ain 't No Other Man " . On October 24 , 2010 , Aguilera was invited to the Justin Timberlake & Friends benefit show at Las Vegas . There , she performed " Beautiful " , " Fighter " and " Ain 't No Other Man " . At the show beginning , Timberlake declared that Aguilera is " the best vocalist of my generation " , " no contest " . 
 = = Covers and usage = = 
 " Ain 't No Other Man " has been covered on several occasions . The song was performed by four American Idol contestants : Melinda Doolittle , <unk> Jones , Haley <unk> and Gina <unk> during the American Idols LIVE ! Tour 2007 . On the season finale of the eighth season of British singing contest The X Factor , singer Amelia Lily also performed the song live . CeCe Frey , a participant of the United States television singing contest The X Factor , performed " Ain 't No Other Man " during the auditions . During the Blind Auditions of the third season of The Voice , the track was covered by Devyn <unk> , making three coaches Blake Shelton , Adam Levine and Aguilera herself turn their chairs to adopt the singer to their team . The performance was released digitally to iTunes Store on September 10 , 2012 . On the Vietnamese reality talent show Vietnam 's Got Talent , contestant Hoang Khanh Linh covered " Ain 't No Other Man " during the final round of the second season . " Ain 't No Other Man " was featured on Just Dance 4 , the fourth main installment of the music video game series Just Dance , which are developed by Ubisoft . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the liner notes of " Ain 't No Other Man " CD single . 
 Recording and sampling 
 Recorded in 2005 at Chalice Recording Studios in Hollywood 
 Contains a repeated brass sample of " Hippy Skippy Moon Strut " , as performed by Dave Cortez & The Moon People 
 Contains a brief vocal sample of " The Cissy 's Thang " , as performed by The Soul Seven 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Elsass = 
 SMS <unk> was the second of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Braunschweig class in the German Imperial Navy , laid down in 1901 and commissioned 1904 . She was named for the German province of Elsass , now the French region of Alsace . Her sister ships were Braunschweig , Hessen , Preussen and Lothringen . 
 The ship served in the II Squadron of the German fleet after commissioning , though by the outbreak of World War I , she had been moved to the IV Squadron . Elsass saw action in the Baltic Sea against the Russian Navy . In August 1915 , she participated in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga , during which she engaged the Russian battleship Slava . In 1916 , however , she was placed in reserve because of crew shortages , and spent the remainder of the war as a training ship . 
 Under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , she was retained after the end of the war and was modernized in 1923 – 24 . Elsass served in the Reichsmarine with the surface fleet until 1930 , when she was again placed in reserve . She was stricken in 1931 and used for a short time as a hulk in Wilhelmshaven . The out @-@ dated battleship was sold to Norddeutscher Lloyd in late 1935 and was broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Elsass was laid down in 1901 at the Schichau @-@ Werke in Danzig under construction number 97 . The second unit of her class , she was ordered under the contract name " J " as a new unit for the fleet . She cost 24 @,@ 373 @,@ 000 marks . Elsass was launched on 26 May 1903 and commissioned into the fleet on 29 November 1904 . 
 The ship was 127 @.@ 7 m ( 419 ft 0 in ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 2 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 1 m ( 26 ft 7 in ) forward . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines that drove three screws . Steam was provided by eight naval and six cylindrical boilers , all of which burned coal . Elsass 's powerplant was rated at 16 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Elsass 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament was composed of fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing guns . Her armament was further increased by six 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Upon her commissioning in November 1904 , Elsass was assigned to the IV Division of the II Squadron of the German fleet . She joined her sister Braunschweig and the old battleship Weissenburg . The German Navy in 1905 consisted of four divisions of three battleships each , with two divisions per squadron . This was supported by a cruiser division , composed of two armored cruisers and six protected cruisers . Kapitän zur See Reinhard Scheer assumed command of the vessel in 1907 ; he would go on to command the entire High Seas Fleet at the Battle of Jutland and eventually serve as the Chief of Naval Staff . Scheer held command of the ship for two years . 
 In 1909 , the ship was transferred to the III Division , II Squadron alongside her sisters Hessen and Preussen ; by this time , enough battleships had been built to increase the size of each division from three to four vessels . In March 1909 , a mine exploded aboard the ship during training in Kiel . Two sailors were killed and six more were wounded . 
 After World War I began in August 1914 , Elsass was assigned to the IV Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The squadron was commanded by Vice Admiral Ehrhard Schmidt . In July 1915 , following the loss of the minelaying cruiser SMS Albatross in the Baltic , the IV Squadron ships were transferred to reinforce the German naval forces in the area . On 11 and 19 July , German cruisers , with the IV Squadron ships in support , conducted sweeps in the Baltic , though without engaging any Russian forces . 
 In August 1915 , the German fleet attempted to clear the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces to assist the German Army then advancing on the city . The IV Squadron was joined by the I Squadron , which consisted of the eight Nassau and Helgoland @-@ class battleships , from the High Seas Fleet , as well as three battlecruisers and many smaller craft . The task force commanded Vice Admiral Franz von Hipper , though operational command remained with Vice Admiral Schmidt . On the morning of 8 August , the German fleet made its initial push into the Gulf . Elsass and Braunschweig were assigned to engage the Russian pre @-@ dreadnought Slava and preventing her from disrupting the German minesweepers . When it became clear that the minesweepers could not clear the minefield before nightfall , however , Schmidt called off the attempt . A second attempt was made on 16 August . Elsass remained outside the Gulf , while the dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen dealt with Slava . By 19 August , the Russian minefields had been cleared and the flotilla entered the Gulf . However , reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted the German fleet to call off the operation the following day . 
 Due to manpower shortages , the ships of the IV Squadron were demobilized . On 25 July 1916 , Elsass became a drill ship and a floating barracks , based in Kiel . The Treaty of Versailles , which ended the war , specified that Germany was permitted to retain six battleships of the older " Deutschland or Lothringen class . " Elsass was kept and used as a training ship in the Reichsmarine . 
 In 1923 , the aging ship underwent a major overhaul . Elsass was dry @-@ docked in the Reichsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven , where the conning tower was rebuilt . Work was completed the following year . She and Braunschweig , with the Deutschland @-@ class battleship Schlesien , were assigned to the North Sea Station . Elsass served with the fleet until she was withdrawn from active service on 25 February 1930 . She was stricken from the naval register on 31 March 1931 and served as a hulk in Wilhelmshaven until 31 October 1935 , when the Reichsmarine sold her to Technischer <unk> des Norddeutscher Lloyd . Elsass was broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = Jumping Flash ! = 
 Jumping Flash ! is a first @-@ person platform video game co @-@ developed by Exact and Ultra and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . The first instalment in the Jumping Flash ! series , it was first released for the PlayStation on 28 April 1995 in Japan , 29 September 1995 in Europe and 1 November 1995 in North America . It was re @-@ released through PlayStation Network store on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable in 2007 . 
 Presented in a first @-@ person perspective , the game follows a robotic rabbit named " Robbit " as he searches for missing jet pods scattered by the game 's astrophysicist antagonist character Baron Aloha . Robbit must explore each section of Crater Planet to retrieve all of the jet pods , stop Aloha and save the world from being destroyed . The game was designed as a technology demonstrator for the PlayStation console and was revealed in early 1994 under the provisional title of " Spring Man " . Jumping Flash ! utilises much of the game engine used in Geograph Seal , an earlier game by Exact for the Sharp X68000 home computer . 
 Jumping Flash ! has been described as an ancestor of as well as an early showcase for 3D graphics in console gaming . It was generally well received by critics , who praised its graphics and unique 3D platforming gameplay , but it was eventually overshadowed by later 3D platformers of the fifth console generation . Jumping Flash ! spawned two sequels : Jumping Flash ! 2 and Robbit Mon Dieu . The game was described as the third @-@ most underrated video game of all time by Matt Casamassina of IGN in 2007 . It also holds the Guinness World Record as the " first platform video game in true 3D " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Jumping Flash ! is presented in a first @-@ person perspective . The player assumes the role of Robbit , a robotic rabbit , and can freely move Robbit in three @-@ dimensional space and can rotate the camera in any direction . The top part of the screen shows the remaining time , the player 's score , and a character named <unk> — Robbit 's sidekick artificial intelligence who offers the player warnings and hints . The top left corner of the screen shows the collected power @-@ ups ; the top right corner contains the radar showing the locations of objects including enemies , power @-@ ups , jet pods and enemy projectiles . The bottom shows a health meter on the sides and the number of remaining lives in the centre . The player starts the game with three lives ; a new life is granted once one million points are earned . 
 The core of the gameplay is focused on the player 's ability to make Robbit jump . Robbit can jump up to three times in mid @-@ air , which allows him to reach extreme heights . Unlike other platform games that continue to face horizontally when the player jumps , in Jumping Flash ! the camera tilts downwards when a double @-@ jump or triple @-@ jump is performed to allow the player to see Robbit 's shadow and easily plan a landing spot . The player has the ability to shoot a low @-@ powered laser beam at a target indicator in the middle of the screen . The player can find and use fireworks for Robbit to damage enemies . These include cherry bombs , rockets , Roman candles and spinners . 
 Each level has a time limit of ten minutes , which ends the game if it is exceeded . A player losing all lives is presented with a choice to continue or return to the title screen . Power @-@ ups scattered across each world , presented as picture frames , include carrots that extend Robbit 's health , extra lives , time @-@ outs that stop the clock and freeze the level 's dynamics for a few seconds , hourglasses that extend the player 's time , and power pills that make Robbit invincible for a short period of time . Enemies in the game vary from anthropomorphic versions of creatures to robots and plants . 
 The game is composed of five worlds with three levels each , totalling to 18 main levels . The objective of the main levels in each world is to collect four jet pods . Each final level of a world consists of a boss fight . The level designs vary from snow @-@ capped mountains to carnivals . While most of the levels are large , outdoor excursions , two are enclosed within a narrow interior . The game features hidden bonus levels , which are triggered when secret entrances are found . Bonus levels consist of blocks with balloons in them ; popping the balloons yields either coins or power @-@ ups . A time attack mode is available for any level the player has completed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins on Crater Planet and revolves around the story of an insane astrophysicist , Baron Aloha . Planning to make a large profit from his evil ingenuity , Aloha removes giant pieces of land from the planet using machines to turn them into private resorts . Aloha also removes and hides the twelve jet pods that propel each world . Witnessing the destruction , the residents of Crater Planet call for help , and in response the Universal City Hall dispatches one of their agents , a mechanical rabbit named Robbit . Robbit is ordered to explore each world to retrieve the jet pods , stop Aloha , and save Crater Planet from destruction . At the end of the game , Aloha flees to his home , Little Muu , and vows revenge on Robbit . 
 Throughout the game , Aloha surrounds himself with creatures called MuuMuus that appear as small , white , five @-@ limbed creatures with miniature palm trees on their heads . Many of the game 's full motion videos feature the MuuMuus in an <unk> tavern , recounting their defeat at the hands of Robbit . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Jumping Flash ! was developed by Japanese developers Exact ( Excellent Application Create Team ) and Ultra . The game was first revealed in early 1994 under the provisional title " Spring Man " as a technology demonstration for the upcoming PlayStation console . Sony Computer Entertainment hoped Jumping Flash ! would be remembered as the first appearance of a new " platform star " with the same longevity as Sonic the Hedgehog or Mario . The game uses the same engine and shares similar gameplay traits with Geograph Seal , a 3D platform game released for the Sharp X68000 home computer the previous year by Exact . After seeing Geograph Seal and realising the potential in their game design , Sony 's director of entertainment in Japan , Koji Tada , paired Exact with Ultra to develop a new game for the upcoming PlayStation console . Tada replaced Hiroyuki Saegusa as director of the game , although he had kept all key Exact staff to work on the project . 
 The initial development was split into two phases . Exact developed the game engine and its gameplay ; Ultra designed the story and 3D cutscenes , and created characters such as the mechanical rabbit protagonist , Robbit . Ultra felt they needed to depart from the " stereotypical science fiction vibe " that included the usual " space ranger " or double agent protagonists . To create a sense of individuality among platform games , the developers implemented a dynamic camera that would automatically pan down towards the shadow of Robbit on the ground during large jumps , allowing players to carefully line up their landings . Jumping Flash ! was considered the first game of the platform genre to be developed with full 3D computer graphics . The music for Jumping Flash ! was composed by Japanese video games and anime music composer Takeo Miratsu . Many of the tracks , along with tracks from Jumping Flash ! 2 , were included on the Jumping Flash ! 2 Original Soundtrack album , which Miratsu also composed . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The game received generally positive reviews upon release . Critics mainly praised its unique innovation , advanced graphics , gameplay and clean textures . The four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly gave it their " Game of the Month " award , citing the outstanding graphics and particularly the innovative 3D gameplay . They described the style as " cutesy " but not off @-@ putting . " Major Mike " of GamePro said that despite the game appearing " strange " , it had action , strategy , and some humour . Next Generation said that " [ many ] of the boundaries have been redefined in a big way " , contrasting it with side @-@ scrolling platformers with a first @-@ person perspective and explorable 3D environments . They called it " simply superb " and gave it a " Revolutionary " five @-@ star rating . 
 Maximum stated that Jumping Flash ! was one of the most " imaginative , playable , enjoyable " and original titles seen on the fifth generation of video game consoles . They criticised its length and lack of difficulty , expressing that it could have been one of the " greatest games ever " if it was longer and more difficult , and questioned whether it was " a really worthwhile " purchase . Game Revolution called the graphics " mind blowing " and the game itself " totally unique " , but criticised the overall length and ease of play . IGN 's 1996 review similarly disapproved the difficulty , stating that despite the small worlds and easy difficulty , it is " a great , genre @-@ pushing game " , also saying it is an essential for all PlayStation owners . In a 2007 review , Greg Miller of IGN condemned the graphics as " dated " , having " jagged edges " and " muddled " colours , and said every aspect of the game is " weak " and that it had not stood " the test of time " . In a retrospective review , Andrew Yoon of Engadget praised the gameplay and innovation , saying the " grainy " and " antiquated " graphics did no harm to the vibrant atmosphere of the game . 
 Speaking in 2007 , Rob Fahey of Eurogamer stated that Jumping Flash ! was arguably one of the most important ancestors of any 3D platform game , as well as asserting that the game would always have a part in <unk> history . Albert Kim of Entertainment Weekly stated that the game provided perhaps the most euphoric sensation of <unk> at the time and described the first @-@ person perspective as " hypnotic " . Matt Thorson , the creator of the indie video game TowerFall , praised the game , saying " something about the sensation of leaping through 3D space captured my childhood imagination " . 
 1UP.com cited its first @-@ person platforming as a precursor to Mirror 's Edge , despite suggesting that the jumping remained " woefully out of place " in the platform genre . In 2007 , Matt Casamassina of IGN ranked Jumping Flash ! as the third @-@ most underrated video game of all time . After release , co @-@ developer Ultra renamed themselves " Muu Muu " , after the creatures featured in the game . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Due to its popularity , Sony produced two sequels to Jumping Flash ! , including one spin @-@ off . A direct sequel , Jumping Flash ! 2 — also developed by Exact — was released worldwide for the PlayStation the following year ; it continued the story of Robbit and the subsequent rise and fall of Baron Aloha . The game received positive reviews upon release , with critics particularly praising its updated features . Robbit Mon Dieu was released exclusively in Japan for the PlayStation in 1999 , and was the final instalment in the series . It was met with mixed reviews , and following Exact 's merger with SCEI in 2000 , the series came to an end . Both Jumping Flash ! and Jumping Flash ! 2 were re @-@ released via the PlayStation Network in 2007 and 2009 , respectively . A loose spin @-@ off titled Pocket <unk> was released exclusively in Japan for the PocketStation in 1999 before Exact 's closure . 
 = Arthur B. McBride = 
 Arthur B. " Mickey " McBride ( March 20 , 1888 – November 10 , 1972 ) was the founder of the Cleveland Browns professional American football team in the All @-@ America Football Conference and National Football League . During McBride 's tenure as owner of the Browns from 1944 to 1953 , the team won five league championships and reached the championship game two more times . It was the most successful period for a Cleveland sports team in the city 's modern history . McBride was also a real estate developer and investor active in Cleveland , Chicago and Florida . He owned taxi @-@ cab companies in Cleveland and a horse racing news wire that sold information to bookmakers . He had ties to organized crime figures arising from the wire service , but was never arrested or convicted of a crime . 
 = = Early career = = 
 McBride was born in Chicago , where he worked as a newsboy from the age of six . His first real job was for publishing tycoon William Randolph Hearst 's organization in Los Angeles , San Francisco , Boston and Chicago . He moved to Cleveland in 1913 , when he was in his mid @-@ twenties , to be circulation manager for the Cleveland News . It was a time when circulation battles over newsstands and street corners often turned violent . He started with the News on a $ 10 @,@ 000 salary ( $ 239 @,@ 428 in today 's dollars ) and was charged with organizing the paper 's newsboys . " This meant choosing strong young men comfortable fighting with fists , clubs , knives , chains and , when they could get them , handguns , " author Ted Schwarz wrote . " They were the business equivalent of the street gang , and McBride 's salary depended on how well he organized his newsboys to avoid losing their corners to one or more violent rivals . " 
 Having built up a fortune in newspapers and purchased apartment buildings in the Cleveland suburb of Lakewood , McBride in 1930 went into business for himself . In 1931 , he bought a majority stake in Cleveland 's Zone Cab Company , which later merged with the Yellow Cab Company to form the city 's biggest taxi operator . He also had taxi businesses in Akron and Canton , two cities southeast of Cleveland . As his taxi businesses prospered , McBride invested in real estate in Cleveland , Chicago and Florida . In the late 1930s , he leveraged his newspaper connections to launch a wire service that supplied bookmakers with the results of horse races . This put him in contact with organized crime figures who were behind gambling operations that relied on such services . He invested in the Continental Press and Empire News , both based in Cleveland and run by mobsters Morris " <unk> " Wexler and Sam " Gameboy " Miller . James <unk> , another friend and associate in the wire business , was murdered in 1946 in a Chicago gangland feud . A federal grand jury in 1940 indicted 18 people , including McBride and Wexler , over the supply of information used in gambling . The allegations were based on federal laws that forbade interstate transmission of lottery results ; prosecutors treated the race results as lottery lists . He was never arrested or tried over his role in the business , however . 
 = = Cleveland Browns = = 
 McBride was a fan of boxing and baseball , but knew little about football . He only grew interested in the sport in 1940 , when his son Arthur Jr. was a student the University of Notre Dame and he attended Notre Dame Fighting Irish football games in South Bend , Indiana . He was drawn by the excitement that surrounded football and thought a professional team could be profitable . In 1942 , McBride made overtures to supermarket heir Dan Reeves about buying his Cleveland Rams , a National Football League team , but Reeves rebuffed him . In 1944 , however , Chicago Tribune sports editor Arch Ward proposed a new professional league called the All @-@ America Football Conference . McBride , who knew Ward from his days in the newspaper business , eagerly signed on as the owner of the eight @-@ team circuit 's Cleveland franchise . 
 McBride first set his sights on Notre Dame 's Frank Leahy as his team 's head coach , and the two men shook hands on a deal to make him coach and general manager . Not wanting to lose Leahy , however , Notre Dame 's president objected and McBride backed off . He then asked Cleveland Plain Dealer sportswriter John Dietrich who he should hire . Dietrich suggested Paul Brown , the Ohio State Buckeyes coach who was then serving in the U.S. Navy and coaching a team at the Great Lakes Naval Training Station outside of Chicago . With his limited football knowledge , McBride had never heard of Brown , and it was Ward who made the initial approach . McBride later met with Brown , whose star was on the rise after bringing Ohio State its first national championship in 1942 , and offered him $ 17 @,@ 500 a year ( $ 253 @,@ 447 in current dollar terms ) – the biggest salary for any football coach at any level – and an ownership stake in the team . He also offered Brown a stipend for the rest of his time in the military . Brown accepted the position , saying that while he was sad to leave Ohio State , he " couldn 't turn down this deal in fairness to my family . " 
 McBride spared no expense in promoting the team and gave Brown full control over personnel . Brown went out and signed future stars including tackle and placekicker Lou Groza , wide receiver Dante Lavelli and quarterback Otto Graham , who got $ 7 @,@ 500 a year and a $ 250 monthly stipend until the end of World War II . McBride then held a contest to name the team in May 1945 ; " Cleveland Panthers " was the most popular choice , but Brown rejected it because it was the name of an earlier failed football team . " That old Panthers team failed , " Brown said . " I want no part of that name . " In August , McBride gave in to popular demand and christened the team the Browns , despite Paul Brown 's objections . 
 As the team prepared for its first season in 1946 , McBride stepped aside and let Brown run it . The Browns were an immediate success , both financially and on the field . A capacity crowd of 35 @,@ 964 saw the Browns play their first preseason game at the Akron Rubber Bowl , and the team led all of football in attendance in 1946 and 1947 . The Browns , meanwhile , won every AAFC championship between 1946 and 1949 . McBride proposed for the Browns to play an inter @-@ league championship game with the National Football League champion Philadelphia Eagles in 1948 and 1949 , but the NFL shot down the idea . He also played a role in negotiating peace between the AAFC and NFL after competition for talent drove up player salaries and ate into owners ' profits . After the 1949 season , the AAFC dissolved and three of its teams , including the Browns , merged into the more established NFL . 
 In the Browns ' early years , Paul Brown wanted to keep on reserve a number of promising players who did not make the team 's official roster . McBride made this happen by putting the reserves on his payroll as taxi drivers , although none of them were asked to drive cabs . This group came to be known as the " taxi squad " , a term still in use to describe players kept on hand to fill in for injured team members . The taxi squad was just one of the ways in which McBride backed Brown . He viewed owning the team as primarily a civic duty – as a gift to the city . " Cleveland has been good to me , " he said in a 1947 interview . " I 've made a great deal of money here . If I was looking for a get @-@ rich @-@ quick investment , the last thing I 'd do is buy a pro football club . It 's a risky business . Too much depends on ideal weather conditions , and this is no climate to risk a buck on a raindrop . " 
 The Browns continued to succeed upon entering the NFL in 1950 , winning the championship that year and reaching the title game in both 1951 and 1952 . In January 1951 , McBride testified in nationally televised hearings before the Kefauver Committee , where he was questioned about his Continental Press Service and alleged ties to organized crime and illegal gambling . It emerged that McBride partnered with Cleveland police captain John Fleming in real estate deals and had Fleming on the Yellow Cab payroll until 1941 . McBride denied the mafia connections , claimed he never broke the law and was never charged with any crime . Congress later passed legislation making such wire services illegal . 
 During the summer before the 1953 season , McBride sold the Browns for $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 306 @,@ 716 in today 's dollars ) , more than twice the largest sum ever paid for a professional football team . The old stockholders were McBride and his son Edward , along with minority owners including taxi business associate Dan <unk> , Brown and four others . The buyers were a group of prominent Cleveland men : Dave R. Jones , a businessman and former Cleveland Indians director , Ellis Ryan , a former Cleveland Indians president , Homer Marshman , an attorney who had founded the Cleveland Rams , Saul Silberman , owner of the horse race track later known as <unk> Racecourse , and Ralph <unk> , an associate of Silberman . While McBride never said so , the Kefauver hearings and the growing public association between him and the mafia may have played a role in his decision to get out of football . McBride said he had simply " had his fling " with football and wanted to concentrate on other business activities . " Well , I came out clean after all , " he said . " Considering what happened to some of the other fellows who started the old All @-@ America Conference with me , this isn 't so bad . I never made anything , but I didn 't lose anything either , except maybe a few thousand dollars . " 
 McBride 's tenure as owner was viewed favorably , partly because of the Browns ' on @-@ field success but also because he gave Paul Brown a free hand to coach and sign players . One of the new ownership group 's first acts was to assure Cleveland fans that Brown would retain complete control over the football side of the operation . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 McBride continued to direct his taxi and real estate businesses after he sold the Browns , but he kept out of the public eye . He died of a heart attack at the Cleveland Clinic and was buried in Cleveland 's Holy Cross Cemetery . He was married to the former Mary Jane Kane . They had three children : Arthur B. , Jr . , Edward and Jane . 
 = Ontario Highway 91 = 
 King 's Highway 91 , commonly referred to as Highway 91 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connected Highway 24 south of Collingwood with Highway 26 in Stayner , a distance of 7 @.@ 9 km ( 4 @.@ 9 mi ) . The majority of the route travels through farmland , with the exception of the portion within Stayner . Highway 91 was established in mid 1937 along an existing road . Aside from paving in 1965 , the highway remained unchanged until it was decommissioned at the beginning of 1998 and transferred to Simcoe County . Today the route is officially known as Simcoe County Road 91 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 91 began at Highway 24 in the community of Duntroon , lying 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) south of Collingwood within Simcoe County . From there it travelled east through farmland , passing north of the Stayner Aerodrome at its midpoint . East of Fairgrounds Road , the route entered Stayner . On the outskirts of the community several industrial and commercial buildings line the route , but are quickly replaced by residential housing moving eastward . In the centre of town , the highway encountered Highway 26 at its eastern terminus . Today , the route of former Highway 91 is known as Simcoe County Road 91 . This route continues west of former Highway 24 to the Simcoe – Grey County boundary at Grey County Road 91 . The entire route is straight , following an old concession line . 
 = = History = = 
 The Duntroon to Stayner Road was first assumed by the Department of Highways as Highway 91 on August 11 , 1937 , the same date as the portion of Highway 24 lying within Simcoe County . Although some initial improvement was carried out on the muddy farm road , the new highway remained gravel @-@ surfaced until 1965 . Beyond that , the highway remained unaltered until it was transferred , or downloaded , to Simcoe County on January 1 , 1998 . Simcoe County subsequently redesignated the road as Simcoe County Road 91 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 91 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in Simcoe County . 
 = Briskeby Arena = 
 Briskeby Arena , previously known as Briskeby <unk> , is an all @-@ seater football stadium located at Briskebyen in Hamar , Norway . It is home to the Norwegian First Division side <unk> ( Ham @-@ Kam ) and is owned by Hamar Municipality . The venue has artificial turf , three stands and a capacity for 8 @,@ 068 spectators . It was used for the 1938 Norwegian Football Cup Final — which saw the venue 's record 14 @,@ 500 spectators — and has also hosted five Norway national under @-@ 21 football team matches between 1984 and 2011 . 
 Construction started in 1934 and the venue opened on 28 June 1936 as the first home venue for Briskebyen FL . The club merged with Hamar AIL in 1946 to form Ham @-@ Kam . The new club has played since 1970 played 22 seasons in the top tier , having been relegated eight times , most recently in 2008 . Ham @-@ Kam 's record home attendance is 11 @,@ 500 , dating from a 1976 match against Lillestrøm . In 1984 , the club house was rebuilt with luxury boxes and a new 2 @,@ 400 @-@ seat East Stand was built . The investments lead the club into financial distress , and in 1993 the municipality had to purchase the venue to save the club . Planning of a new or upgraded venue started in 2001 , construction started in 2007 and the first stage was completed the following year . It cost 111 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , having suffered large cost overruns . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and early years = = = 
 Freidig was established in 1918 as a local team for Briskebyen in what was then the municipality of Vang . At the time there was a severe lack of pitches in Hamar , so the club was forced to sneak into unused venues and play until they were chased by the groundskeeper . The club was accepted as a member of the Football Association of Norway ( NFF ) in 1927 , changing its name to Briskebyen FL . This forced it to formalize its pitch renting so it would have a single home venue for each season . In 1928 and 1929 , it played at <unk> , from 1930 through 1933 at <unk> bane , and from 1934 at Hamar stadion . 
 As the club was dissatisfied with this arrangement , it launched plans to establish its own venues . First it needed to secure a lot , and in the late 1920s lied its eyes on a parcel of land owned by Hamar <unk> . However , the lot was sold to <unk> <unk> in 1930 and the club had to negotiate purchasing the lot from the bank . The club established a new committee to look into the stadium issue . Hamar IL was invited to become part @-@ owner of the venue , but they chose to remain at Hamar stadion . As Briskebyen was not able to secure a partner to share the costs with , opposition towards the project grew within the club . Yet , the decision to build the venue was taken by Briskebyen FL 's annual meeting on 15 April 1934 , with construction starting on 26 April . 
 The venue was estimated to cost NOK 26 @,@ 500 . Financing included a NOK 3 @,@ 000 grant from NFF , NOK 1 @,@ 500 from the municipality and NOK 1 @,@ 800 from the club . The rest was secured through various charity events , 320 of 1 @,@ 500 man @-@ days being volunteer work and a NOK 8 @,@ 000 loan from NFF . Construction in 1934 consisted of removing 5 @,@ 600 cubic meters ( 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of earthwork and laying sewer pipes . The following year , 200 cubic meters ( 7 @,@ 100 cu ft ) of rock was blasted and the pitch was sown on 3 and 4 September . Construction of the terraces and dressing rooms took place in 1936 . Work was not concluded until the morning of the inauguration match on 28 June 1936 , when the last fence was mounted . Briskeby was the first grass pitch in Hedmark and was inaugurated with a match against Lyn , who won 4 – 1 . The venue cost NOK 32 @,@ 036 @.@ 28 , leaving the club with a debt of NOK 18 @,@ 688 @.@ 93 . The venue was awarded the 1938 Norwegian Football Cup Final , which required additional upgrades , largely conducted through volunteer work . 
 The venue was confiscated by the German occupation forces during World War II , who built a cold storage facility south of the pitch . In 1945 , after five years of occupation , the pitch was in a detrimental state . The stadium received a major renovation , including a new pitch and replacing half the wooden terraces with concrete stands . The cold facility was converted to a club house and a basement was dug out and used as a changing room . In 1946 , parts of Vang , including Briskebyen , were amalgamated with Hamar . The same year , Hamar Municipality signed an agreement with the club whereby municipal subsidies would cover the operating costs in exchange for the club allocating training time to other clubs . 
 = = = Debt and <unk> = = = 
 In 1982 , the club decided that it would build a new 2 @,@ 400 @-@ seat stand on the eastern long side . A low construction cost was secured because the construction industry was going through a slump . The costs were covered by NOK 2 @.@ 5 million in national lottery grants and NOK 2 million in loan , which was planned to be repaid through increased sponsor and ticket revenues from increased attendance . The upgrade also included a reconstruction of the club house to facilitate luxury boxes . They were made available for sponsors , who were allowed to bring guests . The boxes and the vestibule became an important informal meeting area for the town 's political and business elite . 
 The new stand became a financial burden for the club . Operating costs increased after Norwegian clubs were allowed to wage players from 1984 . In addition , interest rates rose quickly , making the club unable to meet its financial obligations . At the same time , the club experienced falling attendance . In 1985 , the club 's auditor warned that the club was heading into financial distress . In 1986 , the club spent NOK 1 million to build terraces between the club house and the pitch on the northern short side , and terraces on the southern short side . In 1990 , Hamar Municipality gave Ham @-@ Kam a grant of NOK 1 @.@ 7 million in an attempt to save the club 's finances , in part because of the club 's debt on the venue . 
 In 1993 , Ham @-@ Kam proposed selling the stadium , including its 1 @.@ 0 @-@ hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ) lot , for NOK 6 million , to pay off its debt . In addition , NFF required that the stadium be renovated for NOK 2 million . The club launched the sales plans to the municipality in September 1993 , stating that if they did not purchase the venue , the club would probably be forced to file for bankruptcy . At the time , Lillestrøm and Brann were the only other premiership clubs to own their own stadiums . Ham @-@ Kam 's three star players , Vegard <unk> , Petter <unk> and <unk> Solbakken , threatened to sign with other clubs within days unless the municipality saved the club . 
 On 20 October 1993 , the municipal council voted in favor of purchasing the stadium . The proposal was supported by the Labour Party and Centre Party , who had 28 of 49 councilors , but opposed by the rest of the council . Along with two banks , the municipality established a limited company which would own the venue . The municipality and banks would pay for the club 's debt of NOK 5 @.@ 4 million , and take over the stadium 's operating costs of roughly NOK 1 million per year . Ham @-@ Kam would have to pay rent on the stadium . The transaction took place on 26 January 1994 , and included a clause granting Ham @-@ Kam the right to buy back the stadium at a later date . The municipality issued a loan of NOK 4 million to Ham @-@ Kam in 2003 to allow them to install floodlighting at Briskeby . 
 = = = Arena = = = 
 By 2001 NFF was in the process of implementing new stadium requirements in the top leagues , and Briskeby would no longer be permitted to be used in the top tier . Ham @-@ Kam entered an alliance with <unk> — an real estate development company working on Lillestrøm 's Åråsen Stadion — who presented a concept to finance a new venue : The municipality would transfer property to a limited company jointly owned by the municipality and the major sports clubs , the real estate would be re @-@ regulated to increase their value , and the company would use this capital to build a new professional and a new recreational stadium . Parallel with this , a municipal commission made a report that recommended a consolidation in the number of venues in town and the conversion of gravel and grass fields to artificial turf . The commission recommended that a new professional football venue be built either at Briskeby or Hamar stadion . 
 Hamar <unk> ( HSA ) was established in 2003 to execute the plan . It was owned 34 percent by the municipality , and 22 percent each by Ham @-@ Kam , Hamar IL and Storhamar Dragons . In 2004 , Storhamar 's share was transferred to Hamar Olympiske Anlegg , a municipal company which owns Vikingskipet Olympic Arena and Hamar Olympic Amphitheater . A report estimated the technical value of Briskeby to NOK 6 million , while the sales price of the lot was estimated at NOK 30 million . The municipal council voted on 18 February 2004 to transfer the ownership of the two stadiums to the new company . Ham @-@ Kam rented the venues from HSA , with HSA 's deficit for the first four years being covered by the municipality . Of the NOK 20 @.@ 8 million in value transferred to the company , NOK 14 @.@ 5 million was paid by HSA taking over the municipality 's obligation to build a new athletics venue should Hamar stadion be closed , and NOK 5 million was debt . 
 In October 2004 , <unk> presented the concept <unk> Stadion , which would have been located on <unk> , a peninsula which sticks out into Mjøsa . In addition to a 9 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium , the project included a cultural center with an 800 @-@ seat auditorium and a 22 @-@ story hotel . However , <unk> is a popular recreational areas and a process to regulate the area as such had just been completed . The location would also cause problems for the railway , who wanted to expand Hamar Station . The <unk> project was rejected by the municipal executive committee on 8 December , and on 16 March 2005 , the municipal council voted to continue working on a new venue at Briskeby . This caused <unk> to leave the project . 
 In 2004 , Biong Arkitekter was contracted to design the stadium , with <unk> as structural engineers . Five proposals for Briskeby were launched , estimated to cost between NOK 61 and 150 million . Three of them retained the current alignment and would give a capacity of between 8 @,@ 800 and 10 @,@ 200 spectators , and two of these again contained commercial and residential properties within the stadium complex . The two other proposals involved turning the pitch 90 degrees , which would give the least encroachment on neighbor properties . The residents ' association demanded that an impact study be made and that more specific plans be presented before municipal approval . The municipality concluded that neither were required . The municipal council passed a regulation plan on 1 February 2006 , which involved building a 10 @,@ 200 seat venue , but with the smaller of the two possible commercial property sizes . The residents ' association appealed to the county governor , who reject the appeal on 1 September . 
 At the time NFF awarded an annual license to clubs which permitted them to play in the top two divisions . This included a series of criteria that the home venue needed to meet . As Briskeby was severely substandard to the criteria , Ham @-@ Kam was required to apply for annual exemptions . These were only awarded to clubs who were actively working on upgrading or building new venues . If an exception was not granted , the club would either be relegated to the Second Division ( the third tier ) , or would have to play their home games at an approved stadium in another town . 
 In December 2006 , HSA sold Briskeby to a new company , Briskeby <unk> AS ( BG ) , which was owned 50 percent each by Ham @-@ Kam and HSA . Another company , Briskeby Eiendom 1 AS ( BE1 ) , was established and owned 66 percent by HSA and 34 percent by BG . The latter was also given 50 percent of the shares in Hamar stadion . BG was non @-@ commercial and was to own the stadium itself , while BE1 was commercial and was to rent out the commercial property . The two shared board , managing director and accountant . In May 2007 , NCC was awarded the contract to build the new venue by BG and BE1 . Although NCC was NOK 8 million more expensive than the cheapest bid , they offered four months shorter construction time . Briskeby 's lot needed to be expanded , which was done by purchasing neighbor lots for NOK 34 million . Hamar stadion and the neighbor lot <unk> were sold for NOK 295 million in June 2007 , of which NOK 9 million was paid to BG and another NOK 175 million was a guarantee which would be paid after the lot was re @-@ regulated . 
 Construction was financed through a loan of NOK 218 million from <unk> , which was secured on the revenue which would be generated from the sale of Hamar stadion and <unk> . However , the bank was not willing to lend money secured on the basis of sales price of Hamar stadion being based on the re @-@ regulation of the lot . The municipality was pressed on time by the possibility of NFF denying Ham @-@ Kam the right to play at Briskeby . Hamar Energi Holding AS ( HEH ) , which owns Hamar Municipality 's share of <unk> Energi , had large assets . Both HEH and BE1 had as chair Hans Kolstad , who proposed that HEH could issue a guarantee of NOK 75 million for BG and BE1 — which was issued in September 2007 . This allowed construction to start , but the project was still under @-@ financed by NOK 50 million . HEH therefore issued another guarantee the same month , for NOK 58 @.@ 75 million . Because of delays in the regulation work , HEH issued another two guarantees , NOK 60 million in March and NOK 25 million in June 2008 . 
 In August 2007 , the stadium was planned to be built in three stages , with a combined budget of NOK 156 @.@ 6 million . The first stage would involve the northern and western sides and cost NOK 78 @.@ 4 million , the second stage would involve the eastern side and cost NOK 43 @.@ 0 million , while the third stage would involve the southern side and cost NOK 35 @.@ 1 million . After construction started , BG changed two specifications , moving public rest rooms from the basement to the ground floor , and changing the angle of roof . Both of these gave increased construction costs and alteration of the architectural design plans . 
 During this entire period , BE1 was insolvent . The bank therefore required that the entire sales price of Hamar stadion be transferred to BG , even though NOK 50 million was to go to the construction of <unk> <unk> ( BIP ) . Therefore , Hamar Municipality decided to finance BIP to secure sufficient funding for Briskeby , essentially subsidizing Briskeby with a further NOK 50 million . In 2007 , BG paid NOK 3 @.@ 4 million in compensation to Ham @-@ Kam for lost ticket sales during the construction time and for the club house , which would be demolished . 
 In 2008 , Ham @-@ Kam tried to sell the naming rights of the stadium for between NOK 5 and 8 million per year , but neither of their main sponsors , <unk> Energi and Sparebanken Hedmark , were interested . The first stage of the stadium opened on 10 August 2008 , after which further construction was terminated . Stage one cost NOK 92 @.@ 5 million to build and NOK 19 million for purchase of real estate . By April 2010 , BG had combined negative assets , debt and received grants of NOK 240 million . Of this , NOK 78 million was written @-@ off bad debts to BE1 and NOK 19 million was purchase of lots . On 25 September 2009 , Hamar Municipality bought HSA , BG , BIP and BE1 for NOK 73 @,@ 000 . In December 2009 , the municipality increased the share capital in BG with NOK 16 million and in BE1 with NOK 32 million . 
 With then opening of the venue , Ham @-@ Kam rented 2 @,@ 000 square meters ( 22 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , consisting of 1 @,@ 300 square meters ( 14 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of lounges and 700 square meters ( 7 @,@ 500 sq ft ) for its offices , for which the team played NOK 2 to 3 million per year . In the 2010 season , Ham @-@ Kam played in the Second Division , resulting in the entire VIP area remaining unused . Artificial turf was laid on the stadium in August 2011 . 
 In August 2011 , an investigation of the HSA affair was initiated by the municipality , with the investigation costing NOK 7 million . The report concluded that a large number of illegal action had been taken in the process : HSA had used money reserved for sport for commercial development ; irregular executive work in HEH and lack of correction were conducted after errors were discovered in 2007 ; important instructions from the municipal council were not followed ; illegal executive work was undertaken in the holding companies ; BE1 did not file for bankruptcy after it had lost its equity ; the use of an unnecessarily complex company structure ; violation on the laws of public sector procurements ; violation on European Economic Area law on public grants ; expensive consulting contracts , without tender , which gave the consultants too much influence on the process ; and that the board composition in the companies was in violation with good corporate governance practices . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The new section of Briskeby has the same style and building materials as the two other main sports venues in Hamar , Vikingskipet and Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre , which were built for the 1994 Winter Olympics . The venue has capacity for 8 @,@ 068 spectators and has club seating 600 people . The pitch is 105 by 68 meters ( 344 by 223 ft ) artificial turf . Around the pitch are 180 digital advertising board . There are two 40 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 430 sq ft ) scoreboard screens . The stands have 13 concession stands , all which are built to allow a view of the pitch while standing in a queue . 
 = = Events = = 
 The venue was home ground for Briskebyen from its opening . In its inaugural season , the club was newly relegated to Class B , as most of the club 's effort had gone to building the venue . From 1937 the club again played in Class A. The venue was also used for matches where a mixed Briskebyen and Hamar IL played friendlies against foreign teams . No official matches were played during the Second World War . In April 1946 , Briskebyen FL merged with Hamar AIL to create <unk> . 
 Ham @-@ Kam remained at lower levels in the league system until the 1960s , when it was promoted to the Second Division ( then the second tier ) after the 1967 season . Ham @-@ Kam was promoted to the First Division ( then the top tier ) ahead of the 1970 season . They have since played in the top league in the periods 1970 – 74 , 1976 – 77 , 1979 , 1981 – 84 , 1986 – 87 , 1992 – 95 , 2004 – 06 and 2008 . The club 's eight relegation from the top league is a Norwegian record . After the 2009 season , the club was further relegated to the Second Division , but returned to the First Division ( now the second tier ) in 2011 . For a Ham @-@ Kam match , the record attendance is 11 @,@ 500 , which dates from the 27 May 1976 league match against Lillestrøm . 
 The venue hosted the 1938 Norwegian Football Cup Final on 16 October 1938 , where Fredrikstad beat Mjøndalen 3 – 2 . The match attracted 14 @,@ 500 spectators , which still stands as Briskeby 's record attendance . Briskeby has hosted five Norway national under @-@ 21 football team matches , having played 0 – 0 against Poland on 28 August 1984 , 3 – 0 against Switzerland on 2 June 1992 , 2 – 1 against Switzerland on 16 August 2005 , 2 – 1 against Hungary on 28 May 2010 and 1 – 4 against Sweden on 2 June 2011 . 
 = SECR N1 class = 
