 Surveys have revealed an average of 436 structures per square kilometer ( 1118 per square mile ) in the site core , falling to 244 structures / km ² ( 626 / square mile ) in the periphery . At its height in the Late Preclassic , the population has been estimated at 1600 in the site core with a further 8000 dispersed through the periphery , to produce an estimated total population of almost ten thousand . In the Early Classic the population suffered a severe decline , population is estimated to have dropped to 34 % of peak population . In the Late to Terminal Classic the population increased to 85 % of its Late Preclassic level , an expansion that appears to have occurred rapidly and spread to all parts of the site , perhaps as the result of an influx of refugees arriving from other sites around AD 830 . This was followed by a population crash to 14 % of peak Preclassic population in the Early Postclassic ( AD 900 – 1200 ) prior to the complete abandonment of the site . 
 = = = Social Stratification = = = 
 The social stratification of Seibal was that of priest @-@ kings , as well as nobility and elites living in the main ceremonial center , with the common people living in the peripheries of the city . During the 1964 @-@ 68 excavations , 34 of the 45 found burials were from the peripheral zone , showing the distribution of population by class . 
 = = Known rulers = = 
 All dates A.D. 
 = = History = = 
 The site was occupied by the Middle Preclassic , then declined from the Late Preclassic through to the Early Classic , with a renewed expansion in the Late to Terminal Classic before being completely abandoned . 
 = = = Preclassic = = = 
 Seibal was first settled around 900 BC in the Preclassic Period . It reached its peak population in the Late Preclassic around 200 BC , at the end of the <unk> ceramic phase ( 300 @-@ 200 CE ) . Ceramics from the deep Middle Preclassic levels at Seibal belong to the little @-@ known Real / Xe phase , found in the western Petén region . A cruciform Olmec @-@ style cache consisting of a <unk> and jade celts is similar to those found in the Olmec heartland on the Gulf Coast of Mexico , and the artifacts were probably manufactured at La Venta . This cache dates to approximately 900 BC . After the Real / Xe complex , came the <unk> period , dating to approximately <unk> @-@ <unk> . The ceramics between these two periods are similar , but <unk> ceramics are more extensive and stratigraphically separated . There is also evidence during this time of the population increase that would peak at the end of the <unk> period . 
 The earliest settlement in the Middle Preclassic was mostly confined to Group A. After 300 BC , in the Late Preclassic , settlement expanded to include Group D. During this period , there is evidence of ceremonial structures being build both in Group A and D. 
 By the end of the Late Preclassic ( or <unk> ) , Seibal experienced an unexplained decline in population . 
 = = = Early Classic = = = 
 During the Early Classic , the decline that began in the Late Preclassic continued unabated until the site was all but abandoned around AD 300 for unknown reasons . 
 = = = Late Classic = = = 
 Seibal underwent a revival in the Late Classic with an expansion of occupation linked to the great city of Tikal . About AD 650 new inhabitants moved into the city in order to found a new kingdom . Groups A and D saw new construction , with a particular emphasis on Group D , which became an important part of the ceremonial centre . Any monuments raised by the Late Classic rulers responsible for this renewed occupation were defaced when the city suffered a catastrophic defeat in the 8th century AD . After the defeat of Seibal , foreign influences can be seen from Central Mexico in the art and stelae of the site dating to the <unk> phase ( mid @-@ 700 CE @-@ post @-@ classic ) . 
 The earliest mention of Seibal in hieroglyphic inscriptions is on Stela 15 at Dos Pilas , dated to 13 October 721 , and refers to Seibal becoming involved in the long @-@ running war between the great cities of Tikal and Calakmul and their respective allies and vassals . Dos Pilas was a newly founded city in the Petexbatún region , established by Tikal to exert its control over the Pasión River , a strategy that backfired when Calakmul seized control of the fledgling kingdom . 
 = = = = Defeat = = = = 
 In AD 735 Ucha 'an K 'in B 'alam , the third king of Dos Pilas , attacked Seibal , capturing Yich 'aak B 'alam . The captive king was not executed but rather became a vassal of his more powerful neighbour . Ucha 'an K 'in B 'alam raised monuments to his victory over Seibal at Dos Pilas , Aguateca and Seibal itself . Yich 'aak B 'alam is shown under the feet of Ucha 'an K 'in B 'alam on Aguateca Stela 2 . At Seibal a hieroglyphic stairway was built recording the city 's new status as a vassal of Dos Pilas . At the same time as he erected these monuments to his victory , Ucha 'an K 'in B 'alam ordered the destruction of the hieroglyphic records on the earlier monuments of Seibal , with inscriptions at Dos Pilas and Aguateca specifically recording the destruction of Seibal 's previously recorded history using phrases that translate as " they destroyed the writing " and " they chopped the writing off the statues that were made " . 
 Yich 'aak B 'alam continued as a vassal under the next king of Dos Pilas , K 'awiil Chan K 'inich , who presided over rituals at Seibal in 745 and 747 . 
 Seibal regained its independence in the late 8th century with the destruction of the Dos Pilas kingdom . Ajaw B 'ot <unk> to the throne in AD 771 , restoring Seibal as an independent capital . After AD 800 Seibal fell into a thirty @-@ year hiatus during which no new monuments were erected . 
 = = = Terminal Classic = = = 
 With its independence came a new apogee , and for a brief time Seibal became a prominent regional capital located on the important Pasión River trade route . The architecture and ceramics from this period demonstrate connections with the northern Yucatán Peninsula and the Gulf Coast of Mexico . Seventeen stelae carved between AD 849 and 889 show a mix of Maya and foreign styles , including a lord wearing the beaked mask of Ehecatl , the central Mexican wind god , with a Mexican @-@ style speech scroll emerging from the mouth , carvings of foreign @-@ style foot slippers , and squared cartouches . Some of these stelae have a stylistic affinity with the painted murals at Cacaxtla , a site in the central Mexican state of Tlaxcala . This hybrid style seem to indicate that the new lords of Seibal were Maya lords adapting to changing political conditions by adopting a mix of symbols originating from both lowland Maya and central Mexican sources . Some of the more foreign @-@ looking stelae even bear non @-@ Maya calendrical glyphs . Changes at Seibal at this time are associated with the Chontal @-@ controlled trade flowing along the Pasión River . The Chontal Maya themselves were warrior @-@ merchants originating from the Gulf Coast of Mexico who displayed a mixture of Maya and non @-@ Maya characteristics . 
 Hieroglyphic texts at Seibal indicate that the city 's newly refound vigour was sponsored by a new alliance formed by the cities of Caracol and Ucanal in the east , two sites that had so far survived the spreading Classic Maya collapse . It is likely that they were attempting to reopen the old Pasión @-@ Usumacinta trade route and were drawn to Seibal by its defensible location overlooking the Pasión River . Seibal 's refounding took place in AD 830 with the installation of Wat 'ul Chatel as a vassal of Chan Ek ' <unk> of Ucanal . The new king dedicated a new building and stelae in 849 , overseen by Jewel K <unk> of Tikal , and Chan Pet , king of Calakmul . Wat 'ul Chatel built an innovative new temple @-@ stelae arrangement to the south of the Central Plaza of Group A. Structure A @-@ 3 consists of a low radial pyramid with an inventive arrangement of sculpted monuments . 
 Wat 'ul Chatel 's last monument was erected in 889 . This stela is also the last dated monument raised at Seibal and by 900 the city was all but abandoned , the whole region had been engulfed by the Classic Maya collapse and trade no longer flowed along the Pasión @-@ Usumacinta route . Most Classic Maya capitals had already been abandoned and whatever external support Seibal had received from its overlord had vanished . By 930 AD , the site was completely abandoned . It was left relatively undisturbed until around 1890 when Federico Artes was informed of the city ’ s ruins . 
 The late stelae at Seibal show a marked reduction in quality over a span of about forty years , with the loss of Classic Period traits , and bearing flatter and cruder representations than earlier stelae . This may reflect the loss of expertise in the Terminal Classic , with craftsmen less able to work monuments and large structures as time progressed . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The ruins of Seibal were probably discovered around 1890 by loggers working for the <unk> Mahogany Company . Federico Artes first reported the existence of the ruins in 1892 after he was sent to Petén by the Guatemalan government in order to find material to be displayed in the Guatemalan exhibit for the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago . He was having very little luck getting satisfactory material until he heard through the rumor mill of the site ’ s existence , at which point he traveled to Seibal . He took molds from some of the stelae and the resulting casts were displayed in the Exposition , bringing the recent discovery of the ruins to the attention of archaeologists for the first time . Two years later , in July 1895 , Seibal was explored by Teoberto Maler on behalf of the Peabody Museum of Harvard University . He made a site plan and discovered a new stela to add to those already discovered . He returned to the site for further investigations in August 1905 but discovered no new monuments . The Peabody Museum published Maler 's work in 1908 , including good quality photos of the stelae . 
 Seibal was next investigated by Sylvanus Morley in 1914 on behalf of the Carnegie Institution of Washington . Dr Barnum Brown visited the ruins in 1948 , and members of the Altar de Sacrificios Expedition of the Peabody Museum made visits in 1961 , 1962 and 1963 . 
 In 1964 , the Peabody Museum returned to the site with a thorough investigation that continued until 1968 , led by Gordon R. Willey as Director and A. Ledyard Smith as Field Director . Further excavations were carried out from May to June in 2006 by the Proyecto Arqueológico Ceibal @-@ Petexbatun ( Seibal @-@ Petexbatun Archaeological Project ) . 
 = = Site description = = 
 Seibal is a medium @-@ sized site . The site core is divided into three principal hilltop groups ( Groups A , C and D ) connected by causeways and covers a little over 1 km ² . The causeways were faced with masonry and had parapets in places . Causeway I is the western causeway , Causeway II is the south causeway and Causeway III is the eastern causeway . Group D is a fortress refuge concealed above the river frontage . Group B is a small complex located about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from the site core . Group A is smaller than Group D but has most of the sculptured monuments . Various small <unk> groups lie beyond the site core . They are spaced between 50 and 100 metres ( 55 and 109 yd ) apart , extending for several kilometers to the north , south and west . 
 Only two structures have been restored at Seibal , the A @-@ 3 temple platform and the C @-@ 79 circular platform , topped with the Jaguar Altar . Both were restored during the investigations carried out by the Peabody Museum in the 1960s . 
 Seibal possesses a satellite site located to the north , known as El <unk> . This site has large structures built from clay that date to the Middle Preclassic period . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Group A is in the site core . It features three plazas , the North , South and Central Plazas and lies at the west end of Causeway I. Group A has more than fifty mounds arranged around the three plazas . Monuments dating to the period when Seibal was a vassal of Dos Pilas ( AD 735 – 761 ) are situated in the Central Plaza of the group . In this group , there is also a ball court that is dated to the Terminal Classic and stylistically resembles that at Uxmal . 
 Group C lies on Causeway II , which passes through it to end at the circular Structure C @-@ 79 . Group C has over forty mounds . 
 Group D is a compact group at the east end of Causeway III , it is perched in an easily defensible position at the edge of the bluffs overlooking the Pasión river . It has more than seventy structures crowded around five plazas . Group D only had one stela , which was a plain monument erected in front of a 20 @-@ metre ( 66 ft ) high stepped pyramid . 
 The East Patio of Group A is part of an acropolis complex located behind Structure A @-@ 14 . The complex is situated upon a massive platform raised almost 7 metres ( 23 ft ) above the natural surface level . The patio was accessed by a stairway on the south side . It includes Structures A @-@ 15 and A @-@ 16 . 
 Structure A @-@ 3 is a temple platform located in the centre of the south plaza . It has a stairway ascending each of its four sides . Five stelae are associated with this structure , one located at the base of each stairway and a fifth inside the building surmounting the platform . Three large jade cobbles were interred under the central stela . This structure and its associated stelae were dedicated in AD 849 by king Wat 'ul Chatel ( also known as Aj B 'olon <unk> <unk> ) . Structure A @-@ 3 has the remains of a corbeled vault , the only surviving example at Seibal . The arrangement of the radial pyramid with its associated stelae was highly innovative . The radial temple form was ancient in the Maya region , dating back to the Late Preclassic , but Wat 'ul Chatel placed upon it a square shrine with four doors , one opening onto each of the stairways . The temple building contained three vaulted chambers oriented north @-@ south , with doors joining each chamber along an east @-@ west axis . The cornice of the temple supported a brightly coloured stucco frieze . The frieze collapsed with the temple in ancient times . Archaeologists were able to recover portions of the fallen frieze and attempt a reconstruction of how it originally appeared . Each of the four doors was originally topped by a larger @-@ than @-@ life sculpture of king Wat 'ul Chatel . Twelve smaller figures were spaced around the cornice , one at each corner with an additional figure positioned half way between each corner and the central figure of the king . It is not known who these smaller figures represented . The spaces between the figures were occupied by panels with cross @-@ hatch designs and sculpted vegetation and animals . Old gods sat in the centre of each of the sixteen panels , including Itzamna and Pawatun . Structure A @-@ 3 was built over an earlier platform structure . 
 Structure A @-@ 10 , a 28 @-@ metre ( 92 ft ) tall temple @-@ pyramid , is the tallest structure at the site . 
 Structure A @-@ 13 is a radial pyramid . Excavations uncovered a mass burial ( Burial 4 ) with parts of eleven people , including two women and a child . This was not a traditional Classic Maya burial and has been dated to AD 930 , very late in the occupation of the site . 
 Structure A @-@ 14 is covered by the forest that has overgrown the northern part of the Central Plaza . It is a range structure running north @-@ south and once had a hieroglyphic stairway detailing Seibal 's defeat by Dos Pilas , although the inscriptions have now been removed to the old project camp . The structure was found to contain an elite female burial , labelled as Burial 1 . 
 Structure A @-@ 15 is located on the north side of the East Patio of the North Plaza . It is a long , low structure running east @-@ west and closing the patio on the north side . It measures 24 by 8 metres ( 79 by 26 ft ) by 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) tall . The building contained a long room with a wide entrance opening southwards onto the patio , raised from the patio by a step . The room contained a stone bench built from reused blocks . The structure was superimposed upon two earlier substructures , the earliest of which had a different orientation to the final building . All three periods of construction appear to date to the Terminal Classic , with the last phase perhaps dating to about the time of the fall of the city . 
 Structure A @-@ 16 is located on the northeast side of the East Patio of the North Plaza . It is a rectangular structure measuring 16 by 10 metres ( 52 by 33 ft ) , running north @-@ south and facing to the west . The remains of the structure stand 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The western side of the building had been damaged by looters prior to archaeological investigation . The looters ' trench measured 5 by 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 @.@ 4 by 2 @.@ 6 ft ) by 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) deep and cut through the structure 's floor , bench and rear wall but did not uncover any burials or offerings . Fallen limestone blocks and slabs reveal that the structure once had a corbel @-@ vaulted chamber . Fragments of stucco were also recovered , they once made up a colourful frieze above the front of the building that included modelled human figures . The stucco still had traces of orange , green and yellow paint . The building was a palace @-@ type structure with perhaps six rooms , three on the west side and three on the east , and it was originally roofed in stone . The interior had an L @-@ shaped bench . The structure was built of finely cut limestone blocks and the walls were coated with stucco painted orange and turquoise . It is believed that the building was part of a Terminal Classic royal palace with architectural features similar to those of the temple Structure A @-@ 3 . 
 Structure A @-@ 19 and Structure C @-@ 9 are ballcourts . They have a resemblance to ballcourts at Chichen Itza . Both ballcourts are aligned east @-@ west , an unusual feature in the Maya area , although the topography of the site severely restricted the layout of the city to a principally east @-@ west orientation . Ballcourt A @-@ 19 lies on the west side on the north plaza . 
 Structure C @-@ 79 is a circular three @-@ tiered platform built during the Terminal Classic on top of a pre @-@ existing structure dating to the Late Preclassic Period . Circular structures such as this have their origin in central Mexico , where they are typically temples of Ehecatl , the god of wind . However , the structure at Seibal was surmounted by a rectangular building platform , whereas the temple buildings of Ehecatl were also circular . Structure C @-@ 79 has two stairways , the larger ascends the west side , the smaller is on the east side . A circular jaguar altar rests on three pedestals before the structure , two of these are crouching figures that originally supported the altar , the third central column is modern and was put in place as an additional support during restoration of the ruins . The altar has the crude representation of a jaguar 's head carved onto its edge . Structure C @-@ 79 and the associated altar are dated to about AD 870 . 
 = = = Monuments = = = 
 The monuments of Seibal include a number of stelae , carved stone shafts , often sculpted with figures and hieroglyphs . The monuments at Seibal are fashioned from a hard limestone , accounting for their generally excellent preservation . During excavations in the 1960s , 57 stelae were identified . Of these 22 were sculpted and 35 were plain . 
 Hieroglyphic Stairway 1 was located on the front of Structure A @-@ 14 . The stairway was installed by king Ucha 'an K 'in B 'alam of Dos Pilas to record Seibal 's status as a vassal after its defeat by that city . The stones are no longer in situ , having been removed to the area of the camp of the old archaeological project . 
 Stela 1 , on the north side of the South Plaza near Structure A @-@ 3 , names someone called " Knife @-@ Wing " , who is also known at distant Chichen Itza . It is dated to AD 869 . 
 Stela 2 is believed to date to around AD 870 although it bears no hieroglyphic text . It depicts the frontal view of a masked figure and is the only monument at Seibal to show a frontal portrayal . It was broken into six or seven pieces and has been restored . 
 Stela 3 bears a non @-@ Maya calendrical date , one of the glyphs is <unk> , a crocodile head used to represent the first day of the 260 @-@ day calendar in central Mexico . This stela once stood next to Stela 2 but was removed to a museum in Guatemala City . 
 Stela 4 is badly damaged , having been broken into pieces by a falling tree . It was lost for sixty years before being rediscovered . It currently remains buried under a thin covering of soil . 
 Stela 5 lies to the north of the South Plaza and is badly damaged . The broken middle section of the stela is all that is left , it bears the representation of a ballplayer and dates to about AD 780 . 
 Stela 6 is slightly to the north of Stela 5 , bearing hieroglyphic text . This stela was damaged in antiquity when the upper part was broken off and erected by an altar nearby . 
 Stela 7 stands to the north of stelae 5 and 6 . It is in a reasonable state of preservation and bears the image of a ruler dressed as a ballplayer . This monument was probably dedicated in AD 780 , although it records the accession of a king of Seibal in AD 771 . 
 Stela 8 is a well @-@ preserved monument on the south side of Structure A @-@ 3 . Here king Wat 'ul Chatel wears jaguar claws on his hands and feet , together with other attributes of the Bearded Jaguar God . In one hand the king holds the head of the god K 'awiil . The text describes a visitor named <unk> , an early form of <unk> , the name of one of the patron gods of the Postclassic K 'iche ' Kingdom of Q 'umarkaj in the Guatemalan Highlands . Schele and Mathews propose that the event depicted on this stela gave rise to the foundation legends of the K 'iche ' people . 
 Stela 9 was erected on the west side of Structure A @-@ 3 . It is badly damaged and one section is missing . The stela depicts Wat 'ul Chatel with the attributes of the Maize God and describes him invoking the Vision Serpent . 
 Stela 10 is on the north side of Structure A @-@ 3 . It depicts Wat 'ul Chatel , dressed in Terminal Classic Maya style , although his foreign @-@ looking face bears a moustache , which is not a typically Mayan characteristic . The text on this stela displays the emblem glyphs of Tikal , Calakmul and Motul de San José , describing how he received visitors from those cities . Among the visitors are named Kan @-@ Pet of Calakmul and Kan Ek ' of Motul . Wat 'ul Chatel wears a headdress associated with the patron gods of Seibal , the heron god and K 'awiil , deities that were also the patrons of Palenque . This appears to be an attempt by this foreign king to identify himself more closely with the city he came to rule . 
 Stela 11 is on the east side of Structure A @-@ 3 and describes the refounding of Seibal on 14 March 830 and the installation of its new lord , Wat 'ul Chatel , as a vassal of Chan Ek ' <unk> of Ucanal . A panel beneath the portrait of the ruler depicts a bound captive . The hieroglyphic inscription describes how Wat 'ul Chatel arrived with his palanquins and his patron deities . 
 Stela 13 stands a little to the west of the South Plaza . It dates to AD 870 . 
 Stela 14 dates to about AD 870 and stands at the junction of two causeways and is in a good state of preservation . It has stylistic similarities with sculptures at distant Chichen Itza in the extreme north of the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 Stela 18 is one of the last stelae to be erected at Seibal , it lies 20 metres ( 66 ft ) west of the group of monuments consisting of Stelae 5 , 6 and 7 . 
 Stela 19 demonstrates the foreign influences prevalent at Seibal during the Late Classic . It depicts a lord wearing a mask representing the central Mexican wind god Ehecatl . 
 Stela 20 stands to the west of the South Plaza . It was one of the last monuments to be erected at Seibal , dating to AD 889 . 
 Stela 21 is located inside the chamber at the top of Structure A @-@ 3 . This stela was badly damaged when the vaulted chamber collapsed on top of it and has also suffered from erosion . The monument has been restored and depicts the lord of Seibal Wat 'ul Chatel bearing a manikin sceptre . Like Stela 8 , the king wears attributes of the Bearded Jaguar God , although without the jaguar claws . The king holds a K 'awiil sceptre raised in his right hand , from his other hand hands a shield with the face of the sun god . The inscription on the monument is largely illegible . 
 = Thirty pieces of silver = 
 Thirty pieces of silver was the price for which Judas Iscariot betrayed Jesus , according to an account in the Gospel of Matthew 26 : 15 in the New Testament . Before the Last Supper , Judas is said to have gone to the chief priests and agreed to hand over Jesus in exchange for 30 silver coins , and to have returned the money afterwards , filled with remorse . 
 The Gospel of Matthew claims that the subsequent purchase of the Potter 's field was fulfilment , by Jesus , of a prophecy of Zechariah . 
 The image has often been used in artwork depicting the Passion of Christ . The phrase is used in literature and common speech to refer to people " selling out " , compromising a trust , friendship , or loyalty for personal gain . 
 = = Biblical narrative = = 
 According to the gospel accounts , Judas Iscariot was a disciple of Jesus . Before the Last Supper , Judas went to the chief priests and agreed to hand over Jesus in exchange for 30 silver coins . Jesus was then arrested in Gethsemane , where Judas revealed Jesus ' identity to the soldiers by giving him a kiss . 
 According to Chapter 27 of Matthew 's gospel , Judas was filled with remorse and returned the money to the chief priests before hanging himself . The chief priests decided that they could not put it into the temple treasury , and so with it they bought the Potter 's Field . A different account of the death of Judas is given in Acts of Apostles ; it describes Judas as using the money he had been rewarded with - no sum is specified - to buy the Potter 's field , and then falling there , dying of the resulting intestinal injuries . 
 = = Types of coin = = 
 The word used in Matthew 26 : 15 ( <unk> , <unk> ) simply means " silver coins , " and scholars disagree on the type of coins that would have been used . Donald Wiseman suggests two possibilities . They could have been tetradrachms of Tyre , usually referred to as Tyrian shekels ( 14 grams of 94 % silver ) , or staters from Antioch ( 15 grams of 75 % silver ) , which bore the head of Augustus . Alternatively , they could have been Ptolemaic tetradrachms ( 13 @.@ 5 ± 1 g ) . There are 28 @.@ <unk> grams per ounce . At spot valuation of $ 15 @.@ 85 / oz ( the closing price on Friday , March 18 , 2016 ) , 30 " pieces of silver " is worth approximately $ 225 in present @-@ day value ( USD ) . Other equivalents are C $ 295 ( CAD ) , AU $ 297 ( AUD ) , £ 156 ( GBP ) , € 200 ( EUR ) , 218 Swiss francs ( CHF ) , and 830 Brazilian <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The Tyrian <unk> weighed four Athenian drachmas , about 14 grams , more than earlier 11 @-@ gram Israeli shekels , but was regarded as the equivalent for religious duties at that time . Because Roman coinage was only 80 % silver , the purer ( 94 % or more ) Tyrian shekels were required to pay the temple tax in Jerusalem . The money changers referenced in the New Testament Gospels ( Matt . 21 : 12 and parallels ) exchanged Tyrian shekels for common Roman currency . 
 The 5th century BC Athenian tetradrachm ( " four drachmae " ) coin was perhaps the most widely used coin in the Greek world prior to the time of Alexander the Great ( along with the Corinthian stater ) . It featured the helmeted profile bust of Athena on the obverse ( front ) and an owl on the reverse ( back ) . In daily use they were called <unk> <unk> ( owls ) , hence the proverb <unk> ’ <unk> , ' an owl to Athens ' , referring to something that was in plentiful supply , like ' coals to Newcastle ' . The reverse is featured on the national side of the modern Greek 1 euro coin . <unk> were minted on different weight standards at different Greek mints . The standard that came to be most commonly used was the Athenian or Attic one , which weighed a little over 4 @.@ 3 grams . A drachma was approximately a day 's pay for a skilled laborer . So 30 pieces of silver ( 30 tetradrachm ) , at four drachmas each , would roughly be comparable to four months ' ( 120 days ) wages . 
 Augustus Silver <unk> of Antioch ( 27 B.C. - A.D. 14 ) , The silver <unk> of Augustus from Antioch . Depicting Ancient Rome ’ s celebrated first emperor , who reigned from 27 B.C. to A.D. 14 , this coin was hand struck in the great provincial city of Antioch – honored on the reverse . These coins of Biblical times were hand struck close to the time when Jesus was believed to have been born . And they were among the most prominent coins used to pay the hated temple tax , about which Jesus speaks in the biblical accounts of Matthew , Mark and Luke . Weighing about 15 grams and containing over 75 % silver , these large attractive pieces are similar to the coinage circulated by Seleucid emperors in Syria before being conquered by Rome in 64 B.C. 
 In the medieval period some religious institutions displayed ancient Greek coins of the island of Rhodes as specimens of the Thirty Pieces of Silver . The obverses of these coins showed a facing head of the sun god Helios , with rays projecting around the upper part of it . These rays were interpreted as a representation of the Crown of Thorns . 
 = = Theological interpretation = = 
 In Zechariah 11 : 12 – 13 , 30 pieces of silver is the price Zechariah receives for his labour . He takes the coins and throws them " to the potter " . Klaas Schilder notes that Zechariah 's payment indicates an assessment of his worth , as well as his dismissal . In Exodus 21 : 32 , 30 pieces of silver was the price of a slave , so while Zechariah calls the amount a " handsome price " ( Zechariah 11 : 13 ) , this could be sarcasm . Barry Webb , however , regards it as a " considerable sum of money . " 
 Schilder suggests that these 30 pieces of silver then get " bandied back and forth by the Spirit of Prophecy . " When the chief priests decide to buy a field with the returned money , Matthew says that this fulfilled " what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet . " Namely , " They took the thirty silver coins , the price set on him by the people of Israel , and they used them to buy the potter 's field , as the Lord commanded me " ( Matthew 27 : 9 – 10 ) . Although many scholars see Jeremiah 's name as included in error , Jeremiah 's purchase of a field in Jeremiah 32 may indicate that both prophets are in mind . Craig Blomberg argues that Matthew is using typology in his quotation , rather than " any kind of single or double fulfillment of actual predictive prophecy . " According to Blomberg , Matthew is telling his readers that , " like Jeremiah and Zechariah , Jesus attempts to lead his people with a prophetic and pastoral ministry , but instead he ends up suffering innocently at their hands . " William <unk> argues that Matthew is referring to Jeremiah 19 . 
 Blomberg also suggests that Matthew may also be saying that " Jesus ' death is a ransom , the price paid to secure a slave 's freedom , " and that the use of the blood money to buy a burial ground for foreigners ( Matthew 27 : 7 ) may hint at the idea that " Jesus ' death makes salvation possible for all the peoples of the world , including the Gentiles . " 
 The 1877 Handy Book for Bible Readers states that " <unk> , argenteus , denarius . This word occurs in two <unk> ( A ) the account of the betrayal of our Lord for " thirty pieces of silver " ( <unk> <unk> . 15 ; <unk> . 3 , 5 , 6 , 9 ) . These have usually been considered to be denarii , but on no sufficient ground . The parallel passage in Zechariah ( xi . 12 , 13 ) , is translated " thirty [ pieces ] of silver " ; but which should doubtless be read , " thirty shekels of silver " , whilst it is observable that " thirty shekels of silver " was the price of blood to be paid in the case of a servant accidentally killed ( <unk> <unk> . 32 ) . The passage may therefore be explained as " thirty shekels of silver " , not <unk> shekels , but tetradrachms of the Attic standard of the Greek cities of Syria and <unk> . These tetradrachms were common at the time of our Lord , and of them the stater was a specimen . " 
 = = Relics and depiction in art = = 
 Judas is often shown in narrative scenes from the Passion holding the silver in a bag or purse , where they serve as an attribute to identify him . As one of the " Instruments of the Passion " the Thirty Pieces by themselves often feature in groups of the Instruments , especially in the late Middle Ages , although they are one of the less commonly chosen elements of the group . Sometimes a money bag is used in depictions ; otherwise a hand holding the coins , or two hands , showing the counting @-@ out . 
 The fact that Judas was filled with remorse and returned the money to the chief priests , throwing the coins on the floor of the Temple , before hanging himself , is seldom depicted in art . This would have been contrary to the teachings of the Church that Judas was beyond forgiveness and therefore could not show remorse . One of the few exceptions is the The <unk> <unk> ( 920 ) , carved in ivory for the visit of the Holy Roman Emperor Otto II to Milan , now in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum , London . 
 A number of " Judas @-@ pennies " , ancient coins said to be from the original thirty , were treated as relics in the Middle Ages , and were believed to help in difficult cases of childbirth . As a minor component of the Instruments , and one whose survival was hard to explain given the Biblical account of the use of the money , the relics , and their depiction in art , both appear from the 14th century , later than more important elements like the Crown of Thorns or Spear of Longinus . This was as a result of new styles of devotions , led by the Franciscans in particular , which promoted contemplation of the Passion episode by episode , as in the Stations of the Cross . The stone on which the coins were said to have been counted out was in the Lateran Palace in Rome . 
 A Syracusan <unk> held at the Hunt Museum , Limerick is one such coin claimed to be one of the thirty : inscribed on the mount is Quia <unk> sanguinis est ( Latin : " This is the price of blood " ) . 
 = = Literary references = = 
 The 30 pieces are used in Christian literature on the betrayal of Jesus , as in the poem Thirty Pieces of Silver by William Blane : 
 " Thirty pieces of silver " 
 Burns on the traitor 's brain ; 
 " Thirty pieces of silver ! 
 Oh ! it is hellish gain ! " 
 or as in the poem Matthew XXVII : 9 by Jorge Luis Borges : 
 The coin fell on my hollow hand . 
 I could not bear it , although it was light , 
 and I let it fall . It was all in vain . 
 The other said : " There are still twenty nine . " 
 The phrase " 30 pieces of silver " is used more generally to describe a price at which people sell out . In Dostoyevsky 's Crime and Punishment , it is echoed in the 30 roubles which the character Sonia earns for selling herself . In the folk @-@ song King John and the Bishop , the bishop 's answer to the riddle of how much the king is worth is 29 pieces of silver , as no king is worth more than Jesus . In Shakespeare 's play Henry IV , Part 2 , the mistress of Falstaff asks " and didst thou not kiss me , and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings ? " The story " Treasure Trove " by F. Tennyson Jesse relates the rediscovery in modern times of the thirty pieces of silver and how they drive men to kill . 
 = = Modern usage = = 
 The phrase is used to accuse politicians and artists of selling out their principles or ideals , and is also used in literature as a symbol of betrayal . For example , in the aftermath of the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis , a number of residents of the street in which the Governor General John Kerr had been born sent the Governor 30 pieces of silver , as Kerr was widely blamed for the crisis . Another usage was at the United Nations Climate Change Conference 2009 , a spokesman from Tuvalu criticised the final document by saying , " It looks like we are being offered 30 pieces of silver to betray our people and our future ... Our future is not for sale . " 
 The author Jim Butcher uses the coins in his Dresden Files series , in which each coin is the focal point of a fallen angel . This group of angels is known as the Order of the Blackened Denarius , or the <unk> . 
 The popular Belgian comic book series Blake and Mortimer had a two part story centered on the coins , titled The Curse of the Thirty <unk> ( the English title being The Curse of The 30 Pieces of Silver ) . 
 In the TV Drama HOUSE , James Wilson uses this phrase , suggesting his testament against his colleague and friend Gregory House . 
 In the Marvel Comics event Civil War , Iron Man and Captain America are divided in two camps : the former believing that the government should regulate superhuman activities and the latter believing heroes should keep the freedom of personal security . When the superhero Daredevil , who was on Captain America 's side , is captured by S.H.I.E.L.D , Tony escorts him to a superhero prison . S.H.I.E.L.D agents tell Tony they found a silver dollar under his tongue , and said he told them he 'd been saving it for Stark . Then Daredevil says " Guess that 's thirty @-@ one pieces of silver you 've got now , huh ? " , meaning Tony has given up his beliefs of what a superhero should be and betrayed the superhero community . 
 In the TV sitcom " The Big Bang Theory " there is an episode , " The <unk> Formulation " ( Season 3 , Episode 9 ) , where Theoretical Physicist , Sheldon Cooper , feels that his roommate , best friend , and colleague , Experimental Physicist , Leonard Hofstadter , betrays him by Leonard taking his girlfriend , Penny , with him to visit the CERN Super Collider in Switzerland for Valentine 's Day instead of taking Sheldon despite their " <unk> Agreement " stating that if one friend is offered to visit the Super Collider , then they must bring the other . Sheldon then calls Leonard a traitor on their way to work the next morning . Later during lunch , Sheldon approaches Leonard and places a lunch tray in front of him before walking away . Their colleague and fellow friend , Rajesh <unk> , asks what Sheldon placed down in front of Leonard and Leonard 's response is " Uhh , let 's see ... Yep , 30 pieces of silverware . " 
 = Mulholland Drive ( film ) = 
 Mulholland Drive ( stylized onscreen as Mulholland Dr. ) is a 2001 American neo @-@ noir mystery film written and directed by David Lynch and starring Justin Theroux , Naomi Watts , Laura Harring , Ann Miller , and Robert Forster . It tells the story of an aspiring actress named Betty Elms ( Watts ) , newly arrived in Los Angeles , California , who meets and befriends an amnesic woman ( Harring ) hiding in an apartment that belongs to Betty 's aunt . The story includes several other seemingly unrelated vignettes that eventually interlock , as well as some surreal and darkly comic scenes and images that relate to the cryptic narrative . 
 Originally conceived as a television pilot , a large portion of the film was shot in 1999 with Lynch 's plan to keep it open @-@ ended for a potential series . After viewing Lynch 's version , however , television executives decided to reject it . Lynch then provided an ending to the project , making it a feature film . The half @-@ pilot , half @-@ feature result , along with Lynch 's characteristic style , has left the general meaning of the movie 's events open to interpretation . Lynch has declined to offer an explanation of his intentions for the narrative , leaving audiences , critics , and cast members to speculate on what transpires . He gave the film the tagline " A love story in the city of dreams " . 
 Categorized as a psychological thriller , the film was highly acclaimed by many critics and earned Lynch the Prix de la mise en scène ( Best Director Award ) at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival , as well as an Oscar nomination for Best Director . Mulholland Drive launched the careers of Watts and Harring and was the last feature film to star veteran Hollywood actress Ann Miller . The film is widely regarded as one of Lynch 's finest works , alongside Eraserhead ( 1977 ) and Blue Velvet ( 1986 ) , and was chosen by 40 critics as one of the greatest films of all time in the British Film Institute 's decennial Sight & Sound poll . A. O. Scott of The New York Times writes that while some might consider the plot an " offense against narrative order ... the film is an intoxicating liberation from sense , with moments of feeling all the more powerful for seeming to emerge from the murky night world of the unconscious . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story may not be linear and exhibits several instances of temporal disruption . A dark @-@ haired woman ( Harring ) escapes her own murder , surviving a car accident on Mulholland Drive . Injured and in shock , she descends into Los Angeles and sneaks into an apartment that an older , red @-@ headed woman has just vacated . An aspiring actress named Betty Elms ( Watts ) arrives at the same apartment and finds the dark @-@ haired woman confused , not knowing her own name . The dark @-@ haired woman assumes the name " Rita " after seeing a poster for the film Gilda ( 1946 ) , starring Rita Hayworth . To help Rita remember her identity , Betty looks in Rita 's purse , where she finds a large amount of money and an unusual blue key . 
 In what seems to be a scene from a different narrative , set at a diner called Winkies , a man ( Patrick Fischler ) tells his companion ( Michael Cooke ) about a nightmare in which he dreamt there was a horrible figure behind the diner . When they investigate , the figure appears , causing the man with the nightmare to collapse in fright . As the principal narrative resumes , Hollywood director Adam Kesher ( Justin Theroux ) has his film commandeered by apparent mobsters , who insist he cast an unknown actress named Camilla Rhodes ( Melissa George ) as the lead in his film . After he resists , he returns home to find his wife having an affair and is thrown out of his house . He later learns that his bank has closed his line of credit and he is broke . He agrees to meet a mysterious figure called The Cowboy , who urges him to cast Camilla Rhodes for his own good . Later , a bungling hit man ( Mark Pellegrino ) attempts to steal a book full of phone numbers and leaves three people dead . 
 Trying to learn more about Rita 's accident , Betty and Rita go to Winkies and are served by a waitress named Diane , which causes Rita to remember the name " Diane Selwyn " . They find Diane Selwyn in the phone book and call her , but she does not answer . Betty goes to an audition , where her performance is highly praised . A casting agent takes her to the set of a film called The Sylvia North Story , directed by Adam , where Camilla Rhodes gives an audition and Adam declares , " This is the girl . " Betty smiles shyly as she locks eyes with Adam , but she flees before she can meet him , saying that she is late to meet a friend . 
 Betty and Rita go to Diane Selwyn 's apartment and break in when no one answers the door . In the bedroom they find the body of a woman who has been dead for several days . Terrified , they return to their apartment , where Rita disguises herself with a blonde wig . The two women have sex that night and awake at 2 a.m. , when Rita insists they go to an eerie theater called Club Silencio . On stage , a man explains in several languages that everything is an illusion ; a woman begins singing then collapses , although her vocals continue . Betty finds a blue box in her purse that matches Rita 's key . Upon returning to the apartment , Rita retrieves the key and finds that Betty has disappeared . Rita unlocks the box , and it falls to the floor with a thump . 
 The older red @-@ headed woman investigates the sound , but nothing is there . The Cowboy appears in the doorway of Diane Selwyn 's bedroom saying , " Hey , pretty girl . Time to wake up . " At this point , all elements of the narrative seem to change . Diane Selwyn ( played by Watts ) wakes up in her bed . She looks exactly like Betty , but is portrayed as a failed actress driven into a deep depression by her unrequited love for Camilla Rhodes ( played now by Harring ) . On Camilla 's invitation , Diane attends a party at Adam 's house on Mulholland Drive . Her limousine stops before they reach the house and Camilla escorts her using a shortcut . Adam appears to be in love with Camilla . Over dinner , Diane states that she came to Hollywood when her aunt died , and she met Camilla at an audition for The Sylvia North Story . Another woman ( played by George ) kisses Camilla and they turn and smile at Diane . Adam and Camilla prepare to make an important announcement , and dissolve into laughter and kiss while Diane watches , crying . 
 Diane meets with the hit man at Winkies , where she gives him Camilla 's photo and a large amount of money , and they are served by a waitress named Betty . The hit man tells Diane that when the job is done , she will find a blue key . Diane asks what , if anything , the key opens , but the hit man just laughs . Diane looks up and sees the man who had the nightmare standing at the counter . Back at her apartment , with the key on a table in front of her , she is terrorized by hallucinations . She runs screaming to her bed , where she shoots herself . A woman at the club whispers " Silencio " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Originally conceived as a television series , Mulholland Drive began as a 90 @-@ minute pilot produced for Touchstone Television and intended for the ABC television network . David Lynch sold the idea to ABC executives based only on the story of Rita emerging from the car accident with her purse containing $ 125 @,@ 000 in cash and the blue key , and Betty trying to help her figure out who she is . An ABC executive recalled , " I remember the creepiness of this woman in this horrible , horrible crash , and David teasing us with the notion that people are chasing her . She 's not just ' in ' trouble — she is trouble . Obviously , we asked , ' What happens next ? ' And David said , ' You have to buy the pitch for me to tell you . ' " 
 Lynch described the attractiveness of the idea of a pilot , despite the knowledge that the medium of television would be constricting : " I 'm a sucker for a continuing story [ ... ] Theoretically , you can get a very deep story and you can go so deep and open the world so beautifully , but it takes time to do that . " The story included normal and surreal elements , much like Lynch 's earlier series Twin Peaks . Groundwork was laid for story arcs , such as the mystery of Rita 's identity , Betty 's career and Adam Kesher 's film project . 
 Actress Sherilyn Fenn stated in a 2014 interview that the original idea came during the filming of Twin Peaks , as a spin @-@ off film for her character of Audrey Horne . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Lynch cast Naomi Watts and Laura Harring by their photographs . He called them in separately for half @-@ hour interviews and told them he had not seen either of their previous works in film or television . Harring considered it fateful that she was involved in a minor car accident on the way to the first interview , only to learn her character would also be involved in a car accident in the film . Watts arrived wearing jeans for the first interview , direct from the airplane from New York City . Lynch asked her to return the next day " more glammed up " . She was offered the part two weeks later . Lynch explained his selection of Watts , " I saw someone that I felt had a tremendous talent , and I saw someone who had a beautiful soul , an intelligence — possibilities for a lot of different roles , so it was a beautiful full package . " Justin Theroux also met Lynch directly after his airplane flight . After a long flight with little sleep , Theroux arrived dressed all in black , with untidy hair . Lynch liked the look and decided to cast Adam wearing similar clothes and the same hairstyle . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for the television pilot began on location in Los Angeles in February 1999 and took six weeks . Ultimately , the network was unhappy with the pilot and decided not to place it on its schedule . Objections included the nonlinear storyline , the ages of Harring and Watts ( whom they considered too old ) , Ann Miller 's character cigarette smoking and a close @-@ frame shot of dog feces in one scene . Lynch remembered , " All I know is , I loved making it , ABC hated it , and I don 't like the cut I turned in . I agreed with ABC that the longer cut was too slow , but I was forced to butcher it because we had a deadline , and there wasn 't time to finesse anything . It lost texture , big scenes and storylines , and there are 300 tape copies of the bad version circulating around . Lots of people have seen it , which is embarrassing , because they 're bad @-@ quality tapes , too . I don 't want to think about it . " 
 The script was later rewritten and expanded when Lynch decided to transform it into a feature film . Describing the transition from an open @-@ ended pilot to a feature film with a resolution of sorts , Lynch said , " One night , I sat down , the ideas came in , and it was a most beautiful experience . Everything was seen from a different angle [ ... ] Now , looking back , I see that [ the film ] always wanted to be this way . It just took this strange beginning to cause it to be what it is . " The result was an extra eighteen pages of material that included the romantic relationship between Rita and Betty and the events that occurred after the blue box was opened . Watts was relieved that the pilot was dropped by ABC . She found Betty too one @-@ dimensional without the darker portion of the film that was put together afterward . Most of the new scenes were filmed in October 2000 , funded with $ 7 million from French production company StudioCanal . 
 Theroux described approaching filming without entirely understanding what the plot was about : " You get the whole script , but he might as well withhold the scenes you 're not in , because the whole turns out to be more mystifying than the parts . David welcomes questions , but he won 't answer any of them [ ... ] You work kind of half @-@ blindfolded . If he were a first @-@ time director and hadn 't demonstrated any command of this method , I 'd probably have reservations . But it obviously works for him . " Theroux noted the only answer Lynch did provide was that he was certain that Theroux 's character , a Hollywood director , was not autobiographical of Lynch . Watts stated that she tried to bluff Lynch by pretending she had the plot figured out , and that he delighted in the cast 's frustration . 
 = = Themes and interpretations = = 
 Giving the film only the tagline , " A love story in the city of dreams " , David Lynch has refused to comment on Mulholland Drive 's meaning or symbolism , leading to much discussion and multiple interpretations . The Christian Science Monitor film critic David Sterritt spoke with Lynch after the film screened at Cannes and wrote that the director " insisted that Mulholland Drive does tell a coherent , comprehensible story " , unlike some of Lynch 's earlier films . On the other hand , Justin Theroux said of Lynch 's feelings on the multiple meanings people perceive in the film , " I think he 's genuinely happy for it to mean anything you want . He loves it when people come up with really bizarre interpretations . David works from his subconscious . " 
 = = = Dreams and alternative realities = = = 
 An early interpretation of the film uses dream analysis to explain that the first part is a dream of the real Diane Selwyn , who has cast her dream @-@ self as the innocent and hopeful " Betty Elms " , reconstructing her history and persona into something like an old Hollywood film . In the dream , Betty is successful , charming , and lives the fantasy life of a soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ famous actress . The last one @-@ fifth of the film presents Diane 's real life , in which she has failed both personally and professionally . She arranges for Camilla , an ex @-@ lover , to be killed , and unable to cope with the guilt , re @-@ imagines her as the dependent , pliable amnesiac Rita . Clues to her inevitable demise , however , continue to appear throughout her dream . 
 This interpretation was similar to what Naomi Watts construed , when she said in an interview , " I thought Diane was the real character and that Betty was the person she wanted to be and had dreamed up . Rita is the damsel in distress and she 's in absolute need of Betty , and Betty controls her as if she were a doll . Rita is Betty 's fantasy of who she wants Camilla to be . " Watts ' own early experiences in Hollywood parallel those of Diane 's . She endured some professional frustration before she became successful , auditioned for parts in which she did not believe , and encountered people who did not follow through with opportunities . She recalled , " There were a lot of promises , but nothing actually came off . I ran out of money and became quite lonely . " 
 The Guardian asked six well @-@ known film critics for their own perceptions of the overall meaning in Mulholland Drive . Neil Roberts of The Sun and Tom Charity of Time Out subscribe to the theory that Betty is Diane 's projection of a happier life . Roger Ebert and Jonathan Ross seem to accept this interpretation , but both hesitate to <unk> the movie . Ebert states , " There is no explanation . There may not even be a mystery . " Ross observes that there are storylines that go nowhere : " Perhaps these were leftovers from the pilot it was originally intended to be , or perhaps these things are the non @-@ sequiturs and subconscious of dreams . " Philip French from The Observer sees it as an allusion to Hollywood tragedy , while Jane Douglas from the BBC rejects the theory of Betty 's life as Diane 's dream , but also warns against too much analysis . 
 Another theory offered is that the narrative is a Möbius strip , a twisted band that has no beginning and no end . In another interpretation Betty and Rita and Diane and Camilla may exist in parallel universes that sometimes interconnect . Or the entire film is a dream , but whose dream is unknown . Repeated references to beds , bedrooms and sleeping symbolize the heavy influence of dreams . Rita falls asleep several times ; in between these episodes , disconnected scenes such as the men having a conversation at Winkies , Betty 's arrival in Los Angeles and the bungled hit take place , suggesting that Rita may be dreaming them . The opening shot of the film zooms into a bed containing an unknown sleeper , instilling , according to film scholar Ruth Perlmutter , the necessity to ask if what follows is reality . Professor of dream studies Kelly Bulkeley argues that the early scene at the diner , as the only one in which dreams or dreaming are explicitly mentioned , illustrates " revelatory truth and epistemological uncertainty in Lynch 's film " . The monstrous being from the dream , who is the subject of conversation of the men in Winkies , reappears at the end of the movie right before and after Diane commits suicide . Bulkeley asserts that the lone discussion of dreams in that scene presents an opening to " a new way of understanding everything that happens in the movie " . 
 Philosopher and film theorist Robert Sinnerbrink similarly notes that the images following Diane 's apparent suicide undermine the " dream and reality " interpretation . After Diane shoots herself , the bed is consumed with smoke and Betty and Rita are shown beaming at each other , after which a woman in the Club Silencio balcony whispers " Silencio " as the screen fades to black . Sinnerbrink writes that the " concluding images float in an indeterminate zone between fantasy and reality , which is perhaps the genuinely metaphysical dimension of the cinematic image " , also noting that it might be that the " last sequence comprises the fantasy images of Diane 's dying consciousness , concluding with the real moment of her death : the final Silencio " . Referring to the same sequence , film theorist Andrew Hageman notes that " the ninety @-@ second coda that follows Betty / Diane 's suicide is a cinematic space that persists after the curtain has dropped on her living consciousness , and this persistent space is the very theatre where the illusion of illusion is continually unmasked " . 
 Film theorist David Roche writes that Lynch films do not simply tell detective stories , but they force the audience into the role of becoming detectives themselves to make sense of the narratives , and that Mulholland Drive , like other Lynch films , frustrates " the spectator 's need for a rational diegesis by playing on the spectator 's mistake that narration is synonymous with diegesis " . In Lynch 's films , the spectator is always " one step behind narration " and thus " narration prevails over diegesis " . Roche also notes that there are multiple mysteries in the film that ultimately go unanswered by the characters who meet dead ends , like Betty and Rita , or give in to pressures as Adam does . Although the audience still struggles to make sense of the stories , the characters are no longer trying to solve their mysteries . Roche concludes that Mulholland Drive is a mystery film not because it allows the audience to view the solution to a question , but the film itself is a mystery that is held together " by the spectator @-@ detective 's desire to make sense " of it . 
 = = = A " poisonous valentine to Hollywood " = = = 
 Regardless of the proliferation of theories , critics note that no explanation satisfies all of the loose ends and questions that arise from the film . Stephen Holden of The New York Times writes , " Mulholland Drive has little to do with any single character 's love life or professional ambition . The movie is an ever @-@ deepening reflection on the allure of Hollywood and on the multiple role @-@ playing and self @-@ invention that the movie @-@ going experience promises [ ... ] What greater power is there than the power to enter and to program the dream life of the culture ? " J. Hoberman from The Village Voice echoes this sentiment by calling it a " poisonous valentine to Hollywood " . 
 Mulholland Drive has been compared with Billy Wilder 's film noir classic Sunset Boulevard ( 1950 ) , another tale about broken dreams in Hollywood , and early in the film Rita is shown crossing Sunset Boulevard at night . Apart from both titles being named after iconic Los Angeles streets , Mulholland Drive is " Lynch 's unique account of what held Wilder 's attention too : human putrefaction ( a term Lynch used several times during his press conference at the New York Film Festival 2001 ) in a city of lethal illusions " . The title of the film is a reference to iconic Hollywood culture . David Lynch lives near Mulholland Drive , and stated in an interview , " At night , you ride on the top of the world . In the daytime you ride on top of the world , too , but it 's mysterious , and there 's a hair of fear because it goes into remote areas . You feel the history of Hollywood in that road . " Watts also had experience with the road before her career was established : " I remember driving along the street many times sobbing my heart out in my car , going , ' What am I doing here ? ' " 
 One critic cautions viewers against a cynical interpretation of the events in the movie , stating that Lynch presents more than " the façade and that he believes only evil and deceit lie beneath it . " As much as Lynch makes a statement about the deceit , manipulation and false pretenses in Hollywood culture , he also infuses nostalgia throughout the film and recognizes that real art comes from classic filmmaking as Lynch cast thereby paying tribute to veteran actors Ann Miller , Lee Grant and Chad Everett . He also portrays Betty as extraordinarily talented and that her abilities are noticed by powerful people in the entertainment industry . Commenting on the contrasting positions between film nostalgia and the putrefaction of Hollywood , Steven Dillon writes that Mulholland Drive is critical of the culture of Hollywood as much as it is a condemnation of " <unk> " ( the fascination of filmmaking and the fantasies associated with it ) . 
 Harring described her interpretation after seeing the film : " When I saw it the first time , I thought it was the story of Hollywood dreams , illusion and obsession . It touches on the idea that nothing is quite as it seems , especially the idea of being a Hollywood movie star . The second and third times I saw it , I thought it dealt with identity . Do we know who we are ? And then I kept seeing different things in it [ ... ] There 's no right or wrong to what someone takes away from it or what they think the film is really about . It 's a movie that makes you continuously ponder , makes you ask questions . I 've heard over and over , ' This is a movie that I 'll see again ' or ' This is a movie you 've got to see again . ' It intrigues you . You want to get it , but I don 't think it 's a movie to be gotten . It 's achieved its goal if it makes you ask questions . " 
 = = = Romantic content = = = 
 Treatment of the relationships between Betty and Rita and Diane and Camilla varied between those who were honestly touched by their sincerity and those who were titillated . A review of the film by Premiere states that the relationship between Betty and Rita is " possibly the healthiest , most positive amorous relationship ever depicted in a Lynch movie " , while Thierry <unk> , in his review for Cahiers du cinéma , notes that the love between these two women is " of lyricism practically without equal in contemporary cinema " . Another points out that the pivotal romantic interlude between Betty and Rita is so poignant and tender by Betty 's " understanding for the first time , with self @-@ surprise , that all her helpfulness and curiosity about the other woman had a point : desire [ ... ] It is a beautiful moment , made all the more miraculous by its earned tenderness , and its distances from anything lurid . " Another review states the scene 's " eroticism is so potent it blankets the whole movie , coloring every scene that came before and every one that follows " . Betty and Rita were chosen by the Independent Film Channel as the emblematic romantic couple of the 2000s . Writer Charles Taylor states , " Betty and Rita are often framed against darkness so soft and velvety it 's like a hovering nimbus , ready to swallow them if they awake from the film 's dream . And when they are swallowed , when smoke fills the frame as if the sulfur of hell itself were obscuring our vision , we feel as if not just a romance has been broken , but the beauty of the world has been cursed . " The co @-@ dependency in the relationship between Betty and Rita – which borders on outright obsession – has been compared to female relationships in two similar films , Persona ( 1966 ) and 3 Women ( 1977 ) , which also depict identities of vulnerable women that become tangled , interchanging and ultimately merge : " The female couples also mirror each other , with their mutual interactions conflating hero ( ine ) worship with same @-@ sex desire " . 
 An analysis of the film in terms of the lesbian as a tragic figure notes the media response to the film : " reviewers rhapsodized in particular and at length about the film 's sex scenes , as if there were a contest to see who could enjoy this representation of female same @-@ sex desire the most . " The author , Heather Love , writes that the film used a classic theme in literature and film depicting lesbian relationships : Camilla as achingly beautiful and available , rejecting Diane for Adam . Popular reaction to the film suggests the contrasting relationships between Betty and Rita and Diane and Camilla are " understood as both the hottest thing on earth and , at the same time , as something fundamentally sad and not at all erotic " as " the heterosexual order asserts itself with crushing effects for the abandoned woman " . 
 Media portrayals of Naomi Watts ' and Laura Elena Harring 's views of their onscreen relationships were varied and conflicting . Watts said of the filming of the scene , " I don 't see it as erotic , though maybe it plays that way . The last time I saw it , I actually had tears in my eyes because I knew where the story was going . It broke my heart a little bit . " However , in another interview Watts stated , " I was amazed how honest and real all this looks on screen . These girls look really in love and it was curiously erotic . " While Harring was quoted saying , " The love scene just happened in my eyes . Rita 's very grateful for the help Betty 's given [ her ] so I 'm saying goodbye and goodnight to her , thank you , from the bottom of my heart , I kiss her and then there 's just an energy that takes us [ over ] . Of course I have amnesia so I don 't know if I 've done it before , but I don 't think we 're really lesbians . " Heather Love agreed somewhat with Harring 's perception when she stated that identity in Mulholland Drive is not as important as desire : " who we are does not count for much — what matters instead is what we are about to do , what we want to do . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 Betty Elms ( Naomi Watts ) is the bright and talented newcomer to Los Angeles , described as " wholesome , optimistic , determined to take the town by storm " , and " absurdly naïve " . Her <unk> and intrepid approach to helping Rita because it is the right thing to do is reminiscent of Nancy Drew for reviewers . Her entire persona at first is an apparent cliché of small @-@ town naïveté . But it is Betty 's identity , or loss of it , that appears to be the focus of the film . For one critic , Betty performed the role of the film 's consciousness and unconscious . Naomi Watts , who modeled Betty on Doris Day , Tippi Hedren and Kim Novak , observed that Betty is a thrill @-@ seeker , someone " who finds herself in a world she doesn 't belong in and is ready to take on a new identity , even if it 's somebody else 's " . This has also led one theorist to conclude that since Betty had naively , yet eagerly entered the Hollywood system , she had become a " complicit actor " who had " embraced the very structure that " destroyed her . In an explanation of her development of the Betty character , Watts stated : 
 I had to therefore come up with my own decisions about what this meant and what this character was going through , what was dream and what was reality . My interpretation could end up being completely different , from both David and the audience . But I did have to reconcile all of that , and people seem to think it works . 
 Film critic Amy Taubin suggests that Betty is a reincarnation of Sandy from Lynch 's Blue Velvet : Betty 's hometown , Deep River , Ontario , shares the same name as the apartment building of Blue Velvet 's femme fatale , Dorothy . Having been freed from her small @-@ town constrictions , Sandy is reborn as Betty , drawn to a dark @-@ haired mystery woman like Dorothy , and falls in love with her and loses herself . 
 Betty , however difficult to believe as her character is established , shows an astonishing depth of dimension in her audition . Previously rehearsed with Rita in the apartment , where Rita feeds her lines woodenly , the scene is " dreck " and " hollow ; every line unworthy of a genuine actress 's commitment " , and Betty plays it in rehearsal as poorly as it is written . Nervous but plucky as ever at the audition , Betty enters the cramped room , but when pitted inches from her audition partner ( Chad Everett ) , she turns it into a scene of powerful sexual tension that she fully controls and draws in every person in the room . The sexuality erodes immediately as the scene ends and she stands before them shyly waiting for their approval . One film analyst asserts Betty 's previously unknown ability steals the show , specifically , taking the dark mystery away from Rita and assigning it to herself , and by Lynch 's use of this scene illustrates his use of deception in his characters . Betty 's acting ability prompts Ruth Perlmutter to speculate if Betty is acting the role of Diane in either a dream or a parody of a movie that ultimately turns against her . 
 Rita ( Laura Elena Harring ) is the mysterious and helpless apparent victim , a classic femme fatale with her dark , strikingly beautiful appearance . Roger Ebert was so impressed with Harring that he said of her " all she has to do is stand there and she is the first good argument in 55 years for a Gilda remake " . She serves as the object of desire , directly oppositional to Betty 's bright self @-@ assuredness . She is also the first character with whom the audience identifies , and as viewers know her only as confused and frightened , not knowing who she is and where she is going , she represents their desire to make sense of the film through her identity . Instead of threatening , she inspires Betty to nurture , console and help her . Her amnesia makes her a blank persona , that one reviewer notes is " the vacancy that comes with extraordinary beauty and the onlooker 's willingness to project any combination of angelic and devilish onto her " . A character analysis of Rita asserts that her actions are the most genuine of the first portion of the film , since she has no memory and nothing to use as a frame of reference for how to behave . Todd McGowan , however , author of a book on themes in Lynch 's films , states that the first portion of Mulholland Drive can be construed as Rita 's fantasy , until Diane Selwyn is revealed ; Betty is the object that overcomes Rita 's anxiety about her loss of identity . According to film historian Steven Dillon , Diane transitions a former roommate into Rita : following a tense scene where the roommate collects her remaining belongings , Rita appears in the apartment , smiling at Diane . 
 After Betty and Rita find the decomposing body , they flee the apartment and their images are split apart and reintegrated . David Roche notes that Rita 's lack of identity causes a breakdown that " occurs not only at the level of the character but also at the level of the image ; the shot is subjected to special effects that fragment their image and their voices are drowned out in reverb , the camera seemingly writing out the mental state of the characters " . Immediately they return to Betty 's aunt 's apartment where Rita dons a blonde wig — ostensibly to disguise herself — but making her look remarkably like Betty . It is this transformation that one film analyst suggests is the melding of both identities . This is supported by visual clues , like particular camera angles making their faces appear to be merging into one . This is further illustrated soon after by their sexual intimacy , followed by Rita 's personality becoming more dominant as she insists they go to Club Silencio at 2 a.m. , that eventually leads to the total domination by Camilla . 
 Diane Selwyn ( Naomi Watts ) is the palpably frustrated and depressed woman , who seems to have ridden the coattails of Camilla , whom she idolizes and adores , but who does not return her affection . She is considered to be the reality of the too @-@ good @-@ to @-@ be @-@ true Betty , or a later version of Betty after living too long in Hollywood . For Steven Dillon , the plot of the film " makes Rita the perfect empty vessel for Diane 's fantasies " , but because Rita is only a " blank cover girl " Diane has " invested herself in emptiness " , which leads her to depression and apparently to suicide . Hence , Diane is the personification of dissatisfaction , painfully illustrated when she is unable to climax while masturbating , in a scene that indicates " through blurred , jerky , point of view shots of the stony wall — not only her tears and humiliation but the disintegration of her fantasy and her growing desire for revenge " . One analysis of Diane suggests her devotion to Camilla is based on a manifestation of narcissism , as Camilla embodies everything Diane wants and wants to be . Although she is portrayed as weak and the ultimate loser , for Jeff Johnson , author of a book about morality in Lynch films , Diane is the only character in the second portion of the film whose moral code remains intact . She is " a decent person corrupted by the miscellaneous miscreants who populate the film industry " . Her guilt and regret are evident in her suicide , and in the clues that surface in the first portion of the film . Rita 's fear , the dead body and the illusion at Club Silencio indicate something is dark and wrong in Betty and Rita 's world . In becoming free from Camilla , her moral conditioning kills her . 
 Camilla Rhodes ( Melissa George , Laura Elena Harring ) is little more than a face in a photo and a name that has inspired many representatives of some vaguely threatening power to place her in a film against the wishes of Adam . Referred to as a " vapid moll " by one reviewer , she barely makes an impression in the first portion of the film , but after the blue box is opened and she is portrayed by Laura Elena Harring , she becomes a full person who symbolizes " betrayal , humiliation and abandonment " , and is the object of Diane 's frustration . Diane is a sharp contrast to Camilla , who is more voluptuous than ever , and who appears to have " sucked the life out of Diane " . Immediately after telling Diane that she drives her wild , Camilla tells her they must end their affair . On a movie set where Adam is directing Camilla , he orders the set cleared , except for Diane — at Camilla 's request — where Adam shows another actor just how to kiss Camilla correctly . Instead of punishing Camilla for such public humiliation , as is suggested by Diane 's conversation with the bungling hit man , one critic views Rita as the vulnerable representation of Diane 's desire for Camilla . 
 Adam Kesher ( Justin Theroux ) is established in the first portion of the film as a " vaguely arrogant " , but apparently successful , director who endures one humiliation after another . Theroux said of his role , " He 's sort of the one character in the film who doesn 't know what the [ hell 's ] going on . I think he 's the one guy the audience says , ' I 'm kind of like you right now . I don 't know why you 're being subjected to all this pain . ' " After being stripped of creative control of his film , he is cuckolded by the pool cleaner ( played by Billy Ray Cyrus ) , and thrown out of his own opulent house above Hollywood . After he checks into a seedy motel and pays with cash , the manager arrives to tell him his credit is no good . Witnessed by Diane , Adam is pompous and self @-@ important . He is the only character whose personality does not seem to change completely from the first part of the film to the second . One analysis of Adam 's character contends that because he capitulated and chose Camilla Rhodes for his film , that is the end of Betty 's cheerfulness and ability to help Rita , placing the blame for her tragedy on the representatives of studio power . 
 Minor characters include The Cowboy ( Monty Montgomery , credited as Lafayette Montgomery ) , the <unk> Brothers ( Dan Hedaya and Angelo Badalamenti ) and Mr. Roque ( Michael J. Anderson ) , all of whom are somehow involved in pressuring Adam to cast Camilla Rhodes in his film . These characters represent the death of creativity for film scholars , and they portray a " vision of the industry as a closed hierarchical system in which the ultimate source of power remains hidden behind a series of representatives " . Ann Miller portrays Coco , the landlady who welcomes Betty to her wonderful new apartment . Coco , in the first part of the film , represents the old guard in Hollywood , who welcomes and protects Betty . In the second part of the film , however , she appears as Adam 's mother , who impatiently chastises Diane for being late to the party and barely pays attention to Diane 's embarrassed tale of how she got into acting . 
 = = Style = = 
 The filmmaking style of David Lynch has been written about extensively using descriptions like " <unk> " , " dark " and " oddball " . Todd McGowan writes , " One cannot watch a Lynch film the way one watches a standard Hollywood film noir nor in the way that one watches most radical films . " Through Lynch 's juxtaposition of cliché and surreal , nightmares and fantasies , nonlinear story lines , camera work , sound and lighting , he presents a film that challenges viewers to suspend belief of what they are experiencing . Many of the characters in Mulholland Drive are archetypes that can only be perceived as cliché : the new Hollywood hopeful , the femme fatale , the maverick director and shady <unk> that Lynch never seems to explore fully . Lynch places these often hackneyed characters in dire situations , creating dream @-@ like qualities . By using these characters in scenarios that have components and references to dreams , fantasies and nightmares , viewers are left to decide , between the extremes , what is reality . One film analyst writes of him , " Like most surrealists , Lynch 's language of the unexplained is the fluid language of dreams . " 
 David Lynch uses various methods of deception in Mulholland Drive . A shadowy figure named Mr. Roque , who seems to control film studios , is portrayed by dwarf actor Michael J. Anderson ( also from Twin Peaks ) . Anderson , who has only two lines and is seated in an enormous wooden wheelchair , was fitted with oversized foam prosthetic arms and legs in order to portray his head as abnormally small . During Adam and Camilla 's party , Diane watches Camilla ( played by Harring ) with Adam on one arm , lean over and deeply kiss the same woman who appeared as Camilla ( Melissa George ) before the blue box was opened . Both then turn and smile pointedly at Diane . Film critic Franklin Ridgway writes that the depiction of such a deliberate " cruel and manipulative " act makes it unclear if Camilla is as capricious as she seems , or if Diane 's paranoia is allowing the audience only to see what she senses . In a scene immediately after Betty 's audition , the film cuts to a woman singing without apparent accompaniment , but as the camera pulls backwards , the audience sees that it is a recording studio . In actuality , it is a sound stage where Betty has just arrived to meet Adam Kesher , that the audience realizes as the camera pulls back further . Ridgway insists that such deception through artful camera work sets the viewer full of doubt about what is being presented : " It is as if the camera , in its graceful fluidity of motion , reassures us that it ( thinks it ) sees everything , has everything under control , even if we ( and Betty ) do not . " 
 According to Stephen Dillon , Lynch 's use of different camera positions throughout the movie , such as hand @-@ held points of view , makes the viewer " identify with the suspense of the character in his or her particular space " , but that Lynch at moments also " disconnects the camera from any particular point of view , thereby <unk> a single or even a human perspective " so that the multiple perspectives keep contexts from merging , significantly troubling " our sense of the individual and the human " . Andrew Hageman similarly notes that the camera work in the film " renders a very disturbing sense of place and presence " , such as the scene in Winkies where the " camera floats irregularly during the shot @-@ reverse shot dialogue " by which the " spectator becomes aware that a set of normally objective shots have become disturbingly subjective " . Scholar Curt Hersey recognizes several avant @-@ garde techniques used in the film including lack of transitions , abrupt transitions , motion speed , nontraditional camera movement , computer @-@ generated imagery , nondiegetic images , nonlinear narration and intertextuality . 
 The first portion of the film that establishes the characters of Betty , Rita and Adam presents some of the most logical filmmaking of Lynch 's career . The later part of the film that represents reality to many viewers , however , exhibits a marked change in cinematic effect that gives it a quality just as surreal as the first part . Diane 's scenes feature choppier editing and dirtier lighting that symbolize her physical and spiritual impoverishment , which contrasts with the first portion of the film where " even the plainest decor seems to sparkle " , Betty and Rita glow with light and transitions between scenes are smooth . Lynch moves between scenes in the first portion of the film by using panoramic shots of the mountains , palm trees and buildings in Los Angeles . In the darker part of the film , sound transitions to the next scene without a visual reference where it is taking place . At Camilla 's party , when Diane is most humiliated , the sound of crashing dishes is heard that carries immediately to the scene where dishes have been dropped in the diner , and Diane is speaking with the hit man . Sinnerbrink also notes that several scenes in the film , such as the one featuring Diane 's hallucination of Camilla after Diane wakes up , the image of the being from behind Winkies after Diane 's suicide , or the " repetition , reversal and displacement of elements that were differently configured " in the early portion of the film , creates the uncanny effect where viewers are presented with familiar characters or situations in altered times or locations . Similarly , Hageman has identified the early scene at Winkies as " extremely uncanny " , because it is a scene where the " boundaries separating physical reality from the imaginary realities of the unconscious disintegrate " . Author Valtteri Kokko has identified three groups of " uncanny metaphors " : the doppelgänger of multiple characters played by the same actors , dreams and an everyday object — primarily the blue box — that initiates Rita 's disappearance and Diane 's real life . 
 Another recurring element in Lynch 's films is his experimentation with sound . He stated in an interview , " you look at the image and the scene silent , it 's doing the job it 's supposed to do , but the work isn 't done . When you start working on the sound , keep working until it feels correct . There 's so many wrong sounds and instantly you know it . Sometimes it 's really magical . " In the opening scene of the film , the dark @-@ haired woman stumbles off Mulholland Drive , silently it suggests she is clumsy . After Lynch added " a hint of the steam [ from the wreck ] and the screaming kids " , however , it transformed Laura Elena Harring from clumsy to terrified . Lynch also infused subtle rumblings throughout portions of the film that reviewers noted added unsettling and creepy effects . Hageman also identifies " perpetual and uncanny ambient sound " , and places a particular emphasis on the scene where the man collapses behind Winkies as normal sound is drowned out by a buzzing roar , noting that the noise " creates a dissonance and suspense that draws in the spectator as detective to place the sound and reestablish order " . Mulholland Drive 's ending with the woman at Club Silencio whispering is an example of Lynch 's aural deception and surreality , according to Ruth Perlmutter , who writes , " The acting , the dreams , the search for identity , the fears and terrors of the undefined self are over when the film is over , and therefore , there is only silence and enigma . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of Mulholland Drive was supervised by Angelo Badalamenti , who collaborated on previous Lynch projects Blue Velvet and Twin Peaks . Badalamenti , who was nominated for awards from the American Film Institute ( AFI ) and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) for his work on the film , also has a cameo as an espresso aficionado and mobster . 
 Reviewers note that Badalamenti 's ominous score , described as his " darkest yet " , contributes to the sense of mystery as the film opens on the dark @-@ haired woman 's limousine , that contrasts with the bright , hopeful tones of Betty 's first arrival in Los Angeles , with the score " acting as an emotional guide for the viewer " . Film music journalist Daniel Schweiger remarks that Badalamenti 's contribution to the score alternates from the " nearly motionless string dread to noir jazz and audio feedback " , with " the rhythms building to an explosion of infinite darkness . " Badalamenti described a particular technique of sound design applied to the film , by which he would provide Lynch with multiple ten- to twelve @-@ minute tracks at slow tempo , that they called " firewood " , from which Lynch " would take fragments and experiment with them resulting in a lot of film 's eerie soundscapes . " 
 Lynch uses two pop songs from the 1960s directly after one another , playing as two actresses are auditioning by lip synching them . According to an analyst of music used in Lynch films , Lynch 's female characters are often unable to communicate through normal channels and are reduced to lip @-@ synching or being otherwise stifled . Connie Stevens ' " Sixteen Reasons " is the song being sung while the camera pans backwards to reveal several illusions , and Linda Scott 's version of " I 've Told Ev 'ry Little Star " is the audition for the first Camilla Rhodes , that film scholar Eric Gans considers a song of empowerment for Betty . Originally written by Jerome Kern as a duet , sung by Linda Scott in this rendition by herself , Gans suggests it takes on a homosexual overtone in Mulholland Drive . Unlike " Sixteen Reasons " , however , portions of " I 've Told Ev 'ry Little Star " are distorted to suggest " a sonic split @-@ identity " for Camilla . When the song plays , Betty has just entered the sound stage where Adam is auditioning actresses for his film , and she sees Adam , locks eyes with him and abruptly flees after Adam has declared " This is the girl " about Camilla , thereby avoiding his inevitable rejection . 
 At the hinge of the film is a scene in an unusual late night theater called Club Silencio where a performer announces " No hay banda ( there is no band ) ... but yet we hear a band " , variated between English , Spanish and French . Described as " the most original and stunning sequence in an original and stunning film " , Rebekah del Rio 's Spanish a cappella rendition of " Crying " , named " Llorando " , is praised as " show @-@ stopping ... except that there 's no show to stop " in the sparsely attended Club Silencio . Lynch wanted to use Roy Orbison 's version of " Crying " in Blue Velvet , but changed his mind when he heard Orbison 's " In Dreams " . Del Rio , who popularized the Spanish version and who received her first recording contract on the basis of the song , stated that Lynch flew to Nashville where she was living , and she sang the song for him once and did not know he was recording her . Lynch wrote a part for her in the film and used the version she sang for him in Nashville . The song tragically serenades the lovers Betty and Rita , who sit spellbound and weeping , moments before their relationship disappears and is replaced by Diane and Camilla 's dysfunction . According to one film scholar , the song and the entire theater scene marks the disintegration of Betty 's and Rita 's personalities , as well as their relationship . With the use of multiple languages and a song to portray such primal emotions , one film analyst states that Lynch exhibits his distrust of intellectual discourse and chooses to make sense through images and sounds . The disorienting effect of the music playing although del Rio is no longer there is described as " the musical version of Magritte 's painting <unk> n 'est pas une pipe " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mulholland Drive premiered at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival in May to major critical acclaim . Lynch was awarded the Best Director prize at the festival , sharing it with co @-@ winner Joel Coen for The Man Who Wasn 't There . It drew positive reviews from many critics and some of the strongest audience reactions of Lynch 's career . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Universal Pictures released Mulholland Drive theatrically in 66 theaters in the United States on October 12 , 2001 , grossing $ 587 @,@ 591 over its opening weekend . It eventually expanded to its widest release of 247 theaters , ultimately grossing $ 7 @,@ 220 @,@ 243 at the U.S. box office . TVA Films released the film theatrically in Canada on October 26 , 2001 . In other territories outside the United States , the film grossed $ 12 @,@ 892 @,@ 096 for a worldwide total of $ 20 @,@ 112 @,@ 339 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Since its release , Mulholland Drive has , according to two film scholars , " garnered both some of the harshest epithets and some of the most lavish praise in recent cinematic history " . It received acclaim from many critics ; even Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , who had given negative or mixed reviews to most of Lynch 's previous films , awarded the film four stars and commented , " David Lynch has been working toward Mulholland Drive all of his career , and now that he 's arrived there I forgive him for Wild at Heart ( 1990 ) and even Lost Highway ( 1997 ) . At last his experiment doesn 't shatter the test tubes . The movie is a surrealist dreamscape in the form of a Hollywood film noir , and the less sense it makes , the more we can 't stop watching it . " Ebert subsequently added Mulholland Drive to his " Great Films " list in November 2012 . In The New York Times , Stephen Holden said the film " ranks alongside Fellini 's 8 ½ and other auteurist fantasias as a monumental self @-@ reflection " and added , " Looked at lightly , it is the grandest and silliest cinematic carnival to come along in quite some time : a lurching journey through one filmmaker 's personal fun house . On a more serious level , its investigation into the power of movies pierces a void from which you can hear the screams of a ravenous demon whose appetites can never be slaked . " Edward Guthmann of the San Francisco Chronicle called it " exhilarating [ ... ] for its dreamlike images and fierce , frequently reckless imagination " and added , " there 's a mesmerizing quality to its languid pace , its sense of foreboding and its lost @-@ in @-@ time atmosphere [ ... ] it holds us , spellbound and amused , for all of its loony and luscious , exasperating 146 minutes [ and ] proves that Lynch is in solid form — and still an expert at pricking our nerves . " 
 In Rolling Stone , Peter Travers observed , " Mulholland Drive makes movies feel alive again . This sinful pleasure is a fresh triumph for Lynch , and one of the best films of a sorry @-@ ass year . For visionary daring , swooning eroticism and colors that pop like a whore 's lip gloss , there 's nothing like this baby anywhere . " J. Hoberman of The Village Voice stated , " This voluptuous phantasmagoria [ ... ] is certainly Lynch 's strongest movie since Blue Velvet and maybe Eraserhead . The very things that failed him in the bad @-@ boy rockabilly debacle of Lost Highway — the atmosphere of free @-@ floating menace , pointless transmigration of souls , provocatively dropped plot stitches , <unk> alternate universes — are here brilliantly rehabilitated . " 
 While reviews of the film were mostly positive ( receiving an 82 % rating on movie review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes ) , Mulholland Drive was not without its detractors . Rex Reed of The New York Observer said it was the worst film he had seen in 2001 , calling it " a load of moronic and incoherent garbage . " In New York , Peter Rainer observed , " Although I like it more than some of his other dreamtime <unk> , it 's still a pretty moribund ride [ ... ] Lynch needs to renew himself with an influx of the deep feeling he has for people , for outcasts , and lay off the <unk> and hobgoblins and zombies for a while . " In The Washington Post , Desson Howe called it " an extended mood opera , if you want to put an arty label on incoherence . " Todd McCarthy of Variety found much to praise — " Lynch cranks up the levels of bizarre humor , dramatic incident and genuine mystery with a succession of memorable scenes , some of which rank with his best " — but also noted , " the film jumps off the solid ground of relative narrative coherence into Lynchian <unk> [ ... ] for the final 45 minutes , Lynch is in mind @-@ twisting mode that presents a form of alternate reality with no apparent meaning or logical connection to what came before . Although such tactics are familiar from Twin Peaks and elsewhere , the sudden switcheroo to head games is disappointing because , up to this point , Lynch had so wonderfully succeeded in creating genuine involvement . " James Berardinelli also criticized it , saying : " Lynch cheats his audience , pulling the rug out from under us . He throws everything into the mix with the lone goal of confusing us . Nothing makes any sense because it 's not supposed to make any sense . There 's no purpose or logic to events . Lynch is playing a big practical joke on us . " Film theorist Ray Carney notes , " You wouldn 't need all the emotional back @-@ flips and narrative trap doors if you had anything to say . You wouldn 't need doppelgangers and shadow @-@ figures if your characters had souls . " 
 Mulholland Drive was named the best film of the decade by the Los Angeles Film Critics Association , Cahiers du cinéma , IndieWire , Slant Magazine , Reverse Shot , The Village Voice and Time Out New York , who asked rhetorically in a reference to the September 11 attacks , " Can there be another movie that speaks as resonantly — if unwittingly — to the awful moment that marked our decade ? [ ... ] Mulholland Drive is the monster behind the diner ; it 's the self @-@ delusional dream turned into nightmare . " It was also voted best of the decade in a Film Comment poll of international " critics , programmers , academics , filmmakers and others " , and by the magazine 's readers . It appeared on lists among the top ten best films of the decade , coming in third according to The Guardian , Rolling Stone critic Peter Travers , the Canadian Press , Access Hollywood critic Scott Mantz , and eighth on critic Michael Phillips ' list . In 2010 it was named the second best arthouse film ever by The Guardian . The film was voted as the 11th best film set in Los Angeles in the last 25 years by a group of Los Angeles Times writers and editors with the primary criterion of communicating an inherent truth about the L.A. experience . Empire magazine placed Mulholland Drive at number 391 on their list of the five @-@ hundred greatest films ever . It has also been ranked number 38 on the Channel 4 program 50 Films to See Before You Die . In 2011 , online magazine Slate named Mulholland Drive in its piece on " New Classics " as the most enduring film since 2000 . 
 Sight & Sound ranked Mulholland Drive 28th on their list of the fifty greatest films ever on August 2 , 2012 . It is one of only two films from the 21st century to be included in the list , along with 2000 's In the Mood for Love . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A DVD was released in April 2002 in the United States and Canada , with few special features . It was released without chapter stops , a feature that Lynch objects to on the grounds that it " demystifies " the film . In spite of Lynch 's concerns , the DVD release included a cover insert that provided " David Lynch 's 10 Clues to Unlocking This Thriller " , although one DVD reviewer noted the clues may be " big obnoxious red herrings " . Nick <unk> of Eccentric Cinema gave the film a rating of nine out of ten and the DVD release an eight out of ten , saying that the lack of special features " only adds to the mystery the film itself possesses , in abundance . " Special features in later versions and overseas versions of the DVD include a Lynch interview at the Cannes Film Festival and highlights of the debut of the film at Cannes . 
 Optimum Home Entertainment released Mulholland Drive to the European market on Blu @-@ ray as part of its StudioCanal Collection on September 13 , 2010 . New special features exclusive to this release include : an introduction by Thierry <unk> ; In the Blue Box , a retrospective documentary featuring directors and critics ; two making @-@ of documentaries : On the Road to Mulholland Drive and Back to Mulholland Drive and several interviews with people involved in making the film . It is the second David Lynch film in this line of Blu @-@ rays after The Elephant Man . 
 On July 15 , 2015 , The Criterion Collection announced that it will release Mulholland Drive , newly restored through a 4K digital transfer , on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on October 27 , 2015 , both of which will include new interviews with the film 's crew and the 2005 edition of Chris Rodley 's book Lynch on Lynch , along with the original trailer and other unannounced extras . It will become Lynch 's second film to receive a Criterion Collection release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , proceeding Eraserhead which was released in September 2014 . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Lynch was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Director for the film . From the Hollywood Foreign Press , the film received four Golden Globe nominations , including Best Picture ( Drama ) , Best Director and Best Screenplay . It was named Best Picture by the New York Film Critics Circle at the 2001 New York Film Critics Circle Awards and Online Film Critics Society . 
 = O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad , BWV 165 = 
 O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad ( O holy bath of Spirit and water ) , BWV 165 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Weimar for Trinity Sunday and led the first performance on 16 June 1715 . 
 Bach had taken up regular cantata composition a year before when he was promoted to concertmaster at the Weimar court , writing one cantata per month to be performed in the Schlosskirche , the court chapel in the ducal Schloss . O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad was his first cantata for Trinity Sunday , the feast day marking the end of the first half of the liturgical year . The libretto by the court poet Salomo Franck is based on the day 's prescribed gospel reading about the meeting of Jesus and Nicodemus . It is close in content to the gospel and connects the concept of the Trinity to baptism . 
 The music is structured in six movements , alternating arias and recitatives , and scored for a small ensemble of four vocal parts , strings and continuo . The voices are combined only in the closing chorale , the fifth stanza of Ludwig <unk> 's hymn " Nun laßt uns Gott dem Herren " , which mentions scripture , baptism and the Eucharist , in a summary of the cantata 's topic . Based on the text full of Baroque imagery , Bach composed a sermon in music , especially in the two recitatives for the bass voice , and achieved contrasts in expression . He led the first performance , and probably another on the Trinity Sunday concluding his first year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig on 4 June 1724 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed Konzertmeister ( concert master ) of the Weimar Hofkapelle ( court chapel ) of the co @-@ reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe @-@ Weimar . The position was created for him , possibly on his demand , giving him " a newly defined rank order " according to Christoph Wolff . 
 From 1695 , an arrangement shared the responsibility for church music at the Schlosskirche ( court church ) between the Kapellmeister Samuel Drese and the <unk> @-@ Kapellmeister Georg Christoph <unk> , who took care of one Sunday per month while the Kapellmeister served on three Sundays . The pattern probably continued from 1704 , when <unk> was succeeded by Drese 's son Johann Wilhelm . When Konzertmeister Bach also assumed the principal responsibility for one cantata a month , the Kapellmeister 's workload was further reduced to two Sundays per month . 
 The performance venue on the third tier of the court church , in German called <unk> ( Heaven 's Castle ) , has been described by Wolff as " congenial and intimate " , calling for a small ensemble of singers and players . Performers of the cantatas were mainly the core group of the Hofkapelle , formed by seven singers , three leaders and five other instrumentalists . Additional players of the military band were available when needed , and also town musicians and singers of the gymnasium . Bach as the concertmaster probably led the performances as the first violinist , while the organ part was played by Bach 's students such as Johann Martin Schubart and Johann Caspar Vogler . Even in settings like chamber music , Bach requested a strong continuo section with cello , bassoon and violone in addition to the keyboard instrument . 
 = = = Monthly cantatas from 1714 to 1715 = = = 
 While Bach had composed vocal music only for special occasions until his promotion , the regular chance to compose and perform a new work resulted in a program into which Bach " threw himself wholeheartedly " , as Christoph Wolff notes . In his first cantata of the series , Himmelskönig , sei willkommen , BWV 182 , for the double feast of Palm Sunday and Annunciation , he showed his skill in an elaborate work in eight movements , for four vocal parts and at times ten @-@ part instrumental writing , and presenting himself as a violin soloist . 
 The following table of works performed by Bach as concertmaster between 1714 and the end of 1715 is based on tables by Wolff and Alfred Dürr . According to Dürr , O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad is the eleventh cantata composition of this period . The works contain arias and recitatives , as in contemporary opera , while earlier cantatas had concentrated on biblical text and chorale . Some works , such as Widerstehe doch der Sünde , may have been composed earlier . 
 = = Topic and text = = 
 = = = Trinity Sunday = = = 
 Bach composed O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad for Trinity Sunday , the Sunday concluding the first half of the liturgical year . The prescribed readings for the day were from the Epistle to the Romans , " What depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God " ( Romans 11 : 33 – 36 ) , and from the Gospel of John , the meeting of Jesus and Nicodemus ( John 3 : 1 – 15 ) . 
 In Leipzig , Bach composed two more cantatas for the occasion which focused on different aspects of the readings , <unk> <unk> , BWV 194 , first composed for the inauguration of church and organ in <unk> on 2 November 1723 , Es ist ein <unk> und <unk> Ding , BWV 176 ( 1725 ) and the chorale cantata Gelobet sei der Herr , mein Gott , BWV 129 ( 1726 ) . Scholars debate if Bach performed on Trinity Sunday of 1724 , which fell on 4 June , <unk> <unk> or O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad or both . 
 = = = Cantata text = = = 
 The libretto was written by the court poet , Salomon Franck , and published in Evangelisches Andachts @-@ Opffer in 1715 . The opening refers to Jesus ' words in John 3 : 5 : " Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit , he cannot enter into the kingdom of God . " ( John 3 : 5 ) The second movement , a recitative , reflects upon birth in the Spirit as baptism through God 's grace : " Er wird im Geist und <unk> ein Kind der <unk> und <unk> " ( In the bath of spirit and water he becomes a child of blessedness and grace ) . Movement 3 , an aria for alto , considers that the bond has to be renewed throughout life , because it will be broken by man , reflected in movement 4 . The last aria is a prayer for the insight that the death of Jesus brought salvation , termed " Todes Tod " ( death 's death ) . The cantata concludes with the fifth stanza of Ludwig <unk> 's hymn of 1575 , " Nun laßt uns Gott dem Herren " , mentioning scripture , baptism and the Eucharist . Bach used the eighth and final stanza , " <unk> uns in der Wahrheit " ( Keep us in the truth ) , to conclude his cantata Gott der Herr ist <unk> und Schild , BWV 79 . 
 Salomon expresses his thought in Baroque style rich in imagery . The image of the serpent is used in several meanings : as the serpent which seduced Adam and Eve to sin in paradise , as the symbol which Moses erected in the desert , and related to the gospel 's verse 14 : " And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness , even so must the Son of man be lifted up " . 
 = = Performance and publication = = 
 Bach led the first performance of the cantata on 16 June 1715 . The performance material for Weimar is lost . Bach performed the work again as Thomaskantor in Leipzig . Extant performance material was prepared by his assistant Johann Christian <unk> . The first possible revival is the Trinity Sunday of Bach 's first year in office , 4 June 1724 , also the conclusion of his first year and first Leipzig cantata cycle , because he had assumed the office on the first Sunday after Trinity the year before . Bach made presumably minor changes . 
 The cantata was published in the Bach @-@ Ausgabe , the first edition of Bach 's complete works by the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft , in 1887 in volume 33 , edited by Franz Wüllner . In the second edition of the complete works , the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe , it appeared in 1967 , edited by Dürr , with a <unk> <unk> ( Critical report ) following in 1968 . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Scoring and structure = = = 
 The title on the copy by Johann Christian <unk> is : " Concerto a 2 <unk> : 1 Viola . Fagotto Violoncello <unk> Basso e Continuo / di Joh : Seb : Bach " ( Concerto for 2 violins , 1 viola . Bassoon Cello <unk> and Bass and Continuo / by Joh : Seb : Bach ) . The cantata in six movements is scored like chamber music for four vocal soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir ( SATB ) in the closing chorale , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , bassoon ( Fg ) , cello ( Vc ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) . The bassoon is called for , but has no independent part . The duration is given as about 15 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe , and the abbreviations for voices and instruments the list of Bach cantatas . The keys and time signatures are taken from the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = = Movements = = = 
 The cantata consists of solo movements closed by a four @-@ part chorale . Arias alternate with two recitatives , both sung by the bass . John Eliot Gardiner summarizes : " It is a true sermon in music , based on the Gospel account of Jesus ' night @-@ time conversation with Nicodemus on the subject of ' new life ' , emphasising the spiritual importance of baptism . " He points out the many musical images of water . 
 = = = = 1 = = = = 
 In the first aria , " O heilges Geist- und Wasserbad " ( O bath of Holy Spirit and of water ) , the ritornello is a fugue , whereas in the five vocal sections the soprano and violin I are a duo in imitation on the same material . These sections are composed in symmetry , A B C B ' A ' . The theme of B involves an inversion of material from A , that of C is derived from measure 2 of the ritornello . Dürr writes : 
 The prominent use made of formal schemes based on the principles of symmetry and inversion is in all probability intentional , serving as a symbol of the inner inversion of mankind — his rebirth in baptism . 
 = = = = 2 = = = = 
 The first recitative , " Die <unk> Geburt <unk> <unk> " ( The sinful birth of the cursed heirs of Adam ) , is secco , but several phrases are close to an arioso . The musicologist Julian Mincham notes that Bach follows the meaning of the text closely , for example by " rhythmic dislocations for death and destruction " , a change in harmony on " poisoned " , and " the complete change of mood at the mention of the blessed Christian " . He summarizes : " Here anger and resentment at Man ’ s inheritance of suppurating sin is contrasted against the peace and joy of God @-@ given salvation " . 
 = = = = 3 = = = = 
 The second aria , " Jesu , der aus großer Liebe " ( Jesus , who out of great love ) , accompanied by the continuo , is dominated by an expressive motif with several upward leaps of sixths , which is introduced in the ritornello and picked up by the alto voice in four sections . Mincham notes that " the mood is serious and reflective but also purposeful and quietly resolute " . 
 = = = = 4 = = = = 
 The second recitative , " Ich habe ja , mein <unk> " ( I have indeed , o bridegroom of my soul ) , is accompanied by the strings ( accompagnato ) , marked by Bach " Rec : con <unk> " ( Recitative : with instruments ) . The German musicologist Klaus Hofmann notes that the text turns to mysticism , reflecting the <unk> , Lamb of God and the serpent in its double meaning . The text is intensified by several melismas , a marking " adagio " on the words " <unk> <unk> " ( most holy Lamb of God ) , and by melodic parts for the instruments . Gardiner notes that Bach has images for the serpent displayed in the desert by Moses , and has the accompaniment fade away on the last line " wenn alle Kraft <unk> " ( when all my strength has faded ) . 
 = = = = 5 = = = = 
 The last aria , " Jesu , meines Todes Tod " ( Jesus , death of my death ) , is set for tenor , accompanied by the violins in unison , marked " Aria Violini <unk> e <unk> " . The image of the serpent appears again , described by the composer and musicologist William G. Whittaker : " the whole of the obbligato for violins in unison is constructed out of the image of the bending , writhing , twisting reptile , usually a symbol of horror , but in Bach 's musical speech a thing of pellucid beauty " . 
 = = = = 6 = = = = 
 The cantata closes with a four @-@ part setting of the chorale stanza , Sein Wort , sein <unk> , sein <unk> ( His word , His baptism , His communion ) . The text in four short lines summarizes that Jesus helps any in need by his words , his baptism and his communion , and ends in the prayer that the Holy Spirit may teach to faithfully trust in this . 
 The hymn tune by Nikolaus <unk> was first published in Leipzig in 1587 in the hymnal Christliche <unk> , Lieder <unk> <unk> ( Christian psalms , songs and church chants ) . Bach marked the movement : " Chorale . <unk> concordant " , indicating that the instruments play colla parte with the voices . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The recordings are provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly grouped : 
 Large choirs ( red background ) : Boys ( choir of all male voices ) 
 Medium @-@ size choirs , such as Chamber , Chorale ( choir dedicated mostly to church music ) , Motet 
 Large orchestras ( red background ) : Symphony 
 Chamber orchestra 
 Orchestra on period instruments ( green background ) 
 = Shumen Plateau Nature Park = 
 The Shumen Plateau Nature Park ( Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is located in the Shumen Plateau of the northern province of Shumen of Bulgaria , the highest plateau of the Danubian Plain . The Park encloses the <unk> Reserve Forest , which is known for indigenous Fagus sylvatica Fagus sylvatica ( common beech ) <unk> ( the Balkan beech ) forest . This Park was declared a National Park in 1980 and a Nature Park in 2003 to conserve its ecosystems and floral and faunal biodiversity , and to preserve its tableland landscape together with many tourist sites such as the Shumen fortress , the Founders of the Bulgarian State Monument , cave monasteries , and surface and underground karst caves . The park has the first thematic educational trail in the Karst Nature Park , constructed as part of a project titled " Natural Park of Shumen Plateau " with funds provided by the EU Cohesion Fund and the Republic of Bulgaria ; the trail is integral to the Operational Program " Environment 2007 – 2013 " . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Located in Northeast Bulgaria , the park is part of the Shumen Plateau , which in turn is integral to the " Shumen Heights " to its east . The plateau is one of three zones of the Shumen Heights , the other two being the Balkan area in its central part and the <unk> on its west . Together , the three zones are in the shape of an irregular rectangle oriented in northwest @-@ southeast direction . The river valleys in this area form the shape of segmented bays . 
 The entire plateau is delimited on the northern border by the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> river valleys ; by <unk> and <unk> valleys on its west ; by the Vrana , Ticha , and <unk> river valleys on the south ; and the lowlands of the Shumen @-@ <unk> border on the east , while the <unk> mountain rises to a height of 500 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @,@ 642 ft ) in a north @-@ west direction . The plateau is 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) long from west to east ; and 7 – 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 0 mi ) wide south to north , 7 – 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 0 mi ) wide in the far south ; 9 – 10 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) wide in the central part ; 11 – 12 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 5 mi ) wide towards the north and about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) wide in the northern extremity . Width wise , the plateau is oriented in north @-@ south direction and extends 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) and 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) respectively . The plateau covers a total area of 73 @.@ 13 square kilometres ( 28 @.@ 24 sq mi ) . 
 The Shumen Plateau Nature Park encloses the <unk> Reserve Forest , which covers a total forest area of 63 @.@ 04 hectares ( 155 @.@ 8 acres ) . This forest is protected on account of its indigenous Fagus sylvatica ( common beech ) <unk> ( the Balkan beech ) forest " that is several hundred years old . The only human activity allowed within this reserve is use of trails which pass through it . The Shumen Plateau occupies the highest plateau in the Danubian Plain , with an elevation of 502 metres ( 1 @,@ 647 ft ) , and features " bizarre and fantastic rock phenomena and underground Karst forms " . 
 = = History = = 
 The Shumen Plateau is part of the Natura 2000 network and was designated per the Council Directive 92 / 43 / EEC for the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora . Within this plateau , the park is demarcated over an area of 3 @,@ 929 @.@ 9 hectares ( 9 @,@ 711 acres ) . It lies in the eastern part of the Danubian Plain , near the town of Shumen , and was declared a National Park in 1980 and a Nature Park in 2003 . The responsibility of park 's management is with the government of Bulgaria and is dictated under the Management Plan for Nature Parks and the Protected Areas Act ( 1998 ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The park and the plateau have distinctive topographic features and plateau 's water resources , climate and soil conditions dictate the biodiversity of its plant species . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The park has a dense forest area , with about 90 % area covered by forests mostly of the mixed deciduous forests . The plants and tree species reported from this forest , are : ash ( Fraxinus ) , beech ( Fagus ) , European hornbeam ( Carpinus betulus ) , lime ( Tilia ) , maple ( Acer campestre ) , Turkey oak ( Quercus <unk> ) , and many more . The forest 's conifer vegetation consists of : European black pine ( Pinus nigra ) , Norway spruce ( Picea abies ) , Oregon pine ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) , Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) , and spruce ( Picea ) . The shrub species reported are : dog rose ( Rosa canina ) , the European Cornel ( <unk> mas ) , the hawthorn ( Crataegus ) , and the hazel ( Corylus ) . The open area of the park is covered with several species of bush and grass . Other plant species reported are 14 types of orchid ( Orchidaceae ) and more than 250 species of herbal plants . The Management Plan for the park lists 550 species of vascular plants ( excluding mosses ) . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The faunal species reported consist of 350 invertebrates and more than 240 vertebrates . The mammals recorded are : badger ( Meles meles ) , beech marten ( Martes <unk> ) , fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) , red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) , roe deer ( <unk> capreolus ) , wild boar ( Sus scrofa ) and <unk> . There are also several specie of avifauna . The reptile species reported include Aesculapian snake ( <unk> <unk> ) , European green lizard ( Lacerta viridis ) , Hermann 's tortoise ( Testudo <unk> ) , horned viper ( Vipera <unk> ) , spur @-@ thighed tortoise ( Testudo graeca ) , and wall lizard ( <unk> muralis ) . Animals , which are under different protection categories , reported in the park are : black woodpecker ( Dryocopus martius ) , Eurasian eagle @-@ owl ( Bubo bubo ) , lesser spotted eagle ( Aquila <unk> ) , marbled polecat ( <unk> <unk> ) , Northern goshawk ( Accipiter gentilis ) , and Romanian hamster ( <unk> newtoni ) . 
 = = Cultural heritage = = 
 There are many cultural landmarks in the park . These are : 
 The Shumen fortress ( on Bulgarian language : <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the old town of Shumen , is an archaeological site . It was built over a hill which gives a commanding view of the Shumen city . The fortress is located within the park . The fortress formed the town of Shumen during the First and Second Bulgarian Empire ( 12th – 14th centuries ) . It was the best developed citadel during the 14th century . Thracians ruled over the territory from the 5th to 2nd century BC , followed by Romans who ruled from first century BC to 3rd century AD , and then by the early Byzantine from 4th to 6th century AD . The site consisted of refined residences , religious buildings , and defense fortifications . When the Ottomans took control of the fortress in 1444 , the then King Władysław III of Poland ( <unk> ) ( 1440 – 1444 ) of Polish @-@ Hungarian descent attempted an attack on the Ottomans which proved to be disastrous , as he was killed during the Battle of Varna . Following this battle the fortress was looted and gutted , and the Ottoman rulers eventually abandoned the fortress completely . It has since been partially restored . 
 The Founders of the Bulgarian State Monument or Creators of the Bulgarian State monument , is another notable monument within the park , built to commemorate the 1300th anniversary of the establishment of Bulgaria , starting from the First Bulgarian Empire ( 7th century – 11th century ) . This monument , which is about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) distance from the entrance of the Shumen fortress , was built in 1981 during the communist regime . An information center is situated 300 metres ( 980 ft ) away from this monument and a 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) track from here leads to the Shumen fortress . 
 There are cave monasteries which functioned during the Second Bulgarian Empire as religious and cultural centres . They are located in karstic rock formations in the plateau and are difficult to access . Some of the notable caves are the <unk> Cave ( Pearl Cave ) and the <unk> <unk> Cave ( the Secret <unk> Cave ) . 
 <unk> limestone formations , which comprise the main geological formations of the park and the plateau , are found in the park in the form of <unk> ( sinkholes ) in small canyons and rock rims . 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 The park has the first thematic educational trail in the Karst Nature Park , constructed as part of a project titled " Natural Park of Shumen Plateau " with funds provided by the EU Cohesion Fund and the Republic of Bulgaria , which is integral to the Operational Program " Environment 2007 – 2013 " . 
 = Hubert Walter = 
 Hubert Walter ( c . 1160 – 13 July 1205 ) was an influential royal adviser in the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries in the positions of Chief Justiciar of England , Archbishop of Canterbury , and Lord Chancellor . As chancellor , Walter began the keeping of the Charter Roll , a record of all charters issued by the chancery . Walter was not noted for his holiness in life or learning , but historians have judged him one of the most outstanding government ministers in English history . 
 Walter owed his early advancement to his uncle Ranulf de Glanvill , who helped him become a clerk of the Exchequer . Walter served King Henry II of England in many ways , not just in financial administration , but also including diplomatic and judicial efforts . After an unsuccessful candidacy to the see of York , Walter was elected Bishop of Salisbury shortly after the accession of Henry 's son Richard I to the throne of England . 
 Walter accompanied Richard on the Third Crusade , and was one of the principals involved in raising Richard 's ransom after the king was captured in Germany on his return from the Holy Land . As a reward for his faithful service , Walter was selected to become Archbishop of Canterbury in 1193 . He also served as Richard 's justiciar until 1198 , in which role he was responsible for raising the money Richard needed to prosecute his wars in France . Walter set up a system that was the precursor for the modern justices of the peace , based on selecting four knights in each hundred to administer justice . He also revived his predecessor 's dispute over setting up a church to rival Christ Church Priory in Canterbury , which was only settled when the pope ordered him to abandon the plan . Following Richard 's death in 1199 , Walter helped assure the elevation of Richard 's brother John to the throne . Walter also served John as a diplomat , undertaking several missions to France . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hubert Walter was the son of Hervey Walter and his wife Maud de Valoignes , one of the daughters ( and co @-@ heiresses ) of Theobald de Valoignes , who was lord of Parham in Suffolk . Walter was one of six brothers . The eldest brother , Theobald Walter , and Walter himself , were helped in their careers by their uncle , Ranulf de Glanvill . Glanvill was the chief justiciar for Henry II ; and was married to Maud de Valoignes ' sister , Bertha . Walter 's father and paternal grandfather held lands in Suffolk and Norfolk , which were inherited by Theobald . A younger brother , Osbert , became a royal justice and died in 1206 . Roger , Hamo ( or Hamon ) and Bartholomew only appear as witnesses to charters . 
 Walter 's family was from West Dereham in Norfolk , which is probably where Walter was born . Walter first appears in Glanvill 's household in a charter that has been dated to 1178 , although as it is undated it may have been written as late as 1180 . His brother Theobald also served in their uncle 's household . Walter 's gratitude towards his aunt and uncle is shown in the foundation charter of Walter 's monastery in Dereham , where he asks the foundation to pray for the " souls of Ranulf Glanvill and Bertha his wife , who nourished us " . Earlier historians asserted that Walter studied law at Bologna , based on his name appearing in a list of those to be commemorated at a monastery in Bologna in which English students lodged . Modern historians have discounted this , as the list also includes benefactors , not just students ; other evidence points to the fact that Walter had a poor grasp of Latin , and did not consider himself to be a learned man . However , this did not mean that he was illiterate , merely that he was not " book @-@ learned " , or educated at a university . His contemporary , the medieval writer Gerald of Wales said of Walter that the Exchequer was his school . 
 = = Early assignments = = 
 By 1184 – 1185 Walter had a position as a baron of the exchequer . The king employed him on several tasks , including as a negotiator , a justice , and as a royal secretary . He was appointed Dean of York by order of King Henry II about July 1186 . The archbishopric had been vacant since 1181 and would remain so until 1189 , so it was Walter 's job as dean to administer the archbishopric of York . Walter was also an unsuccessful candidate to become Archbishop of York in September 1186 . The medieval chronicler Gervase of Canterbury said that during Henry II 's reign , Walter " ruled England because Glanvill sought his counsel " . Documents also show that Walter was active in the administration of the diocese of York . 
 At the same time he was administering York , Walter founded a Premonstratensian house of canons on purchased property at West Dereham , Norfolk in 1188 . His uncle and other family members had favoured the Premonstratensian Order , and this monastery was located near the family lands in Norfolk . 
 In 1187 Walter , along with Glanvill and King Henry II , attempted to mediate a dispute between the Archbishop of Canterbury , Baldwin of Forde , and the monks of the cathedral chapter . Their efforts were fruitless , and Walter was later drawn back into the dispute , in early 1189 and again as archbishop . The dispute centred on the attempt by Baldwin to build a church dedicated to Saint Thomas Becket , just outside the town of Canterbury . The plan was to staff the church with canons instead of monks , which the monks of Canterbury 's cathedral chapter feared was an attempt to take away the cathedral chapter 's right to elect the archbishop . The attempt in 1189 was settled by Baldwin giving up the site near Canterbury for one further away at Lambeth , which was less threatening to the monks . 
 = = Bishop and archbishop = = 
 After the death of King Henry in 1189 , the new King Richard I appointed Walter Bishop of Salisbury ; the election took place on 15 September 1189 at Pipewell , with the consecration on 22 October 1189 at Westminster . Also elected to bishoprics at this council were Godfrey de Lucy to the see of Winchester , Richard FitzNeal to the see of London , and William Longchamp to the see of Ely . The elevation of so many new bishops was probably meant to signal the new king 's break with his father 's habit of keeping bishoprics empty to retain the revenues of the sees . At about the same time Glanvill was either forced out of his justiciarship or resigned , but the sources are unclear . Walter was probably elevated to a bishopric even though his uncle had lost some of his power because of political manoeuvring over the elevation of King Richard 's illegitimate half @-@ brother Geoffrey to the see of York , which Walter had at first opposed . The bishopric was either a reward or a bribe for Walter 's withdrawal of his objections to Geoffrey 's election . 
 Soon after his appointment , Walter accompanied the king on the Third Crusade , going ahead of the king directly from Marseille to the Holy Land in a group that included Baldwin of Forde , Archbishop of Canterbury , and Ranulf de Glanvill . The group left Marseille in August 1190 , and arrived at Acre two months later . While on crusade , he was praised by his fellow crusaders , and acted as Richard 's principal negotiator with Saladin for a peace treaty . After the conclusion of the treaty with Saladin , Walter was in the first band of pilgrims that entered Jerusalem . Saladin entertained Walter during his stay in Jerusalem , and the Englishman succeeded in extracting a promise from Saladin that a small group of Western clergy would be allowed to remain in the city to perform divine services . Walter subsequently led the English army back to England after Richard 's departure from Palestine , but in Sicily he heard of the king 's capture , and diverted to Germany . He , along with William of Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Eglise , was among the first of Richard 's subjects to find the king at <unk> where he was being held . In April 1193 he returned to England to raise the king 's ransom . Richard wrote to his mother , Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine , that Walter should be chosen for the see of Canterbury , as well as to the monks of the cathedral chapter , and soon after Walter 's return to England , he was duly elected archbishop of Canterbury , having been transferred to the see on 29 May 1193 . He was chosen as archbishop without consultation from the bishops , who normally claimed the right to help decide the new archbishop . He received his pallium , the symbol of his archiepiscopal authority , from Pope Celestine III and was ceremonially enthroned at Canterbury on 7 November 1193 . 
 = = Justiciar = = 
 After Richard was freed , he spent little time in England , instead concentrating on the war with King Philip II of France , which began with Philip 's attempts to acquire Richard 's possessions on the continent . Richard made Walter Chief Justiciar about 25 December 1193 . Walter remained in England , raising money for the king 's wars and overseeing the administration of the kingdom . The constant warfare forced Walter to find new means of raising money through taxation . The historian Doris Stenton wrote that the Pipe Rolls , or financial records , during Walter 's time as justiciar " give the impression of a country taxed to the limit " . Walter was also responsible for choosing royal justices , and many of his choices were connected with , or had previously worked with , the archbishop in the royal administration . Because of Richard 's absence from England , Walter was able to exercise more authority as justiciar than any of his predecessors . All that Walter needed to do was keep Richard 's monetary needs satisfied . Combined with Walter 's position as archbishop , Walter wielded a power unseen in England since the days of Lanfranc . 
 One of Walter 's first acts as justiciar was in February 1194 , when he presided over a feudal judgement of John , Richard 's younger brother . After Richard 's release from captivity , John , intending to begin a rebellion , had prepared his castles for defence . His letters ordering the preparations were intercepted and John was deprived of his lands . When John showed no signs of submitting , Walter called an ecclesiastical council at Westminster for the purposes of excommunicating John unless he submitted . John refused to submit , and was excommunicated . To defeat the rebellion , Walter was required to lay siege to Marlborough Castle himself . Walter employed his brother Theobald in similar actions in Lancaster , and rewarded him with the office of sheriff of Lancaster . Eventually in May 1194 , John made peace with Richard , and was restored to favour , although the restoration of his lands did not occur until late in 1195 . 
 Walter 's chief administrative measures were his instructions to the itinerant justices of 1194 and 1198 , his ordinance of 1195 , an attempt to increase order in the kingdom , and his plan of 1198 for the assessment of a land tax . In 1194 the justices were ordered to secure the election of four coroners by each county court . The coroners were to keep , or register , royal pleas , which had previously been a duty of the sheriff . The juries were to be chosen by a committee of four knights , also elected by the county court . This introduction of coroners and constables eventually led to a change in the role of sheriffs , and a lessening of their importance in royal administration . Although he probably did not take part in the decision to set up a special exchequer for the collection of Richard 's ransom , Walter did appoint the two <unk> , or guardians of the amounts due , who were Hugh Bardulf in the north of England and William of Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Eglise in the south . His instructions for the eyre , or circuits of traveling justices , are the first that survive in English history . It was during his tenure of the justiciarship that the judicial role of the Exchequer became separated from the purely financial aspects . 
 He also worked to introduce order into the lending of money by Jewish moneylenders , and organised a system where the royal officials worked to combat fraud by both parties in the business of Jewish money lending . Walter was probably the originator of the custom of keeping an archival copy of all charters , letters , patents and feet of fines , or record of agreements reached in the royal courts , in the chancery . The first recorded " foot of the fine " is endorsed with the statement " This is the first <unk> that was made in the king 's court in the form of three <unk> , according to the command of his lordship of Canterbury and other barons of the king , to the end that by this form a record can be made to be passed on to the treasurer to put in the treasury . " The agreement concerns Walter 's brother Theobald , who was the plaintiff . 
 Walter also helped with the creation of a more professional group of royal justices . Although the group , which included Simon of <unk> , Ralph Foliot , Richard Barre , William de Warenne , Richard <unk> , and Walter 's brother Osbert fitzHervey , had mostly already served as justices prior to Walter 's term of office , it was Walter who used them extensively . It appears likely that Walter chose them for their ability , not for any familial ties to himself . This group of men replaced the previous system of using mostly local men , and are the first signs of a professional judiciary . 
 In 1195 Walter issued an ordinance by which four knights were appointed in every hundred to act as guardians of the peace , a precursor to the office of Justice of the Peace . His use of the knights , who appear for the first time in political life , is the first sign of the rise of this class who , either as members of parliament or justices of the peace , later became the mainstay of English government . In 1198 , Walter requested a carucage , or plough @-@ tax , of five shillings on every plough @-@ land , or carucate , under cultivation . However , difficulties arose over the assessments , so the justiciar ordered them to be made by a sworn jury in every hundred . It is likely that those jurors were elected . 
 In foreign affairs , Walter negotiated with Scotland in 1195 and with the Welsh in 1197 . Scotland claimed Northumbria , or northern England . Negotiations broke down , but relations between the two countries remained good throughout the rest of Richard 's reign . Talks with the Welsh began after the English lords Roger Mortimer and William de Briouze expanded into Welsh territory in 1195 , causing a concern that the Welsh lord Rhys ap Gruffydd would strike back across the border . In 1196 , Walter quickly suppressed a popular uprising in London led by William Fitz Osbern . FitzOsbern was an orator who harnessed the discontent of the poor residents of London against high taxes . His oratory provoked a riot in London , and he was apprehended and hanged on Walter 's orders . 
 = = Ecclesiastical affairs and resignation = = 
 Walter held a legateship from Pope Celestine III from 1195 to 1198 , which enabled him to act with the pope 's delegated authority within the English Church . Walter actively investigated ecclesiastical misconduct , and deposed several abbots , including Robert of Thorney Abbey in 1195 and an abbot of St Mary 's in the province of the Archbishop of York . At the monastic cathedral of Worcester , he disciplined the monks between the death of Henry de Sully and the election of John of Coutances , as was his right as the archbishop of the province . In his own diocese , he granted markets and fairs to towns , was granted the privilege of minting coins at Shrewsbury , and worked to recover lands and manors that had been lost to the archdiocese . 
 Walter revived the scheme of his predecessor , Baldwin of Forde , to found a church in Canterbury that would be secular and not monastic . He promised that the new foundation 's canons would not be allowed to vote in archiepiscopal elections nor would the body of Saint Thomas Becket ever be moved to the new church , but the monks of his cathedral chapter were suspicious and appealed to the papacy . The dispute from the time of Baldwin of Forde flared up again , with the papacy supporting the monks and the king supporting the archbishop . Finally , Pope Innocent III ruled for the monks and ordered Walter to destroy what had been built . 
 The archbishop held ecclesiastical councils , including one at York in 1195 that legislated that the clergy should collect their tithes in full , " ... without any reduction . " Another council was held at London in 1200 to legislate the size and composition of clerical retinues , and also ruled that the clergy , when saying Mass , should speak clearly and not speed up or slow down their speech . At the request of the papacy , Walter also led inquiries into the <unk> of Gilbert of Sempringham and Wulfstan of Worcester . Walter refused to acquiesce in the election of Gerald of Wales to the see of St David 's in Wales and opposed the efforts of Gerald and others to elevate St David 's to an archbishopric . 
 In the later part of Richard 's reign , the pressures mounted on Walter . Conflicts between his ecclesiastical duties and his government duties made him the target of criticism from both sides . A dispute in December 1197 , over Richard 's demand that the magnates of England provide 300 knights to serve in France , led to renewed grumbling among the clergy and barons . Richard was also dissatisfied with the results of the carucage in 1198 , so Walter resigned his position of chief justiciar on 11 July of that year . Walter may have resigned willingly , as he had talked of resigning his secular duties since 1194 . Some medieval sources , however , stated that he was forced out of office by the king . 
 = = Under John = = 
 According to the Life of William Marshal , which dates to soon after 1219 , when word reached William Marshal , one of the richest and most influential barons , that Richard was dead , he consulted with Walter and discussed whom to support as the next king . Marshal 's choice was John , but Walter initially leaned towards John 's young nephew Arthur of Brittany . When Marshall was insistent on John , who was an adult , the author of the Life has Walter say in reply " ' So be it then , ' said the archbishop , ' but mark my words , Marshal , you will never regret anything in your life as much as this . ' " This is almost certainly a retrospective comment that has been inserted into the biography , however , based on John 's later behaviour . Once John knew he had the support of Walter and William Marshal , he sent Walter ahead to England to request all free men to pledge fealty to the new king . On 27 May 1199 Walter crowned John , supposedly making a speech that promulgated , for the last time , the theory of a king 's election by the people . This story is only contained in the writings of Matthew Paris , however , and although it seems certain that Walter made a speech , it is not certain what the exact contents were . On his coronation day , John appointed Walter Lord Chancellor . W. L. Warren , historian and author of a biography of John , says of Walter that " No one living had a firmer grasp of the intricacies of royal government , yet even in old age his mind was adaptable and fecund with suggestions for coping with new problems . " 
 One of Walter 's first suggestions was to lower the fees for having charters confirmed , from nine pounds and five shillings to eighteen shillings and four pence . Accompanying this measure was a requirement that no charter would be accepted in a king 's court without having been confirmed by King John . Not only did this reduce forgeries , it led to the establishment of the Charter Roll , an administrative copy of all charters issued and confirmed by the government . In his relations with other officers , Walter worked closely with the justiciar Geoffrey Fitz Peter , on the collection of taxation , and both men went to Wales in 1203 on a diplomatic mission . Another joint action of the two men concerned a tax of a seventh part of all <unk> collected from both lay and ecclesiastical persons . The medieval chronicler Roger of Wendover said that the king " had Archbishop Hubert of Canterbury to act for him in the matter of the church property , Geoffrey fitz @-@ Peter in the matter of lay property ; and these two spared no one in carrying out their orders . " Walter was also responsible for the keeping of copies of other royal letters in the Close Rolls and the Patent Rolls . The Patent rolls record letters that were issued in " patent " , or openly and not sealed , and the Close rolls record letters issued sealed , or letters close . The various rolls are extant from 1199 for the Charter roll , 1201 for the Patent roll , and 1204 for the Close roll . Walter also continued to innovate in local government , as the earliest record of the coroner 's rolls , or county records , being used to cross @-@ check oral testimony in the county courts date from 1202 and 1203 , during Walter 's chancellorship . 
 In 1201 Walter went on a diplomatic mission to Philip II of France , which was unsuccessful , and in 1202 he returned to England as regent while John was abroad . In April 1204 Walter returned to France with John de Gray the Bishop of Norwich , Eustace the Bishop of Ely , William Marshal , and Robert de Beaumont the Earl of Leicester to seek peace with Philip Augustus . Philip insisted that John hand over Arthur of Brittany , Arthur 's sister Eleanor , and renounce all of his continental possessions before the French king would make peace . John refused to do this , and the embassy returned to England not long before Philip conquered Normandy . 
 Besides sending Walter on diplomatic missions , King John gave Walter custody of Rochester Castle on 20 July 1202 , but as Walter was already accounting for the taxes and fees of the city of Rochester to the Exchequer in 1200 , it is possible that he held the castle before 1202 . John also upheld the right of the archbishop to mint coins , which Walter held until his death in 1205 . 
 Under John , Walter continued to be active in ecclesiastical affairs , and in September 1200 held a provincial church council at London . This council set forth 14 canons , or decrees , which dealt with a number of subjects , including doctrinal concerns , financial affairs , and the duties of the clergy . It drew heavily on earlier church decrees , including those of the Third Lateran Council of 1179 . Walter also interceded with Pope Innocent III in 1200 , mediating between the pope and the king over a royal dispute with the Cistercians . Walter 's intercession prevented the dispute from escalating , and kept the pope from imposing sanctions on the king for his threats to the Cistercians . It was in 1200 that the church court records of the archdiocese of Canterbury began to be recorded and kept , although after Walter 's death in 1205 the records become sparse until the 14th century . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Walter died on 13 July 1205 , after a long illness that permitted a reconciliation with his monks . The medieval chronicler Ralph of Coggeshall described his death as taking four days , and related that he gave vestments , jewellery , and altar furnishings to his monks , which were confiscated by King John after Walter 's death . He was buried in the Trinity Chapel in Canterbury Cathedral , next to Thomas Becket , where his tomb can still be seen . The tomb occupied a highly visible spot in the Trinity Chapel , and Walter was the first archbishop to be buried there since the 1170s , when all of the tombs but Becket 's had been relocated to focus attention on Becket 's shrine . His remained the only ecclesiastic to be buried there until the 14th century . The use by the archbishops of Canterbury of the title " Primate of All England " dates from Walter 's archiepiscopal tenure . 
 The medieval chronicler Matthew Paris retold the story that when King John heard of Walter 's death , the king exclaimed " Now for the first time I am king of England " . This story , however entertaining , is apocryphal . More secure is the story that another chronicler , Roger of Wendover , relates about Walter 's Christmas celebrations in 1200 . Roger reports that Walter distributed clothing to those attending his Christmas feast , which angered King John . The chronicler says that Walter " wished to put himself on a par with the king " . 
 Walter was not a holy man , although he was , as John Gillingham , a historian and biographer of Richard I , says , " one of the most outstanding government ministers in English History " . Hugh of Lincoln , a contemporary and later canonised , is said to have asked forgiveness of God for not having rebuked Walter as often as he probably should have . Modern historians tend not to share the older view that Walter was the driving force behind the administrative changes during Richard 's reign , that Richard was uninterested in government , and that he left all decisions in the hands of his ministers , especially Longchamp and Walter . The studies of James Holt and others have shown that Richard was highly involved in government decisions , and that it was more a partnership between the king and his ministers . Walter was , however , very innovative in his approach to government . Walter continued to enjoy the support of Richard 's brother John , and it was during John 's reign that a number of Walter 's administrative reforms took place , although how much royal initiative was behind the innovations is unknown , given John 's interest in government and administration . 
 Walter was the butt of jokes about his lack of learning , and was the target of a series of tales from the pen of the chronicler Gerald of Wales , an enemy of the archbishop . Even Walter 's supporters could only state that he was " moderately literate " . Walter employed several canon lawyers who had been educated at Bologna in his household , including John of Tynemouth , Simon of Southwell , and Honorius of Kent . He also employed the architect Elias of Dereham , who was one of Walter 's executors . Elias is traditionally credited as being the architect of Salisbury Cathedral after Walter 's death . Another scholar employed by Walter was Peter of Blois , who served both Walter and his predecessor as a Latin secretary . 
 Little is known of his appearance , although he was described by Gerald of Wales as tall and handsome . Gerald also praised his intelligence and cleverness . 
 W. L. Warren advances the theory that either Walter or Geoffrey Fitz Peter , instead of Ranulf Glanvill , was the author of Tractatus de <unk> et <unk> regni Angliae , a legal treatise on the laws and constitutions of the English . Chrimes agrees that Glanvill was probably not the author , and feels that Walter likely was , although he could not be certain . If he was the author , he composed what Chrimes called a " great literary memorial of Henry II 's government " . Neither of Walter 's two modern biographers , however , feel that he was the author of the Tractatus , and the historian Ralph Turner agrees . The historian Michael Clanchy says of Walter " The proliferation of documents was a European and a continuing phenomenon , yet if it were to be associated in England with one man , he would be Hubert Walter . " 
 = Ediacaran biota = 
 The Ediacaran ( / <unk> / ; formerly Vendian ) biota consisted of enigmatic tubular and frond @-@ shaped , mostly sessile organisms that lived during the Ediacaran Period ( ca . 635 – 542 Ma ) . Trace fossils of these organisms have been found worldwide , and represent the earliest known complex multicellular organisms . The Ediacaran biota radiated in an event called the Avalon explosion , 575 million years ago , after the Earth had thawed from the <unk> period 's extensive glaciation . The biota largely disappeared with the rapid increase in biodiversity known as the Cambrian explosion . Most of the currently existing body plans of animals first appeared in the fossil record of the Cambrian rather than the Ediacaran . For <unk> , the Cambrian biota appears to have completely replaced the organisms that populated the Ediacaran fossil record , although relationships are still a matter of debate . 
 The organisms of the Ediacaran Period first appeared around 600 million years ago and flourished until the cusp of the Cambrian 542 million years ago , when the characteristic communities of fossils vanished . The earliest reasonably diverse Ediacaran community was discovered in 1995 in Sonora , Mexico , and is approximately 600 million years in age , pre @-@ dating the <unk> glaciation of about 580 million years ago . While rare fossils that may represent survivors have been found as late as the Middle Cambrian ( 510 to 500 million years ago ) , the earlier fossil communities disappear from the record at the end of the Ediacaran leaving only curious fragments of once @-@ thriving ecosystems . Multiple hypotheses exist to explain the disappearance of this biota , including preservation bias , a changing environment , the advent of predators and competition from other life @-@ forms . 
 Determining where Ediacaran organisms fit in the tree of life has proven challenging ; it is not even established that they were animals , with suggestions that they were lichens ( fungus @-@ alga symbionts ) , algae , protists known as foraminifera , fungi or microbial colonies , or hypothetical intermediates between plants and animals . The morphology and habit of some taxa ( e.g. <unk> <unk> ) suggest relationships to Porifera or Cnidaria . Kimberella may show a similarity to molluscs , and other organisms have been thought to possess bilateral symmetry , although this is controversial . Most macroscopic fossils are morphologically distinct from later life @-@ forms : they resemble discs , tubes , mud @-@ filled bags or quilted mattresses . Due to the difficulty of deducing evolutionary relationships among these organisms , some palaeontologists have suggested that these represent completely extinct lineages that do not resemble any living organism . One palaeontologist proposed a separate kingdom level category Vendozoa ( now renamed Vendobionta ) in the Linnaean hierarchy for the Ediacaran biota . If these enigmatic organisms left no descendants , their strange forms might be seen as a " failed experiment " in multicellular life , with later multicellular life evolving independently from unrelated single @-@ celled organisms . 
 <unk> <unk> argues that the concept of " Ediacara Biota " is artificial and arbitrary as it can not be defined geographically , stratigraphically , <unk> nor biologically . He points out that 8 particular fossils or groups of fossils considered " Ediacaran " have 5 taphonomic modes ( preservation styles ) , occur in 3 geological periods , and have no phylogenetic meaning as a whole . 
 = = History = = 
 The first Ediacaran fossils discovered were the disc @-@ shaped Aspidella <unk> in 1868 . Their discoverer , Scottish geologist Alexander Murray , found them useful aids for correlating the age of rocks around Newfoundland . However , since they lay below the " Primordial Strata " of the Cambrian that was then thought to contain the very first signs of animal life , a proposal four years after their discovery by Elkanah Billings that these simple forms represented fauna was dismissed by his peers . Instead , they were interpreted as gas escape structures or inorganic concretions . No similar structures elsewhere in the world were then known and the one @-@ sided debate soon fell into obscurity . In 1933 , Georg <unk> discovered specimens in Namibia but the firm belief that complex life originated in the Cambrian led to them being assigned to the Cambrian Period and no link to Aspidella was made . In 1946 , Reg Sprigg noticed " <unk> " in the Ediacara Hills of Australia 's Flinders Ranges but these rocks were believed to be Early Cambrian so , while the discovery sparked some interest , little serious attention was garnered . 
 It was not until the British discovery of the iconic Charnia in 1957 that the pre @-@ Cambrian was seriously considered as containing life . This frond @-@ shaped fossil was found in England 's Charnwood Forest , and due to the detailed geological mapping of the British Geological Survey there was no doubt these fossils sat in Precambrian rocks . Palaeontologist Martin Glaessner finally , in 1959 , made the connection between this and the earlier finds and with a combination of improved dating of existing specimens and an injection of vigour into the search many more instances were recognised . 
 All specimens discovered until 1967 were in coarse @-@ grained sandstone that prevented preservation of fine details , making interpretation difficult . S.B. Misra 's discovery of fossiliferous ash @-@ beds at the Mistaken Point assemblage in Newfoundland changed all this as the delicate detail preserved by the fine ash allowed the description of features that were previously <unk> . 
 Poor communication , combined with the difficulty in correlating globally distinct formations , led to a plethora of different names for the biota . In 1960 the French name " <unk> " – after the Ediacaran Hills in South Australia , which take their name from aborigine <unk> , " water is present " – was added to the competing terms " <unk> " and " Vendian " for terminal @-@ Precambrian rocks , and these names were also applied to the life @-@ forms . " Ediacaran " and " <unk> " were subsequently applied to the epoch or period of geological time and its corresponding rocks . In March 2004 , the International Union of Geological Sciences ended the inconsistency by formally naming the terminal period of the Neoproterozoic after the Australian locality . 
 The term " Ediacaran biota " and similar ( " Ediacara " / " Ediacaran " / " <unk> " / " Vendian " , " fauna " / " biota " ) has , at various times , been used in a geographic , stratigraphic , taphonomic , or biological sense , with the latter the most common in huge modern literature . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 = = = Microbial mats = = = 
 Microbial mats are areas of sediment stabilised by the presence of colonies of microbes that secrete sticky fluids or otherwise bind the sediment particles . They appear to migrate upwards when covered by a thin layer of sediment but this is an illusion caused by the colony 's growth ; individuals do not , themselves , move . If too thick a layer of sediment is deposited before they can grow or reproduce through it , parts of the colony will die leaving behind fossils with a characteristically wrinkled ( " elephant skin " ) and tubercular texture . 
 Some Ediacaran strata with the texture characteristics of microbial mats contain fossils , and Ediacaran fossils are almost always found in beds that contain these microbial mats . Although microbial mats were once widespread , the evolution of grazing organisms in the Cambrian vastly reduced their numbers . These communities are now limited to inhospitable refugia , such as the stromatolites found in Hamelin Pool Marine Nature Reserve in Shark Bay , Western Australia where the salt levels can be twice those of the surrounding sea . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The preservation of these fossils is one of their great fascinations to science . As soft @-@ bodied organisms , they would normally not fossilise and , unlike later soft @-@ bodied fossil biota such as the Burgess Shale or Solnhofen Limestone , the Ediacaran biota is not found in a restricted environment subject to unusual local conditions : they were a global phenomenon . The processes that were operating must have been systemic and worldwide . There was something very different about the Ediacaran Period that permitted these delicate creatures to be left behind and it is thought the fossils were preserved by virtue of rapid covering by ash or sand , trapping them against the mud or microbial mats on which they lived . Ash beds provide more detail and can readily be dated to the nearest million years or better using radiometric dating . However , it is more common to find Ediacaran fossils under sandy beds deposited by storms or high @-@ energy bottom @-@ scraping ocean currents known as turbidites . Soft @-@ bodied organisms today almost never fossilise during such events , but the presence of widespread microbial mats probably aided preservation by stabilising their impressions in the sediment below . 
 = = = Scale of preservation = = = 
 The rate of cementation of the overlying substrate relative to the rate of decomposition of the organism determines whether the top or bottom surface of an organism is preserved . Most disc @-@ shaped fossils decomposed before the overlying sediment was cemented , whereupon ash or sand slumped in to fill the void , leaving a cast of the organism 's underside . 
 Conversely , quilted fossils tended to decompose after the cementation of the overlying sediment ; hence their upper surfaces are preserved . Their more resistant nature is reflected in the fact that , in rare occasions , quilted fossils are found within storm beds as the high @-@ energy sedimentation did not destroy them as it would have the less @-@ resistant discs . Further , in some cases , the bacterial precipitation of minerals formed a " death mask " , ultimately leaving a positive , cast @-@ like impression of the organism . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 The Ediacaran biota exhibited a vast range of morphological characteristics . Size ranged from millimetres to metres ; complexity from " blob @-@ like " to intricate ; rigidity from sturdy and resistant to jelly @-@ soft . Almost all forms of symmetry were present . These organisms differed from earlier fossils by displaying an organised , differentiated multicellular construction and centimetre @-@ plus sizes . 
 These disparate morphologies can be broadly grouped into form taxa : 
 " Embryos " 
 Recent discoveries of Precambrian multicellular life have been dominated by reports of embryos , particularly from the Doushantuo Formation in China . Some finds generated intense media excitement though some have claimed they are instead inorganic structures formed by the precipitation of minerals on the inside of a hole . Other " embryos " have been interpreted as the remains of the giant sulfur @-@ reducing bacteria akin to Thiomargarita , a view that , while it had enjoyed a notable gain of supporters as of 2007 , has since suffered following further research comparing the potential Doushantuo embryos ' morphologies with those of Thiomargarita specimens , both living and in various stages of decay . 
 <unk> dating from 632 @.@ 5 million years ago – just 3 million years after the end of the <unk> glaciations – may represent embryonic ' resting stages ' in the life cycle of the earliest known animals . An alternative proposal is that these structures represent adult stages of the multicellular organisms of this period . 
 Discs 
 Circular fossils , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> led to the initial identification of Ediacaran fossils as cnidaria , which include jellyfish and corals . Further examination has provided alternative interpretations of all disc @-@ shaped fossils : not one is now confidently recognised as a jellyfish . Alternate explanations include holdfasts and protists ; the patterns displayed where two meet have led to many ' individuals ' being identified as microbial colonies , and yet others may represent scratch marks formed as stalked organisms spun around their holdfasts . Useful diagnostic characters are often lacking because only the underside of the organism is preserved by fossilisation . 
 Bags 
 Fossils such as <unk> preserved within sediment layers resemble " mud @-@ filled bags " . The scientific community is a long way from reaching a consensus on their interpretation . 
 <unk> 
 The fossil <unk> tuberculata from the Nama Group , Namibia , has been interpreted as a dorso @-@ ventrally compressed stem @-@ group metazoan , with a large gut cavity and a transversely ridged ectoderm . The organism is in the shape of a flattened torus , with the long axis of its toroidal body running through the approximate center of the presumed gut cavity . 
 Quilted organisms 
 The organisms considered in Seilacher 's revised definition of the Vendobionta share a " quilted " appearance and resembled an inflatable mattress . Sometimes these quilts would be torn or ruptured prior to preservation : such damaged specimens provide valuable clues in the reconstruction process . For example , the three ( or more ) petaloid fronds of <unk> <unk> could only be recognised in a posthumously damaged specimen – usually multiple fronds were hidden as burial squashed the organisms flat . 
 These organisms appear to form two groups : the fractal <unk> and the simpler <unk> . Including such fossils as the iconic Charnia and <unk> , the group is both the most iconic of the Ediacaran biota and the most difficult to place within the existing tree of life . Lacking any mouth , gut , reproductive organs , or indeed any evidence of internal anatomy , their lifestyle was somewhat peculiar by modern standards ; the most widely accepted hypothesis holds that they sucked nutrients out of the surrounding seawater by <unk> or osmosis . However , others argue against this . 
 Non @-@ Ediacarans 
 Some Ediacaran organisms have more complex details preserved , which has allowed them to be interpreted as possible early forms of living phyla excluding them from some definitions of the Ediacaran biota . 
 The earliest such fossil is the reputed bilaterian <unk> claimed by some , however , to represent the infilling of an egg @-@ sac or <unk> . Later examples are almost universally accepted as bilaterians and include the mollusc @-@ like Kimberella , Spriggina ( pictured ) and the shield @-@ shaped Parvancorina whose affinities are currently debated . 
 A suite of fossils known as the Small shelly fossils are represented in the Ediacaran , most famously by Cloudina a shelly tube @-@ like fossil that often shows evidence of predatory boring , suggesting that , while predation may not have been common in the Ediacaran Period , it was at least present . 
 Representatives of modern taxa existed in the Ediacaran , some of which are recognisable today . Sponges , red and green <unk> , protists and bacteria are all easily recognisable with some pre @-@ dating the Ediacaran by nearly three billion years . Possible arthropods have also been described . 
 Trace fossils 
 With the exception of some very simple vertical burrows the only Ediacaran burrows are horizontal , lying on or just below the surface of the seafloor . Such burrows have been taken to imply the presence of motile organisms with heads , which would probably have had a bilateral symmetry . This could place them in the bilateral clade of animals but they could also have been made by simpler organisms feeding as they slowly rolled along the sea floor . Putative " burrows " dating as far back as 1 @,@ 100 million years may have been made by animals that fed on the undersides of microbial mats , which would have shielded them from a chemically unpleasant ocean ; however their uneven width and tapering ends make a biological origin so difficult to defend that even the original proponent no longer believes they are authentic . 
 The burrows observed imply simple behaviour , and the complex efficient feeding traces common from the start of the Cambrian are absent . Some Ediacaran fossils , especially discs , have been interpreted tentatively as trace fossils but this hypothesis has not gained widespread acceptance . As well as burrows , some trace fossils have been found directly associated with an Ediacaran fossil . <unk> and Dickinsonia are often found at the end of long pathways of trace fossils matching their shape ; these fossils are thought to be associated with ciliary feeding but the precise method of formation of these disconnected and overlapping fossils largely remains a mystery . The potential mollusc Kimberella is associated with scratch marks , perhaps formed by a radula . 
 = = Classification and interpretation = = 
 Classification of the Ediacarans is difficult , and hence a variety of theories exist as to their placement on the tree of life . 
 Martin Glaessner proposed in The Dawn of Animal Life ( 1984 ) that the Ediacaran biota were recognizable crown group members of modern phyla , but were unfamiliar because they had yet to evolve the characteristic features we use in modern classification . 
 In 1998 Mark McMenamin claimed Ediacarans did not possess an embryonic stage , and thus could not be animals . He believed that they independently evolved a nervous system and brains , meaning that " the path toward intelligent life was embarked upon more than once on this planet " . 
 = = = Cnidarians = = = 
 Since the most primitive eumetazoans — multi @-@ cellular animals with tissues — are cnidarians , the first attempt to categorise these fossils designated them as jellyfish and sea pens . However , more recent discoveries have established that many of the circular forms formerly considered " cnidarian medusa " are actually holdfasts – sand @-@ filled vesicles occurring at the base of the stem of upright frond @-@ like Ediacarans . A notable example is the form known as <unk> , a circular impression later found to be attached to the long ' stem ' of a frond @-@ like organism that now bears the name . 
 The link between certain frond @-@ like Ediacarans and sea pens has been thrown into doubt by multiple lines of evidence ; chiefly the derived nature of the most frond @-@ like <unk> <unk> , their absence from the fossil record before the Tertiary , and the apparent cohesion between segments in Ediacaran frond @-@ like organisms . Some researchers have suggested that an analysis of " growth poles " discredits the <unk> nature of Ediacaran fronds . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Adolf Seilacher has suggested the Ediacaran sees animals usurping giant protists as the dominant life form . The modern <unk> are giant single @-@ celled protozoans found throughout the world 's oceans , largely on the abyssal plain . A recent genetic study suggested that the <unk> are a specialised group of Foraminifera . There are approximately 42 recognised species in 13 genera and 2 orders ; one of which , <unk> <unk> , is among the largest known protozoans at up to 20 centimetres in diameter . 
 = = = New phylum = = = 
 Seilacher has suggested that the Ediacaran organisms represented a unique and extinct grouping of related forms descended from a common ancestor ( clade ) and created the kingdom Vendozoa , named after the now @-@ obsolete Vendian era . He later excluded fossils identified as metazoans and relaunched the phylum " Vendobionta " . 
 He described the Vendobionta as quilted cnidarians lacking stinging cells . This absence precludes the current cnidarian method of feeding , so Seilacher suggested that the organisms may have survived by symbiosis with photosynthetic or chemoautotrophic organisms . Mark McMenamin saw such feeding strategies as characteristic for the entire biota , and referred to the marine biota of this period as a " Garden of Ediacara " . 
 = = = Lichen Hypothesis = = = 
 Greg <unk> 's hypothesis that Ediacaran organisms were lichens is not widely accepted by the scientific community . He argues that the fossils are not as squashed as known fossil jellyfish , and their relief is closer to compressed woody branches whose compaction can be estimated as compressed cylinders . He points out the chitinous walls of lichen colonies would provide a similar resistance to compaction , and claims the large size of the organisms ( up to 1 @.@ 5 metres long , far larger than any of the preserved burrows ) also hints against classification with animals . Finally , Ediacaran fossils from classic localities of the Flinders Ranges have been found in growth position within red calcareous and gypsiferous paleosols , interpreted as soils of well @-@ drained temperate desert soils . Such habitats limit interpretive options for fractal Ediacaran fossils such as Dickinsonia to <unk> or <unk> fungi , but other Ediacaran fossils could have been slime moulds or microbial colonies . 
 = = = Other interpretations = = = 
 Several classifications have been used to accommodate the Ediacaran biota at some point , from algae , to protozoans , to fungi to bacterial or microbial colonies , to hypothetical intermediates between plants and animals . 
 A new extant genus discovered in 2014 , <unk> , which appears to be a basal metazoan but of unknown taxonomic placement , has been noted to have similarities with the Ediacaran fauna . It has since been found to be a siphonophore , possibly even sections of a more complex species , though this in turn has raised suspicions for a similar status for at least some <unk> organisms . 
 = = Origin = = 
 It took almost 4 billion years from the formation of the Earth for the Ediacaran fossils to first appear , 655 million years ago . While putative fossils are reported from 3 @,@ 460 million years ago , the first uncontroversial evidence for life is found 2 @,@ 700 million years ago , and cells with nuclei certainly existed by 1 @,@ 200 million years ago : The reason why it took so long for forms with an Ediacaran grade of organisation to appear is uncertain . 
 It could be that no special explanation is required : the slow process of evolution simply required 4 billion years to accumulate the necessary adaptations . Indeed , there does seem to be a slow increase in the maximum level of complexity seen over this time , with more and more complex forms of life evolving as time progresses , with traces of earlier semi @-@ complex life such as <unk> , found in the 610 million year old <unk> formation , ( and possibly older rocks dating to 770 million years ago ) possibly displaying the most complex morphology of the time . 
 The alternative train of thought is that it was simply not advantageous to be large until the appearance of the Ediacarans : the environment favoured the small over the large . Examples of such scenarios today include plankton , whose small size allows them to reproduce rapidly to take advantage of <unk> abundant nutrients in algal blooms . But for large size never to be favourable , the environment would have to be very different indeed . 
 A primary size @-@ limiting factor is the amount of atmospheric oxygen . Without a complex circulatory system , low concentrations of oxygen cannot reach the centre of an organism quickly enough to supply its metabolic demand . 
 On the early Earth , reactive elements , such as iron and uranium , existed in a reduced form that would react with any free oxygen produced by photosynthesising organisms . Oxygen would not be able to build up in the atmosphere until all the iron had rusted ( producing banded iron formations ) , and all the other reactive elements had been oxidised . Donald Canfield detected records of the first significant quantities of atmospheric oxygen just before the first Ediacaran fossils appeared – and the presence of atmospheric oxygen was soon heralded as a possible trigger for the Ediacaran radiation . Oxygen seems to have accumulated in two pulses ; the rise of small , sessile ( stationary ) organisms seems to correlate with an early oxygenation event , with larger and mobile organisms appearing around the second pulse of oxygenation . However , the assumptions underlying the reconstruction of atmospheric composition have attracted some criticism , with widespread anoxia having little effect on life where it occurs in the Early Cambrian and the Cretaceous . 
 Periods of intense cold have also been suggested as a barrier to the evolution of multicellular life . The earliest known embryos , from China 's Doushantuo Formation , appear just a million years after the Earth emerged from a global glaciation , suggesting that ice cover and cold oceans may have prevented the emergence of multicellular life . Potentially , complex life may have evolved before these glaciations , and been wiped out . However , the diversity of life in modern Antarctica has sparked disagreement over whether cold temperatures increase or decrease the rate of evolution . 
 In early 2008 a team analysed the range of basic body structures ( " disparity " ) of Ediacaran organisms from three different fossil beds : Avalon in Canada , 575 to 565 million years ago ; White Sea in Russia , 560 to 550 million years ago ; and Nama in Namibia , 550 to 542 million years ago , immediately before the start of the Cambrian . They found that , while the White Sea assemblage had the most species , there was no significant difference in disparity between the three groups , and concluded that before the beginning of the Avalon timespan these organisms must have gone through their own evolutionary " explosion " , which may have been similar to the famous Cambrian explosion . 
 = = = Preservation bias = = = 
 The paucity of Ediacaran fossils after the Cambrian could simply be due to conditions that no longer favoured the fossilisation of Ediacaran organisms , which may have continued to thrive unpreserved . However , if they were common , more than the occasional specimen might be expected in exceptionally preserved fossil assemblages ( <unk> @-@ Lagerstätten ) such as the Burgess Shale and Chengjiang . However , Vendobionta remain locally common in paleosols throughout the Cambrian and into the Ordovician , and may always have been rare in marine environments . 
 A general discussion of preservation bias may be found under Taphonomy . 
 = = = Predation and grazing = = = 
 It is suggested that by the Early Cambrian , organisms higher in the food chain caused the microbial mats to largely disappear . If these grazers first appeared as the Ediacaran biota started to decline , then it may suggest that they destabilised the microbial substrate , leading to displacement or detachment of the biota ; or that the destruction of the mat destabilised the ecosystem , causing extinctions . 
 Alternatively , <unk> animals could have fed directly on the relatively undefended Ediacaran biota . However , if the interpretation of the Ediacaran age Kimberella as a grazer is correct then this suggests that the biota had already had limited exposure to " predation " . 
 There is however little evidence for any trace fossils in the Ediacaran Period , which may speak against the active grazing theory . Further , the onset of the Cambrian Period is defined by the appearance of a worldwide trace fossil assemblage , quite distinct from the activity @-@ barren Ediacaran Period . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 It is possible that increased competition due to the evolution of key innovations among other groups , perhaps as a response to predation , drove the Ediacaran biota from their niches . However , this argument has not successfully explained similar phenomena . For instance , the bivalve molluscs ' " competitive exclusion " of brachiopods was eventually deemed to be a coincidental result of two unrelated trends . 
 = = = Change in environmental conditions = = = 
 While it is difficult to infer the effect of changing planetary conditions on organisms , communities and ecosystems , great changes were happening at the end of the Precambrian and the start of the Early Cambrian . The breakup of the supercontinents , rising sea levels ( creating shallow , " life @-@ friendly " seas ) , a nutrient crisis , fluctuations in atmospheric composition , including oxygen and carbon dioxide levels , and changes in ocean chemistry ( promoting <unk> ) could all have played a part . 
 = = Assemblages = = 
 Ediacaran @-@ type fossils are recognised globally in 25 localities and a variety of depositional conditions , and are commonly grouped into three main types , named after typical localities . Each assemblage tends to occupy its own region of <unk> , and after an initial burst of diversification changes little for the rest of its existence . 
 = = = Avalon @-@ type assemblage = = = 
 The Avalon @-@ type assemblage is defined at Mistaken Point in Canada , the oldest locality with a large quantity of Ediacaran fossils . The assemblage is easily dated because it contains many fine ash @-@ beds , which are a good source of zircons used in the uranium @-@ lead method of radiometric dating . These fine @-@ grained ash beds also preserve exquisite detail . Constituents of this biota appear to survive through until the extinction of all Ediacarans at the base of the Cambrian . 
 The biota comprises deep @-@ sea @-@ dwelling <unk> such as Charnia , all of which share a fractal growth pattern . They were probably preserved in situ ( without post @-@ mortem transportation ) , although this point is not universally accepted . The assemblage , while less diverse than the <unk> or Nama @-@ types , resembles Carboniferous suspension @-@ feeding communities , which may suggest filter feeding – by most interpretations , the assemblage is found in water too deep for photosynthesis . The low diversity may reflect the depth of water – which would restrict speciation opportunities – or it may just be too young for a rich biota to have evolved . Opinion is currently divided between these conflicting hypotheses . 
 = = = Ediacara @-@ type assemblage = = = 
 The Ediacara @-@ type assemblage is named after Australia 's Ediacara Hills , and consists of fossils preserved in facies of coastal lagoons and rivers . They are typically found in red gypsiferous and calcareous paleosols formed on loess and flood deposits in an arid cool temperate paleoclimate . Most fossils are preserved as imprints in microbial earths , but a few are preserved within sandy units . 
 = = = Nama @-@ type assemblage = = = 
 The Nama assemblage is best represented in Namibia . Three @-@ dimensional preservation is most common , with organisms preserved in sandy beds containing internal bedding . Dima <unk> believes that these fossils represent burrowing organisms , while Guy Narbonne maintains they were surface dwellers . These beds are sandwiched between units comprising interbedded sandstones , siltstones and shales – with microbial mats , where present , usually containing the fossils . The environment is interpreted as sand bars formed at the mouth of a delta 's distributaries . 
 = = = Significance of assemblages = = = 
 In the White Sea region of Russia , all three assemblage types have been found in close proximity . This , and the faunas ' considerable temporal overlap , makes it unlikely that they represent evolutionary stages or temporally distinct communities . Since they are globally distributed – described on all continents except Antarctica – geographical boundaries do not appear to be a factor ; the same fossils are found at all <unk> ( the latitude where the fossil was created , accounting for continental drift ) and in separate sedimentary basins . 
 It is most likely that the three assemblages mark organisms adapted to survival in different environments , and that any apparent patterns in diversity or age are in fact an artefact of the few samples that have been discovered – the timeline ( right ) demonstrates the paucity of Ediacaran fossil @-@ bearing assemblages . An analysis of one of the White Sea fossil beds , where the layers cycle from continental seabed to inter @-@ tidal to estuarine and back again a few times , found that a specific set of Ediacaran organisms was associated with each environment . 
 As the Ediacaran biota represent an early stage in multicellular life 's history , it is unsurprising that not all possible modes of life are occupied . It has been estimated that of 92 potentially possible modes of life – combinations of feeding style , <unk> and motility — no more than a dozen are occupied by the end of the Ediacaran . Just four are represented in the Avalon assemblage . The lack of large @-@ scale predation and vertical burrowing are perhaps the most significant factors limiting the ecological diversity ; the emergence of these during the Early Cambrian allowed the number of lifestyles occupied to rise to 30 . 
 = Charles Ollivierre = 
 Charles Augustus Ollivierre ( 20 July 1876 – 25 March 1949 ) was a Vincentian cricketer who represented the West Indies in matches before they attained Test match status . Born in St Vincent , Ollivierre initially played first @-@ class cricket for Trinidad ; he was selected to tour England with the West Indies team in 1900 . He later qualified to play first @-@ class cricket for Derbyshire between 1901 and 1907 , becoming the first black West Indian to play for an English county . Ollivierre was reasonably successful in county cricket and had a reputation as a stylish batsman . However , he dropped out of first @-@ class cricket after 1907 owing to eye trouble . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ollivierre was born in St Vincent on 20 July 1876 . His family were enthusiastic cricketers , although the region had little history within the sport , and his two younger brothers Richard and <unk> went on to represent the West Indies in first @-@ class cricket . 
 Initially , Ollivierre played for Trinidad ; he made his first @-@ class debut against an English touring team in March 1895 at the age of 18 . He took two wickets , scored 7 runs in his first innings and 12 runs in the second . In non @-@ first @-@ class cricket , he continued to represent St Vincent , and impressed critics when Barbados played the island in 1897 . In 1899 , he played two first @-@ class matches for a team selected by A. B. St Hill against a team representing Trinidad . In the first game , he took 11 wickets and scored 67 in the second innings ; in the second game , he took a further five wickets in Trinidad 's first innings . 
 = = West Indian tour of England in 1900 = = 
 During the 1900 English cricket season , Ollivierre travelled to England with a West Indian team . Invited to tour England by Lord Hawke following the success of English tours to the Caribbean , the team was the first from the West Indies to visit England , and matches were not first @-@ class . The team improved steadily throughout , and by the end of the tour were judged to be playing well . Although predominantly made up from white players , the team contained several black cricketers ; at the time , the dominant teams in the West Indies were exclusively white . Ollivierre was the most consistent and successful batsman in the team , scoring 883 runs at a batting average of 32 . His highest score , and only century , came against Leicestershire , when he scored 159 runs and shared an opening partnership of 238 with Pelham Warner . He also shared an opening partnership of 208 with Percy Cox against Surrey . He bowled occasionally in the early part of the tour , although with little success , but did not bowl at all in his last eight games . 
 According to the review of the tour in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , Ollivierre was the team 's best batsman , and his innings against Leicestershire was one of the best of the season . The article observed : " He has strokes all round the wicket , and in some ways reminds one of Ranji " . During the tour , Ollivierre agreed to play for Derbyshire and remained in England to begin the two @-@ year process of qualification for the County Championship . It is unlikely that Ollivierre ever returned to the West Indies . 
 = = Derbyshire cricketer = = 
 Throughout his career in England , Ollivierre played as an amateur cricketer . He was employed by Samuel Hill @-@ Wood , a businessman and politician from Derbyshire , to work in his office in Glossop , where Ollivierre lived . During the 1901 season , he played three first @-@ class games for Derbyshire in non @-@ Championship games : twice against London County Cricket Club and once against the touring South African cricket team , hitting two half @-@ centuries in the process of scoring 247 runs at an average of 41 @.@ 16 . After further appearances in 1902 , while waiting to qualify , against London County and the Australian touring team , he became eligible for county matches in July and made his Championship debut against Essex . Later in 1902 , he scored 167 against Warwickshire , his maiden first @-@ class century . In all first @-@ class matches in the season , Ollivierre scored 524 runs at 34 @.@ 93 . The following season , Ollivierre played in 19 games and scored 721 runs , but his average fell to 20 @.@ 60 . 
 Ollivierre 's most successful season was 1904 , when he scored 1 @,@ 268 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 27 . Against Essex , he made the highest score of his career , when , according to his obituary in Wisden , " he was the dominating figure in a remarkable match " . Essex scored 597 runs in their first innings ; Derbyshire replied with 548 , of which Ollivierre made 229 . After Essex were bowled out for 97 , Derbyshire hit off the required runs to win by nine wickets . Ollivierre was left on 92 not out , and had scored 321 runs in the match . The match report in the 1905 edition of Wisden noted : " In defeating Essex , Derbyshire accomplished the most phenomenal performance ever recorded in first @-@ class cricket ... [ Their ] achievement has no parallel in the history of the game . " Over the following seasons , Ollivierre 's form faded . In 1905 , he scored 759 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 07 . He improved his average with 752 runs at 25 @.@ 06 in 1906 , including his final first @-@ class century . During that season , he played against a touring West Indian team which included his brother Richard — Ollivierre scored 0 and 64 not out . In 1907 , he managed just 417 runs at 12 @.@ 26 . In these later seasons , he began to have problems with his eyesight , and was forced to retire from first @-@ class cricket after 1907 . In total , he played 114 first @-@ class games , scored 4 @,@ 830 runs at 23 @.@ 56 and hit three centuries . However , he continued to play club cricket in Yorkshire and , annually between 1924 and 1939 , spent time in the Netherlands coaching in schools . Ollivierre died at Pontefract in Yorkshire on 25 March 1949 . 
 = = Style and impact = = 
 According to Wisden in 1901 , as a batsman Ollivierre " was particularly strong in cutting and playing to leg " . J. N. Pentelow , a cricket writer , suggested in 1928 that " there was something about Ollivierre that reminded one of the great Ranji . He was a more heavily built man than the slim Ranji of the days when we were young ; but his strokes and his movements had real grace . " A correspondent in the Observer in 1931 remembered Ollivierre as a " great batsman " , while Neville Cardus , writing in 1920 , named Ollivierre among a list of top @-@ quality batsmen who did not do themselves justice at the highest level : " Geniuses who have just lost their way ... every one of them in possession of an excellent enough record in county cricket , but every one of them really intended by nature to wear the most precious laurels the greatest of games has to offer " . 
 Ollivierre was the first black West Indian cricketer to play county cricket , and the first West Indian cricketer to establish a cricketing reputation outside of that region . Other West Indians looked to follow his example , and several were approached by English counties with a view to qualifying . At least one of Ollivierre 's Derbyshire colleagues was unhappy playing alongside a black cricketer ; Bill Storer , according to the cricket writer E. H. D. Sewell , believed in " England for the English " and specifically objected to presence of black people . However , there is no evidence that Ollivierre experienced any difficulties from spectators , and the historian Jack Williams suggests that despite racism inherent in English cricket at the time , Ollivierre 's presence may have " created goodwill towards non @-@ whites among [ Derbyshire 's ] white supporters " . 
 = Ernie Toshack = 
 Ernest Raymond Herbert Toshack ( 8 December 1914 – 11 May 2003 ) was an Australian cricketer who played in 12 Tests from 1946 to 1948 . A left arm medium paced bowler who was known for his accuracy and stamina in his application of leg theory , Toshack was best known for being as member of Don Bradman 's Invincibles that toured England in 1948 without incurring a defeat , where he reinforced Australia 's new ball attack of Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller . 
 Born in 1914 , Toshack overcame many obstacles to reach international level cricket . He was orphaned as an infant , and his early cricket career was hindered because of financial difficulties caused by the Great Depression . The Second World War prevented Toshack from competing at first @-@ class level until he was into his thirties . In 1945 – 46 , the first season of cricket after the end of the War , Toshack made his debut at first @-@ class level and after only seven matches in the Sheffield Shield he was selected for Australia 's tour of New Zealand . In Wellington , he opened the bowling in a match that was retrospectively classed as an official Test match . Toshack became a regular member of the Australian team , playing in all of its Tests until the 1947 – 48 series against India . He took his career @-@ best match bowling figures of 11 / 31 in the First Test but began to suffer recurring knee injuries , and a medical board had to approve his selection for the 1948 England tour . Toshack played in the first four Tests before being injured . After a long convalescence , he attempted a comeback during Australia 's 1949 – 50 season , but further injury forced him to retire . He was a parsimonious bowler , who was popular with crowds for his sense of humour . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in the New South Wales bush town of Cobar on 8 December 1914 , he was one of five children born to a stationmaster , but was orphaned at the age of six . He was raised by relatives in Lyndhurst , in the northwest of the state and played his early cricket and rugby league for Cowra . At this stage of his life , Toshack 's ambition was to play rugby league for Australia . One of his childhood friends , Edgar Newham , also played both sports and wanted to play Test cricket . However , the town 's doctor , a local community leader , advised them that they were targeting the wrong sport , and the two boys followed his recommendation . Newham later played rugby league for Australia . 
 In his youth he was also a boxer , and earned the nickname " Johnson " for his dark @-@ skinned resemblance to American black heavyweight boxing champion Jack Johnson . In the mid @-@ 1930s , he made brief appearances for the State Colts and Second XI , and played cricket against the likes of Stan McCabe , an inductee into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame . In December 1933 , Toshack played in a colts match for New South Wales against Queensland . He took 3 / 63 and 3 / 36 but was unable to prevent a five @-@ wicket defeat . He then took a total of 3 / 88 in a match for New South Wales Country against their city counterparts , and was promoted into the state 's Second XI . Toshack took a total of 1 / 91 in a match against the Victorian Second XI and did not play for his state again until 1945 . 
 His cricket aspirations , already hindered due to economic difficulties caused by the Great Depression , were further interrupted when he was wheelchair @-@ bound for months after a ruptured appendix in 1938 . He was not allowed to enlist in the Australian Defence Force during World War II and worked at Lithgow 's Small Arms factory , in the Blue Mountains west of Sydney . Only at the end of the war , aged 30 did he go to Sydney . At the time , he was a medium @-@ fast left @-@ arm bowler and approached Petersham — as Toshack lived in their locality , they had the right to register him ahead of other clubs . They did not select Toshack , so he joined Marrickville in Sydney Grade Cricket , starting in the third grade team in 1944 – 45 . Within two matches , he rose to the first grade team . By this time , Petersham regretted their decision to spurn Toshack and lodged a complaint with the cricket authorities , claiming that he was obliged to represent them and ineligible to play for Marrickville . Toshack later recalled that Petersham were " told where to go " . 
 = = First @-@ class and Test debut = = 
 Upon the resumption of first @-@ class cricket in 1945 – 46 , Toshack made his debut for New South Wales against Queensland as an opening bowler aged almost 31 , and was quickly among the wickets . He took four wickets for the loss of 69 runs ( 4 / 69 ) in his first innings as his team took a 128 @-@ run lead , but he managed only 0 / 87 from 20 overs in the second innings as New South Wales fell to a four @-@ wicket loss , failing to defend a target of 270 . His first wicket was that of Geoff Cook . Toshack 's most successful match of the season came in the following fixture , against South Australia . Taking 4 / 30 and 4 / 78 as New South Wales won by an innings . He then took 2 / 36 and 3 / 54 in an innings victory over the Australian Services . 
 By the end of the season , in March 1946 , Toshack had taken 35 wickets in seven first @-@ class matches , at an average of 18 @.@ 82 , making him the second highest wicket @-@ taker behind George Tribe with 40 . He performed consistently and took at least four wickets in each match , his innings best was 4 / 30 . Toshack was selected for a non @-@ Test tour of New Zealand . He played in three provincial tour matches against Auckland , Canterbury and Wellington , all of which were won by an innings . He took match figures of 7 / 91 against Auckland and 8 / 58 against Wellington . 
 In the final match of the tour , Toshack found himself opening the bowling for Australia with fellow debutant Ray Lindwall in a match against New Zealand at Wellington that was retrospectively recognised as a Test two years later . The eight years since Australia 's last Test saw a new post @-@ war generation of international cricketers make their debut . Toshack was one of seven Australians playing their first Test . New Zealand were routed inside two days on a damp pitch , having been dismissed for 42 in their first innings after winning the toss and choosing to bat . Toshack 's first Test wicket was that of opposing captain Walter Hadlee , who was caught by Keith Miller . Toshack took three further wickets to end with innings figures of 4 / 12 . He did not bat as Australia made 8 / 198 . New Zealand were then bowled out in their second innings for 54 , with Toshack taking 2 / 6 as Australia took an innings victory . He dismissed Eric <unk> and Ces Burke in both innings . The performance ensured that Toshack would become an integral part of Australia 's attack for the next three years . Toshack ended the tour with 23 wickets at 10 @.@ 34 in four matches . 
 Toshack started the 1946 – 47 season strongly , taking 5 / 46 and 4 / 70 as New South Wales opened the season with a five @-@ wicket win over Queensland . He removed Australian wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon twice . After going wicketless in a rain @-@ curtailed match for his state against England , Toshack was selected to make his Ashes debut in the First Test at Brisbane . With the emergence of leading all rounder Keith Miller , Toshack was relegated to first change bowler as Miller began his much celebrated partnership with Lindwall . Toshack was unbeaten on one in his first innings with the bat when Australia were bowled out for 645 on the third day . 
 On a sticky wicket , Toshack initially struggled , bowling his characteristic leg stump line . England struggled to 117 runs for the loss of five wickets ( 5 / 117 ) at the end of the fourth day despite many interruptions caused by rain . Norman Yardley and captain Wally Hammond had defied the Australian bowlers since coming together at 5 / 66 . On the fifth and final morning , captain Don Bradman advised him to pitch straighter and at a slower pace . Before play began Bradman took him down the pitch and showed him exactly where he wanted him to bowl and even make him bowl a practice over alongside to make sure he got it right . Having started the day wicketless , Toshack dismissed Yardley and Hammond in the space of 13 runs to break the English resistance and finished with an economical 3 / 17 from 17 overs as England were bowled out for 141 . Bradman enforced the follow @-@ on , and with Lindwall indisposed , Toshack took the new ball with Miller . He continued where he finished in the first innings , taking four of the first six wickets ( Bill Edrich , Denis Compton , Hammond and Yardley ) as the English top order were reduced to 6 / 65 . He ended the innings with 6 / 82 as England were bowled out twice in a day to lose by an innings and 332 runs . The remaining four Tests were less successful : only in one innings did he take more than one wicket . In the Second Test at Sydney the pitch favoured spin bowling and Toshack only bowled 13 overs without taking a wicket as Australia claimed another innings victory . He took match figures of 2 / 127 on a flat pitch in the Third Test in Melbourne , removing world record holder Len Hutton and Compton . During the match , Toshack came in to bat in the second innings with Australia nine wickets down . He defended stubbornly and ended unbeaten on two as his partner Lindwall went from 81 to 100 to score the fastest Test century by an Australian , in 88 balls . Toshack was more productive in the drawn Fourth Test in Adelaide , where he took match figures of 5 / 135 from 66 eight ball overs in extreme heat , including the wicket of Hammond twice , Edrich and Joe Hardstaff junior . Ahead of the final Test , Toshack removed Compton , Edrich and Godfrey Evans in a drawn match for Victoria against the tourists . He took only one wicket in the Fifth Test as Australia sealed the series 3 – 0 with a five @-@ wicket win . Toshack finished the series with 17 wickets at a bowling average of 25 @.@ 71 . His first @-@ class season was not a productive as in his debut year ; he took 33 wickets at an average of 30 @.@ 93 in eleven matches , making him the sixth highest wicket @-@ taker for the season . Toshack had a particularly unsuccessful time in the two Sheffield Shield matches against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , which were lost by heavy margins of an innings and 114 runs , and 288 runs respectively . In the first match he took 0 / 133 after Australian team @-@ mate Miller hit three sixes from his opening over . In the second match he took a total of 3 / 144 . Victoria went on to win the title . 
 The following 1947 – 48 season , Toshack warmed up for the Test campaign against the touring Indians by taking 2 / 64 and 4 / 65 for New South Wales in an innings win , dismissing Hemu Adhikari twice . He retained his position in the national team , and in the First Test at Brisbane on a wet pitch , Toshack took ten wickets for the only time in his Test career . In reply to Australia 's 8 / 382 declared , India had been reduced to 5 / 23 by Lindwall , Miller and Bill Johnston before Vijay Hazare and captain Lala Amarnath took the score to 53 without further loss , prompting Toshack 's introduction into the attack . He dismissed both and removed the remaining lower @-@ order batsmen to end with 5 / 2 in 19 balls as India were bowled out after adding only five further runs . Bradman enforced the follow on and India reached 1 / 27 before a spell of 6 / 29 from Toshack reduced them to 8 / 89 , including the wickets of Hazare , Amarnath and Khanderao <unk> for a second time . India were bowled out for 98 as Australia won by an innings and 226 runs . Injury persistently curtailed Toshack during the season , and he missed a month of cricket , including the next two Tests . He returned for the second match against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , and took 6 / 38 and 2 / 71 to play a key role in a New South Wales victory by six wickets . His victims in the first innings included Test batsmen Lindsay Hassett , Neil Harvey and Sam Loxton as New South Wales took a decisive 290 @-@ run lead . He dismissed Hassett and Ken Meuleman in the second innings to help set up victory . Toshack only played in one further Test during the season , the Fourth , where he was less successful with match figures of 2 / 139 . He dismissed centurion <unk> <unk> as Australia went on to win the series 4 – 0 . When fit , Toshack was a heavy wicket @-@ taker ; his 41 wickets at 20 @.@ 26 placed him second only to Bill Johnston 's 42 among Australian bowlers for the season . 
 = = Invincibles tour = = 
 By the end of the Indian series , knee injuries had begun to hamper Toshack , and he only made the trip to England for the 1948 tour on a 3 – 2 majority vote by a medical team , despite being one of the first selected by the board . Two Melbourne doctors ruled him unfit , but three specialists from his home state presented a more optimistic outlook that allowed him to tour . The tour was to guarantee him immortality as a member of Bradman 's Invincibles . He grew tired of signing autographs during the voyage , and entrusted a friend with the task . As a result , there are still sheets circulating with his name mis @-@ spelt as <unk> . Between the new @-@ ball attacks of Lindwall , Keith Miller and Johnston every 55 overs , Toshack played the role of stifling England 's scoring . In one match against Sussex , his 17 overs yielded only three scoring shots . He finished the match bowling 32 overs while conceding 29 runs . At Bramall Lane , Sheffield , he recorded the best innings analysis of his first @-@ class career , taking 7 / 81 from 40 consecutive overs , bemusing the Yorkshire spectators with the his accent and distinctive " Ow Wizz Ee " appealing . Bradman considered his 6 / 51 against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord 's as the best performance of all . He removed the leading English batsmen Len Hutton and Denis Compton , as well as Martin Donnelly and Ken Cranston . In particular , Toshack was involved in an extended battle with Compton before dismissing him ; Bradman said that their duel was " worth going a long way to see " . This performance helped Australia to take an innings victory over a team that was virtually a full @-@ strength England outfit and allowed Australia to take a psychological victory in a dress rehearsal ahead of the Tests . 
 Toshack 's performance in the First Test at Trent Bridge was a quiet one , taking a wicket in each innings . He was involved in an aggressive final wicket partnership of 32 with Johnston , scoring 19 runs , his best at Test level to date in just 18 minutes . Toshack 's best Test performance was his 5 / 40 in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord 's when Miller was unable to bowl after being injured , including the wickets of Cyril Washbrook , Bill Edrich , captain Yardley and Alec Coxon . During this performance , he employed two short legs and a silly mid @-@ off . He had a moderately successful Third Test , taking figures of 3 / 101 in the only Test that Australia did not win . His knee injury flared again in the Fourth Test after taking an ineffective 1 / 112 in the first innings , he was unable to bowl in the second innings of an Australian win . He made a recovery and it was hoped that he would be able to play in the Fifth Test , but he injured again himself in the lead @-@ up match against Lancashire . He was taken to London for cartilage surgery , ending his tour and his Test career . An inept batsman with an average of 5 @.@ 78 in first @-@ class fixtures , Toshack managed a Test average of 51 on the 1948 tour after being out only once , behind only Arthur Morris , Sid Barnes , Bradman and Neil Harvey . The unbeaten 20 he managed in the Lord 's Test was his best first @-@ class score , made in an uninhibited tenth @-@ wicket stand with Johnston . Due to the fragility of his knee , Toshack was used sparingly in the tour games , playing in only 11 of the 29 non @-@ Test matches on the tour . Toshack totalled 50 wickets at the average of 21 @.@ 12 for the tour . 
 The knee injury prevented Toshack from playing during the 1948 – 1949 Australian domestic season . The Australian team to tour South Africa in 1949 – 50 was named at the end of the previous season , and Toshack was omitted after a season on the sidelines . At the start of the 1949 – 50 season , when his Test teammates were sailing across the Indian Ocean to South Africa , Toshack made a strong start to his first @-@ class comeback . He took 4 / 41 and 5 / 59 in a Shield match against Queensland in Brisbane , removing Ken Mackay and Wally Grout twice , helping to seal a close 15 @-@ run win . In the second match , against Western Australia , Toshack took 4 / 68 in the first innings before his injury resurfaced . New South Wales won the match despite Toshack 's inability to bowl in the second innings . The injury cost Toshack dearly ; it forced him to retire from first @-@ class cricket and cost him a Test recall . Toshack had been offered a position on the South African tour as a reinforcement for Johnston , who had been involved in a car crash . Instead , Miller took the position and played in all five Tests . 
 Toshack subsequently joined a firm of builders and spent 25 years as a foreman and supervisor on construction sites around Sydney . He also wrote about cricket and enjoyed cultivating his vegetable garden in the northern Sydney suburb of Hornsby Heights . Toshack died on 11 May 2003 . He was survived by his wife Cathleen Hogan , whom he married in 1939 , their only daughter , three granddaughters and two great @-@ granddaughters . 
 = = Style = = 
 Bowling primarily from over the wicket , his accuracy , changes of pace , and movement in both directions , coupled with a leg stump line to a packed leg @-@ side field , made scoring off him difficult . He achieved his success in a manner not dissimilar to Derek Underwood a generation later . His accuracy and stamina allowed Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller , one of Australia 's finest fast bowling pairs of all time , to draw breath between short and incisive bursts of pace and swing . Standing 6 feet 2 inches ( 188 cm ) , he was particularly effective on sticky wickets , reducing his speed to slow medium pace and using a repertoire of off cutters , inswingers , outswingers and leg breaks . Bowling a leg @-@ stump line from over the wicket with a leg side cordon of two short legs and a silly mid @-@ on , he was described by Bradman as " unique in every way " . Bradman further added " I cannot remember another of the same type ... He worried and got out the best bats , was amazingly accurate and must have turned in fine figures had not his cartilage given way . " He usually bowled with four men on the off side including a slip , and five on the leg . When the pitch was wet , he moved a further man to the on side to field at leg slip . 
 Nicknamed the " Black Prince " because of his tanned skin , Toshack 's looks and sense of humour made him a crowd favourite , as did his theatrical appealing , which was more reminiscent of later eras of cricketers . His vocal appealing prompted the journalist and former Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton to dub him " The Voice " , while teammate Sid Barnes called him " The film star " because of his looks . His sense of fun was often on show . While on the 1948 tour , he would often wear a bowler hat , grab a furled umbrella , and place a cigar in his mouth , parodying an Englishman . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = 152 mm howitzer M1943 ( D @-@ 1 ) = 
 The D @-@ 1 howitzer M1943 ( Russian : 152 @-@ mm <unk> <unk> . 1943 g . ( D @-@ 1 ) ) is a Soviet World War II @-@ era 152 @.@ 4 mm howitzer . The gun was developed by the design bureau headed by F. F. Petrov in 1942 and 1943 , based on the carriage of the 122 mm howitzer M1938 ( M @-@ 30 ) and using the barrel of the 152 mm howitzer M1938 ( M @-@ 10 ) . The powerful and mobile D @-@ 1 , with its wide range of ammunition , significantly increased the firepower and breakthrough abilities of Red Army tank and motor rifle formations . Several hundred D @-@ 1s were manufactured before the end of World War II . 
 Post World War II , the D @-@ 1 saw combat in numerous conflicts during the mid- to late 20th century . The long operational history of D @-@ 1 howitzers in national armies of numerous countries is a testimony to its qualities ; the gun still remains in service in a number of post @-@ Soviet states and some other countries . The D @-@ 1 is widely considered a valuable element of Soviet artillery . 
 = = Development and production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1941 the Soviet Union decided to cease production of the 152 mm howitzer M1938 ( M @-@ 10 ) . One of the reasons was the disbanding of the Rifle Corps between August and September 1941 and the consequent removal of the corps artillery . Moreover , all 152 mm howitzers were excluded from divisional artillery . As a result , there was no series production of 152 mm howitzers during 1942 . 
 However , the rifle corps were re @-@ established in late 1942 and the previous organization of artillery at the corps level was reintroduced . As a result of the halting of 152 mm howitzer production , the Red Army corps artillery lacked a weapon more mobile than the heavy 152 mm howitzer @-@ gun <unk> ( ML @-@ 20 ) ( typically employed by army @-@ level and Reserve of the Main Command artillery units ) , but more powerful than the 122 mm howitzer M1938 ( M @-@ 30 ) . 
 = = = Response to the challenge = = = 
 In 1942 , trying to solve the problem of lack of a suitable mobile 152 mm howitzer , the design bureau headed by F. F. Petrov started to work privately on a new howitzer , based on the carriage of the M @-@ 30 and the barrel of the M @-@ 10 ( which was fitted with a muzzle brake in order to reduce the recoil and thus prevent damage to the lighter carriage ) . The approach allowed production to begin on the new howitzer almost immediately from the stockpile of parts for both earlier guns . Given the war situation and shortages of artillery , this solution was both elegant and expedient . 
 Early in 1943 Petrov notified the People 's Commissar of Armaments Dmitriy Ustinov about the new project . On 13 April Ustinov informed Petrov that the State Committee of Defence had requested for five of the new guns to be sent to the testing grounds on 1 May . On 5 May , two pieces were received for trials ; two days later , on 7 May the gun was recommended for adoption , and on 8 August 1943 it was officially adopted as the 152 mm howitzer M1943 . One and a half months later , the first series production D @-@ 1 howitzers were delivered to the Red Army representatives . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The D @-@ 1 was manufactured solely at No. 9 Plant ( <unk> ) in Sverdlovsk from late 1943 to 1949 . During World War II , the howitzer was only produced in small numbers because Plant No. 9 was also responsible for the mass production of the 122 mm howitzer M @-@ 30 . This resulted in critical shortages of the 152 mm howitzers in the Red Army corps artillery until the end of the war . 
 = = Description = = 
 The D @-@ 1 howitzer was essentially a combination of the barrel of the 152 @-@ mm howitzer model 1938 ( M @-@ 10 ) on the carriage of the 122 @-@ mm howitzer M1938 ( M @-@ 30 ) . Since the new carriage was lighter than that of the M @-@ 10 , the barrel was fitted with a massive double @-@ baffle muzzle brake DT @-@ 3 to soften the shock of recoil . The breech block was of interrupted screw type , the recoil system consisted of a hydraulic buffer and a hydro @-@ pneumatic <unk> . The separately loaded ammunition included a variety of shells and eight different propellant charges in cartridges . 
 The carriage was nearly identical to the carriage of the M @-@ 30 . It had suspension and steel wheels with pneumatic rubber tires . The trails were initially of riveted construction , but were eventually replaced in production by welded ones . Late production pieces were equipped with caster wheels to ease manhandling . Time to set up for combat was about two minutes . In an emergency it was possible to fire without splitting trails ; however this was at the price of a drastically reduced traverse ( 1 ° 30 ' ) . Since the gun was not equipped with a limber , it could be towed only by vehicle . The maximum towing speed was 40 km / h on paved roads , 30 km / h on cobbled roads and 10 km / h off @-@ road . To give the crew some protection from bullets and shell fragments , the gun was fitted with a shield . 
 = = = Comparison with contemporary howitzers = = = 
 From a technical and tactical point of view , the D @-@ 1 project provided the Red Army ( <unk> ) corps artillery with a modern 152 mm howitzer , which combined both good mobility and firepower . When compared with a typical contemporary howitzer of similar caliber , the D @-@ 1 had shorter range , but was much lighter . For example , the German 15 cm <unk> 18 had a range of 13 @,@ 325 meters - about one kilometer longer than that of the D @-@ 1 - but also weighed almost two tons more ( 5 @,@ 510 kilograms in traveling position ) . The same can be said of the US 155 @-@ mm howitzer M1 ( 14 @,@ 600 meters , 5 @,@ 800 kilograms ) or the 149 mm howitzer manufactured by the Italian Ansaldo ( 14 @,@ 250 meters , 5 @,@ 500 kilograms ) . A German howitzer with characteristics similar to those of the D @-@ 1 — the 15 cm <unk> 36 — did not reach mass production . Compared with older pieces such as the French Schneider model 1917 ( 11 @,@ 200 meters , 4 @,@ 300 kg ) , the D @-@ 1 had the advantage in both weight and range . 
 = = Organization and employment = = 
 The D @-@ 1 was employed by corps artillery and the reserve of the main command units . In 1944 , the rifle corps of the Red Army had one artillery regiment each . Those regiments consisted of five batteries ( totaling 20 guns ) , equipped with the D @-@ 1 along with various other 152 mm howitzers , 122 mm gun <unk> / 37 ( A @-@ 19 ) , 152 mm howitzer @-@ gun <unk> ( ML @-@ 20 ) or 107 mm gun M1910 / 30 . Reserve of the Main Command included howitzer regiments ( 48 pieces ) and heavy howitzer brigades ( 32 pieces ) . Those could be merged to form artillery divisions . 
 The Red Army employed D @-@ 1 howitzers from 1944 onwards , during the final stages of World War II . The D @-@ 1 was used primarily used against personnel , fortifications and key structures in the enemy rear . The anti @-@ concrete G @-@ 530 shell was also sometimes used against armored vehicles with good results . During its service the gun earned a reputation for being reliable and accurate . The D @-@ 1 was finally withdrawn from service in the mid @-@ seventies . 
 After the war the gun was supplied to many countries around the globe , including former Warsaw Pact allies , such as Poland . As of the early 2000s it remains in service in Afghanistan , Albania , China , Cuba , Hungary , Iraq , Mozambique , Syria , Vietnam and other countries . The gun was employed in the Arab @-@ Israeli Conflict and also in some conflicts in former republics of Soviet Union . The long operational history of D @-@ 1 howitzers in the national armies of numerous countries is an additional testimony to its qualities . 
 The D @-@ 1 was seen in use during the April 2016 battles between the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Defense Army and the Azerbaijani Forces . It was used by the NKR Defense Forces . 
 Surviving D @-@ 1 howitzers can be seen in various military museums and war memorials , e. g. in the Museum of Artillery and Engineering Forces , Saint Petersburg , Russia ; in the Museum of Heroic Defense and Liberation of Sevastopol on Sapun Mountain , Sevastopol ; in the Museum of the Great Patriotic War , Kiev , Ukraine ; in Poznań Citadel , Poland and in Polatsk , Belarus , as a memorial piece . 
 = = Variants = = 
 In addition to the towed howitzer , Petrov 's team developed a vehicle @-@ mounted variant of the D @-@ 1 . Red Army offensive operations in the summer and fall of 1943 reawakened interest in the idea of a heavy " artillery " tank similar to the KV @-@ 2 , that could provide close fire support to rifle and tank units and would be capable of demolishing heavy fortifications . Probable causes for the development of such a vehicle were the cessation of mass production of the SU @-@ 122 medium assault gun and diversion of SU @-@ 152 heavy assault guns for anti @-@ tank actions . The tank variant of the D @-@ 1 was originally intended for mounting in a variant of the KV @-@ 1s heavy tank . It utilized the mount of the 85 mm D @-@ 5 , leading to the unofficial name D @-@ 1 @-@ 5 and eventually to the official designation of D @-@ 15 . Only one example was built . There is no information about the gun being mounted in the KV tank . By October 1943 Soviet authorities were anticipating the start of mass production of the powerful IS @-@ 2 heavy tank ; as a result the idea of a specialized artillery tank based on the obsolete KV chassis was dropped . 
 Another project combining the T @-@ 34 tank chassis with the D @-@ 15 gun was also considered . Designated SU @-@ <unk> , the medium assault gun was intended as a replacement for the SU @-@ 122 . Although the project received a lot of support from the authorities it never entered production , both because of its shortcomings ( the heavy gun put too much strain on the suspension and ammunition stowage was too limited ) and because it was made redundant by the ISU @-@ 152 . However lessons learned mounting a powerful gun in the T @-@ 34 allowed for rapid development of the SU @-@ 100 tank destroyer . 
 = = Ammunition = = 
 The D @-@ 1 had a large variety of ammunition , including high @-@ explosive , armor @-@ piercing , HEAT , shrapnel , illumination , and chemical . 
 The D @-@ 1 used separate loading ammunition , with eight different charges . The charges included the " full charge " <unk> @-@ 536 and smaller charges ranging from the " first " to " sixth " , which was the smallest . A " special charge " was used with the BP @-@ 540 HEAT projectile . Propellant charges were produced in " full " and " third " variants in munitions factories . All other charges were derived from them by removing small gunpowder bags from the charge cartridge . For flash suppression there was a special chemical mixture which was to be inserted into a cartridge before night firing . 152 mm projectiles for the D @-@ 1 weighed about 40 kg ; a difficult job for the loaders , who had to carry the projectiles alone . 
 When set to fragmentation mode , the OF @-@ 530 projectile produced fragments which covered an area 70 meters wide and 30 meters deep . When set to high @-@ explosive ( HE ) action , the exploding shell produced a crater about 3 @.@ 5 meters in diameter and about 1 @.@ 2 meters deep . Despite the D @-@ 1 's withdrawal from service in the mid- 1970s , the OF @-@ 530 is still fired from modern 152 mm ordnance pieces of the Russian Army . 
 The G @-@ 530 <unk> anti @-@ concrete shell had a muzzle velocity of 457 m / s when fired with the " first " charge . At a range of one kilometer it had a 358 m / s terminal velocity and was able to punch through up to 80 centimeters of reinforced concrete before detonating a TNT charge which increased the total penetration to 114 centimeters . The G @-@ 530 could not be fired with a " full " charge without putting the crew at risk of having the shell explode in the barrel . A special version of the shell , the G @-@ <unk> , was developed to allow use with the full charge . 
 The BP @-@ 540 HEAT projectile was not used during World War II . It had an armour penetration of 250 millimeters at an incident angle of 90 ° , 220 millimeters at 60 ° , 120 millimeters at 30 ° . 
 In the late 1950s old ammunition stocks for the D @-@ 1 were removed from the Soviet inventory . The only shells retained were the OF @-@ 530 , O @-@ 530 , G @-@ 530 / G @-@ <unk> , and possibly chemical shells . The Soviet Army also possessed a 152 mm nuclear shell , but it is not clear whether that shell could be used with the D @-@ 1 . 
 = 1 Thing = 
 " 1 Thing " is a song written by American R & B singer @-@ songwriter Amerie and Rich Harrison for Amerie 's second studio album , Touch ( 2005 ) . The song is influenced by go @-@ go rhythms and features a prominent sample of The Meters ' 1970 funk recording of " Oh , Calcutta ! " , written by Stanley Walden . Its lyrics focus on an unidentified " thing " that fuels a romantic attraction . 
 The song was released as Touch 's lead single in 2005 , and is the only single from the soundtrack to the 2005 romantic comedy film Hitch . " 1 Thing " received acclaim from critics , and peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and number four in the United Kingdom , becoming Amerie 's first top ten single and her biggest hit to date , also peaking at number one on the U.S. R & B singles chart . Its digital download and ringtone releases were each certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The song earned Amerie a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 2006 Grammy Awards . A remix of " 1 Thing " features rapper Eve . It was later named the twenty @-@ second and twenty @-@ fifth best song of the 2000s decade by Rolling Stone and Robert Christgau , respectively . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In 2004 , when working on her second album , Amerie enlisted the services of producer Rich Harrison , who had helped produce and write her first album . In May 2004 , Harrison heard " Oh , Calcutta ! " for the first time and began working on the beat accompanying the ten @-@ second back @-@ and @-@ forth breakdown between Meters drummer Ziggy <unk> and guitarist Leo Nocentelli . Harrison said he loved the work of the Meters , especially <unk> , commenting , " Ziggy , he 's crazy . " He processed the way the breakdown could be " flipped " , added a bongo drum , a cowbell , and a ride cymbal , and sent it to Amerie . According to Harrison , they wrote and finished the song in two to three hours . 
 Amerie 's manager , Len Nicholson , felt the song was " the single " to release . When executives at Amerie 's label , Columbia / Sony Urban Music , heard " 1 Thing " , they felt that the song 's choruses needed to be " bigger " . They recommended that more music be added to the percussion @-@ focused beat , but Harrison and Amerie replied that adding more to the beat would overpower the song . Harrison and Amerie returned to the studio several times to rework the track . Each time they submitted a new version to the label , Columbia told them that the song sounded unfinished , but was unable to specify what should be changed . The label continued to refuse to release " 1 Thing " ; in Amerie 's words , " People just weren 't getting it " . 
 Later in 2004 , six months after recording " 1 Thing " , Amerie and Harrison leaked it to U.S. radio stations in an attempt to get it released officially . The response from DJs and listeners was positive , and it consequently received airplay across the country . Columbia Records attempted to suppress the song because it was an unofficial release , and because Jennifer Lopez ( another artist on the label ) had expressed interest in recording the song for her own album , Rebirth . Radio stations refused to retract the song from their playlists , and Columbia eventually began promoting " 1 Thing " as a single , making it a last @-@ minute addition to the Hitch soundtrack . Lopez settled on another Harrison @-@ produced , funk @-@ infused track , the Usher outtake " Get Right " . 
 = = Theme and sound = = 
 " 1 Thing " was produced by Harrison and is built around a sample of The Meters ' 1970 version of the theme song from Oh ! Calcutta ! , " Oh , Calcutta ! " , written by Stanley Walden . Built around The Meters ' funky beat @-@ driven percussion , " 1 Thing " finds Amerie lamenting an aspect of a relationship that keeps her satisfied . Even if other factors are less than positive , there is one thing that keeps her hooked ( " It 's this one thing that 's got me trippin ' " ) . Amerie said that the inspiration for the song came from a conversation she had with Harrison " about relationships and how there 's always one thing that keeps you attracted to someone . No matter what they do or how they act , there 's that one undeniable thing that keeps you coming back . " She told Blender that the " one thing " " could be bringing flowers , or something more ... physical . People think I 'm just this good girl , but there are other sides they don 't see . " 
 Despite being based on a New Orleans funk sample , the song belies a strong go @-@ go influence . Harrison likened the two based on their heavy use of percussion and chant . Amerie stated , " You don 't hear go @-@ go outside of D.C. ... I was like , ' We have to do it in an up @-@ tempo way because when you hear it on the radio in D.C. , it 's fast . ' ... So it 's a fresh sound for everybody but people in the D.C. / Maryland / Virginia area . They [ already ] know what it is . " The song is composed in the key of B major , moving at a tempo of 100 beats per minute in common time . It uses four @-@ measure phrases with a I @-@ III @-@ II @-@ I @-@ VI chord progression . The first four chords are played on the measure 's downbeat , and off @-@ beat syncopation is used for the fifth chord . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " 1 Thing " received acclaim from music critics . In its review of Touch , Rolling Stone named the song " an early front @-@ runner for song @-@ of @-@ the @-@ summer status , " also ranking it the number one single of 2005 . Pitchfork Media stated that Harrison " knows something about horns , big glorious ascending heavenly anthemic horns " and " drums , huge sweaty riotous back @-@ and @-@ forth second @-@ line old @-@ school Clyde Stubblefield drums . " AllMusic described " 1 Thing " as being " just as exciting " as " Oh , Calcutta ! " for how it " [ flails ] all over the place with unbound joy " . 
 The song received second place behind Kanye West 's " Gold Digger " on the 2005 Pazz & Jop list , a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau . Blender ranked " 1 Thing " number 191 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . It praised the song 's " cascading drums … and Amerie 's frantic , top @-@ of @-@ her @-@ range vocals " . Calling it " a pretty fucking smart move to wrap perfect pop around a question that stays open all night " , Pitchfork listed the song as the second best single of 2005 , behind Antony and the Johnsons ' " Hope There 's Someone " . The song was ranked 32nd on Pitchfork 's top 500 songs of the 2000s , and the publication included " 1 Thing " in its collection of The Pitchfork 500 . Christgau named it the twenty @-@ fifth best song of the 2000s . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " 1 Thing " became Amerie 's most commercially successful song . In the United States , it debuted at the bottom of the Billboard Hot 100 on February 12 , 2005 . The song gradually climbed the chart over a ten @-@ week period , peaking at number eight , and exited the chart after a total of twenty weeks . It received play from urban contemporary stations and topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs in late April 2005 . " 1 Thing " also charted on the Rhythmic Top 40 and Pop 100 , reaching numbers thirteen and twenty @-@ eight respectively . The Recording Industry Association of America awarded a platinum certification to its digital download in October 2005 , and another platinum certification to its ringtone release in June 2006 . The song received a Grammy nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 48th Grammy Awards but lost to Mariah Carey 's " We Belong Together " . 
 The song was successful in the British Isles . In the United Kingdom , " 1 Thing " debuted and peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart in late May 2005 . It went on to spend fourteen weeks on the chart . The song ended the year as Britain 's thirty @-@ eighth best @-@ selling single of 2005 . In the neighboring Republic of Ireland , the single debuted at number ten on the Irish Singles Chart . It climbed to number six in two weeks , remaining on the chart for another nine weeks . " 1 Thing " was successful in continental Europe , where it peaked at number thirteen on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . It reached the top ten in Denmark , Finland , and Norway ; the top twenty in Belgium and the Netherlands ; and the top forty in France , Germany , Sweden , and Switzerland . 
 = = Video , covers , and other uses = = 
 The music video for " 1 Thing " , directed by Chris Robinson and Amerie , revealed to the public the singer 's sexual side . It focuses on her dance routines , featuring her as a go @-@ go dancer in various setups , intercut with footage from the film Hitch . Amerie co @-@ directed the video with Chris Robinson after she approached him with the video 's concept in mind . The two collaborated again when directing the music video for the following single , " Touch " . 
 Lauryn Hill sampled " 1 Thing " during the second and last part of " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " during live performances . Girls Aloud used the song as an interlude in performances of its 2004 single " Love Machine " during its 2006 Chemistry Tour . Foo Fighters member Dave Grohl showed the video for " 1 Thing " during 24 Hours of Foo , during a segment in which each member of the band presented one song that they considered their " guilty pleasure " . Alternative rock band Elbow covered the song in a comedic fashion for an August 2005 performance on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . " 1 Thing " was used in the PlayStation 2 karaoke game SingStar R & B. The Sweden @-@ based Norwegian singer @-@ songwriter Ane Brun covered the song in an acoustic style on her 2013 album Rarities . A cover of the song by British duo Peter and Kerry is featured on Late Night Tales : <unk> . The Irish singer @-@ songwriter Hozier has performed " 1 Thing " during concerts in 2014 and 2015 . 
 " 1 Thing " was played during the pole dancing scene in Somewhere . The song can also be heard in the soundtracks for video games Saints Row 2 , Everybody Dance , The Hip Hop Dance Experience and Grand Theft Auto V. 
 = = Remixes = = 
 The song 's only official remix features guest vocals from rapper Eve , and an alternate version of the music video was created for it . Amerie that said she chose Eve to appear on the remix because most other female R & B singers were accompanied by male rappers , and that Eve " epitomizes that whole independent fearless female doing her thing . She 's fashionable and very much a woman even though she definitely has a lot of attitude , the strength that most would attribute to men . ... With ' 1 Thing ' being such an aggressive track , it was perfect to see two females really doing it . " 
 A second remix features Fabolous , a third features B.G. , and little @-@ known <unk> producer Satya Rock arranged an extended underground remix to feature E @-@ 40 , Method Man , Lyrics Born , One Be Lo , <unk> , Joe Budden , Talib Kweli , Beanie Sigel , <unk> , and MF <unk> . <unk> remixed " 1 Thing " by using instrumentals from a song by Japanese producer <unk> . Stylus Magazine listed <unk> 's remix seventh on its list of the top ten remixes of 2005 and commented that " it 's enough to warrant a whole change of venue , from the sizzling pep of the dance floor to the silk luxury of the bedroom . " Most of the unofficial remixes were released on mixtapes , and Amerie said that she liked them all , particularly those by Fabolous , B.G. , and Juelz Santana . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Abu Taghlib = 
 Fadl Allah Abu Taghlib al @-@ Ghadanfar <unk> al @-@ Dawla ( Arabic : <unk> الله أبو <unk> <unk> <unk> الدولة ) , usually known simply by his kunya as Abu Taghlib , was the third Hamdanid ruler of the Emirate of Mosul , encompassing most of the Jazira . 
 His reign was troubled , being marked by conflicts with some of his brothers , antagonism with the various branches of the Buyids for influence in Baghdad , and attacks by the Byzantine Empire under John I Tzimiskes . His relations with the Buyid emir of Iraq , ' Izz al @-@ Dawla Bakhtiyar , were initially hostile , but the two later concluded an alliance . In 978 , the Jazira was occupied by the Buyids of Shiraz under ' Adud al @-@ Dawla , and he fled to the Fatimid @-@ controlled parts of Syria , where he tried to secure the governorship of Damascus , and became involved in local rivalries which resulted in his defeat in battle and execution on 29 August 979 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin and background = = = 
 Abu Taghlib was the eldest son of al @-@ Hasan , better known by his laqab of Nasir al @-@ Dawla , who had established the Hamdanids as masters of a practically independent emirate encompassing the Jazira and centred on Mosul . Nasir al @-@ Dawla engaged in repeated attempts to gain control over the Abbasid caliphs at Baghdad , but in the end was forced to concede defeat to the more powerful Buyids , recognize their suzerainty and pay them tribute . At the same time , Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's younger brother Ali , better known as Sayf al @-@ Dawla , managed to establish his control over northern Syria from his two capitals Aleppo and Mayyafariqin , and through his clashes with the Byzantine Empire quickly overshadowed his brother . However , the last decade of Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's rule , until his death in February 967 , was marked by heavy military defeats at the hands of the Byzantines , who occupied much of his domains , and internal turmoil . 
 It was in this context that Abu Taghlib is first mentioned in 964 , when his father had once again been embroiled in a conflict with the Buyids . The army of the Buyid Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla occupied Mosul and Nasir al @-@ Dawla was once again forced to flee to the hill country of the northern Jazira . Abu Taghlib led the resistance against the Buyids , who , unable to maintain themselves there , evacuated Mosul and reached a new agreement with the Hamdanids . Consequently , Nasir al @-@ Dawla was now increasingly eclipsed by his sons , and was deposed outright and exiled in 967 , dying in captivity shortly after . 
 = = = Reign = = = 
 Abu Taghlib , surnamed al @-@ Ghadanfar ( " The Lion " ) , succeeded his father as emir and head of the Jaziran branch of the Hamdanid family , but almost immediately his authority was contested by a younger half @-@ brother , Hamdan . Nasir al @-@ Dawla had entrusted the latter with the governance of Nisibis , <unk> and Rahba shortly before his deposition , and may have intended to name him as his heir over Abu Taghlib . Hamdan was indeed the only son of Nasir al @-@ Dawla to protest his father 's deposition , and refused to recognize Abu Taghlib . With the aid of the new Buyid emir of Iraq , ' Izz al @-@ Dawla Bakhtiyar , Abu Taghlib prevailed over Hamdan , who fled to Baghdad . In addition , Abu Taghlib used the conditions of near @-@ anarchy prevailing in Syria at the time and after Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's death to expand his territory at the expense of his cousin , Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla . Upon Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's death , Abu Taghlib seized al @-@ Raqqah and <unk> , and by 971 he had extended his control over all of Diyar Bakr and Diyar Mudar , once part of Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's domain , uniting the entire Jazira under his rule . Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla , deprived of his own capital and lacking any power to offer any resistance , tacitly accepted these losses as well as his cousin 's suzerainty . As ruler of the Jazira , Abu Taghlib was one of the richest rulers of the region ; Ibn <unk> 's descriptions attest to the wealth derived from the many Hamdanid estates , and Ibn <unk> , who was tasked with inventorying the family 's mountain strongholds after the Buyid dissolution of the Hamdanid emirate in 979 , writes of the immense cash reserves stored there . 
 Relations with the Buyids were initially good , as Abu Taghlib , unlike his father , had no direct claim on Baghdad , and Bakhtiyar himself was too preoccupied with affairs in Iraq and elsewhere to focus his attention on the Jazira . However , the Buyid prince offered refuge to Hamdan and other disgruntled members of the Hamdanid clan ( including another of Abu Taghlib 's brothers , Abu Tahir Ibrahim ) and intervened in the Hamdanid family quarrels . Thus in 970 Hamdan was restored in Rahba thanks to Buyid pressure , only to be chased away again in 971 . The exiled prince now urged Bakhtiyar to make war on Abu Taghlib : in 973 the Buyids once again occupied Mosul , while Abu Taghlib with his army outflanked them and threatened Baghdad . The conflict ended in a negotiated settlement in 974 that included in its provisions the award of the laqab of <unk> al @-@ Dawla ( " Instrument of the Dynasty " ) to Abu Taghlib by the caliph and the restoration of Hamdan to his domains . During the same period , Abu Taghlib also faced the attacks of the Byzantines , who under Emperor John I Tzimiskes penetrated deep into the Jazira , forcing the Hamdanids to pay tribute . The devastating raids of 972 were partly avenged through the defeat and capture of the Domestic of the Schools Melias at Amid in 973 , but in 974 Tzimiskes himself raided the Jazira in retaliation . 
 In 973 – 975 , Abu Taghlib supported Bakhtiyar in his own struggles to safeguard his power . Thus he once again marched on Baghdad during the rebellion of the Turkish military commander , <unk> , although it was the intervention of the Buyid emir of Shiraz , ' Adud al @-@ Dawla , that decided the conflict for Bakhtiyar . As a result of his assistance , in 975 Abu Taghlib secured a revision of the earlier treaty which freed him from the payment of tribute . In 976 , following the death of Tzimiskes , Abu Taghlib agreed to support the bid for the Byzantine throne of the rebel general Bardas Skleros , with whom he concluded a treaty whereby the Hamdanid ruler supplied Skleros with light cavalry in exchange for an unspecified marriage agreement . 
 In 977 , as Bakhtiyar found himself driven from Baghdad by the ambitious ' Adud al @-@ Dawla , he turned again to the Hamdanids for aid . Abu Taghlib agreed to support him in exchange for the handing over of Hamdan , who was promptly executed . Although this secured Abu Taghlib 's position in his family , it also brought him to the attention of ' Adud al @-@ Dawla . In May 978 , Bakhtiyar and Abu Taghlib were defeated in a battle near Samarra by ' Adud al @-@ Dawla . Bakhtiyar himself was captured and executed at the orders of ' Adud al @-@ Dawla , who then advanced on Mosul . Unlike earlier Buyid expeditions against the Hamdanids , that had failed chiefly because they were unable to sustain themselves in the Jazira , this was far better organized , as ' Adud al @-@ Dawla brought along experienced administrators familiar with the area . The Buyids took Mosul and forced Abu Taghlib to flee to Mayyafariqin and then to the mountains of Armenia ; while the Buyids laid siege to Mayyafariqin , he even visited Skleros in Byzantine territory in <unk> , trying to secure his assistance , but in vain , for Skleros too was hard @-@ pressed by the loyalist general Bardas Phokas . After the fall of Mayyafariqin in 978 , Abu Taghlib fled to Rahba , from where he tried in vain to negotiate with ' Adud al @-@ Dawla . 
 = = = Exile and death = = = 
 With the Buyid troops completing their conquest of the Jazira , and unable to seek aid from his cousin Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla , who had already acknowledged ' Adud al @-@ Dawla 's suzerainty and was under orders to arrest him , Abu Taghlib with his remaining followers crossed the Syrian Desert to the Fatimid @-@ controlled south of Syria . There he became embroiled in the complex power struggles between the Fatimid government and local elites . He endeavoured to gain recognition by the Fatimids as governor of Damascus , but the rebel general al @-@ Qassam , who held the city , repulsed him . Under attack by the <unk> , and with members of his family starting to desert him , Abu Taghlib moved further south to the region of Lake Tiberias . Abu Taghlib 's ambitions and his contacts with the Fatimids now came to threaten the position of Mufarrij ibn Daghfal ibn al @-@ Jarrah , a Tayy chief and ruler of Ramla . Hoping to sow dissension among the Arab tribes of the area and strengthen Fatimid authority , the Fatimid general Fadl now promised Ramla to Abu Taghlib , who openly allied himself with Mufarrij 's rivals , the Banu Uqayl , and attacked Ramla in August 979 . Fadl 's troops , however , came to the aid of Mufarrij , and in the ensuing battle on 29 August Abu Taghlib was taken captive and executed . 
 The Jazira remained under Buyid control until 989 , when Abu Taghlib 's brothers Abu Abdallah Husayn and Abu Tahir Ibrahim , who had submitted to the Buyids , were installed as governors to oppose the power of the Kurdish chieftain <unk> , who had taken control of Mosul . In this fight , the two brothers relied upon the <unk> ; after the defeat of <unk> , the Banu Uqayl turned on the Hamdanids and deposed and killed Abu Tahir Ibrahim , establishing the Uqaylid Dynasty as the rulers of the Jazira . 
 = Piano music of Gabriel Fauré = 
 The French composer Gabriel Fauré ( 1845 – 1924 ) wrote in many genres , including songs , chamber music , orchestral pieces , and choral works . His compositions for piano , written between the 1860s and the 1920s , include some of his best known works . 
 Fauré 's major sets of piano works are thirteen nocturnes , thirteen barcarolles , six impromptus , and four valses @-@ caprices . These sets were composed during several decades in his long career , and display the change in his style from uncomplicated youthful charm to a final enigmatic , but sometimes fiery introspection , by way of a turbulent period in his middle years . His other notable piano pieces , including shorter works , or collections composed or published as a set , are Romances sans paroles , Ballade in F ♯ major , Mazurka in B ♭ major , Thème et variations in C ♯ major , and <unk> pièces brèves . For piano duet , Fauré composed the Dolly Suite and , together with his friend and former pupil André Messager , an exuberant parody of Wagner in the short suite Souvenirs de Bayreuth . 
 Much of Fauré 's piano music is difficult to play , but is rarely virtuosic in style . The composer disliked showy display , and the predominant characteristic of his piano music is a classical restraint and understatement . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 Although for much of his career he made his living as a church organist , Fauré greatly preferred the piano . He never underestimated the challenges in composing for the instrument ; he wrote , " In piano music there 's no room for padding – one has to pay cash and make it consistently interesting . It 's perhaps the most difficult genre of all . " Although his publishers insisted on descriptive titles , Fauré said that his own preference would be for utilitarian labels such as " Piano piece No X " . His works for the piano are marked by a classical French lucidity ; he was unimpressed by pianistic display , commenting of keyboard virtuosi , " the greater they are , the worse they play me . " Even a virtuoso such as Franz Liszt said that he found Fauré 's music hard to play : at his first attempt he said to Fauré , " I 've run out of fingers " . Fauré 's years as an organist influenced the way he laid out his keyboard works , often using arpeggiated figures , with themes distributed between the two hands , requiring fingerings more natural for organists than pianists . This tendency may have been even stronger because Fauré was ambidextrous , and he was not always inclined to follow the convention that the melody is in the right hand and the accompaniment in the left . His old friend and former teacher Camille Saint @-@ Saëns wrote to him in 1917 , " Ah ! if there is a god for the left hand , I should very much like to know him and make him an offering when I am disposed to play your music ; the 2nd Valse @-@ Caprice is terrible in this respect ; I have however managed to get to the end of it by dint of absolute determination . " 
 As a man , Fauré was said to possess " that mysterious gift that no other can replace or surpass : charm " , and charm is a conspicuous feature of many of his early compositions . His early piano works are influenced in style by Chopin , and throughout his life he composed piano works using similar titles to those of Chopin , notably nocturnes and barcarolles . An even greater influence was Schumann , whose piano music Fauré loved more than any other . The authors of The Record Guide ( 1955 ) wrote that Fauré learnt restraint and beauty of surface from Mozart , tonal freedom and long melodic lines from Chopin , " and from Schumann , the sudden felicities in which his development sections abound , and those codas in which whole movements are briefly but magically illuminated . " When Fauré was a student at the École Niedermeyer his tutor had introduced him to new concepts of harmony , no longer outlawing certain chords as " dissonant " . By using unresolved mild discords and colouristic effects , Fauré anticipated the techniques of Impressionist composers . 
 In later years Fauré 's music was written under the shadow of the composer 's increasing deafness , becoming gradually less charming and more austere , marked by what the composer Aaron Copland called " intensity on a background of calm . " The critic Bryce Morrison has noted that pianists frequently prefer to play the accessible earlier piano works , rather than the later music , which expresses " such private passion and isolation , such alternating anger and resignation " that listeners are left uneasy . The Fauré scholar Jean @-@ Michel Nectoux writes : 
 Fauré 's stylistic evolution can ... be observed in his works for piano . The elegant and captivating first pieces , which made the composer famous , show the influence of Chopin , Saint @-@ Saëns , and Liszt . The lyricism and complexity of his style in the 1890s are evident in the Nocturnes nos . 6 and 7 , the Barcarolle no . 5 and the Thème et variations . Finally , the stripped @-@ down style of the final period informs the last nocturnes ( <unk> – 13 ) , the series of great barcarolles ( nos . 8 – 11 ) and the astonishing Impromptu no . 5 . 
 = = Nocturnes = = 
 The nocturnes , along with the barcarolles , are generally regarded as the composer 's greatest piano works . Fauré greatly admired the music of Chopin , and was happy to compose in forms and patterns established by the earlier composer . Morrison notes that Fauré 's nocturnes follow Chopin 's model , contrasting serene outer sections with livelier or more turbulent central episodes . The composer 's son Philippe commented that the nocturnes " are not necessarily based on <unk> or on emotions inspired by the night . They are lyrical , generally impassioned pieces , sometimes anguished or wholly elegiac . " 
 Nocturne No 1 in E ♭ minor , Op 33 / 1 ( <unk> ) 
 Nectoux rates the first nocturne as one of the best of the composer 's early works . It is dedicated , like Fauré 's song " Après un rêve " , to his friend and early patron Marguerite Baugnies . Morrison calls the piece " cloistered and elegiac . " Though published as the composer 's Op 33 / 1 in 1883 , it was written considerably earlier . It opens with a slow , pensive melody , followed by a more agitated second theme and another melody in C major , and ends with the return of the opening theme . The pianist and academic Sally Pinkas writes that the work contains many hallmarks of Fauré 's style , including " undulating rhythms , syncopation of the accompaniment against the melody and layered textures are already in evidence . " 
 Nocturne No 2 in B major , Op 33 / 2 ( <unk> ) 
 The second nocturne opens with a bell @-@ like passage , andantino <unk> , recalling – although Fauré said it was unconscious – the sound of distant bells that he heard frequently when a boy . Nectoux singles out " the light footed episode in alternating fifths and sixths " and its extremely delicate <unk> , and points to the influence of Fauré 's former teacher Saint @-@ Saëns in the allegro ma non troppo toccata section . Saint @-@ Saëns himself declared the piece " absolutely entrancing . " 
 Nocturne No 3 in A ♭ major , Op 33 / 3 ( <unk> ) 
 In the third nocturne , Morrison notes that the composer 's fondness for syncopation is at its gentlest , " nostalgia lit by passion . " Like its predecessors , it is in tripartite form . An expansive melody with syncopated left @-@ hand accompaniment leads into a middle section in which a <unk> theme metamorphoses into bursts of passion . The return of the opening section is concluded by a gentle coda that introduces new harmonic subtleties . 
 Nocturne No 4 in E ♭ major , Op 36 ( <unk> ) 
 The fourth nocturne , dedicated to the Comtesse de Mercy @-@ Argenteau , contrasts a lyrical opening section and an episode in E ♭ minor with a sombre theme recalling the tolling of a bell . The first theme returns and is followed by a short coda . The pianist Alfred Cortot , generally a great admirer of Fauré , found the piece " rather too satisfied with its languor . " 
 Nocturne No 5 in B ♭ major , Op 37 ( <unk> ) 
 By contrast with its predecessor , the fifth nocturne is more animated , with unexpected shifts into remote keys . Nectoux writes of its undulating outline , and the " almost improvisatory , questioning character " of the opening . 
 Nocturne No 6 in D ♭ major , Op 63 ( 1894 ) 
 The sixth nocturne , dedicated to Eugène d <unk> , is widely held to be one of the finest of the series . Cortot said , " There are few pages in all music comparable to these . " Morrison calls it " among the most rich and eloquent of all Fauré 's piano works . " The pianist and writer Nancy <unk> calls it " one of the most passionate and moving works in piano literature . " Fauré wrote it after a six @-@ year break from composing for the piano . The piece begins with an emotional , outpouring phrase , with echoes of Fauré 's song cycle La bonne chanson . The second theme , at first seemingly tranquil , has what the composer Charles Koechlin calls a persistent <unk> , emphasised by the syncopated accompaniment . The initial theme returns , and is followed by a substantial development of a gentle , contemplative melody . A recapitulation of the principal theme takes the piece to its conclusion . Copland wrote that it was with this work that Fauré first fully emerged from the shadow of Chopin , and he said of the piece , " The breath and dignity of the opening melody , the restless C sharp minor section which follows ( with the peculiar syncopated harmonies so often and so well used by Fauré ) , the graceful fluidity of the third idea : all these elements are brought to a stormy climax in the short development section ; then , after a pause , comes the return of the consoling first page . " 
 Nocturne No 7 in C ♯ minor , Op 74 ( 1898 ) 
 The seventh nocturne departs from the A – B – A form of Fauré 's earlier nocturnes ; in Pinkas 's view is it constructed more like a ballade than a nocturne . It opens with a slow ( molto lento ) theme of harmonic ambiguity , followed by a second theme , equally ambiguous in key , though nominally in D major . The central section is in F ♯ major , and the re @-@ emergence of the first theme brings the piece to a conclusion . Morrison finds in this piece a sense of bleakness , and of the composer 's struggle against despair . Pinkas , however , regards the work as a " contrast between ambiguity and joy , ending in reassurance . " It is sometimes known as the " English " nocturne , having been composed while Fauré was staying in the UK , and being dedicated to the English pianist Adela Maddison . 
 Nocturne No 8 in D ♭ major , Op 84 / 8 ( 1902 ) 
 Fauré did not intend the eighth nocturne to appear under that designation . His publisher collected eight short piano pieces together and published them as 8 pièces brèves , allocating each of them a title unauthorised by the composer . The nocturne , the last piece in the set of eight , is shorter and less complex than its immediate predecessor , consisting of a song @-@ like main theme with a delicate semiquaver accompaniment in the left hand . 
 Nocturne No 9 in B minor , Op 97 ( 1908 ) 
 The ninth nocturne , dedicated to Cortot 's wife , Clotilde Bréal , is the first of three that share a directness and sparseness in contrast with the more elaborate structures and textures of their predecessors . The left @-@ hand accompaniment to the melodic line is simple and generally unvaried , and the harmony looks forward to later composers of the 20th century , using a whole tone scale . Most of the piece is inward @-@ looking and pensive , presaging the style of Fauré 's final works , although it ends optimistically in a major key . 
 Nocturne No 10 in E minor , Op 99 ( 1908 ) 
 Like its immediate predecessor , the tenth nocturne is on a smaller scale than those of Fauré 's middle period . In contrast with the ninth , however , the tenth is darker and angrier . The composer applies the A – B – A form less rigorously than in earlier nocturnes , and the opening bars of the piece recur intermittently throughout , eventually building to a fierce climax , described by Morrison as " a slow central climb ... that inhabits a world of nightmare . " The piece ends with a calm coda . It is dedicated to Madame Brunet @-@ Lecomte . 
 Nocturne No 11 in F ♯ minor , Op 104 / 1 ( 1913 ) 
 The eleventh nocturne was written in memory of Noémi Lalo ; her widower , Pierre Lalo , was a music critic and a friend and supporter of Fauré . Morrison suggests that its funereal effect of tolling bells may also reflect the composer 's own state of anguish , with deafness encroaching . The melodic line is simple and restrained , and except for a passionate section near the end is generally quiet and elegiac . 
 Nocturne No 12 in E minor , Op 107 ( 1915 ) 
 With the twelfth nocturne Fauré returned to the scale and complexity of his middle @-@ period works , but both melodically and harmonically it is much harder to comprehend . There are deliberate dissonances and harmonic ambiguities that Pinkas describes as " taking tonality to its limit while still maintaining a single key . " Morrison writes that " the ecstatic song of No 6 is transformed in a central section where lyricism is soured by dissonance , held up , as it were , to a distorting mirror . " The work is in Fauré 's customary nocturne form , A – B – A , but with a reiteration of the material of the second section , harmonically transformed , followed by a coda that draws on material from the opening section . 
 Nocturne No 13 in B minor , Op 119 ( 1921 ) 
 Fauré scholars are generally agreed that the last nocturne – which was the last work he wrote for the piano – is among the greatest of the set . Nectoux writes that along with the sixth , it is " incontestably the most moving and inspired of the series . " <unk> calls it " the most inspired and beautiful in the series . " For Pinkas , the work " achieves a perfect equilibrium between late @-@ style simplicity and full @-@ textured passionate expression . " The work opens in a " pure , almost rarefied atmosphere " ( Nectoux ) , with a " tone of noble , gentle supplication ... imposing gravity and ... rich expressive four part writing . " This is followed by an allegro , " a true middle section in a virtuoso manner , ending in a bang " ( Pinkas ) . The repeat of the opening section completes the work . 
 = = Barcarolles = = 
 Barcarolles were originally folk songs sung by gondoliers in Venice . In Morrison 's phrase , Fauré 's use of the term was more convenient than precise . Fauré was not attracted by fanciful titles for musical pieces , and maintained that he would not use even such generic titles as " barcarolle " if his publishers did not insist . His son Philippe recalled , " he would far rather have given his Nocturnes , Impromptus , and even his Barcarolles the simple title Piano Piece <unk> so @-@ and @-@ so . " Nevertheless , following the precedents of Chopin and most conspicuously Mendelssohn , Fauré made extensive use of the barcarolle , in what his biographer Jessica Duchen calls " an evocation of the rhythmic rocking and lapping of water around appropriately lyrical melodies . " 
 Fauré 's ambidexterity is reflected in the layout of many of his piano works , notably in the barcarolles , where the main melodic line is often in the middle register , with the accompaniments in the high treble part of the keyboard as well as in the bass . Duchen likens the effect of this in the barcarolles to that of a reflection shining up through the water . 
 Like the nocturnes , the barcarolles span nearly the whole of Fauré 's composing career , and they similarly display the evolution of his style from the uncomplicated charm of the early pieces to the withdrawn and enigmatic quality of the late works . All are written with compound time signatures ( 6 / 8 or 9 / 8 ) , except number 7 , which is in 6 / 4 . 
 Barcarolle No 1 in A minor , Op 26 ( 1880 ) 
 The first barcarolle was dedicated to the pianist Caroline de Serres ( Mme. Montigny @-@ <unk> ) and premiered by Saint @-@ Saëns at a concert of the Société Nationale de Musique in 1882 . The piece begins with an uncomplicated melody in a traditional lilting Venetian style in 6 / 8 time . It develops into a more elaborate form before the introduction of the second theme , in which the melodic line is given in the middle register with delicate arpeggiated accompaniments in the treble and bass . Morrison comments that even in this early work , conventional sweetness is enlivened by subtle dissonance . 
 Barcarolle No 2 in G major , Op 41 ( 1885 ) 
 The second barcarolle , dedicated to the pianist Marie Poitevin , is a longer and more ambitious work than the first , with what Morrison calls an Italianate profusion of detail . Duchen writes of the work as complex and questing , harmonically and melodically , and points to the influence of Saint @-@ Saëns , Liszt and even , unusually for Fauré , of Wagner . The work opens in 6 / 8 time like the first , but Fauré varies the time signature to an unexpected 9 / 8 in the middle of the piece . 
 Barcarolle No 3 in G ♭ major , Op 42 ( 1885 ) 
 The third barcarolle is dedicated to Henriette Roger @-@ Jourdain , wife of Fauré 's friend , the painter Roger Jourdain . It opens with a simple phrase that is quickly elaborated into trills reminiscent of Chopin . The middle section , like that of the first , keeps the melody in the middle register with delicate arpeggiated ornaments above and below . The pianist Marguerite Long said that these ornaments " crown the theme like sea foam . " 
 Barcarolle No 4 in A ♭ major , Op 44 ( 1886 ) 
 One of the best @-@ known of the set , the fourth barcarolle is " tuneful , quite short , perhaps more direct than the others . " ( Koechlin ) . 
 Barcarolle No 5 in F ♯ minor , Op 66 ( 1894 ) 
 Dedicated to Mme la <unk> V. d 'Indy , the fifth barcarolle was written after a five @-@ year period in which Fauré composed nothing for the piano . Orledge calls it powerful , agitated and virile . It is the first of Fauré 's piano works in which there are no identifiable sections ; its changes are in metre , not in tempo . 
 Barcarolle No 6 in E ♭ major , Op 70 ( 1896 ) 
 Koechlin brackets the sixth and seventh of the set together as a contrasting pair . Both pieces show " an economy of writing " , the sixth " more moderate and tranquil in expression " . The Fauré scholar Roy Howat writes of a " sensuous insouciance " with an underlying virtuosity and wit under the " deceptively nonchalant surface " . 
 Barcarolle No 7 in D minor , Op 90 ( 1905 ) 
 The seventh barcarolle contrasts with its predecessor in being more restless and sombre , recalling Fauré 's " <unk> " from his song cycle La chanson d 'Ève . 
 Barcarolle No 8 in D ♭ major , Op 96 ( 1906 ) 
 Dedicated to Suzanne Alfred @-@ Bruneau , the eighth barcarolle opens in with a cheerful theme , which soon gives way to melancholy . The second episode , in C ♯ minor , marked cantabile , is succeeded by an abrupt ending with a fortissimo chord . 
 Barcarolle No 9 in A minor , Op 101 ( 1909 ) 
 The ninth barcarolle , in Koechlin 's view , " recalls , as in a hazy remoteness , the happiness of the past " . Nectoux writes that it consists of " a series of harmonic or polyphonic variations on a strange , sombre , syncopated theme , whose monotony recalls some sailor 's song " . 
 Barcarolle No 10 in A minor , Op 104 / 2 ( 1913 ) 
 Dedicated to Madame Léon Blum , the tenth barcarolle stays more closely within conventional tonality than its predecessor , " with a certain sedate gravity ... the monotony appropriate to a grey evening " ( Koechlin ) . The melancholy theme is reminiscent of Mendelssohn 's Venetian themes from Songs Without Words , but is developed in a way characteristic of Fauré , with " increasingly animated rhythms and , at certain points , excessively complex textures " ( Nectoux ) . 
 Barcarolle No 11 in G minor , Op 105 ( 1913 ) 
 Dedicated to Laura , daughter of the composer Isaac Albéniz . The eleventh and twelfth of the set can be viewed as another contrasting pair . The eleventh is severe in mood and in rhythm , reflecting the prevailing austerity of Fauré 's later style . 
 Barcarolle No 12 in E ♭ major , Op <unk> ( 1915 ) 
 Dedicated to Louis <unk> , the twelfth barcarolle is an allegretto <unk> . It opens in what was by now for Fauré a rare uncomplicated theme , in the traditional Venetian manner , but is developed in more subtle rhythms . Despite the increasing complexity of the polyphonic lines , Fauré keeps the melody prominent , and the piece ends with it transformed into " a theme of almost triumphal character " ( Nectoux ) . 
 Barcarolle No 13 in C major , Op 116 ( 1921 ) 
 The last of the set is dedicated to Magda <unk> . Koechlin writes of it : " bare , superficially almost dry , but at heart most expressive with that deep nostalgia for vanished bright horizons : sentiments that the composer suggests in passing rather than comments on in loquacious or theatrical oratory ; he seemed to desire to preserve the soothing and illusory serenity of the mirage . " 
 = = Impromptus = = 
 Impromptu No 1 in E ♭ major , Op 25 ( 1881 ) 
 Cortot compared the first impromptu to a rapid barcarolle , redolent of " sunlit water " , combining " stylised <unk> and regret " . 
 Impromptu No 2 in F minor , Op 31 ( 1883 ) 
 Dedicated to Mlle Sacha de <unk> , the second impromptu maintains an airy tarantella rhythm . It is scored less richly than the first of the set , giving it a lightness of texture . 
 Impromptu No 3 in A ♭ major , Op 34 ( 1883 ) 
 The third impromptu is the most popular of the set . Morrison calls it " among Fauré 's most idyllic creations , its principal idea dipping and soaring above a gyrating , moto perpetuo accompaniment " . It is marked by a combination of dash and delicacy . 
 Impromptu No 4 in D ♭ major , Op 91 ( 1906 ) 
 Dedicated to " Madame de <unk> " ( Marguerite Long ) , the fourth impromptu was Fauré 's return to the genre in his middle period . Unlike much of his music of the period , it avoids a dark mood , but Fauré had by now moved on from the uncomplicated charm of the first three of the set . His mature style is displayed in the central section , a contemplative andante , which is followed by a more agitated section that concludes the work . 
 Impromptu No 5 in F ♯ minor , Op 102 ( 1909 ) 
 Nectoux describes this impromptu as " a piece of sheer virtuosity celebrating , not without humour , the beauties of the whole @-@ tone scale . " Morrison , however , writes that the work " seethes with unrest " . 
 Impromptu in D ♭ major , Op 86 bis ( Transcription of the Impromptu for harp , Op 86 , 1904 ) 
 The last work in the published set was written before numbers four and five . It was originally a harp piece , composed for a competition at the Paris Conservatoire in 1904 . Cortot made a transcription for piano , published in 1913 as Fauré 's Op 86 bis . The outer sections are light and brilliant , with a gentler central section , marked <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Valses @-@ caprices = = 
 The four valses @-@ caprices are not a cycle , but rather two sets of two , the first from Fauré 's early period and the second from his middle period . Morrison calls all four " more ' caprice ' than ' waltz ' " , and comments that they combine and develop the scintillating style of Chopin and Saint @-@ Saëns waltzes . They show Fauré at his most playful , presenting variations before the theme is heard and darting in and out of unexpected keys . Aaron Copland , though generally a keen admirer of Fauré 's music , wrote , " the several Valses @-@ Caprices , in spite of their admirable qualities , seem to me essentially foreign to Faure 's esprit . His is too orderly , too logical a mind to be really capricious . " Cortot , by contrast , spoke approvingly of their " sensual grace ... perfect distinction ... impassioned tenderness . " 
 Valse @-@ caprice No 1 in A major , Op 30 ( 1882 ) ; and 
 Valse @-@ caprice No 2 in D ♭ major , Op 38 ( 1884 ) : 
 Chopin 's influence is marked in the first two pieces . Orledge observes that the right @-@ hand figuration at the end of No 1 is remarkably similar to that at the end of Chopin 's Waltz in E minor . In No 2 Nectoux detects the additional influence of Liszt ( Au bord d 'une source ) in the opening bars . In the closing bars of No 2 , Orledge finds a resemblance to the end of Chopin 's Grande Valse Brillante , Op , 18 . 
 Valse @-@ caprice No 3 in G ♭ major , Op 59 ( 1887 – 93 ) ; and 
 Valse @-@ caprice No 4 in A ♭ major , Op 62 ( 1893 – 94 ) : 
 Orledge writes that the second two valses @-@ caprices are subtler and better integrated than the first two ; they contain " more moments of quiet contemplation and more thematic development than before . " There still remain touches of virtuosity and traces of Liszt , and these two valses @-@ caprices are , in Orledge 's words , the only solo pieces in the middle period to end in a loud and spectacular manner . No 3 is dedicated to Mme. Philippe <unk> , No 4 to Mme. Max Lyon . 
 = = Other solo piano works = = 
 = = = Romances sans paroles , Op 17 = = = 
 Fauré wrote these three " songs without words " while still a student at the École Niedermeyer , in about 1863 . They were not published until 1880 , but they then became some of his most popular works . Copland considered them immature pieces , which " should be relegated to the indiscretions every young composer commits . " Later critics have taken a less severe view ; Morrison describes the Romances as " an affectionate and very Gallic tribute to Mendelssohn 's urbanity , agitation and ease . " The commentator Keith Anderson writes that although they were a popular French counterpart to Mendelssohn 's Songs without Words , Fauré 's own voice is already recognisable . Instead of placing the slowest piece in the middle of the set and ending with the lively A minor piece , Fauré , already with musical views of his own , switches the expected order , and the set ends pianissimo , fading to nothing . 
 Andante quasi allegretto 
 The first romance , in A ♭ major , has as an opening theme an uncomplicated melody with Mendelssohnian syncopations . The theme is presented first in the higher and then in the middle register , before flowing evenly to its conclusion . 
 Allegro molto 
 The second romance , in A minor , an exuberant piece , has a strong semiquaver figure supporting the theme , and running high into the treble and low into the bass . This was later to become one of Fauré 's most recognisable characteristics . After a lively display , the piece ends quietly . 
 Andante moderato 
 The final piece of the set , in A ♭ major , is a serene andante , with a flowing tune in the Mendelssohnian style . After gentle variation , it equally gently fades to silence at the end . 
 = = = Ballade in F ♯ major , Op 19 = = = 
 The Ballade , dedicated to Camille Saint @-@ Saëns , dates from 1877 . It is one of Fauré 's most substantial works for solo piano , but is better known in a version for piano and orchestra that he made in 1881 at Liszt 's suggestion . Playing for a little over 14 minutes , it is second in length only to the Thème et variations . Fauré first conceived the music as a set of individual pieces , but then decided to make them into a single work by carrying the main theme of each section over into the following section as a secondary theme . The work opens with the F ♯ major theme , an andante cantabile , which is followed by a slower section , marked lento , in E ♭ minor . The third section is an andante introducing a third theme . In the last section , an allegro , a return of the second theme brings the work to a conclusion in which Nectoux comments , the treble sings with particular delicacy . 
 Marcel Proust knew Fauré , and the Ballade is thought to have been the inspiration for the sonata by Proust 's character <unk> that haunts Swann in In Search of Lost Time . Debussy , reviewing an early performance of the Ballade , compared the music with the attractive soloist , straightening her shoulder @-@ straps during the performance : " I don 't know why , but I somehow associated the charm of these gestures with the music of Fauré himself . The play of fleeting curves that is its essence can be compared to the movements of a beautiful woman without either suffering from the comparison . " Morrison describes the Ballade as " a reminder of halcyon , half @-@ remembered summer days and bird @-@ haunted forests " . 
 = = = Mazurka in B ♭ major , Op 32 = = = 
 The Mazurka was composed in the mid @-@ 1870s but not published until 1883 . It is a tribute to Chopin , and contains echoes of the earlier composer 's music . Chopin , however , composed more than 60 mazurkas , and Fauré wrote only this one . Morrison regards it as an experiment on Fauré 's part . The piece owes little to Polish folk @-@ dance rhythms , and may have had a Russian influence through Fauré 's friendship with Sergei Taneyev at around the time of its composition . 
 = = = Pavane , Op 50 = = = 
 The Pavane ( 1887 ) was conceived and originally written as an orchestral piece . Fauré published the version for piano in 1889 . In the form of an ancient dance , the piece was written to be played more briskly than it has generally come to be performed in its familiar orchestral guise . The conductor Sir Adrian Boult heard Fauré play the piano version several times and noted that he took it at a tempo no slower than crochet = 100 . Boult commented that the composer 's sprightly tempo emphasised that the Pavane was not a piece of German romanticism . 
 = = = Thème et variations in C ♯ minor , Op 73 = = = 
 Written in 1895 , when he was 50 , this is among Fauré 's most extended compositions for piano , with a performance time of about 15 minutes . Although it has many passages that reflect the influence of Schumann 's Symphonic Studies , in Jessica Duchen 's words " its harmonies and pianistic idioms " are unmistakably those of Fauré . As in the earlier Romances sans paroles , Op 17 , Fauré does not follow the conventional course of ending with the loudest and most extrovert variation ; the variation nearest to that description is placed next to last , and is followed by a gentle conclusion , " a typically <unk> understated finish . " Copland wrote of the work : 
 Certainly it is one of Faure 's most approachable works . Even at first hearing it leaves an indelible impression . The " Theme " itself has the same fateful , march @-@ like tread , the same atmosphere of tragedy and heroism , that we find in the introduction of Brahms 's First Symphony . And the variety and spontaneity of the eleven variations which follow bring to mind nothing less than the Symphonic Etudes . How many pianists , I wonder , have not regretted that the composer disdained the easy triumph of closing on the brilliant , dashing tenth variation . No , poor souls , they must turn the page and play that last , enigmatic ( and most beautiful ) one , which seems to leave the audience with so little desire to applaud . 
 = = = Prelude to Pénélope = = = 
 Fauré 's opera based on the legend of Ulysses and Penelope was first performed in 1913 , after which the composer published a version of the prelude transcribed for piano . The piece , in G minor , contrasts a gravely noble andante moderato theme representing Penelope with a forthright theme for Ulysses . The polyphonic writing transfers effectively from the orchestral original to the piano . 
 = = = 8 Pièces brèves , Op 84 = = = 
 Fauré did not intend these pieces to be published as a set ; they were composed as individual works between 1869 and 1902 . When Hamelle , his publishers , insisted on issuing them together as " Eight Short Pieces " in 1902 , the composer successfully demanded that none of the eight must be allocated its own title . When he moved on to another publisher , Hamelle ignored his earlier instructions and issued subsequent editions with titles for each piece . Nectoux comments that the labelling of the eighth piece as " Nocturne No 8 " is particularly questionable ( see Nocturne [ No 8 ] , below ) . In the first decade of the 21st century the publisher Peters issued a new critical edition of the Eight Pieces with the spurious titles removed . The eight pieces take less than three minutes each in performance . 
 Capriccio in E ♭ major : Dedicated to Madame Jean Leonard Koechlin . Morrison calls it " capricious indeed " , and notes a harmonic twist at the end " as nonchalant as it is acrobatic " . It was originally written as a sight @-@ reading test for students at the Paris Conservatoire , of which Fauré was the professor of composition from 1896 and director from 1905 to 1920 . 
 Fantaisie in A ♭ major : Koechlin calls this piece a pleasant <unk> d <unk> . 
 Fugue in A minor : This , like the other fugue in the set , is a revised version of a fugue Fauré composed at the start of his career , when he was a church organist in Rennes . They are both , in Koechlin 's view " in a pleasant and correct style , obviously less rich than those in the Well @-@ Tempered Clavier , and more careful , but whose reserve conceals an incontestable mastery " . 
 Adagietto in E minor : An andante moderato , " serious , grave , at once firm and pliant , attaining real beauty " ( Koechlin ) . 
 Improvisation in C ♯ minor : Orledge calls this piece a middle period " song without words " . It was composed as a sight @-@ reading test for the Conservatoire . 
 Fugue in E minor : See Fugue in A minor , above . 
 <unk> in C major : " A bubbling perpetuum mobile whose surging romantic feelings are only just kept under restraint " ( Orledge ) . " A song , pure and gay , uplifted to a sunlit sky , a youthful outpouring , full of happiness . " ( Koechlin ) . 
 Nocturne [ No 8 ] in D ♭ major : As noted above , this piece stands apart from the larger @-@ scale works to which Fauré gave the title " nocturne " . It would not be listed among them were it not for the publisher 's unauthorised use of the title in this case . It is the longest of the eight pieces of Op 84 , but is much shorter and simpler than the other 12 nocturnes , consisting of a song @-@ like main theme with a delicate semiquaver accompaniment in the left hand . 
 = = = 9 Préludes , Op 103 = = = 
 The nine préludes are among the least known of Fauré 's major piano compositions . They were written while the composer was struggling to come to terms with the onset of deafness in his mid @-@ sixties . By Fauré 's standards this was a time of unusually prolific output . The préludes were composed in 1909 and 1910 , in the middle of the period in which he wrote the opera Pénélope , barcarolles Nos. 8 – 11 and nocturnes Nos. 9 – 11 . 
 In Koechlin 's view , " Apart from the Préludes of Chopin , it is hard to think of a collection of similar pieces that are so important " . The critic Michael Oliver wrote , " Fauré 's Préludes are among the subtlest and most elusive piano pieces in existence ; they express deep but mingled emotions , sometimes with intense directness ... more often with the utmost economy and restraint and with mysteriously complex simplicity . " Jessica Duchen calls them " unusual slivers of magical inventiveness . " The complete set takes between 20 and 25 minutes to play . The shortest of the set , No 8 , lasts barely more than a minute ; the longest , No 3 , takes between four and five minutes . 
 Prélude No 1 in D ♭ major 
 Andante molto moderato . The first prélude is in the manner of a nocturne . Morrison refers to the cool serenity with which it opens , contrasted with the " slow and painful climbing " of the middle section . 
 Prélude No 2 in C ♯ minor 
 Allegro . The moto perpetuo of the second prélude is technically difficult for the pianist ; even the most celebrated Fauré interpreter can be stretched by it . Koechlin calls it " a feverish whirling of dervishes , concluding in a sort of ecstasy , with the evocation of some fairy palace . " 
 Prélude No 3 in G minor 
 Andante . Copland considered this prélude the most immediately accessible of the set . " At first , what will most attract you , will be the third in G @-@ minor , a strange mixture of the romantic and classic . " The musicologist Vladimir <unk> wrote , " it might be a barcarolle strangely interrupting a theme of very modern stylistic contour " . 
 Prélude No 4 in F major 
 Allegretto moderato . The fourth prélude is among the gentlest of the set . The critic Alain <unk> writes that it " casts a spell on the ear through the subtlety of a harmony tinged with the modal and its melodic freshness . " Koechlin calls it " a guileless pastorale , flexible , with succinct and refined modulations " . 
 Prélude No 5 in D minor 
 Allegro . <unk> quotes the earlier writer Louis <unk> 's description of this prélude as " This fine outburst of anger ( Ce bel <unk> de <unk> ) " . The mood is turbulent and anxious ; the piece ends in quiet resignation reminiscent of the " Libera me " of the Requiem . 
 Prélude No 6 in E ♭ minor 
 Andante . Fauré is at his most classical in this prélude , which is in the form of a canon . Copland wrote that it " can be placed side by side with the most wonderful of the Preludes of the Well @-@ Tempered <unk> . " 
 Prélude No 7 in A major 
 Andante moderato . Morrison writes that this prélude , with its " stammering and halting progress " conveys an inconsolable grief . After the opening andante moderato , it becomes gradually more assertive , and subsides to conclude in the subdued mood of the opening . The rhythm of one of Fauré 's best @-@ known songs , " N 'est @-@ ce @-@ pas ? " from La bonne chanson , runs through the piece . 
 Prélude No 8 in C minor 
 Allegro . In Copland 's view this is , with the third , the most approachable of the Préludes , " with its dry , acrid brilliance ( so rarely found in Faure ) . " Morrison describes it as " a repeated @-@ note scherzo " going " from nowhere to nowhere . " 
 Prélude No 9 in E minor 
 Adagio . Copland described this prélude as " so simple – so absolutely simple that we can never hope to understand how it can contain such great emotional power . " The prélude is withdrawn in mood ; <unk> wrote that it " belongs from beginning to end to another world . " Koechlin notes echoes of the " Offertoire " of the Requiem throughout the piece . 
 = = For two pianists = = 
 Souvenirs de Bayreuth 
 Subtitled Fantasie en forme de quadrille sur les <unk> <unk> de l <unk> de Nibelung ( " Fantasy in the form of a quadrille on favourite themes from Der Ring des Nibelungen " ) . Fauré admired the music of Wagner and was familiar with the smallest details of his scores , but he was one of the few composers of his generation not to come under Wagner 's musical influence . From 1878 , Fauré and his friend and ex @-@ pupil André Messager made trips abroad to see Wagner operas . They saw Das Rheingold and Die Walküre at Cologne Opera ; the complete Ring cycle in Munich and London ; and Die Meistersinger in Munich and at Bayreuth , where they also saw Parsifal . They frequently performed as a party piece their joint composition , the irreverent Souvenirs de Bayreuth , written in about 1888 . This short , skittish piano work for four hands sends up themes from The Ring . It consists of five short sections in which Wagner 's themes are transformed into dance rhythms . The manuscript ( in the Bibliothèque nationale , Paris ) is in Messager 's hand . 
 Suite d <unk> , Op 20 
 Between 1867 and 1873 , Fauré wrote a symphonic work for full orchestra . The piece was first heard in 1873 when Fauré and Saint @-@ Saëns performed it in a two @-@ piano version , but that transcription has not survived . Léon <unk> made a new transcription of the first movement in 1893 . 
 Dolly Suite , Op 56 
 The Dolly Suite is a six @-@ section work for piano duet . It was inspired by Hélène , nicknamed " Dolly " , daughter of the singer Emma Bardac with whom Fauré was intimately associated in the 1890s . The opening piece was a present for Dolly 's first birthday , and Fauré added the other five pieces to mark her subsequent birthdays and other family occasions . Unusually for Fauré , who generally favoured strictly functional titles , the movements of the suite have whimsical titles associated with Dolly and her family . 
 Its six movements take about fifteen minutes to perform . The first is a Berceuse , or cradle @-@ song . " Mi @-@ a @-@ ou " , despite a title suggesting a cat , in fact represents the infant Dolly 's attempts to pronounce the name of her brother Raoul ; after " Le jardin de Dolly " , the " Kitty Valse " , again confounds its feline title , being a sketch of the family 's pet dog . After the gentle " <unk> " , the suite ends with a lively evocation of Spain , which , Orledge notes , is one of Fauré 's few purely extrovert pieces . 
 Masques et bergamasques , Op 112 
 From the orchestral suite drawn from his music for the stage presentation Masques et bergamasques , Fauré made a transcription for piano duet , which was published in 1919 . Like the orchestral suite , it consists of four movements , titled " Ouverture " , " Menuet " , " Gavotte " and " Pastorale " . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Fauré made piano rolls of his music for several companies between 1905 and 1913 . The rolls that survive are of the " Romance sans paroles " No 3 , Barcarolle No 1 , Prelude No 3 , Nocturne No 3 , Thème et variations , Valses @-@ caprices Nos 1 , 3 and 4 , and piano versions of the Pavane , and the " <unk> " from Fauré 's music for Pelléas and Mélisande . Several of these rolls have been transferred to CD . Recordings on disc were few until the 1940s . A survey by John Culshaw in December 1945 singled out recordings of piano works played by Kathleen Long , including the Nocturne No 6 , Barcarolle No 2 , the Thème et Variations , Op 73 , and the Ballade Op 19 in its orchestral version . Fauré 's music began to appear more frequently in the record companies ' releases in the 1950s . 
 In the LP and particularly the CD era , the record companies built up a substantial catalogue of Fauré 's piano music , performed by French and non @-@ French musicians . The piano works were first recorded largely complete in the mid @-@ 1950s by Germaine <unk> @-@ Valentin , with later sets being made by Grant Johannesen ( 1961 ) , Jean <unk> ( 1966 – 1969 ) , Jean @-@ Philippe Collard ( 1974 ) , Paul Crossley ( 1984 – 85 ) , Jean <unk> ( 1988 – 89 ) , and Kathryn Stott ( 1995 ) . Recital selections of major piano works have been recorded by many pianists including Vlado <unk> ( 1989 ) , Pascal Rogé ( 1990 ) , and Kun @-@ Woo Paik ( 2002 ) . 
 = Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix = 
 In 1969 , American rock musician Jimi Hendrix , who was then at the height of his career , was arrested , tried , and acquitted in Canada for drug possession . 
 On May 3 , 1969 , customs agents at Toronto International Airport detained Hendrix after finding a small amount of what they suspected to be heroin and hashish in his luggage . Four hours later , after a mobile lab confirmed what had been found , he was formally charged with drug possession . Released on $ 10 @,@ 000 bail , Hendrix was required to return on May 5 for an arraignment hearing . During a performance at Maple Leaf Gardens later that night , he displayed a jovial attitude , joking with the audience and singing a few lines of mock opera for comedic effect . 
 At a preliminary hearing on June 19 , Judge Robert Taylor set a date for December 8 , at which Hendrix would stand trial for two counts of illegal possession of narcotics , for which he faced as many as 20 years in prison . While there was no question as to whether the drugs were in Hendrix 's luggage , in order for the Crown to prove possession they had to show that he knew they were there . In his cross @-@ examination of Canadian customs officials , defense attorney John O 'Driscoll raised doubts about whether the narcotics belonged to Hendrix , who had no drug paraphernalia in his luggage or needle tracks on his arms . After a trial that lasted for three days , the jury deliberated for 8 hours before returning a not guilty verdict , acquitting Hendrix of both charges . 
 The incident proved stressful for Hendrix , and it weighed heavily on his mind during the seven months that he awaited trial . Two weeks after the arrest , he told his friend , journalist Sharon Lawrence , that his fear of needles discouraged him from using heroin and that associating with junkies had convinced him it was not a drug he wanted to use . Both of Hendrix 's Experience bandmates , Mitch Mitchell and Noel Redding , later stated that they had been warned about a planned drug bust the day before flying to Toronto and they believed that drugs had been planted in Hendrix 's bag . Although Hendrix was one of the biggest stars in North America at the time , and the world 's highest @-@ paid performer , only a couple of Toronto newspapers carried the story . His public relations manager , Michael Goldstein , later revealed that he bribed a member of the Associated Press with a case of liquor in an effort to prevent the story from going out on the news wire . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 1968 , the members of the Jimi Hendrix Experience were living in a rented house in Benedict Canyon , Los Angeles . One night bassist Noel Redding was warned about a pending visit from law enforcement , so he immediately phoned drummer Mitch Mitchell , who was at the nightclub Whisky a Go Go , and asked him to come over to the house so that they could search for and remove any illegal drugs . They found a large assortment of substances in Hendrix 's room that had apparently been given to him by fans . Soon afterwards , they were paid a visit by three detectives who told them that they were under police surveillance by officers living in a nearby house . 
 On May 2 , 1969 , the Experience performed at Cobo Hall in Detroit . According to Mitchell , while they were getting ready for the show the band and their entourage were informed about a possible drug bust planned for the following day . The group 's road crew warned everyone to take precautions against any potential for drugs to be planted on them . Mitchell responded by wearing a suit without pockets and not wearing any underwear . Tour managers Gerry Stickells and Tony Ruffino expressed their concern to Hendrix and asked him if he had any drugs on him to which he replied : " No . " After arriving in Toronto , he was awoken by concert promoter Ron Terry who told him : " Whatever you got in that bag , get rid of it . " Terry then took him into the plane 's bathroom and dumped anything that might be mistaken for illegal drugs into the toilet . Terry commented : " I thought he was clean . " 
 = = Arrest , performance , and arraignment = = 
 After landing at Toronto International Airport on May 3 , 1969 , Hendrix and Terry were the last to exit the plane . Ruffino was carrying Hendrix 's bags , and he placed them on a counter at the customs station . An agent immediately chastised him , shouting : " If that 's not yours , keep your hands off it " , to which Ruffino replied : " I work for him . " The agent repeated the order before asking Hendrix if they were his bags ; he confirmed that they were . At 9 : 30 a.m. , authorities detained Hendrix after finding a small amount of what they suspected to be heroin and hashish in his luggage . A mobile lab was set up to determine what had been found , and at 1 : 30 p.m. Metro police detective Harry Midgley arrested him for illegal possession of narcotics . After being booked and photographed , he was released on $ 10 @,@ 000 bail and required to return on May 5 for an arraignment hearing . While they awaited the lab results , Stickells attempted to make contact with Hendrix 's manager , Mike Jeffery , who had traveled to Hawaii and was unavailable . 
 When Stickells expressed concern that the arrest might jeopardize the concert that was scheduled for that night at Maple Leaf Gardens , the booking detective assured them that he would " get it done as quickly " as he could because his children had tickets for the event ; he commented : " they 'll kill me if I don 't get [ Hendrix ] out . " Management at the Gardens pressured the Toronto police department to release him , complaining that the sell @-@ out crowd of 18 @,@ 000 fans might riot if they canceled the show . He was released by 8 p.m. and escorted to the venue by the police , who remained at the arena throughout the performance . He displayed a jovial attitude during the concert , joking with the audience and singing in a mock operatic style for comedic effect . In light of the arrest , he altered the lyrics to " Red House " , singing " soon as I get out of jail , I wanna see her . " 
 Rolling Stone magazine reported that during the arraignment hearing , which lasted for three minutes , the courthouse was filled with young fans who had come to show their support for Hendrix , who " entered wearing a pink shirt open to the waist , an Apache @-@ style headband , a multi @-@ colored scarf around his neck and beads . His manner was dead serious . " 
 = = Preliminary hearing = = 
 On June 19 , 1969 , Hendrix flew to Toronto for a preliminary hearing . He wore a business suit for the first time since before the formation of the Experience in late 1966 . Judge Robert Taylor presided over the hearing , setting a date for December 8 , at which Hendrix would stand trial for two counts of possession of heroin and hashish , for which he faced as many as 20 years in prison . More serious potential charges of drug transporting and trafficking , which had been discussed at the time of the arrest , were not filed . 
 = = Second Toronto arrest = = 
 In preparation for the trial , Hendrix had his hair cut , and he purchased new clothes . One of his defense lawyers , Bob Levine , commented : " I took him to a number of stores that specialized in tailored suits . We found a conservative suit that looked great on him . It was hilarious . He was like a hick , awkwardly fidgeting around and trying to loosen his tie . I didn 't care how uncomfortable he was ; the suit was perfect . " 
 On December 7 , while Hendrix and Levine were travelling by limousine to a New York airport for their flight to Toronto , Levine noticed that Hendrix was putting some personal items into his guitar case . Levine then reminded him that they would be going through customs and that they had better not bring anything inappropriate . He reassured Levine , but as they approached their destination Levine confronted him : " Jimi , I know you have something in that guitar case . I don 't know what it is , and it 's not normally my business to interfere , but I know we will be searched at customs . " Hendrix insisted that he had nothing to worry about , stating : " Trust me , Bob , no one is going to recognize me " , to which he replied : " Recognize you ? They will be waiting at customs for you . " Soon after their arrival at the Toronto airport , Hendrix was arrested by customs agents who found a capsule of an unknown substance in his guitar case . He spent the night in jail , waiting for it to be tested . Later that day , the Toronto police department dropped the charges when the pill was determined to be a legal medication . 
 = = Trial = = 
 While there was no question as to whether the drugs were in Hendrix 's luggage , in order for the Crown to prove possession they had to show that he knew they were there . Judge Joseph Kelly presided over the trial proceedings , which began on December 8 , 1969 . Crown counsel John Malone called as witnesses the officers who discovered the drugs and the lab technicians who identified them as heroin ; the prosecution rested after three hours of testimony . In his cross @-@ examination of Canadian customs officials , defense attorney John O 'Driscoll raised doubts about whether the drugs belonged to Hendrix . Mervin Wilson , the customs agent who discovered the drugs , agreed with O 'Driscoll 's assertion that Hendrix had drawn attention to himself at the airport by wearing what O 'Driscoll described as " obviously mod clothing " . Wilson stated that Hendrix had no drug paraphernalia in his luggage , and Constable W. J. Matheson confirmed that Hendrix had no needle tracks on his arms . 
 The Hendrix defense team did not dispute that the drugs were found in his bag . They instead developed a strategy intended to demonstrate that he was not aware of its contents . Further , they offered substantiated accounts of how common it was for him to receive gifts from fans , which often included drugs . Hendrix was called as the first witness for the defense ; he testified that fans showered gifts on him , including teddy bears , scarves , clothing , and jewelry . He explained that while in Beverly Hills , California , a female fan had given him a vial of what he thought was <unk> @-@ Seltzer — a legal medication — which he put in his bag without knowledge of the illegal substances contained therein . Malone countered : " You are charged with a serious offense , and your evidence is you don 't really know how it got there , or who put it there " , to which Hendrix responded : " Yes . " The prosecutor then held up the aluminum tube in which the hashish was found and asked Hendrix to explain what he thought it was , he replied : " A pea shooter " , drawing uproarious laughter from the court . When asked about his drug use , he denied that he had ever used heroin or amphetamines , but admitted to smoking cannabis and hashish . He also admitted that he had used cocaine twice and LSD five times . He testified that his cannabis use had declined over the previous year , stating : " I feel I have outgrown it " . Hendrix admitted that he had seen people use heroin , but denied any further knowledge of the drug . He testified that he was given some gifts at a fan club meeting for the Beatles that were intended for the English group ; when he opened them he found several joints as well as what appeared to be doses of LSD . 
 The second witness called by the defense was United Press International ( UPI ) journalist and Hendrix 's friend Sharon Lawrence , who testified that she was with Hendrix in California when , after complaining about feeling ill , an unnamed fan gave him something . When Malone suggested that her memory was suspiciously acute , she explained that her training as a reporter prepared her to notice fine details . Hendrix 's manager and producer , Chas Chandler , was called next , and he corroborated the defense 's assertion that rock stars , particularly Hendrix , would regularly receive gifts from fans and that those gifts often included drugs . In its closing argument , the defense reiterated that in order to be guilty of possession of narcotics Hendrix had to have knowledge of the illegal drugs . After a trial that had lasted for three days , the jury deliberated for more than eight hours before returning a not guilty verdict , acquitting Hendrix of both charges . <unk> 's Kevin Plummer wrote : " As the all @-@ male jury announced its acquittal , the courtroom — crowded with young people — erupted into applause . " In remarks to reporters after the verdict was announced , Hendrix commented : " Canada has given me the best Christmas present I ever had " , while flashing a peace sign . 
 = = Impact on Hendrix = = 
 The incident proved stressful for Hendrix , and it weighed heavily on his mind while he awaited trial . His limousine driver and a witness to the arrest , Louis Goldblatt , described him as " genuinely dumbfounded by the whole affair . " Tour manager Eric Barrett said that he looked " as if there had been a plane crash " . Hendrix biographers Harry Shapiro and Caesar Glebbeek described the incident as " a nightmare which ... plagued " him for seven months . According to Redding , " the bust knocked any positive feelings Jimi was holding onto out of him " and that he was in " agonised suspense " from the arrest until the trial . In 2012 , Plummer wrote : " The real possibility of prison hung over Hendrix like a spectre ... a threat to his career and the cause of much brooding and rumination . " Journalist Charles Shaar Murray asserted that the incident jeopardized what he described as " Hendrix 's increasingly fragile peace of mind " . 
 Two weeks after the arrest , Hendrix told Lawrence : " Whatever I have done ... getting hooked on heroin is not one of them . " He explained that his fear of needles discouraged him from using the drug and that having known junkies convinced him that it was not something he should get involved with . Soon after the story of his arrest became public , he drew a connection between the bust and anti @-@ establishment sentiments : " All of that is the establishment fighting back ... Eventually , they will swallow themselves up , but I don 't want them to swallow up too many kids as they go along . " 
 According to Shapiro and Glebbeek , in 1969 there was little confidence in the staying power of rock stars ; it was assumed that their careers were going to be short , and industry insiders operated under a " take the money and run " mentality . For this reason , they speculated that had Hendrix been convicted it would have ended his music career . After the trial , his management announced to the British press that they were planning a farewell tour for the Experience . However , the US tour during which the arrest occurred was their last . The band played their final concert on June 29 , at Mile High Stadium in Denver ( less than two months before Hendrix 's iconic solo performance at Woodstock ) . There were no new album releases from them during 1969 . Hendrix 's management later stated that concert promoters were apprehensive about booking him until after the matter had been resolved . 
 = = Initial suppression of media coverage = = 
