 According to Cross , " By far the most extraordinary aspect of Jimi Hendrix 's drug bust in Toronto on May 3 , 1969 , was how little press it generated . " Despite the fact that Hendrix was one of the biggest stars in North America at the time , and the highest @-@ paid performer in the world , only a couple of Toronto newspapers carried the story . Sharon Lawrence was informed of the incident by a London reporter working for UPI who told her that people were speculating that he had been set up . She commented : " There was nothing about the Hendrix arrest in the Los Angeles papers . " However , The New York Times ran a brief story about the arrest on May 5 . Four weeks later , Rolling Stone published a sympathetic article written by rock journalists Ben Fong @-@ Torres and Ritchie Yorke that included speculation that Hendrix had been framed . 
 In January 1970 , Rolling Stone asked Hendrix about having testified that he stopped using cannabis ; he laughed and replied : " At least , stop it from growing " . When pressed he answered : " I 'm too ... wrecked right now . " His management was concerned that the incident might provoke cancellations during the concurrent tour , but the story stayed largely unknown until after the tour had ended . The public relations manager , Michael Goldstein , later revealed that he had bribed a member of the Associated Press with a case of liquor to prevent the story from going out on the wire . Goldstein commented : " I knew that a million dollars was riding on that story not getting on UPI and the AP wire ... By his nature , a press agent shouldn 't have to determine someone 's future . " 
 = = Conspiracy theories = = 
 Wayne Kramer , a guitarist for MC5 , suggested that Hendrix had been set up as part of a wide @-@ scale crackdown on rock musicians : " I don 't have any doubt in my mind that the right @-@ wing government forces were behind all of that ... There was an effort , a movement , to stop this threat that rock and roll represented . " Hendrix was not the only prominent rock musician who found himself in legal trouble during May 1969 . On May 16 , the US embassy in London revoked John Lennon 's visa in response to his 1968 drug conviction , describing him as " an inadmissible immigrant " . That same day , Jefferson Airplane bassist Jack Casady was arrested for possession of marijuana , and on May 28 , Mick Jagger and Marianne Faithfull were arrested at their London home for marijuana possession . 
 After the arrest in Toronto , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) opened a file on Hendrix , which grew to seven pages , including documents related to his previous arrests for stealing cars at the age of 19 . Yorke and Fong @-@ Torres wrote , " The populace of Toronto are a very conservative lot , and tend to look with suspicion upon anybody who looks and dresses a little different from themselves . Hendrix looks a lot different . " Lawrence commented : " The prevailing political attitude in Canada regarding Hendrix was ' We have to make an example of this fuzzy @-@ haired black weirdo ' . " Shapiro and Glebbeek asserted their suspicion regarding the presence of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) , who did not typically make arrests at the airport . They also speculated that Canadian authorities had anticipated a public spectacle , intentionally searching the Hendrix entourage in plain view of people at the airport . 
 According to author John Hagen , Toronto 's then Mayor , William Dennison , was openly antagonistic to the influx of American hippies , draft resisters , and those who supported them who were coming to Canada in large numbers during the height of the Vietnam War . In his 2001 book , Northern Passage : American Vietnam War Resisters in Canada , Hagen wrote : " The mayors of Canada 's largest cities used the ( War Measures Act ) in a backlash against American war resisters . " Dennison stated : " a few hippies and deserters are Toronto 's only problem . " Mayor Jean Drapeau of Montreal asserted that military resisters were part of a " revolutionary conspiracy . " Vancouver 's mayor , Tom Campbell , commented : " I don 't like draft dodgers and I 'll do anything within the law that allows me to get rid of them . " While all three men supported use of the War Measures Act to harass war resisters and hippies , Campbell was the most aggressive ; he told the Toronto Star : " I believe the law should be used against any revolutionary whether he 's a US draft dodger or a hippie . " According to Hagen , the RCMP and the FBI cooperated in their effort to harass American war resisters during the late 1960s . 
 Although several people expressed the opinion that Mike Jeffrey had set Hendrix up in an effort to control him and create dependency , Shapiro and Glebbeek dispute this theory based on Jeffrey 's severe risk of significant financial shortfall had Hendrix been convicted . Jeffrey 's assistant , Trixie Sullivan , speculated that the drugs had been planted by a fan who became disgruntled after Hendrix refused his sexual advance . Both Mitch Mitchell and Noel Redding later wrote in their autobiographies that the entire Hendrix entourage had been warned about a planned drug bust the day before flying to Toronto ; both men also stated that they believed the incident had been set up and that the drugs had been planted in Hendrix 's bag . According to author Ritchie Unterberger , although Hendrix " took his fair share of drugs " , the commonly accepted view is that he did not use heroin regularly and was not an addict ; his drug use was typical of his peers , but not excessive . Mitchell wrote : " Contrary to what some people have said , Jimi was never a junkie – that is he was never addicted to any drug , particularly heroin , which he tried once or twice but didn 't like . " 
 = Hurricane Dog ( 1950 ) = 
 Hurricane Dog was the most intense hurricane in the 1950 Atlantic hurricane season . Prior to reanalysis by the Hurricane Research Division in 2014 , it was considered one of the strongest Atlantic hurricanes on record , equivalent to Category 5 status on the modern Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , with winds of 185 miles per hour ( 298 km / h ) . The fourth named storm of the season , Dog developed on August 30 to the east of Antigua ; after passing through the northern Lesser Antilles , it turned to the north and intensified into a Category 4 hurricane . Dog reached its peak intensity with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) over the open Atlantic , and after weakening it passed within 200 miles ( 320 km ) of Cape Cod , Massachusetts . The storm became extratropical on September 12 . 
 Hurricane Dog caused extensive damage to the Leeward Islands , and was considered the most severe hurricane on record in Antigua . Many buildings were destroyed or severely damaged on the island , with thousands left homeless just weeks after Hurricane Baker caused serious damage there . In the United States , the hurricane caused moderate coastal damage , including damage to several boats , and resulted in 11 offshore drownings . Strong winds caused widespread power outages across southeastern New England . There were twelve people missing and assumed dead offshore Nova Scotia . Damage across its path totaled about $ 3 million ( 1950 USD , $ 26 @.@ 8 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The exact origins of Hurricane Dog are obscure , due to sparse ship and land observations over the eastern Atlantic Ocean ; the storm may have originated from an easterly wave on August 24 near the Cape Verde islands , but there are no observations to support such development . Ships first encountered the storm on August 30 , when the SS <unk> reported gale @-@ force winds and an area of low pressure about 320 miles ( 510 km ) east @-@ southeast of Antigua . The storm is first documented as a hurricane with winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) late on August 30 . With high pressures to its northeast , the storm tracked west @-@ northwestward and rapidly intensified : on August 31 it attained major hurricane status , reaching winds of 130 mph ( 209 km / h ) — the first peak intensity in its life — before entering the Leeward Islands . Early on September 1 , Hurricane Dog passed just north of Antigua as the equivalent of a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . A weather station on Antigua reported a pressure of 28 @.@ 73 inches of mercury ( 973 mb ) , though the eye of the hurricane missed the station . After bypassing Antigua , Hurricane Dog weakened slightly , based on reports by reconnaissance aircraft ; the cyclone made its first and only landfall over Anguilla with winds of 120 to 125 mph ( 193 to 201 km / h ) . The cyclone produced hurricane @-@ force winds over Antigua and the nearby island of Saint Martin , which reported a pressure of 978 @.@ 7 mb ( 28 @.@ 90 inHg ) . 
 Early on September 2 , Hurricane Dog came under weak steering currents , causing it to drift northward . The cyclone weakened even further : aircraft recorded a central pressure of 962 mb ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) , and maximum sustained winds diminished to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The storm mostly maintained its intensity for two more days , but on September 4 it began to re @-@ intensify as it turned northwestward . On September 5 Hurricane Dog regained Category 4 intensity about 335 miles ( 540 km ) north of the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic . The hurricane strengthened further after turning to the north , and Hurricane Dog reached its second and strongest peak intensity of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . On September 6 Hurricane Hunters visually estimated peak winds of 185 mph ( 300 km / h ) about 450 miles ( 720 km ) south @-@ southwest of Bermuda ; however , being early in the period of hurricane reconnaissance , such wind speeds — derived from observations of the sea surface — were subjective and sometimes unreliable . In 2014 , a reanalysis of HURDAT by the Hurricane Research Division found that the peak winds in Hurricane Dog were more likely 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) , marking a reduction in the intensity of Hurricane Dog from Category 5 to Category 4 . Nevertheless , while now estimated to have been less intense than assessed operationally in 1950 , Dog was a formidable hurricane while over the western Atlantic , producing wave heights of over 100 feet ( 30 m ) . 
 Hurricane Dog maintained its peak intensity for about 12 hours . On September 7 , the cyclone attained a central pressure of 948 mbar ( 27 @.@ 99 inHg ) , which was the lowest pressure in association with the hurricane . A building ridge of high pressure to its north caused it to decelerate and weaken steadily for unknown reasons as it turned to the west ; by September 9 , the intensity had decreased to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . On September 10 , Hurricane Dog began turning to the northwest , and a day later it headed north and then northeast . Late that day , it briefly re @-@ intensified slightly to 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone with hurricane @-@ force winds . The former hurricane passed within 200 miles ( 320 km ) of Cape Cod on September 12 . Shortly afterwards , the extratropical remnant turned to the east , losing hurricane winds for several days beginning on September 13 . The system eventually turned to the northeast on September 15 , and a day later it regained hurricane @-@ force winds as a vigorous extratropical cyclone . Early on September 17 , the cyclone struck Scotland with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , but the system persisted until finally losing its identity north of Scotland on September 18 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In the United States , the threat of the hurricane prompted the National Weather Bureau to issue warnings of gale force winds , high tides , and rough surf from the Outer Banks of North Carolina to Maine . At least 17 naval ships were moved in preparation for the hurricane . Rhode Island state police officers warned homeowners near the coast to be ready to evacuate , if necessary . There , officials also closed several beaches and canceled ferry travel along the state 's southern waterways . On the day of the hurricane 's closest approach to the United States , the National Weather Bureau issued storm warnings from Cape May , New Jersey , to Eastport , Maine . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Passing through the Lesser Antilles , Hurricane Dog produced a storm surge of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in Antigua . Winds on Antigua and Barbuda were estimated at 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) , with a gust of 144 mph ( 232 km / h ) recorded at St. John 's , Antigua and Barbuda . On Antigua , where hurricane @-@ force winds were reported for six hours , residents considered it the most severe hurricane in history . Hurricane Dog left thousands homeless on Antigua , just weeks after Hurricane Baker caused severe damage on the island . Damage throughout the Lesser Antilles totaled $ 1 million ( 1950 USD , $ 8 @.@ 92 million 2009 USD ) , primarily on Antigua and Barbuda , and included many damaged or destroyed homes , ruined crops , blocked roads from washouts or fallen trees , and power outages across the islands . The hurricane resulted in several shipwrecks ; two people drowned when their small boat capsized . The hurricane sank a boat on the island of Saint @-@ Barthélemy , where damage amounted to $ 70 @,@ 000 ( 1950 USD , $ 624 thousand 2009 USD ) . 
 Heavy rain fell in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , leading to flash floods in some locations . In Bel Air , Maryland , a car drove into the swollen Little Gunpowder Falls ; three people in the car drowned and a fourth was injured . A further two people drowned in Lexington , Virginia . Though newspaper sources attributed the heavy rainfall to Hurricane Dog , this was not confirmed . The hurricane deposited light to moderate rainfall across southeastern Massachusetts , ranging from around 1 inch ( 25 mm ) to about 4 to 5 inches ( 100 to 125 mm ) near Nantucket . In Provincetown , a car hit a woman — neither the driver nor the victim was able to see due to the rains . A man in Falmouth was paralyzed from the waist downwards after coming into contact with a wet tree limb next to a downed power line . 
 The hurricane produced high tides and rough surf along the East Coast of the United States , with coastal flooding reported along some beaches in Rhode Island . The hurricane capsized or damaged several boats along the coastline , including two large vessels in Nantucket . In Marblehead , Massachusetts , the surf grounded at least 15 vessels from the harbor onto a coastal causeway . Near Cape Cod , damage to fishermen 's assets totaled $ 150 @,@ 000 ( 1950 USD , $ 1 @.@ 34 million 2009 USD ) . Tides along Nantucket were reported at the highest levels since the 1944 Great Atlantic Hurricane . Hurricane Dog produced powerful wind gusts along coastal areas of New England , which caused widespread power outages , including a loss of power to 15 towns on Cape Cod , to hundreds of residences on Nantucket , and to several other locations in the area . Additionally , winds from the hurricane destroyed two small barns and uprooted a few trees , some of which blocked roads . Overall damage was fairly light , totaling about $ 2 million ( 1950 USD , $ 17 @.@ 8 million 2009 USD ) — a much lower total than would have been expected if the hurricane had made landfall . In all , 12 people died in New England as a result of the hurricane . Two ships went missing during the storm along the coast of Nova Scotia , with a crew of six people each ; their status is unknown , and they are considered storm fatalities . 
 = = Records , naming , and aftermath = = 
 Before scientific reexamination reduced its winds , Hurricane Dog was listed as the second @-@ strongest Atlantic hurricane on record , tied with Hurricanes Gilbert in 1988 and Wilma in 2005 ; following reanalysis in 2012 , the 1935 Labor Day hurricane also met this distinction . Only Hurricanes Camille in 1969 and Allen in 1980 were stronger , peaking at 190 mph ( 306 km / h ) . ( However , Camille was later found to have been somewhat weaker than originally estimated , with top winds of 175 mph ( 282 km / h ) . ) During the 1950 , 1951 , and 1952 seasons , Atlantic hurricanes were named using the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . However , Hurricane Dog was referred to as " the great hurricane in the central Atlantic " in newspaper reports , and its name was seldom used . Operationally , hurricanes were not referred to by name until 1952 . 
 A relief fund was organized in the aftermath of the hurricane by The Daily Gleaner , a newspaper from Kingston , Jamaica . The newspaper invited its readers to help assist " their suffering fellow @-@ West Indians in the island of Antigua . " Four days after the hurricane , the fund totaled £ 171 @,@ 000 ( 1950 GBP , $ 4 @.@ 27 million 2009 USD ) . One Antigua official stated the country " would appreciate voluntary assistance from outside , especially food and clothing " . Relief aid was also sent from the United States to the affected islands . 
 = Hurricane David = 
 Hurricane David was a Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that reached Category 5 hurricane status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The fourth named tropical cyclone , second hurricane , and first major hurricane of the 1979 Atlantic hurricane season , traversed through the Leeward Islands , Greater Antilles , and East Coast of the United States during late August and early September . David was the first hurricane to affect the Lesser Antilles since Hurricane Inez in 1966 . With winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) , David remains the only storm of Category 5 intensity to make landfall on the Dominican Republic in the 20th century and the deadliest since the 1930 Dominican Republic Hurricane killing over 2 @,@ 000 people in its path . Also , the hurricane was the strongest to hit Dominica in the 20th century , and was the deadliest Dominican tropical cyclone since a hurricane killed over 200 in September of the 1834 season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 25 , the US National Hurricane Center reported that a tropical depression had developed within an area of disturbed weather , that was located about 1 @,@ 400 km ( 870 mi ) to the southeast of the Cape Verde Islands . During that day the depression gradually developed further as it moved westwards , under the influence of the subtropical ridge of high pressure that was located to the north of the system before during the next day the NHC reported that the system had become a tropical storm and named it David . David continued to strengthen , becoming a hurricane on August 27 . As it moved west @-@ northwestward on from August 27 – 28 , it rapidly intensified to a 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) major hurricane . It weakened slightly to a 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) hurricane , but restrengthened by the time David ravaged the tiny windward Island of Dominica on the 29th . 
 David continued west @-@ northwest , and became a Category 5 hurricane in the northeast Caribbean Sea , reaching peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) and minimum central pressure of 924 mbar ( hPa ) on August 30 . An upper @-@ level trough pulled David northward into Hispaniola as a Category 5 hurricane on the August 31 . The eye passed almost directly over Santo Domingo , capital of the Dominican Republic with over a million people . The storm crossed over the island and emerged as a weak hurricane after drenching the islands . 
 After crossing the Windward Passage , David struck eastern Cuba as a minimal hurricane on September 1 . It weakened to a tropical storm over land , but quickly re @-@ strengthened as it again reached open waters . David turned to the northwest along the western periphery of the subtropical ridge , and re @-@ intensified to a 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane while over the Bahamas , where it caused heavy damage . Despite initial forecasts of a Miami , Florida landfall , the hurricane turned to the north @-@ northwest just before landfall to strike near West Palm Beach , Florida on September 3 . It paralleled the Florida coastline just inland until emerging into the western Atlantic Ocean at New Smyrna Beach , Florida later on September 3 . David continued to the north @-@ northwest , and made its final landfall just south of Savannah , Georgia as a minimal hurricane on September 5 . It turned to the northeast while weakening over land , and became extratropical on the 6th over New York . As an extratropical storm , David continued to the northeast over New England and the Canadian Maritimes . David intensified once more as it crossed the far north Atlantic , clipping northwestern Iceland before moving eastward well north of the Faroe Islands on September 10 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In the days prior to hitting Dominica , David was originally expected to hit Barbados and spare Dominica in the process . However , on August 29 a turn in the hours before moving through the area caused the 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) hurricane to make a direct hit on the southern part of Dominica . Even as it became increasingly clear that David was headed for the island , residents did not appear to take the situation seriously . This can be partly attributed to the fact that local radio warnings were minimal and disaster preparedness schemes were essentially non @-@ existent . Furthermore , Dominica had not experienced a major hurricane since 1930 , thus leading to complacency amongst much of the population . This proved to have disastrous consequences for the island nation . 
 Some 400 @,@ 000 people evacuated in the United States in anticipation of David , including 300 @,@ 000 in southeastern Florida due to a predicted landfall between the Florida Keys and Palm Beach . Of those , 78 @,@ 000 fled to shelters , while others either stayed at a friend 's house further inland or traveled northward . Making landfall during Labor Day weekend , David forced the cancellations of many activities in the greater Miami area . 
 = = Impact = = 
 David is believed to have been responsible for 2 @,@ 068 deaths , making it one of the deadliest hurricanes of the modern era . It caused torrential damage across its path , most of which occurred in the Dominican Republic where the hurricane made landfall as a Category 5 hurricane . 
 = = = Dominica = = = 
 During the storm 's onslaught , David dropped up to 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of rain , causing numerous landslides on the mountainous island . Hours of hurricane @-@ force winds severely eroded the coastlines and washed out coastal roads . 
 Damage was greatest in the southwest portion of the island , especially in the capital city , Roseau , which resembled an air raid target after the storm 's passage . Strong winds from Hurricane David destroyed or damaged 80 percent of the homes ( mostly wood ) on the island , leaving 75 percent of the population homeless , with many others temporarily homeless in the immediate aftermath . In addition , the rainfall turned rivers into torrents , sweeping away everything in their path to the sea . Power lines were completely ripped out , causing the water system to stop as well . 
 Most severely damaged was the agricultural industry . The worst loss in agriculture was from bananas and coconuts , of which about 75 percent of the crop was destroyed . Banana fields were completely destroyed , and in the southern portion of the island most coconut trees were blown down . Citrus trees fared better , due to the small yet sturdy nature of the trees . In addition , David 's winds uprooted many trees on the tops of mountains , leaving them bare and damaging the ecosystem by disrupting the water levels . 
 In all , 56 people died in Dominica and 180 were injured . Property and agricultural damage figures in Dominica are unknown . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 Aside from Dominica , other islands in the Lesser Antilles experienced minor to moderate damage . Just to the south of Dominica , David brought Martinique winds of up to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) sustained gust in the northeast of the coast of the Caravelle . The capital , Fort @-@ de @-@ France , reported wave heights of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) and experienced strong tropical storm sustained winds at 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) and gust at 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) . David 's strong winds caused severe crop damage , mostly to bananas , amounting to $ 50 million ( $ 150 million in 2007 USD ) in losses . Though no deaths were reported , the hurricane caused 20 to 30 injuries and left 500 homeless . 
 Guadeloupe experienced moderate to extensive damage on Basse @-@ Terre Island . There , the banana crop was completely destroyed , and combined with other losses , crop damage amounted to $ 100 million ( $ 280 million in 2005 USD ) . David caused no deaths , a few injuries , and left several hundred homeless . Nearby , Marie @-@ Galante and Les Saintes reported some extreme damage while Grande @-@ Terre had some moderate damages . 
 The island of St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands experienced significant rainfall amounting to 10 – 12 inches ( 250 – 300 mm ) but fairly minor damages . 
 = = = Puerto Rico = = = 
 Hurricane David was originally going to hit the south coast of Puerto Rico , but a change in course in the middle of the night spared it the damage that the Dominican Republic suffered . 
 Though it did not hit Puerto Rico , Hurricane David passed less than 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of the island , bringing strong winds and heavy rainfall to the island . Portions of southwestern Puerto Rico experienced sustained winds of up to 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) , while the rest of the island received tropical storm @-@ force winds . While passing by the island , the hurricane caused strong seas and torrential rainfall , amounting to 19 @.@ 9 inches ( 505 mm ) in Mayagüez , Puerto Rico and up to 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in the central mountainous region . 
 Despite remaining offshore , most of the island felt David 's effects . Agricultural damage was severe , and combined with property damage , the hurricane was responsible for $ 70 million in losses ( $ 200 million in 2005 USD ) . Following the storm , the FEMA declared the island a disaster area . In all , Hurricane David killed seven people in Puerto Rico , four of which resulted from electrocutions . 
 = = = Dominican Republic = = = 
 Upon making landfall in the Dominican Republic , David turned unexpectedly to the northwest , causing 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) winds in Santo Domingo and Category 5 winds elsewhere in the country . The storm caused torrential rainfall , resulting in extreme river flooding . The flooding swept away entire villages and isolated communities during the storm 's onslaught . A rail @-@ mounted container crane collapsed in Rio <unk> at the sea @-@ land terminal . Many roads in the country were either damaged or destroyed from the heavy rainfall , especially in the towns of <unk> , San Cristobal , and <unk> . 
 Nearly 70 % of the country 's crops were destroyed from the torrential flooding . Extreme river flooding resulted in most of the country 's 2 @,@ 000 fatalities . One particularly deadly example of this was when a rampaging river in the mountainous village of Padre las Casas swept away a church and a school , killing several hundred people who were sheltering there . The flooding destroyed thousands of houses , leaving over 200 @,@ 000 homeless in the aftermath of the hurricane . President Antonio Guzmán Fernández estimated the combination of agricultural , property , and industrial damage to amount to $ 1 billion ( $ 2 @.@ 8 billion in 2005 USD ) . 
 Neighboring Haiti experienced very little from David , due to the hurricane 's weakened state upon moving through the country . 
 = = = Bahamas = = = 
 While passing through the Bahamas , David brought 70 – 80 mph ( 115 – 130 km / h ) winds to Andros Island as the eye crossed the archipelago . David , though still disorganized , produced heavy rainfall in the country peaking at 8 inches ( 200 mm ) . Strong wind gusts uprooted trees , and overall damage was minimal . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 David produced widespread damage across the United States amounting to $ 320 million ( $ 900 million in 2005 USD ) . Prior to the hurricane 's arrival , 400 @,@ 000 evacuated from coastal areas . In total , David directly killed five in the United States , and was responsible for ten indirect deaths . 
 = = = = Florida = = = = 
 Upon making landfall , David brought a storm surge of only two @-@ four feet ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) , due to its lack of strengthening and the obtuse angle at which it hit . In addition , David caused strong surf and moderate rainfall , amounting to a maximum of 8 @.@ 92 inches ( 227 mm ) in Vero Beach . Though it made landfall as a Category 2 storm , the strongest winds were localized , and the highest reported wind occurred in Fort Pierce , with 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) sustained and 95 mph ( 155 km / h ) gusts . 
 Because the hurricane remained near the coastline , Hurricane David failed to cause extreme damage in Florida . The storm 's winds shattered windows in stores near the coast and caused property damage , including blowing the frame of the Palm Beach Jai <unk> fronton and downing the 186 @-@ foot ( 57 @-@ m ) <unk> AM radio tower in West Palm Beach into the Intracoastal Waterway . A few roofs were torn off , and numerous buildings were flooded from over six inches ( 150 mm ) of rainfall . A 450 @-@ foot ( 140 @-@ m ) crane was even snapped in two at the St. Lucie Nuclear Power Plant . The hurricane spawned over 10 tornadoes while passing over the state , though none caused deaths or injuries . Total damages in Florida amounted to $ 95 million ( $ 270 million in 2005 USD ) , of which $ 30 million occurred in Palm Beach County , mostly from crop damage . Two journalists with TODAY newspaper from Brevard County followed the hurricane path from South Florida to Cocoa , FL and experienced extremely high winds as they reported on the hurricane . 
 = = = = Georgia = = = = 
 Hurricane David made landfall in Georgia as a quickly weakening minimal hurricane , bringing a three – five foot ( 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 5 m ) storm surge and heavy surf . Its inner core remained away from major cities , though Savannah recorded sustained winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) and wind gusts of 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) . No major damage occurred in Savannah . High winds downed numerous power lines , leaving many without power for up to two weeks after the storm . Offshore , strong seas disrupted a portion of the coastal reef by moving a sunken ship 300 feet ( 90 m ) . Overall , Hurricane David was responsible for minor damage and two casualties from its heavy surf . 
 = = = = Southeast , Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England = = = = 
 Upon entering South Carolina , David retained winds of up to hurricane force , though the highest recorded was 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) sustained in Charleston and a 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) wind gust in Hilton Head Island . Numerous U.S. Navy ships that were in port at the Charleston Naval Station sortied , several of which ( notably the frigate USS Bowen ( FF @-@ 1079 ) and the destroyer tender USS Sierra ( AD @-@ 18 ) sustained severe damage riding the storm out at sea . Similar winds occurred in North Carolina , and lesser readings were recorded throughout the northeastern United States , excluding a 174 mph ( 280 km / h ) wind gust on Mount Washington in New Hampshire . In addition , David dropped heavy rainfall along its path , peaking at 10 @.@ 73 inches ( 273 mm ) in Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , with widespread reports of over five inches ( 130 mm ) . Storm surge was moderate , peaking at 8 @.@ 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) in Charleston and up to five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) along much of the eastern United States coastline . 
 Overall , damage was light in most areas , though it was very widespread . High winds and rain downed power lines in the New York City area , leaving 2 @.@ 5 million people without electricity during the storm 's passage . David also caused minor to moderate beach erosion , as well as widespread crop damage from the flooding . In addition , the hurricane spawned numerous tornadoes while moving through the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England . In Virginia eight tornadoes formed across the southeastern portion of the state , of which six were F2 's or greater on the Fujita scale . The tornadoes caused one death , 19 injuries , damaged 270 homes , and destroyed three homes , amounting to $ 6 million ( $ 20 million in 2005 USD ) in losses . In Maryland , David 's outer bands formed seven tornadoes . In New Castle County , Delaware , an F2 tornado damaged numerous homes and injured five . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Dominica = = = 
 Immediately after the storm , lack of power prevented communications and the outside world had little knowledge of the extent of the damage in Dominica . A citizen named Fred White ended that by using a battery @-@ operated ham radio to contact the world . 
 In response to the severe agricultural damage , the government initiated a food ration . By two months after the storm , assistance pledges amounted to over $ 37 million ( 1979 US $ ) from various groups around the world . Similar to the aftermath of other natural disasters , the distribution of the aid raised concerns and accusations over the amount of food and material , or lack thereof , for the affected citizens . The Hurricane destroyed some important landmarks , including a significant part of the ruins of the Fort Young which had stood since the 1770s . 
 Another occurrence less typical of the aftermath of other natural disasters was the looting . In supermarkets , seaports , and homes , what was not destroyed by the hurricanes was stolen in the weeks after the storm . 
 HMS Fife ( a Royal Navy County Class Destroyer ) was on its way back to the United Kingdom when the hurricane struck , and was turned back to provide emergency aid to the island . Sailing through mountainous seas The Fife docked in the main harbor at Roseau without assistance , and was the only outside help for several days . The crew provided work details and medical parties to offer assistance to the island and concentrated on the hospital buildings , the airstrip , and restoring power and water . The ship 's helicopter ( called Humphrey ) took medical aid into the hills to assist people who were cut off from getting to other help by fallen trees . The ship also used its radio systems to broadcast news and music to the island to inform the population of what was being done and how to get assistance . This was the first time a Royal Navy ship had provided a public broadcast news service . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Despite the casualties and damages attributed to David , the storm 's effects were not as bad as in other countries . In particular , South Florida escaped relatively lightly . Because of this , NHC Director Neil Frank was accused of overly stirring up panic before the arrival of David : two local psychiatrists even claimed that the experience would make residents more complacent towards future storms . However , the NHC defended their methods , with Neil Frank stating : " If we hadn 't [ raised public alarm ] and our predictions had been more accurate , the consequences would have been disastrous . " One reporter who covered Hurricane David was Dick Baumbach , a journalist with TODAY newspaper , now known as Florida Today . He along with news photographer Scott Maclay followed the path of the hurricane from Miami to Central Florida . In Cocoa Beach , Baumbach decided to ride out the hurricane in his home with two other journalists . While it was a difficult and trying experience all three reporters survived and ended up winning numerous awards . The hurricane also interrupted the filming of the movie Caddyshack that was taking place at the Rolling Hills Country Club in Fort Lauderdale . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name David was retired following this storm because of its devastation and high death toll and will never be used again for an Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced with Danny for the 1985 season . 
 = Song Beneath the Song = 
 " Song Beneath the Song " also known as Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event , is the eighteenth episode of the seventh season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the one @-@ hundred forty @-@ fourth episode overall . It was named after a song by American singer Maria Taylor . Written by series creator Shonda Rhimes and directed by Tony Phelan , it premiered on ABC in the United States on March 31 , 2011 . It is the series 's first musical episode , and features the cast performing songs previously featured within the program . It is accompanied by a soundtrack album , titled Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event , also released on March 31 , 2011 . 
 The episode revolves around Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , just after they are involved in a vehicular collision . Various songs are performed by the cast members , as they attempt to save the life of Torres . Rhimes originally idealized the episode at the conception of the drama , while the show remained untitled . The episode opened to mixed reviews from television critics , and it was the second most watched program of the night . " Song Beneath the Song " was ranked in several " best and worst " lists , and the soundtrack was included on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 En route to a weekend getaway , surgeons Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) are involved in a vehicular collision , moments after Robbins proposes marriage . Torres suffers severe injuries , which endanger both her life and the life of her unborn child . She and Robbins are taken to Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , the institute at which they both work . Their colleagues attempt to save Torres , while Robbins and Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , the father of Torres 's baby , stand by . Torres 's many injuries include neurological trauma . While barely conscious , she hallucinates an uninjured version of herself standing beside her . The hallucinatory Torres begins to sing , and is gradually joined by the doctors treating her . This singing continues throughout the episode , as Torres 's projection of herself attempts to reach out to Robbins . 
 Torres goes into cardiac arrest and is taken into an operating room she is temporarily stabilized , pending further surgery . She is moved into intensive care , while neonatal surgeon Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) is flown in by helicopter in case the baby has to be delivered prematurely . Robbins and Sloan argue over Torres 's treatment ; Robbins believes that Torres would not risk endangering the baby , but Sloan argues for saving Torres at all costs . The attending surgeons devise a treatment plan , led by trauma surgeon Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) . As they do so , Torres dreams about the moments preceding the accident . Her dream self sings to Robbins , interspersed with shots of the hospital staff singing and dancing with their own partners . Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) suggests treating Torres with a high @-@ risk but potentially effective cardiothoracic procedure she learned from her old mentor , Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) . Her current mentor , Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) , refuses to perform it , but when Torres 's condition deteriorates and she is rushed back into surgery , Hunt agrees that Yang should attempt the procedure . 
 When Torres again goes into cardiac arrest , Montgomery delivers her daughter at twenty @-@ three weeks 's gestation . The baby is initially unable to breathe , so with Sloan 's support , Robbins steps in and is able to revive her . Across the operating room , Torres 's condition begins to improve . Once the surgery is complete , the doctors deal with their own affairs ; Sloan 's former partner Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) commits to her new relationship with resident Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) ; Lexie 's sister Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) confesses that she was jealous of Torres 's pregnancy , which prompts her husband Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) to promise that they will have a child together ; Altman tells Yang that she can no longer teach her ; Sloan and Robbins bond over their shared parenthood . Later , as Robbins keeps a vigil by Torres 's bedside , the hallucinatory Torres is able to rouse her recovering self . As she regains consciousness , Torres accepts Robbins 's proposal . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Since Grey 's Anatomy began , series creator Shonda Rhimes had planned to produce a musical episode . She first vocalized the idea during filming of the pilot episode , when the program was as yet untitled . Rhimes felt that seasons six and seven were the right time for the crew to " try anything and everything [ they had ] always wanted to do , " and explained that she " finally [ had ] the right idea and the right talent to make [ a musical episode ] happen . " Filming began seven and a half years after Rhimes initially raised the idea . The episode was shot in approximately two weeks . Though cast member Dempsey jokingly referred to the episode as Glee M.D. , Rhimes intended for it to differ from other musical television episodes . She called it the opposite of " Once More , with Feeling , " the " all @-@ out , show @-@ stopping , " musical episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , as she aimed to " do something that was musical without being a musical . " 
 Rhimes said she had difficulty getting the network 's permission . She added : " I begged the studio people . I begged the network people . I took these people to dinner and begged . I jumped out at these people in bathrooms and begged . And they all smiled politely but what they were clearly really thinking was , ' This woman is an idiot . ' " Rhimes also explains why it took so long to produce this episode : 
 The script was written by Rhimes in November 2010 . She centered the episode around Ramirez 's character , Callie , and stated that the storyline would have developed regardless of whether it involved musical performances . Sara Ramirez used the opportunity to launch her career as a singer @-@ songwriter ; an alternate version of " The Story " is included on her debut EP , released four days prior to the episode 's premiere . The episode served to improve the relationship between Mark and Arizona . Capshaw assessed that , " The traumatic circumstance leads to them having a greater understanding of each other and then appreciation , and then need for each other and desire to be in each other ’ s lives . They come to care , I think , for one another . " 
 = = = Musical performances = = = 
 Rhimes , executive producer Betsy Beers and director Tony Phelan selected songs that became famous through their use in Grey 's Anatomy , and chose " the most iconic ones , the ones that best suited [ their ] singers , and the ones that made the most sense . " The multiple cover versions include the program 's theme tune , " <unk> in the Rocket " by Psapp . The primary vocalists are cast members Ramirez , McKidd , Leigh and Chandra Wilson . The soundtrack also includes " How to Save a Life " by The Fray and " Running on Sunshine " by Jesus Jackson , performed as ensemble pieces by Ramirez , McKidd , Wilson , Leigh , Daniel Sunjata , Scott Foley , Ellen Pompeo , Justin Chambers , Raver , Dane , and Capshaw . Ramirez , McKidd and Wilson also perform together on Snow Patrol 's " Chasing Cars . " Ramirez is the lead vocalist on " The Story " by Brandi Carlile , and " Grace " by Kate Havnevik , which also features the other female cast members , including Leigh and Sarah Drew on the chorus . Capshaw duets with Ramirez on KT Tunstall 's " Universe & U. " Wilson is the lead vocalist on " Wait " by Get Set Go , McKidd on " How We Operate " by Gomez , and Leigh on Anna <unk> 's " Breathe ( 2 AM ) . " 
 Leigh told that some actors were not " adamant and excited " about singing but still had the possibility to participate in the episode . " There were certain ways in which the scenes were written , even if there was a song in there , that perhaps a line was spoken instead of sung , " she said . 
 A vocal coach was enlisted to help the cast . Music director Chris Horvath was recruited to arrange the selected songs for the cast . The arrangements took around two months , with vocals recorded over four days in February 2011 . Horvath praised the cast 's response to the episode , noting that only four performers had " serious vocal talent , " while some had " barely sung in the shower " before . Those with professional singing experience include Ramirez , who won a Tony Award for her role in the musical Spamalot , and Wilson , who appeared in the Broadway production of Caroline , or Change . Cast members 's reactions toward the episode varied . Pompeo initially deemed the idea " crazy , " but rescinded her stance following the first read @-@ through . Recurring cast member Sunjata stated that singing was " a bit out of [ his ] comfort zone , " but found it an " interesting challenge , " and McKidd deemed it " very exciting to do something that 's completely out on a limb for the show . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ broadcast commentary = = = 
 Critical response prior to broadcast was mixed . TVLine 's Michael Ausiello assessed that the episode would " either be a show @-@ stopping triumph or a spectacular failure , " with no possible middle ground . William Keck of TV Guide initially had " serious doubts , " which were allayed by a visit to the set , during which he listened to the soundtrack . Keck likened it to the " much @-@ beloved early seasons of Grey 's , when music played a vital role on the show . " Entertainment Weekly 's Dan Snierson predicted heavy use of Auto Tune , though fellow EW writer Jennifer Armstrong was optimistic that the episode would be a success , commenting : " I have faith . I like musicals , I like Grey 's . I 'm rooting for this to work . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 During its original broadcast , " Song Beneath the Song " was watched by an average of 13 @.@ 09 million American viewers . It attained a 4 @.@ 9 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , making it the second highest @-@ rated program of the night , behind only American Idol on the Fox network . The rating was the second highest of the seventh season until that point , and a 30 percent increase from the previous episode , " This is How We Do It , " which was watched by 2 @.@ 4 million fewer viewers . 
 In Canada , where the episode also aired on March 31 , 2011 , it was watched by 3 @.@ 18 million viewers . Viewership again increased on " This is How We Do It , " which attained 2 @.@ 63 million viewers . However , while the preceding episode was the most @-@ viewed scripted show for the week of its original broadcast , " Song Beneath the Song " ranked second , behind The Big Bang Theory . 
 = = = Post @-@ broadcast commentary = = = 
 Following the first minutes of the drama , reactions on Twitter were mixed . Nicole Golden from TV Fanatic gave the episode 4 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 @.@ 0 . She found that " overall , the concept worked since music really has always played a big part in the show . Some songs were more appropriate and / or better performed than others , though . " She also wrote the concept worked in part because it was new but noted " the format would probably not have the same effect if used in future episodes . " Even though Boston Herald 's critic Mark Perigard was not a fan of the concept , saying " the Grey 's Anatomy event proved how tricky it is for an established show , especially a drama , to pull off a musical episode , " he did like several actors 's performances . He wrote : " Chandra Wilson and Chyler Leigh ( whom I never have anything good to say about ) delivered some impressive vocal work . Eric Dane did some of his best acting of his career last night as an anxious father @-@ to @-@ be terrified he would lose his best friend . " <unk> Little of The Wall Street Journal wrote , " If Glee and ER had a baby it would be tonight ’ s episode of the medical drama Grey ’ s Anatomy titled “ Song Beneath the Song . ” " In his review of the episode Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote " Like Grey 's Anatomy as a whole , some parts were unintentionally silly , others were surprisingly powerful , and it was rarely dull , at least . " 
 Patrick Dempsey admitted that the musical episode might not have been showrunner Shonda Rhimes 's best idea . He explained : " It 's very difficult to keep it fresh when you 're doing 24 episodes a year . Shonda Rhimes has a lot of ideas , and she is in a position where she can take more chances . Sometimes that works , sometimes it does not . Last year we had the singing episode , which I think was a big mistake . But you have to try . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2011 , the episode was ranked number 19 on the TV Guide Network special , 25 Biggest TV <unk> 2 . It was included in TV Guide 's list " The Worst of 2011 " saying , " Sara Ramirez has powerhouse pipes , but what this episode desperately needed was a better playlist . " BuddyTV , however , ranked it number 43 on its list of 2011 's 50 Best TV Episodes and it also appeared on Digital Spy 's shortlist of " TV 's Best Musical Episodes . " Supervising Music Editor Jennifer Barak and Music Editors Carli Barber and Jessica Harrison were nominated in the Best Sound Editing : Short Form Musical in Television category at the 2012 Golden Reel Awards for their work on the episode . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event debuted at number 24 on the Billboard 200 , with 19 @,@ 000 copies sold . It reached number 2 on the U.S. Soundtracks chart , and was the number 5 Independent Album . " The Story " entered the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart at number 69 , and the Canadian Hot 100 at 72 . 
 = Douglas MacArthur 's escape from the Philippines = 
 Douglas MacArthur 's escape from the Philippines began on 11 March 1942 , during World War II , when General Douglas MacArthur and members of his family and staff left Corregidor Island , where his forces had been surrounded by the Japanese . They traveled in PT boats ( patrol torpedo boats ) for two days through stormy seas patrolled by Japanese warships to reach Mindanao . From there , MacArthur and his party flew to Australia in a pair of Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses , ultimately arriving in Melbourne by train on 21 March . In Australia , he made his famous speech in which he declared , " I came through and I shall return " . 
 MacArthur was a well @-@ known and experienced officer with a distinguished record in World War I , who had retired from the United States Army in 1937 and had become a defense advisor to the Philippine government . He was recalled to active duty with the United States Army in July 1941 , a few months before the outbreak of the Pacific War between the United States and the Empire of Japan , to become commander of United States Army Forces in the Far East ( USAFFE ) , uniting the Philippine and United States Armies under one command . 
 By March 1942 , the Japanese invasion of the Philippines had compelled MacArthur to withdraw his forces on Luzon to Bataan , while his headquarters and his family moved to Corregidor . The doomed defense of Bataan captured the imagination of the American public . At a time when the news from all fronts was uniformly bad , MacArthur became a living symbol of Allied resistance to the Japanese . 
 Fearing that Corregidor would soon fall , and MacArthur would be taken prisoner , President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered MacArthur to go to Australia . A submarine was made available , but MacArthur elected to break through the Japanese blockade in PT boats under the command of Lieutenant ( junior grade ) John D. Bulkeley . The staff MacArthur brought with him became known as the " Bataan Gang " . They would become the nucleus of his General Headquarters ( GHQ ) Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Douglas MacArthur was a well @-@ known and experienced officer . The son of Lieutenant General Arthur MacArthur Jr . , who was awarded the Medal of Honor for his services in the American Civil War , MacArthur had graduated at the top of the United States Military Academy class of 1903 . He was an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to his father from 1905 to 1906 , and to President Theodore Roosevelt from 1906 to 1907 . During World War I he commanded the 84th Brigade of the 42nd ( Rainbow ) Division in the fighting on the Western Front . After the war he served as Superintendent of the United States Military Academy , and as Chief of Staff of the United States Army . He retired from the United States Army in 1937 , and became a field marshal in the Philippine Army . 
 MacArthur 's job was to advise the Philippine government on defense matters , and prepare the Philippine defense forces when the Philippines became fully independent , which was to be in 1946 . The Philippine Army , almost entirely manned and officered by Filipinos with only a small number of American advisors , was raised by conscription , with two classes of 20 @,@ 000 men being trained each year , starting in 1937 . In addition , there was a regular U.S. Army garrison of about 10 @,@ 000 , half of whom were Filipinos serving in the U.S. Army known as Philippine Scouts . When MacArthur was recalled from retirement in July 1941 to become commander of United States Army Forces in the Far East ( USAFFE ) at the age of 61 , he united the Philippine and United States Armies under one command . 
 In getting the Philippine Army ready for war , MacArthur faced an enormous task On a visit to the United States in 1937 , MacArthur lobbied the Navy Department for the development of PT boats — small , fast boats armed with torpedoes — for which he believed that the geography of the Philippines , with its shallow waters and many coves , was ideally suited . The nascent Philippine Navy acquired three , known as Q boats , after President Manuel L. Quezon . In August 1941 , the U.S. Navy created Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Three , under the command of Lieutenant ( junior grade ) John D. Bulkeley . It was a half @-@ strength squadron , with only six PT boats instead of the normal twelve , numbered 31 to 35 and 41 . It arrived at Manila in September 1941 . It was understood that a fleet consisting of more than PT boats would be required for a successful defense of the Philippines . 
 As early as 1907 , U.S. naval and military planners had concluded that it would be impractical to repel an invasion of the Philippines . The best that could be hoped for was that the garrison could hold out on the Bataan peninsula until help arrived . In the 1920s it was estimated that they could do so for about 60 days . By the 1930s , the planners had become decidedly pessimistic in view of the increased capability of aircraft , and by 1936 they were agreed that the Philippine should be written off . But in July 1941 , this decision was abruptly reversed , and it became the policy of the U.S. government to defend and hold the Philippines . This was based , at least in part , in the belief that Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers could deter or defeat an invading force . 
 Soon after the Japanese invasion of the Philippines in 1941 , MacArthur , in accordance with the pre @-@ war plan , declared Manila an open city , and ordered his forces on Luzon to withdraw to Bataan . The Philippine government , the High Commissioner 's office and MacArthur 's USAFFE headquarters moved to Corregidor Island . Although the dependents of U.S. military personnel had been sent back to the United States , MacArthur was , until his recall from retirement , a Philippine government employee , so his family had remained in the Philippines . MacArthur 's wife , Jean MacArthur , and young son , Arthur MacArthur IV , went with him to Corregidor . Arthur celebrated his fourth birthday on Corregidor , on 21 February 1942 . When an aide asked about Arthur 's possible fate , MacArthur replied : " He is a soldier 's son . " 
 Most of the United States Asiatic Fleet retired to the south of the Philippines . A small force was left behind under the command of Rear Admiral Francis W. Rockwell consisting of the submarine tender USS Canopus , the submarine rescue ship Pigeon , gunboats Oahu , Luzon and Mindanao , minesweepers Finch , Tanager and Quail , five tugboats , three small patrol boats , and the PT boats of Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Three . The loss of Manila and the U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay meant that fuel and spare parts became scarce . The PT boats relied on Canopus and the floating dry dock USS Dewey for assistance with maintenance . Despite this , Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Three continued to patrol . On 17 December , PT @-@ 32 , PT @-@ 34 and PT @-@ 35 rescued 296 survivors from SS Corregidor , which had been carrying refugees to Australia when it struck a mine and sank in Manila Bay . A week later , PT @-@ 33 ran aground while patrolling south of Manila Bay , and was set on fire to prevent her being salvaged by the Japanese . PT @-@ 31 met a similar fate a month later , after its engines failed and it drifted onto a reef . The PT boats attacked enemy barges off Luzon on the night of 23 January 1942 , a small Japanese warship on 1 February , and a small vessel , probably a fishing trawler , on 17 February . 
 = = Decision = = 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 In a message to President Franklin D. Roosevelt in Washington , D.C. , on 11 February , MacArthur announced that he and his family intended to " share the fate of the garrison " . This meant surrender at best ; MacArthur knew that death from artillery fire or an air raid was also likely . Three days later , the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , George C. Marshall , urged MacArthur to send his family away , but MacArthur ignored this part of the message . Singapore , once considered impregnable , fell on 15 February , and in Washington , the possibility that Corregidor would also fall and MacArthur would be taken prisoner was considered . MacArthur was America 's most experienced general , but would be of little use in a prisoner of war camp . Moreover , he had become a living symbol of Allied resistance to the Japanese . The brave but doomed defense of Bataan had captured the imagination of the American public , who saw MacArthur as the only Allied general who knew how to fight the Japanese . Walter R. Borneman noted that : 
 in a fragile period of the American psyche when the general American public , still stunned by the shock of Pearl Harbor and uncertain what lay ahead in Europe , desperately needed a hero , they wholeheartedly embraced Douglas MacArthur — good press copy that he was . There simply were no other choices that came close to matching his mystique , not to mention his evocative lone @-@ wolf stand — something that always resonated with Americans . 
 Secretary of State Cordell Hull raised the possibility of MacArthur 's evacuation . Brigadier General Dwight Eisenhower wrote in his diary : 
 I cannot help thinking that we are disturbed by editorials and reacting to " public opinion " rather than to military logic . " Pa " Watson is certain we must get MacArthur out , as being worth " five Army corps . " 
 The President considered sending MacArthur to Mindanao to coordinate the defense of the Philippines from there , but another consideration arose . The fall of Singapore sealed the fate of the American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDA ) , of which MacArthur 's command was nominally a part . Discussions were held with the British about future command arrangements . A broad agreement was reached that the United States would assume responsibility for the Southwest Pacific . A senior American officer was required , and MacArthur was the obvious choice . On 23 February , MacArthur received a message that had been drafted by the President , Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson and Marshall . It read : 
 The President directs that you make arrangements to leave and proceed to Mindanao . You are directed to make this change as quickly as possible … From Mindanao you will proceed to Australia where you will assume command of all United States troops … Instructions will be given from here at your request for the movement of submarine or plane or both to enable you to carry out the foregoing instructions . You are authorized to take your chief of staff General Sutherland . 
 = = = Corregidor = = = 
 MacArthur responded with a request that he might select the time of his departure . " Unless the right moment is chosen for this delicate operation " , he wrote , " a sudden collapse might occur . " " With regard to the actual movement " , he went on , " I deem it advisable to go to Mindanao by combined use of surface craft and submarine , and thence by air , further movement by submarine being too time consuming . " Marshall replied that the President would allow him to choose the time and method of his departure . ABDA was dissolved on 27 February , and MacArthur nominally came under Dutch command , but was ordered to continue communicating directly with the War Department . 
 MacArthur inspected the PT boat squadron on 1 March . With air cover provided by his four remaining Curtiss P @-@ 40 Warhawks , MacArthur and his wife Jean took a half @-@ hour ride on PT @-@ 41 . Although the sea was tranquil , Jean still felt queasy . Ostensibly , the purpose of MacArthur 's visit was presenting Bulkeley with the Distinguished Service Cross for sinking an " unidentified 5 @,@ 000 @-@ ton enemy ship with torpedoes without serious damage to his ship or casualty to his crew " , but afterwards MacArthur took Bulkeley aside and asked him if it would be possible to make the 600 @-@ mile ( 970 @-@ kilometre ) journey through uncharted waters at night in PT boats . Bulkeley told him that it would be " a piece of cake . " 
 When some days passed without any further word on the matter , follow @-@ up messages were sent on 6 and 9 March . By 10 March , MacArthur had decided that the Bataan front was not in danger of imminent collapse , and replied that he planned to depart on 15 March , when the submarine USS Permit was scheduled to arrive at Corregidor . Radio broadcasts in the United States calling for MacArthur to be placed in charge in Australia had been picked up by MacArthur 's headquarters in Corregidor , and it had to be assumed that the Japanese had heard them too . There were ominous signs : Japanese surface patrols had been stepped up in the Subic Bay area , and there were reports of Japanese destroyers heading north from the southern Philippines . MacArthur therefore elected not to wait for the Permit , but to leave as soon as possible , by PT boat on the night of 11 March . Major General Jonathan M. Wainwright was left in command on Bataan and Corregidor . " When I get back " , MacArthur told him , " if you 're still on Bataan , I 'll make you a lieutenant general . " Wainwright replied : " I 'll be on Bataan if I 'm still alive . " 
 Of the decision to depart by PT boat rather than wait for the submarine , Lieutenant Robert B. Kelly , executive officer of Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Three , and commander of PT @-@ 34 , later recalled : 
 Having served with Lieutenant Bulkeley as his second in command on this and a prior assignment , I was privy to much of what transpired during his conferences with General MacArthur during the decision making process . MacArthur 's decision to use the PT boats for the evacuation of his part dramatically emphasized to the American public the overwhelming odds against which the United States was fighting in the Philippines . It evened an old score with the United States Navy . And since he had a tendency towards claustrophobia and did not relish making the trip on a submerged submarine with a commander whom he did not personally know , it provided an acceptable alternative which he elected to exercise . 
 = = Escape = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Bulkeley and his crews overhauled the PT boats for the voyage . All of the engines had performed hard war service , and had been operated for double the recommended mileage without overhaul . As a result , they were reduced to operating at half speed . Since there were no replacement parts , the gaskets , which normally would have been discarded , had to be carefully cleaned and replaced . Each PT boat would carry twenty 55 @-@ gallon drums of additional fuel on the deck . This reduced the top speed of the boats to about 30 knots ( 56 kilometres per hour ; 35 miles per hour ) . To make room for the passengers , Bulkeley had to leave 32 of his men behind , who would be sent to fight as infantry on Bataan . 
 MacArthur 's chief of staff , Major General Richard K. Sutherland , drew up the passenger lists . Rockwell and his chief of staff , Captain Herbert Ray , were ordered to accompany MacArthur . They were already under orders to return by submarine , but this was switched to accompanying MacArthur when his date of departure was brought forward . A United States Army Air Corps officer , Major General Harold H. George , was included at the request of the United States Army Air Forces . 
 MacArthur was accompanied by his family : his wife Jean , four @-@ year @-@ old son Arthur , and Arthur 's Cantonese amah , Ah Cheu . MacArthur later defended his decision to take her instead of an American nurse . " Few people outside the Orient " , he wrote , " know how completely a member of the family an amah can become , and Ah Cheu had been with us since Arthur 's birth . Because of her relationship to my family , her death would have been certain had she been left behind . " 
 In case a doctor was needed , Major Charles H. Morhouse was summoned from Bataan to accompany the party . The remaining thirteen were members of MacArthur 's staff . They were loyal and experienced , and some of them had been with MacArthur for years . Creating a new staff in Australia would have taken time , while taking his existing one would enable him to commence work soon after arrival in Australia . They would be more valuable there than in the Philippines . Sutherland included two of his own men : his assistant , Lieutenant Colonel Francis H. Wilson , and his stenographer , Master Sergeant Paul P. Rogers . Promoted from private that day , Rogers was the only enlisted man on the list , which he typed . A number of men gave him letters to post . 
 Because there was no food for the passengers on the PT boats , Jean and MacArthur 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp , Lieutenant Colonel Sidney L. Huff , packed tins of food into four duffel bags , one for each PT boat . Huff removed the four @-@ star rank number plates from MacArthur 's car so they could be used in Australia , and took a mattress for the MacArthurs to lie on . Stories later circulated that it was full of cash or gold . Other stories had it that furniture from MacArthur 's residence in the Manila Hotel had been loaded on board the PT boats , even , in one version of the story , the piano . In fact , each passenger was limited to one piece of luggage weighing 35 pounds ( 16 kilograms ) or less . Jean took a small suitcase with some clothes . It sported a label from the Hotel New Grand in Yokohama , where she stayed during her honeymoon . Ah Cheu wrapped her possessions in a handkerchief . MacArthur took nothing . 
 = = = PT boat voyage = = = 
 Only PT @-@ 41 , which carried MacArthur and his family , departed from Corregidor 's North Dock . The passengers of the remaining boats were taken to Bataan in launches and boarded their PT boats there . While his family boarded , MacArthur spoke to Major General George F. Moore , the commander of the Harbor Defenses of Manila and Subic Bays . " George " , he told him , " keep the flag flying . I 'm coming back . " 
 PT @-@ 41 departed at 19 : 45 on 11 March and joined the other three 15 minutes later . A navy minelayer led the PT boats through the protective minefield in single file . The boats then assumed a diamond formation , with PT @-@ 41 in the lead and PT @-@ 34 bringing up the rear . If attacked by the Japanese , PT @-@ 41 was to flee while the other three boats engaged the enemy . The seas were moderate , but most of the passengers quickly became seasick . MacArthur later recalled : 
 The weather deteriorated steadily , and towering waves buffeted our tiny , war @-@ weary , blacked @-@ out vessels . The spray drove against our skin like stinging pellets of birdshot . We would fall into a trough , then climb up the steep water peak , only to slide down the other side . The boat would toss crazily back and forth , seeming to hang free in space as though about to breach , and would then break away and go forward with a rush . I recall describing the experience afterward as what it must be like to take a trip in a concrete mixer . 
 During the night , the four boats became separated . Bulkeley spent time looking for the other three boats , but was unable to find them in the darkness . At dawn he gave up , and headed for one of the alternative hiding places . Kelly 's PT @-@ 34 was the first to reach the rendezvous point , a cove on Tagauayan Island , two hours late at 09 : 30 . There was no sign of the other boats , and Rockwell , in the same boat with Kelly , was far from convinced that Kelly had found the correct island . Some repairs were made , and the boat was refueled by hand pumps from the drums . Two men were posted atop the island 's tallest hill to watch out for the Japanese and the other boats . 
 PT @-@ 32 , which had only two good engines , had straggled behind the others . Around dawn , Schumacher spotted what appeared to be a Japanese destroyer heading towards him . He jettisoned his fuel drums so he could increase speed and run from it . He ordered his crew to man the .50 @-@ caliber machine guns and get ready to launch torpedoes . Akin prepared to toss a barracks bag filled with code books overboard . However , as the light improved , and the vessel drew closer , another look though the binoculars revealed that it was not a Japanese destroyer at all , but PT @-@ 41 , carrying an angry Bulkeley . Schumacher was ordered to recover the drums he had jettisoned , but this proved to be a time @-@ consuming task , and a dangerous one in broad daylight , and it had to be abandoned after only a few drums were recovered . Bulkeley had his gunners sink the rest . The two boats then hid for the day in a nearby cove . 
 In the afternoon , PT @-@ 41 and PT @-@ 32 made their way to Tagauayan , where they found PT @-@ 34 . There was a discussion about whether to proceed to Mindanao , or wait for Permit . Bulkeley warned that the seas might even be higher . But , since there was no assurance that the submarine would make it , MacArthur decided to continue , departing in daylight at 18 : 00 so as to be sure to meet their air transport there . Since PT @-@ 32 had no fuel to make Mindanao , its passengers were divided between PT @-@ 41 and PT @-@ 34 . Soon after they had departed , PT @-@ 35 belatedly arrived at rendezvous point . Akers found the crew of PT @-@ 32 there , and discovered that the other two boats had been and gone . He therefore set out for Cagayan de Oro as well . 
 At 19 : 00 , about an hour after they had left Tagauayan , PT @-@ 34 and PT @-@ 41 spotted a Japanese cruiser . Bulkeley made a sharp turn due west , and headed at top speed , about 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , into the setting sun . Whether because of the high waves , the glare of the sun , or simple inattentiveness , the cruiser did not spot them . After midnight , the weather began to worsen , with heavy swells and sporadic squalls . Kelly later recalled : 
 Big foaming waves fifteen or twenty feet high thundering over the cockpit , drenching everybody . Our binoculars were full of water and our eyes so continuously drenched with stinging salt that we couldn 't see , in addition to which it was pitch @-@ black . We were making good speed through strange waters with islands all around us . We could see the outlines of the big ones — Negros and Mindanao — very dimly against the horizon through the storm . But there were dozens of small ones and probably hundreds of reefs . 
 You had to keep one hand in front of your eyes to avoid the slapping force of the water and yet you needed both to hold on . 
 The Admiral was pretty wrought up . " I 've sailed every type of ship in the Navy except one of these MTBs " , he shouted at me above the wind , " and this is the worst bridge I 've ever been on . I wouldn 't do duty on one of these for anything in the world — you can have them . " 
 By dawn , the winds and swells had subsided , but the delay caused by the bad weather had slowed the two boats , and they now had to travel across the Mindanao Sea in daylight . Cagayan was sighted shortly after 06 : 30 on 13 March . Although PT @-@ 34 had led all the way from Tagauayan , Kelly now let Bulkeley take the lead , as he had the channel charts . PT @-@ 41 therefore pulled up at the wharf first , with MacArthur on the bow . They were met by Colonel William Morse , an officer on the staff of the Brigadier General William F. Sharp , the commander of U.S. forces on Mindanao . MacArthur told Bulkeley " I 'm giving every officer and man here the Silver Star for gallantry . You 've taken me out of the jaws of death , and I won 't forget it . " 
 A few hours later , PT @-@ 35 reached Cagayan . Willoughby later recalled : 
 We were behind schedule and reached the north coast of Mindanao in broad daylight . It was a clear , dazzling day . Fortunately , no Japanese planes cut across the blue sky , though the enemy was known to make regular mail flights from Mindanao to Luzon . We were pretty conspicuous as the hours dragged on . 
 USS Permit , under the command of Lieutenant Wreford G. Chapple , reached Tagauayan on 13 March , and found PT @-@ 32 . With two of his three engines out of action , Schumacher felt that his boat was no longer seaworthy . He had Chapple destroy the boat with Permit 's deck gun . Chapple then took the fifteen PT @-@ 32 crewmen back to Corregidor . There , eight of the crew were disembarked , while Chapple embarked forty more passengers , thirty @-@ six of them codebreakers . Nonetheless , Chapple was ordered to conduct a regular war patrol , which he did . He finally reached Australia on 7 April . Unaware of this , Bulkeley attempted to locate PT @-@ 32 . Over the next few days he flew over the area as a passenger in various aircraft , including a P @-@ 35 and a P @-@ 40 , in the hope of finding it . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The commander of U.S. Army Forces in Australia , Lieutenant General George H. Brett , received a radiogram from General Marshall in Washington , D.C. , alerting him that MacArthur would be requesting bombers to transport his party from Mindanao to Australia . A subsequent message from MacArthur requested his " most experienced pilots , and the best available planes in top condition " , but the only long @-@ range aircraft that Brett had were Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses of the 19th Bombardment Group which had seen hard service in the Philippines and the Dutch East Indies campaigns . He therefore approached Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary , the commander of naval forces in the Anzac Area , to ask for a loan of some of twelve newly arrived Navy B @-@ 17s . Leary , who had a reputation for refusing requests unless he could see how the Navy would benefit , turned Brett down . 
 Brett therefore sent four of the 19th Bombardment Group 's old planes . Two were forced to turn back with engine trouble . One of the others accidentally dumped 300 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 100 litres ; 250 imperial gallons ) of its fuel . The pilot flew on , and nearly made it to Del Monte Field , but , just a few miles from his destination , the fuel tanks ran dry and the engines stopped . The B @-@ 17 crash landed in the sea . Two of the crew were killed , but the rest made it to shore , and thence to Del Monte Field . Only one B @-@ 17 , piloted by Lieutenant Harl Pease , reached Del Monte , and this B @-@ 17 was in poor condition , with no brakes and a faulty supercharger . Sharp ordered it back to Australia before MacArthur arrived . Despite the lack of brakes , Pease made the return trip , carrying sixteen passengers . 
 Thus , with the arrival of PT @-@ 35 , all of MacArthur 's group had reached Mindanao safely , but there were no aircraft at Del Monte Field to meet them . They were taken to the Del Monte Plantation , where they were lodged in the guest houses , and had breakfast in the clubhouse . MacArthur sent a couple of sharp messages to Brett in Melbourne and Marshall in Washington . On their second day there , a Filipino woman arrived who wanted to speak to MacArthur . Her son was fighting on Luzon , and she had walked 25 miles ( 40 kilometres ) in the hope that the general would have some news about him . He did not , but the fact that she was aware of MacArthur 's presence was disturbing to the party , as the Japanese were only 30 miles ( 48 km ) away , at Davao on the south coast of Mindanao . 
 Brett went back to Leary , expecting to be turned down again , but this time , Leary gave Brett the aircraft he wanted . " Perhaps " , Brett speculated , " Leary had heard from Washington " . The newly formed 40th Reconnaissance Squadron manned the bombers . One B @-@ 17 turned back , but two made it to Del Monte Field on 16 March , landing in the dark on a runway lit by flares . Lieutenant Frank P. Bostrom , the pilot of the first plane , calculated that everyone could be carried in just two planes if they left most of their baggage behind . They divided into two groups and the two bombers took off at 01 : 30 on 17 March . MacArthur rode in the radio operator 's seat , which did not need to be manned as the aircraft were travelling under radio silence . For most of the passengers , the trip was dark and cold , with only a blanket between them and the metal skin of the aircraft . 
 As the two planes approached Darwin , word was received that a Japanese air raid was in progress there . The two B @-@ 17s therefore flew on to Batchelor Airfield , where they touched down at 09 : 30 . MacArthur awarded Silver Stars to the crews of the two bombers . Brett 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Ralph Royce , was on hand to greet them , and Brett had sent two Australian National Airways DC @-@ 3s to bring them to Melbourne . However , Jean now refused to fly any further , so MacArthur asked for a motorcade to take them to the nearest railway station , which was at Alice Springs , 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) away . Sutherland had received word of an incoming Japanese air raid , and asked Morhouse to intervene . Morhouse told MacArthur that Arthur , who had suffered badly from seasickness and airsickness , was on an intravenous feed , and could not guarantee that he would survive the trip across the desert . MacArthur then agreed to take the planes to Alice Springs . Sutherland had Huff hurry everyone onto the aircraft , which took off as the air raid siren sounded . 
 At Alice Springs , the party split up . MacArthur , his family , Sutherland , Morhouse and Huff took a special train that Brett had borrowed from the Australians , while the rest of the staff flew down to Melbourne via Adelaide in the DC @-@ 3s . His famous speech , in which he said , " I came through and I shall return " , was first made at Terowie , a small town in South Australia , on 20 March , where he changed trains . On 21 March , MacArthur 's journey was completed when his train rolled into Spencer Street Station , where he was greeted by the Australian Minister for the Army , Frank Forde . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Roosevelt issued a public statement on 17 March : 
 I know that every man and woman in the United States admires with me General MacArthur 's determination to fight to the finish with his men in the Philippines . But I also know that every man and woman is in agreement that all important decisions must be made with a view toward the successful termination of the war . Knowing this , I am sure that every American , if faced individually with the question as to where General MacArthur could best serve his country , could come to only one answer . 
 On Bataan , the reaction to MacArthur 's escape was mixed , with many American and Filipino troops feeling bitter and betrayed . When Wainwright broke the news to his generals " they were all at first depressed by the news … But I soon saw that they understood just as I understood . " Some people with family members in the Philippines were dismayed . One wrote to Roosevelt that " Nothing you could have done would have broken their morale and that of their parents at home so thoroughly " . Wainwright held out on Corregidor until 6 May . To Joseph Goebbels , MacArthur was a " fleeing general " , while Benito Mussolini labeled him a coward . Marshall decided that the best way to counter this was to award MacArthur the Medal of Honor . 
 In April 1942 , Bulkeley led his squadron in an attack on the Japanese cruiser Kuma . The PT boats scored a hit on the cruiser , but the torpedo was a dud , and failed to explode . No damage resulted . With the loss of Cebu City , there were no more torpedoes , so the active careers of the remaining boats of Bulkeley 's squadron came to an end . MacArthur gave PT boat officers a high priority to be flown out from Mindanao . Bulkeley was flown out on MacArthur 's orders on 13 April . Knox , Kelly and Akers were evacuated on 23 April , and Brantingham also made one of the last flights out from Mindanao . Sharp surrendered on Mindanao on 10 May . 
 MacArthur subsequently nominated Bulkeley for the Medal of Honor . The Commander in Chief , U.S. Fleet , Admiral Ernest King was not going to let MacArthur award the Medal of Honor to a naval officer , so he wrote a citation for Bulkeley on behalf of the Navy . Roosevelt presented it to Bulkeley in a ceremony in the Oval Office on 4 August 1942 . Bulkeley wrote a book about his exploits , entitled They Were Expendable . Parts were serialized in Reader 's Digest and Life magazines and it became a bestseller in 1942 . In 1944 , it was adapted as a movie of the same name , with Robert Montgomery playing a character based on Bulkeley , John Wayne one based on Kelly , and Donna Reed in the role of an Army nurse with whom Kelly had a brief liaison . Postwar analysis found that most of the book 's claims were exaggerated . 
 The staff that MacArthur brought with him from Corregidor formed the nucleus of General Headquarters ( GHQ ) Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . The " Bataan Gang " , as they came to be called , remained with MacArthur for the duration , and were noted for their fanatical loyalty to him . So too was Bulkeley , who lauded MacArthur as " the greatest general as well as statesman since George Washington " , and hailed his decision to escape on PT boats as a stroke of genius . MacArthur eventually kept his promise , and returned to the Philippines . The Bataan Gang returned to Corregidor in March 1945 on four PT boats . 
 = John Millington Synge = 
 Edmund John Millington Synge ( / <unk> / ; 16 April 1871 – 24 March 1909 ) was an Irish playwright , poet , prose writer , travel writer and collector of folklore . He was a key figure in the Irish Literary Revival and was one of the co @-@ founders of the Abbey Theatre . He is best known for his play The Playboy of the Western World , which caused riots in Dublin during its opening run at the Abbey Theatre . 
 Although he came from a privileged Anglo @-@ Irish background , Synge 's writings are mainly concerned with the world of the Roman Catholic peasants of rural Ireland and with what he saw as the essential paganism of their world view . Synge developed Hodgkin 's disease , a metastatic cancer that was then untreatable . He died several weeks short of his 38th birthday as he was trying to complete his last play , Deirdre of the Sorrows . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Synge was born in Newtown Villas , Rathfarnham , County Dublin on 16 April 1871 . He was the youngest son in a family of eight children . His parents were members of the Protestant upper middle class : his father , John Hatch Synge , who was a barrister , came from a family of landed gentry in <unk> Castle , County Wicklow . Synge 's grandfather , also named John Hatch Synge , was an admirer of the educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi and founded an experimental school on the family estate . Synge 's mother had a private income from lands in County Galway , although her father , Robert Traill , had been a Church of Ireland rector in Schull , County Cork , and a member of the Schull Relief Committee during the Great Irish Famine ( 1845 – 1849 ) . 
 Synge 's father contracted smallpox and died in 1872 at the age of 49 . Synge 's mother moved the family to the house next door to her mother 's house in Rathgar , County Dublin . Synge , although often ill , had a happy childhood there . He developed an interest in bird @-@ watching along the banks of the River Dodder and during family holidays at the seaside resort of <unk> , County Wicklow , and the family estate at <unk> . 
 Synge was educated privately at schools in Dublin and Bray , and later studied piano , flute , violin , music theory and counterpoint at the Royal Irish Academy of Music . He traveled to the continent to study music , but changed his mind and decided to focus on literature . He was a talented student and won a scholarship in counterpoint in 1891 . The family moved to the suburb of Kingstown ( now Dún Laoghaire ) in 1888 , and Synge entered Trinity College , Dublin the following year . He graduated with a BA in 1892 , having studied Irish and Hebrew , as well as continuing his music studies and playing with the Academy Orchestra in the Antient Concert Rooms . Between November 1889 to 1894 he took private music lessons with Robert Prescott Stewart . 
 Synge joined the Dublin Naturalists ' Field Club and read the works of Charles Darwin . He wrote : " When I was about fourteen I obtained a book of Darwin 's .... My studies showed me the force of what I read , [ and ] the more I put it from me the more it rushed back with new instances and power ... Soon afterwards I turned my attention to works of Christian evidence , reading them at first with pleasure , soon with doubt , and at last in some cases with derision . " He then continued , " Soon after I had relinquished the kingdom of God I began to take up a real interest in the kingdom of Ireland . My politics went round ... to a temperate Nationalism . " 
 Synge later developed an interest in Irish antiquities and the Aran Islands , and became a member of the Irish League for a year . He left the League because , as he told Maud Gonne , " my theory of regeneration for Ireland differs from yours ... I wish to work on my own for the cause of Ireland , and I shall never be able to do so if I get mixed up with a revolutionary and semi @-@ military movement . " In 1893 he published his first known work , a poem influenced by Wordsworth , <unk> : A College Miscellany . 
 = = = Emerging writer = = = 
 After graduating , Synge decided that he wanted to be a professional musician and went to Germany to study music . He stayed in Coblenz during 1893 and moved to Würzburg in January 1894 . Partly because he was shy about performing in public , and partly because of doubt about his ability , he decided to abandon music and pursue his literary interests . He returned to Ireland in June 1894 , and moved to Paris in January 1895 to study literature and languages at the Sorbonne . 
 During summer holidays with his family in Dublin he met and fell in love with Cherrie Matheson , a friend of one of his cousins and a member of the Plymouth Brethren . He proposed to her in 1895 and again the next year , but she turned him down on both occasions because of their differing views on religion . This rejection affected Synge greatly and reinforced his determination to spend as much time as possible outside Ireland . 
 In 1896 Synge visited Italy to study the language for a time before returning to Paris . Later that year he met W. B. Yeats , who encouraged him to live for a while in the Aran Islands , and then return to Dublin and devote himself to creative work . That year he joined with Yeats , Augusta , Lady Gregory and George William Russell to form the Irish National Theatre Society , which later established the Abbey Theatre . He also wrote some pieces of literary criticism for Gonne 's <unk> Libre and other journals , as well as unpublished poems and prose in a decadent fin de siècle style . ( These writings were eventually gathered in the 1960s for his Collected Works . ) He also attended lectures at the Sorbonne by the noted Celtic scholar Henri d <unk> de <unk> . 
 = = = Aran Islands and First Plays = = = 
 In 1897 Synge had his first attack of Hodgkin 's disease and also had an enlarged gland removed from his neck . The following year he spent the summer in the Aran Islands . He spent the next five summers in the Aran Islands , collecting stories and folklore , and perfecting his Irish , while continuing to live in Paris for most of the rest of each year . He also visited Brittany regularly . During this period he wrote his first play , When the Moon Has Set and sent it to Lady Gregory for the Irish Literary Theatre in 1900 , but she rejected it . ( The play was not published until it appeared in the Collected Works . ) 
 Synge 's first account of life in the Aran Islands was published in the New Ireland Review in 1898 and his book , The Aran Islands , based largely on journals , was completed in 1901 and published in 1907 with illustrations by Jack Butler Yeats . Synge considered the book " my first serious piece of work " . When Lady Gregory read the manuscript she advised Synge to remove any direct naming of places and to add more folk stories , but he refused to do either because he wanted to create something more realistic . The book expresses Synge 's belief that beneath the Catholicism of the islanders it was possible to detect a substratum of the pagan beliefs of their ancestors . His experiences in the Aran Islands were to form the basis for the plays about Irish rural life that Synge went on to write . 
 In 1903 Synge left Paris and moved to London . He had written two one @-@ act plays , Riders to the Sea and The Shadow of the Glen , the previous year . These met with Lady Gregory 's approval and The Shadow of the Glen was performed at the Molesworth Hall in October 1903 . Riders to the Sea was performed at the same venue in February the following year . The Shadow of the Glen , under the title In the Shadow of the Glen , formed part of the bill for the opening run of the Abbey Theatre from 27 December 1904 to 3 January 1905 . Both plays were based on stories that Synge had collected in the Aran Islands , and Synge relied on props from the Aran Islands to help set the stage for each of them . He also relied on Hiberno @-@ English , the English dialect of Ireland , to reinforce its usefulness as a literary language , partly because he believed that the Irish language could not survive . 
 The Shadow of the Glen , based on a story about an unfaithful wife , was attacked in print by the Irish nationalist leader Arthur Griffith as " a slur on Irish womanhood " . Years later Synge wrote : " When I was writing The Shadow of the Glen some years ago I got more aid than any learning could have given me from a chink in the floor of the old Wicklow house where I was staying , that let me hear what was being said by the servant girls in the kitchen . " This encouraged more critical attacks alleging that Synge described Irish women in an unfair manner . Riders to the Sea was also attacked by nationalists , this time including Patrick Pearse , who decried it because of the author 's attitude to God and religion . Pearse , Arthur Griffith and other conservative @-@ minded Catholics claimed Synge had done a disservice to Irish nationalism by not idealising his characters . However , later critics have attacked Synge for idealising the Irish peasantry too much . A third one @-@ act play , The Tinker 's Wedding , was drafted around this time , but Synge initially made no attempt to have it performed , largely because of a scene in which a priest is tied up in a sack , which , as he wrote to the publisher Elkin Mathews in 1905 , would probably upset " a good many of our Dublin friends " . 
 When the Abbey Theatre was set up Synge was appointed literary adviser and soon became one of the directors , along with Yeats and Lady Gregory . He differed from Yeats and Lady Gregory on what he believed the Irish theatre should be , as he wrote to Stephen MacKenna : 
 I do not believe in the possibility of " a purely fantastic , unmodern , ideal , breezy , spring @-@ <unk> , <unk> National Theatre " ... no drama can grow out of anything other than the fundamental realities of life , which are never fantastic , are neither modern nor unmodern and , as I see them , rarely spring @-@ <unk> , or breezy or <unk> . 
 Synge 's next play , The Well of the Saints , was staged at the Abbey in 1905 , again to nationalist disapproval , and then in 1906 at the Deutsches Theater in Berlin . The critic Joseph Holloway claimed that the play combined " lyric and dirt " . 
 = = = Playboy Riots and After = = = 
 The play widely regarded as Synge 's masterpiece , The Playboy of the Western World , was first performed at the Abbey Theatre on 26 January 1907 . A comedy about apparent patricide , it attracted a hostile reaction from sections of the Irish public . The Freeman 's Journal described it as " an unmitigated , protracted libel upon Irish peasant men , and worse still upon Irish girlhood " . Arthur Griffith , who believed that the Abbey Theatre was insufficiently politically committed , described the play as " a vile and inhuman story told in the foulest language we have ever listened to from a public platform " , and perceived a slight on the virtue of Irish womanhood in the line " ... a drift of chosen females , standing in their shifts ... " 
 At the time a shift was known as a symbol representing Kitty O 'Shea and adultery . A significant portion of the audience at the first performance rioted , causing the third act of the play to be acted out in dumbshow . Yeats returned from Scotland to address the crowd on the second night , and decided to call in the police . Press opinion soon turned against the rioters and the protests petered out . Yeats referred to this incident in a speech to the Abbey audience in 1926 on the fourth night of Seán O 'Casey 's The Plough and the Stars , when he declared : " You have disgraced yourselves again . Is this to be an ever @-@ recurring celebration of the arrival of Irish genius ? Synge first and then O 'Casey ? " 
 Although the writing of The Tinker 's Wedding began at the same time as Riders to the Sea and In the Shadow of the Glen , it took Synge five years to complete , and was finished in 1907 . Riders was performed in the Racquet Court theatre in Galway 4 – 8 January 1907 and not performed again until 1909 , and only then in London . The first critic to respond to the play was Daniel <unk> , who said , " One is sorry Synge ever wrote so poor a thing , and one fails to understand why it ever should have been staged anywhere . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Synge died at the Elpis Nursing Home in Dublin on 24 March 1909 , aged 37 , and was buried in Mount Jerome Graveyard , Harold 's Cross , Dublin . 
 A collected volume , Poems and Translations , with a preface by Yeats , was published by the Cuala Press on 8 April 1909 . Yeats and actress and one @-@ time fiancee Molly Allgood completed Synge 's unfinished final play , Deirdre of the Sorrows , and it was presented by the Abbey players in January 1910 with Allgood as Deirdre . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 John Masefield , who knew Synge , wrote that he " gave one from the first the impression of a strange personality " . Masefield felt that Synge 's view of life originated with his poor health . In particular , Masefield claimed that " His relish of the savagery made me feel that he was a dying man clutching at life , and clutching most wildly at violent life , as the sick man does " . 
 Yeats summarised his view of Synge in one of the stanzas of his poem " In Memory of Major Robert Gregory " : 
 And that enquiring man John Synge comes next , 
 That dying chose the living world for text 
 And never could have rested in the tomb 
 But that , long travelling , he had come 
 Towards nightfall upon certain set apart 
 In a most desolate stony place , 
 Towards nightfall upon a race 
 Passionate and simple like his heart . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Synge 's plays helped to set the dominant style of plays at the Abbey Theatre until the 1940s . The stylised realism of his writing was reflected in the training given at the theatre 's school of acting , and plays of peasant life were the main staple of the repertoire until the end of the 1950s . Sean O 'Casey , the next major dramatist to write for the Abbey , knew Synge 's work well and attempted to do for the Dublin working classes what Synge had done for the rural poor . Brendan Behan , Brinsley MacNamara , and Lennox Robinson were all indebted to Synge . 
 Critic Vivian Mercier was among the first to recognise Samuel Beckett 's debt to Synge . Beckett was a regular member of the audience at the Abbey in his youth and particularly admired the plays of Yeats , Synge and O 'Casey . Mercier points out parallels between Synge 's casts of tramps , beggars and peasants and many of the figures in Beckett 's novels and dramatic works . 
 In recent years Synge 's cottage in the Aran Islands has been restored as a tourist attraction . An annual Synge Summer School has been held every summer since 1991 in the village of Rathdrum , County Wicklow . Synge is the subject of Mac Dara Ó <unk> 's 1999 documentary film , Synge <unk> an <unk> <unk> ( Synge and the Western World ) . Joseph O 'Connor wrote a novel , Ghost Light ( 2010 ) , loosely based on Synge 's relationship with Molly Allgood . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 In the Shadow of the Glen , 1903 
 Riders to the Sea , 1904 
 The Well of the Saints , 1905 
 The Aran Islands , 1907 ( The book at <unk> : The Aran Islands ) 
 The Playboy of the Western World , 1907 
 The Tinker 's Wedding , 1908 
 Poems and Translations , 1909 
 Deirdre of the Sorrows 1910 
 In Wicklow and West Kerry , 1912 
 Collected Works of John Millington Synge 4 vols , 1962 – 1968 
 Volume 1 Poems , 1962 
 Volume 2 Prose , 1966 
 Volumes 3 and 4 Plays , 1968 
 = Dromedary = 
 The dromedary ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) , also called the Arabian camel ( Camelus dromedarius ) , is a large , even @-@ toed ungulate with one hump on its back . It is one of the three species of camel that was given its current binomial name by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . The dromedary is the largest camel after the Bactrian camel ; adult males stand 1 @.@ 8 – 2 m ( 5 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) at the shoulder , while females are 1 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 9 m ( 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 2 ft ) tall . Males typically weigh between 400 and 600 kg ( 880 and 1 @,@ 320 lb ) , and females weigh between 300 and 540 kg ( 660 and 1 @,@ 190 lb ) . The species ' distinctive features include its long , curved neck , narrow chest , a single hump ( compared with two on the Bactrian camel ) , and long hairs on the throat , shoulders and hump . The coat is generally a shade of brown . The hump , 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall or more , is made of fat bound together by fibrous tissue . 
 Dromedaries are mainly active during daylight hours . They form herds of about 20 individuals , which are led by a dominant male . This camel feeds on foliage and desert vegetation ; several adaptations , such as the ability to tolerate greater than 30 % of the water content of the body , allow it to thrive in its desert habitat . Mating occurs annually and peaks in the rainy season ; females bear a single calf after a gestation of 15 months . 
 The dromedary has not occurred naturally in the wild for nearly 2 @,@ 000 years . It was probably first domesticated in Somalia or the Arabian Peninsula about 4 @,@ 000 years ago . In the wild , the dromedary inhabited arid regions , including the Sahara Desert . The domesticated dromedary is generally found in the semi @-@ arid to arid regions of the Old World , mainly in Africa , and a significant feral population occurs in Australia , and were also recently introduced to North America , more specifically , Nevada in the United States . Products of the dromedary , including its meat and milk , support several north Arabian tribes ; it is also commonly used for riding and as a beast of burden . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The common name " dromedary " comes from the Old French <unk> or the Late Latin dromedarius . These originated from the Greek word <unk> , <unk> ( ο , η ) ( GEN ( <unk> ) <unk> , <unk> ) , meaning " running " or " runner " , used in Greek in the combination <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , literally " running camel " , to refer to the dromedary . The first recorded use in English of the name " dromedary " occurred in the 14th century . The dromedary possibly originated in Arabia and is therefore sometimes referred to as the Arabian camel . The word " camel " generally refers either to the dromedary or the congeneric Bactrian ; it may have been derived from the Latin word <unk> , the Greek <unk> , or an old Semitic language such as the Hebrew <unk> or the Arabic <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The dromedary shares the genus Camelus with the Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) and the wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus , sometimes considered a subspecies of the Bactrian camel ) . The dromedary belongs to the family <unk> . The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle ( 4th century BC ) was the first to describe the species of Camelus . He named two species in his History of Animals ; the one @-@ humped Arabian camel and the two @-@ humped Bactrian camel . The dromedary was given its current binomial name Camelus dromedarius by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 publication Systema Naturae . In 1927 , British veterinarian Arnold Leese classified dromedaries by their basic habitats ; the hill camels are small , muscular animals and efficient beasts of burden ; the larger plains camels could be further divided into the desert type that can bear light burdens and are apt for riding , and the riverine type – slow animals that can bear heavy burdens ; and those intermediate between these two types . 
 In 2007 , Peng Cui of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and colleagues carried out a phylogenetic study of the evolutionary relationships between the two tribes of <unk> ; <unk> – consisting of the three Camelus species ( the study considered the wild Bactrian camel as a subspecies of the Bactrian camel ) – and <unk> , which consists of the alpaca ( <unk> <unk> ) , the guanaco ( Lama <unk> ) , the llama ( L. <unk> ) and the <unk> ( V. <unk> ) . The study showed the two tribes had diverged 25 million years ago ( early Miocene ) , earlier than previously estimated from North American fossils . Speciation began first in <unk> as the alpaca came into existence 10 million years ago ( late Pleistocene ) . Nearly two million years later , the dromedary and the Bactrian camel emerged as two independent species . 
 The dromedary and the Bactrian camel often interbreed to produce fertile offspring . Where the ranges of the species overlap , such as in northern Punjab , Persia and Afghanistan , the phenotypic differences between them tend to decrease as a result of extensive crossbreeding . The fertility of their hybrid has given rise to speculation that the dromedary and the Bactrian camel should be merged into a single species with two varieties . However , a 1994 analysis of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene showed the species display 10 @.@ 3 % divergence in their sequences . 
 = = Genetics and hybrids = = 
 The dromedary has 74 diploid chromosomes , the same as other camelids . The autosomes consist of five pairs of small to medium @-@ sized metacentrics and submetacentrics . The X chromosome is the largest in the metacentric and submetacentric group . There are 31 pairs of acrocentrics . The dromedary 's karyotype is similar to that of the Bactrian camel . 
 Camel hybridisation began in the first millennium BC . For about a thousand years , Bactrian camels and dromedaries have been successfully bred in regions where they are sympatric to form hybrids with either a long , slightly lopsided hump or two humps – one small and one large . These hybrids are larger and stronger than their parents – they can bear greater loads . A cross between a first generation female hybrid and a male Bactrian camel can also produce a hybrid . Hybrids from other combinations tend to be bad @-@ tempered or runts . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The extinct <unk> , which occurred in North America during the upper Eocene , is the oldest and the smallest @-@ known camel . During the transition from Pliocene to Pleistocene , several mammals faced extinction . This period marked the successful radiation of the Camelus species , which migrated over the Bering Strait and dispersed widely into Asia , eastern Europe and Africa . By the Pleistocene , ancestors of the dromedary occurred in the Middle East and northern Africa . 
 The modern dromedary probably evolved in the hotter , arid regions of western Asia from the Bactrian camel , which in turn was closely related to the earliest Old World camels . This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the dromedary foetus has two humps , while in the adult male an anterior vestigial hump is present . A jawbone of a dromedary that dated from 8 @,@ 200 BC was found in Saudi Arabia on the southern coast of the Red Sea . 
 In 1975 , Richard <unk> of Columbia University wrote that the dromedary exists in large numbers in areas from which the Bactrian camel has disappeared ; the converse is also true to a great extent . He said this substitution could have taken place because of the heavy dependence on the milk , meat and wool of the dromedary by Syrian and Arabian nomads , while the Asiatic people domesticated the Bactrian camel but did not have to depend upon its products . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The dromedary is the largest camel after the Bactrian camel . Adult males range in height between 1 @.@ 8 and 2 m ( 5 @.@ 9 and 6 @.@ 6 ft ) at the shoulder ; females range between 1 @.@ 7 and 1 @.@ 9 m ( 5 @.@ 6 and 6 @.@ 2 ft ) . Males typically weigh between 400 and 600 kg ( 880 and 1 @,@ 320 lb ) ; females range between 300 and 540 kg ( 660 and 1 @,@ 190 lb ) . The distinctive features are its long , curved neck , narrow chest and single hump ( the Bactrian camel has two ) , thick , double @-@ layered eyelashes and bushy eyebrows . They have sharp vision and a good sense of smell . The male has a soft palate ( <unk> in Arabic ) nearly 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , which it inflates to produce a deep pink sac . The palate , which is often mistaken for the tongue , dangles from one side of the mouth and is used to attract females during the mating season . 
 The coat is generally brown but can range from black to nearly white . Leese reported piebald dromedaries in Kordofan and Darfur in Sudan . The hair is long and concentrated on the throat , shoulders and the hump . The large eyes are protected by prominent supraorbital ridges ; the ears are small and rounded . The hump is at least 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) high . The dromedary has long , powerful legs with two toes on each foot . The feet resemble flat , leathery pads . Like the giraffe , dromedaries moves both legs on one side of the body at the same time . 
 Compared with the Bactrian camel , the dromedary has a lighter build , longer limbs , shorter hairs , a harder palate and an <unk> or absent <unk> fissure . Unlike the camelids of the genus Lama , the dromedary has a hump , and in comparison has a longer tail , smaller ears , squarer feet and a greater height at the shoulder . The dromedary has four teats instead of the two in the Lama species . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 The cranium of the dromedary consists of a postorbital bar , a tympanic bulla filled with <unk> , a well @-@ defined sagittal crest , a long facial part and an indented nasal bone . Typically , there are eight sternal and four non @-@ sternal pairs of ribs . The spinal cord is nearly 214 cm ( 84 in ) long ; it terminates in the second and third sacral vertebra . The fibula is reduced to a <unk> bone . The dromedary is a digitigrade animal ; it walks on its toes , which are known as digits . It lacks the second and fifth digits . The front feet are 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) wide and 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) long ; they are larger than the hind feet , which measure 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide and 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) long . 
 The dromedary has 22 milk teeth , which are eventually replaced by 34 permanent teeth . The dental formula for permanent dentition is 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 , and 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 for milk dentition . In the juvenile , the lower first molars develop by 12 to 15 months and the permanent lower incisors appear at 4 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 5 years of age . All teeth are in use by 8 years . The lenses of the eyes contain crystallin , which constitutes 8 to 13 % of the protein present there . 
 The skin is black ; the epidermis is 0 @.@ 038 – 0 @.@ 064 mm ( 0 @.@ 0015 – 0 @.@ 0025 in ) thick and the dermis is 2 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 087 – 0 @.@ 185 in ) thick . The hump is composed of fat bound together by fibrous tissue . There are no glands on the face ; males have glands that appear to be modified apocrine sweat glands that secrete pungent , coffee @-@ coloured fluid during the rut , located on either side of the neck midline . The glands generally grow heavier during the rut , and range from 20 to 115 g ( 0 @.@ 71 to 4 @.@ 06 oz ) . Each cover hair is associated with an arrector <unk> muscle , a hair follicle , a ring of sebaceous glands and a sweat gland . Females have cone @-@ shaped , four @-@ chambered mammary glands that are 2 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) long with a base diameter of 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) . These glands can produce milk with up to 90 % water content even if the mother is at risk of dehydration . 
 The heart weighs around 5 kg ( 11 lb ) ; it has two ventricles with the tip curving to the left . The pulse rate is 50 beats per minute . The dromedary is the only mammal with oval red blood corpuscles . The pH of the blood varies from 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 6 ( slightly alkaline ) . The individual 's state of hydration and sex , and the time of year can influence blood values . The lungs lack lobes . A dehydrated camel has a lower breathing rate . Each kidney has a capacity of 858 cm3 ( 52 @.@ 4 cu in ) , and can produce urine with high chloride concentrations . Like the horse , the dromedary has no gall bladder . The grayish violet , crescent @-@ like spleen weighs less than 500 g ( 18 oz ) . The triangular , four @-@ chambered liver weighs 6 @.@ 5 kg ( 14 lb ) ; its dimensions are : 60 × 42 × 18 cm ( 23 @.@ 6 × 16 @.@ 5 × 7 @.@ 1 in ) . 
 = = = = Reproductive system = = = = 
 The ovaries are reddish , circular and flattened . They are enclosed in a conical bursa and have the dimensions 4 × 2 @.@ 5 × 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 57 × 0 @.@ 98 × 0 @.@ 20 in ) during anestrus . The oviducts are 25 – 28 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 0 in ) long . The uterus is bicornuate . The vagina is 3 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) long and has well @-@ developed Bartholin 's glands . The vulva is 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) deep and has a small clitoris . The placenta is diffuse and epitheliochorial , with a crescent @-@ like chorion . 
 The penis is covered by a triangular penile sheath that opens backwards ; it is about 60 cm ( 24 in ) long . The scrotum is located high in the perineum with the testicles in separate sacs . <unk> are 7 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long , 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) deep and 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide . The right testicle is often smaller than the left . The typical mass of either testicle is less than 140 g ( 0 @.@ 31 lb ) ; during the rut the mass increases from 165 to 253 g ( 0 @.@ 364 to 0 @.@ 558 lb ) . The Cowper 's gland is white , almond @-@ shaped and lacks seminal vesicles ; the prostate gland is dark yellow , disc @-@ shaped and divided into two lobes . 
 = = = Health and diseases = = = 
 The dromedary generally suffers from fewer diseases than other domestic livestock such as goats and cattle . Temperature fluctuations occur throughout the day in a healthy dromedary – the temperature falls to its minimum at dawn , rises until sunset and falls during the night . Nervous camels may vomit if they are carelessly handled ; this does not always indicate a disorder . Rutting males may develop nausea . 
 The dromedary is prone to trypanosomiasis , a disease caused by a parasite transmitted by the tsetse fly . The main symptoms are recurring fever , anaemia and weakness ; the disease is typically fatal for the camel . <unk> is another prominent malady . In an observational study , the seroprevalence of this disease was generally low ( 2 to 5 % ) in nomadic or moderately free dromedaries , but it was higher ( 8 to 15 % ) in denser populations . <unk> is caused by different <unk> of Brucella <unk> and B. melitensis . Other internal parasites include <unk> <unk> ( trematode ) , two types of cestode ( tapeworm ) and various nematodes ( roundworms ) . Among external parasites , Sarcoptes species cause sarcoptic mange . In a 2000 study in Jordan , 83 % of the 32 camels studied tested positive for sarcoptic mange . In another study , dromedaries were found to have natural antibodies against the rinderpest and ovine rinderpest viruses . 
 In 2013 , a <unk> study ( a study investigating the patterns , causes and effects of a disease on a specific population on the basis of serologic tests ) in Egypt was the first to show the dromedary might be a host for the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus ( MERS @-@ CoV ) . A 2013 – 14 study of dromedaries in Saudi Arabia concluded the unusual genetic stability of MERS @-@ CoV coupled with its high seroprevalence in the dromedary makes this camel a highly probable host for the virus . The full genome sequence of MERS @-@ CoV from dromedaries in this study showed a 99 @.@ 9 % match to the genomes of human clade B MERS @-@ CoV . Another study in Saudi Arabia showed the presence of MERS @-@ CoV in 90 % of the evaluated dromedaries and suggested that camels could be the animal source of MERS @-@ CoV . 
 Fleas and ticks are common causes of physical irritation . In a study in Egypt , a species of Hyalomma was dominant in dromedaries , comprising 95 @.@ 6 % of the adult ticks isolated from the camels . In Israel , the number of ticks per camel ranged from 20 to 105 . Nine camels in the date palm plantations in Arava Valley were injected with <unk> , which is not effective against Hyalomma tick infestations . Larvae of the camel nasal fly <unk> <unk> can cause possibly fatal brain compression and nervous disorders . Illnesses that can affect dromedary productivity are pyogenic diseases and wound infections caused by Corynebacterium and Streptococcus , pulmonary disorders caused by Pasteurella such as hemorrhagic septicemia and Rickettsia species , <unk> , anthrax , and cutaneous necrosis caused by <unk> and deficiency of salt in the diet . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The dromedary is diurnal ( active mainly during daylight ) ; free @-@ ranging herds feed and roam throughout the day , though they rest during the hottest hours around noon . The night is mainly spent resting . Dromedaries form cohesive groups of about 20 individuals , which consist of several females led by a dominant male . Females may also lead in turns . Some males either form bachelor groups or roam alone . Herds may congregate to form associations of hundreds of camels during migrations at the time of natural disasters . The males of the herd prevent female members from interacting with bachelor males by standing or walking between them and somtimes driving the bachelor males away . In Australia , short @-@ term home ranges of feral dromedaries cover 50 to 150 km2 ( 19 to 58 sq mi ) ; annual home ranges can spread over several thousand square kilometres . 
 Special behavioural features of the dromedary include snapping at others without biting them and showing displeasure by stamping their feet . They are generally non @-@ aggressive , with the exception of rutting males . They appear to remember their homes ; females in particular remember the places they first gave birth or suckled their offspring . Males become aggressive in the mating season , and sometimes wrestle . A 1980 study showed androgen levels in males influences their behaviour . Between January and April when these levels are high during the rut , they become difficult to manage , blow out the palate from the mouth , vocalise and throw urine over their backs . Camels scratch parts of their bodies with their legs or with their lower incisors . They may also rub against tree bark and roll in sand . 
 Free @-@ ranging dromedaries face large predators typical of their regional distribution , which includes wolves , lions and tigers . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The dromedary 's diet consists mostly of foliage , dry grasses and desert vegetation – mostly thorny plants . A study said the typical diet of the dromedary is dwarf shrubs ( 47 @.@ 5 % ) , trees ( 29 @.@ 9 % ) , grasses ( 11 @.@ 2 % ) , other herbs ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) and vines ( 11 % ) . The dromedary is primarily a browser ; forbs and shrubs comprise 70 % of its diet in summer and 90 % of its diet in winter . The dromedary may also graze on or suck in tall , young , succulent grasses . 
 In the Sahara , 332 plant species have been recorded as food plants of the dromedary . These include Aristida pungens , Acacia tortilis , Panicum <unk> , <unk> arborescens and <unk> aegyptiaca . The dromedary eats Acacia , Atriplex and Salsola when they are available . Feral dromedaries in Australia prefer <unk> zeylanicum and Euphorbia <unk> . In India , dromedaries are fed with forage plants such as Vigna <unk> , V. <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> parviflora , <unk> sativa , Trifolium species and Brassica campestris . Dromedaries keep their mouths open while chewing thorny food . They use their lips to grasp the food and chew each bite 40 to 50 times . Its long eyelashes , eyebrows , lockable nostrils , caudal opening of the prepuce and a relatively small vulva help the camel avoid injuries , especially while feeding . They graze for 8 – 12 hours per day and ruminate for an equal amount of time . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The dromedary is specially adapted to its desert habitat ; these adaptations are aimed at conserving water and regulating body temperature . The bushy eyebrows and the double row of eyelashes prevent sand and dust from entering the eyes during strong windstorms , = and shield them from the sun 's glare . The dromedary is able to close its nostrils voluntarily ; this assists in water conservation . The dromedary can conserve water by reducing perspiration by fluctuating the body temperature throughout the day from 31 to 41 @.@ 7 ° C ( 87 @.@ 8 to 107 @.@ 1 ° F ) . The kidneys are specialised to minimise water loss through excretion . Groups of camels avoid excess heat from the environment by pressing against each other . The dromedary can tolerate greater than 30 % water loss , which is generally impossible for other mammals . In temperatures between 30 and 40 ° C ( 86 and 104 ° F ) , it needs water every 10 to 15 days . In the hottest temperatures the dromedary takes water every four to seven days . This camel has a quick rate of rehydration and can drink at 10 – 20 L ( 2 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 4 imp gal ) per minute . The dromedary has a rete mirabile , a complex of arteries and veins lying very close to each other which uses countercurrent blood flow to cool blood flowing to the brain . This effectively controls the temperature of the brain . 
 The hump stores up to 80 lb ( 36 kg ) of fat , which the camel can break down into water and energy to meet its needs when resources are scarce ; the hump also helps dissipate body heat . If the hump is small , the animal can show signs of starvation . In a 2005 study , the mean volume of adipose tissues ( in the external part of the hump that have cells to store lipids ) is related to the dromedary 's unique mechanism of food and water storage . In case of starvation , they can even eat fish and bones , and drink brackish and salty water . The hair is longer on the throat , hump and shoulders . Though the padded hooves effectively support the camel 's weight on the ground , they are not suitable for walking on slippery and muddy surfaces . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Since camels have a slow growth rate ; they reach sexual maturity only in advanced years . The age of sexual maturity varies geographically and depends on the individual , as does the reproductive period . Both sexes might mature by three to five years of age , though successful breeding could take longer . Mating occurs once a year , and peaks in the rainy season . The mating season lasts three to five months , but may last a year for older animals . 
 During the reproductive season , males splash their urine on their tails and nether regions . To attract females they extrude their soft palate – a trait unique to the dromedary . As <unk> male gurgles copious <unk> of saliva turns to foam and covers the mouth . Males threaten each other for dominance over the female by trying to stand taller than the other , making low noises and a series of head movements including lowering , lifting and bending their necks backwards . Males tries to defeat other males by biting the opponent 's legs and taking the head between his jaws . Copulation begins with foreplay ; the male smells the female 's genitalia and often bites her there or around her hump . The male forces the female to sit , then grasps her with his forelegs . <unk> often aid the male insert his penis into the female 's vulva . The male dromedary 's ability to penetrate the female on his own is disputed , though feral populations in Australia reproduce naturally . Copulation takes from 7 to 35 minutes , averaging 11 to 15 minutes . Normally , three to four <unk> occur . The semen of a <unk> dromedary is white and viscous , with a pH of around 7 @.@ 8 . 
 A single calf is born after a gestation period of 15 months . Calves move freely by the end of their first day . Nursing and maternal care continue for one to two years . In a study to find whether young could exist on milk substitutes , two male , month @-@ old camels were separated from their mothers and were fed on milk substitutes prepared commercially for lambs . For the first 30 days , the changes in their weights were marked . Each gained 0 @.@ 400 kg ( 0 @.@ 88 lb ) and 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , respectively , per day . They were found to have grown properly and weighed 135 kg ( 298 lb ) and 145 kg ( 320 lb ) – normal weights for male calves of that age . <unk> yield can vary with species , breed , individual , region , diet , management conditions and lactating stage . The largest quantity of milk is produced during the early period of lactation . The lactation period can vary between nine and eighteen months . 
 Dromedaries are induced ovulators . Oestrus may be cued by the nutritional status of the camel and the <unk> . If mating does not occur , the follicle , which grows during oestrus , usually regresses within a few days . In one study , 35 complete oestrous cycles were observed in five nonpregnant females over 15 months . The cycles were about 28 days long ; follicles matured in six days , maintained their size for 13 days , and returned to their original size in eight days . In another study , ovulation could be best induced when the follicle reaches a size of 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 75 in ) . In another study , pregnancy in females could be recognized as early as 40 to 45 days of gestation by the swelling of the left uterine horn , where 99 @.@ 5 % of pregnancies were located . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The dromedary has not occurred in the wild for nearly 2 @,@ 000 years . Wild dromedaries inhabited arid regions , particularly the Sahara Desert . The original range of the camel ’ s wild ancestors was probably southern Asia and the Arabian peninsula . Its range included hot , arid regions of northern Africa , Ethiopia , the Near East and western and central Asia . The dromedary typically thrives in areas with a long dry season and a short wet season . They are sensitive to cold and humidity , though some breeds can thrive in humid conditions . 
 In the early 21st century , the domesticated dromedary is found in the semi @-@ arid to arid regions of the Old World . Africa has more than 80 % of the world 's total dromedary population ; it occurs in almost every desert zone in the northern part of the continent . The Sahel marks the southern extreme of its range , which is nearly 2 – 3 ° S latitude where the annual rainfall is around 550 mm ( 22 in ) . The Horn of Africa has nearly 35 % of the world 's dromedaries , most of the region 's stock is in Somalia , followed by Sudan and Ethiopia ( as of the early 2000s ) . According to the Yearbook of the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) for 1984 , eastern Africa had about 10 million dromedaries , the largest population of Africa . Western Africa followed with 2 @.@ 14 million , while northern Africa had nearly 0 @.@ 76 million . Populations in Africa increased by 16 % from 1994 to 2005 . 
 Feral dromedary populations occur in Australia , where it was introduced in 1840 . The total dromedary population in Australia is 0 @.@ 5 million as of 2005 . Nearly 99 % of the populations are feral , and have annual growth rate of 10 % . Most of the Australian feral camels are dromedaries , with only a few Bactrian camels . Most of the dromedaries occur in Western Australia , with smaller populations in the Northern Territory , Western Queensland and northern South Australia . 
 In Asia , nearly 70 % of the population occurs in India and Pakistan . The combined population of the dromedary and the Bactrian camel decreased by around 21 % between 1994 and 2004 . The dromedary is sympatric with the Bactrian camel in Afghanistan , Pakistan , and central and southwestern Asia . India has a dromedary population of less than one million , with most ( 0 @.@ 67 million ) in the state of Rajasthan . Populations in Pakistan decreased from 1 @.@ 1 million in 1994 to 0 @.@ 8 million in 2005 – a 29 % decline . According to the FAO , the dromedary population in six countries of the Persian Gulf was nearly 0 @.@ 67 million in 2003 . In the Persian Gulf region the dromedary is locally classified into breeds including Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> and Al @-@ Shakha , based on coat colour . The UAE has three prominent breeds ; Racing camel , Al @-@ <unk> and Al @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Domestication = = = 
 The dromedary was probably first domesticated in Somalia or the Arabian Peninsula about 4 @,@ 000 years ago . In the ninth or tenth century BC , the dromedary became popular in the Near East . The Persian invasion of Egypt under Cambyses in 525 BC introduced domesticated camels to the area . The Persian camels were not well @-@ suited to trading or travel over the Sahara ; journeys across the desert were made on chariots pulled by horses . The dromedary was introduced into Egypt from south @-@ western Asia ( Arabia and Persia ) . The popularity of dromedaries increased after the Islamic conquest of North Africa . While the invasion was accomplished largely on horseback , new links to the Middle East allowed camels to be imported en masse . These camels were well @-@ suited to long desert journeys and could carry a great deal of cargo , allowing substantial trans @-@ Saharan trade for the first time . In Libya , dromedaries were used for transport and their milk and meat constituted the local diet . 
 Dromedaries were also shipped from south @-@ western Asia to Spain , Italy , Turkey , France , Canary Islands , the Americas and Australia . Dromedaries were introduced into Spain in 1020 AD and to Sicily in 1059 AD . Camels were exported to the Canary Islands in 1405 during the European colonisation of the area , and are still extant there , especially in Lanzarote and to the south of Fuerteventura . Attempts o introduce dromedaries into the Caribbean , Colombia , Peru , Bolivia and Brazil were made between the 17th and 19th centuries ; some were imported to the western United States in the 1850s and some to Namibia in the early 1900s , but presently they exist in small numbers or are absent in these areas . 
 In 1840 , about six camels were shipped from Tenerife to Adelaide , but only one survived the journey to arrive on 12 October that year . The animal , a male called Harry , was owned by the explorer John Ainsworth Horrocks . Harry was ill @-@ tempered but was included in an expedition the following year because he could carry heavy loads . The next major group of camels were imported into Australia in 1860 , and between 1860 and 1907 10 to 12 thousand were imported . These were used mainly for riding and transport . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The strength and docility of the dromedary make it popular as a domesticated animal . According to <unk> , they can be used for a wide variety of purposes : riding , transport , ploughing , trading and as a source of milk , meat , wool and leather . The main attraction of the dromedary for nomadic desert @-@ dwellers is the wide variety of resources they provide , which are crucial for their survival . It is important for several Bedouin pastoralist tribes of northern Arabia , such as the <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> . 
 = = = Riding camels = = = 
 Although the role of the camel is diminishing with the advent of technology and modern means of transport , it is still an efficient mode of communication in remote and less @-@ developed areas . The dromedary has been used in warfare since the 2nd century BC , and it remains popular for racing , particularly in the Arab world . Riding camels of Arabia , Egypt and the Sahara are locally known as the <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> respectively ; several local breeds are included within these groups . 
 The ideal riding camel is strong , slender and long @-@ legged with thin , supple skin . The special adaptations of the dromedary 's feet allow it to walk with ease on sandy and rough terrain and on cold surfaces . The camels of the <unk> of Sudan and the Anafi camel bred in Sudan are common breeds used as riding camels . 
 According to Leese , the dromedary walks with four speeds or gaits : walk , jog , fast run and canter . The first is the typical speed of walking , around 4 km / h ( 2 @.@ 5 mph ) . Jog is the most common speed , nearly 8 – 12 km / h ( 5 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 mph ) on level ground . He estimated a speed of 14 – 19 km / h ( 8 @.@ 7 – 11 @.@ 8 mph ) during a fast run , by observing northern African and Arabian dromedaries . He gave no speed range to describe the " canter " , but implied it was a type of gallop that if induced could exhaust the camel and the rider . Canter could be used only for short periods of time , for example in races . 
 The ideal age to start training dromedaries for riding is three years , although they may be stubborn and unruly . At first the camel 's head is controlled , and it is later trained to respond to sitting and standing commands , and to allow mounting . At this stage a camel will often try to escape when a trainer tries to mount it . The next stage involves training it to respond to reins . The animal must be given loads gradually and not forced to carry heavy loads before the age of six . Riding camels should not be struck on their necks , rather they should be struck behind the right leg of the rider . Leese described two types of saddles generally used in camel riding ; the Arabian <unk> used by single riders and the Indian pakra used when two riders mount the same camel . 
 = = = Baggage and draught camels = = = 
 The baggage camel should be robust and heavy . Studies have recommended the camel should have either a small or a large head with a narrow aquiline nose , prominent eyes and large lips . The neck should be medium to long so the head is held high . The chest should be deep and the hump should be well @-@ developed with sufficient space behind it to accommodate the saddle . The hindlegs should be heavy , muscular and sturdy . The dromedary can be trained to carry baggage from the age of five years , but must not be given heavy loads before the age of six . The <unk> is a typical baggage saddle from Sudan . The methods of training the baggage camels are similar to those for riding camels . 
 Draught camel are used for several purposes including ploughing , processing in oil mills and pulling carts . There is no clear description for the ideal draught camel , though its strength , its ability to survive without water and the flatness of its feet could be indicators . It may be used for ploughing in pairs or in groups with buffaloes or bullocks . The draught camel can plough at around 2 @.@ 5 km / h ( 1 @.@ 6 mph ) , and should not be used for more than six hours a day – four hours in the morning and two in the afternoon . The camel is not easily exhausted unless diseased or undernourished , and has remarkable endurance and hardiness . 
 = = = Dairy products = = = 
 Camel milk is a staple food of nomadic tribes living in deserts . According to a study , it consists of 11 @.@ 7 % solids , 3 % protein , 3 @.@ 6 % fat , 0 @.@ 8 % ash , 4 @.@ 4 % lactose and 0 @.@ 13 % acidity ( pH 6 @.@ 5 ) . The quantities of sodium , potassium , zinc , iron , copper , manganese , niacin and vitamin C were relatively higher than the amounts in cow milk . However , the levels of <unk> , riboflavin , <unk> , vitamin B12 , pantothenic acid , vitamin A , lysine , and tryptophan were lower than those in cow milk . The molar percentages of the fatty acids in milk fat were 26 @.@ 7 % for palmitic acid , 25 @.@ 5 % oleic acid , 11 @.@ 4 % myristic acid and 11 % <unk> acid . Camel milk has higher thermal stability compared with cow milk , but it does not compare favourably with sheep milk . 
 Daily milk yield generally varies from 3 @.@ 5 to 35 kg ( 7 @.@ 7 to 77 @.@ 2 lb ) and from 1 @.@ 3 % to 7 @.@ 8 % of the body weight . Milk yield varies geographically and depends upon the animals ' diet and living conditions . At the peak of lactation , a healthy female would typically provide 9 kg ( 20 lb ) milk per day . Leese estimated a lactating female would yield 4 to 9 L ( 0 @.@ 88 to 1 @.@ 98 imp gal ) besides the amount ingested by the calf . The Pakistani dromedary , which is considered a better <unk> and bigger , can yield 9 @.@ 1 – 14 @.@ 1 kg ( 20 – 31 lb ) when well @-@ fed . Dromedaries in Somalia may be milked between two and four times a day , while those in Afar , Ethiopia , may be milked up to seven times a day . 
 The acidity of dromedary milk stored at 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) increases at a slower rate than that of cow milk . Though the preparation of butter from dromedary milk is difficult , it has been carried out successfully in 1959 in the USSR . The cream of the dromedary milk , containing 4 @.@ 2 % fat , yielded 25 @.@ 8 % butter . In 2001 , the ability of dromedary milk to form curd was studied ; coagulation did not show curd formation , and had a pH of 4 @.@ 4 . It was much different from curd produced from cow milk , and had a fragile , heterogeneous composition probably composed of casein flakes . Nevertheless , cheese and other dairy products can be made from camel milk . A study found bovine calf rennet could be used to coagulate dromedary milk . A special factory has been set up in Nouakchott to <unk> and make cheese from camel milk . Mystical beliefs surround the use of camel milk in some places ; for example , it may be used as an aphrodisiac in Ethiopia . 
 = = = Meat = = = 
 The meat of a five @-@ year @-@ old dromedary has a typical composition of 76 % water , 22 % protein , 1 % fat , and 1 % ash . The carcass , weighing 141 – 310 kg ( 311 – 683 lb ) for a five @-@ year @-@ old dromedary , is composed of nearly 57 % muscle , 26 % bone and 17 % fat . A seven @-@ to @-@ eight @-@ year @-@ old camel can produce a carcass of 125 – 400 kg ( 276 – 882 lb ) . The meat is bright red to a dark brown or maroon , while the fat is white . It has the taste and texture of beef . A study of the meat of Iranian dromedaries showed its high glycogen content , which makes it taste sweet like horse meat . The carcasses of well @-@ fed camels were found to be covered with a thin layer of good quality fat . In a study of the fatty acid composition of raw meat taken from the hind legs of seven one @-@ to @-@ three years old males , 51 @.@ 5 % of the fatty acids were saturated , 29 @.@ 9 % mono @-@ unsaturated , and 18 @.@ 6 % polyunsaturated . The major fatty acids in the meat were palmitic acid ( 26 @.@ 0 % ) , oleic acid ( 18 @.@ 9 % ) and linoleic acid ( 12 @.@ 1 % ) . In the hump , palmitic acid was dominant ( 34 @.@ 4 % ) , followed by oleic acid ( 28 @.@ 2 % ) , myristic acid ( 10 @.@ 3 % ) and stearic acid ( 10 % ) . 
 Dromedary slaughter is more difficult than the slaughter of other domestic livestock such as cattle , because of the size of the animal and the significant manual work involved . More males that females are slaughtered . . Though less affected by mishandling than other livestock , the pre @-@ slaughter handling of the dromedary plays a crucial role in determining the quality of meat obtained ; mishandling can often disfigure the hump . The animal is stunned , seated in a crouching position with the head in a caudal position and slaughtered . The dressing percentage – the percentage of the mass of the animal that forms the carcass – is 55 – 70 % , more than the 45 – 50 % of cattle . Camel meat is rarely consumed by African camel herders , who use it only during severe food scarcity or for rituals . Camel meat is processed into food items such as burgers , patties , sausages and shawarma . Dromedaries can be slaughtered between four and ten years of age . As the animal ages , the meat grows tougher and deteriorates in taste and quality . 
 A 2005 report issued jointly by the Ministry of Health ( Saudi Arabia ) and the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention details five cases of bubonic plague in humans resulting from the ingestion of raw camel liver . Four of the five patients had severe pharyngitis and submandibular lymphadenitis . Yersinia pestis was isolated from the camel 's bone marrow , from the <unk> ( Meriones libycus ) and from fleas ( <unk> <unk> ) captured at the camel 's corral . 
 = = = Camel hair , wool and hides = = = 
 Camels in hot climates generally do not develop long coats . Camel hair is light , and has low thermal conductivity and durability , and is thus suitable for manufacturing warm clothes , blankets , tents and rugs . Hair of highest quality is typically obtained from juvenile or wild camels . In India , camels are clipped usually in spring and around 1 – 1 @.@ 5 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 lb ) hair is produced per clipping . In colder regions one clipping can yield as much as 5 @.@ 4 kg ( 12 lb ) . A dromedary can produce 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) wool per year , whereas a Bactrian camel has an annual yield of nearly 5 – 12 kg ( 11 – 26 lb ) . Dromedaries under the age of two years have a fine undercoat that tends to fall off and should be cropped by hand . Little information about camel hides has been collected but they are usually of inferior quality and are less preferred for manufacturing leather . 
 = Snowdon = 
 Snowdon ( Welsh : Yr Wyddfa , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̞ <unk> ] ) is the highest mountain in Wales , at an elevation of 1 @,@ 085 metres ( 3 @,@ 560 ft ) above sea level , and the highest point in the British Isles outside the Scottish Highlands . It is located in Snowdonia National Park ( Parc Cenedlaethol Eryri ) in Gwynedd , and has been described as " probably the busiest mountain in Britain " . It is designated as a national nature reserve for its rare flora and fauna . 
 The rocks that form Snowdon were produced by volcanoes in the Ordovician period , and the massif has been extensively sculpted by glaciation , forming the pyramidal peak of Snowdon and the arêtes of Crib Goch and Y Lliwedd . The cliff faces on Snowdon , including Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu , are significant for rock climbing , and the mountain was used by Edmund Hillary in training for the 1953 ascent of Mount Everest . 
 The summit can be reached by a number of well @-@ known paths , and by the Snowdon Mountain Railway , a rack and pinion railway opened in 1896 which carries passengers the 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) from Llanberis to the summit station . The summit also houses a cafe called Hafod Eryri , open only when the railway is operating and built in 2006 to replace one built in the 1930s . The railway generally operates to the summit station from Whitsun to October . The daily running schedule depends on weather and customer demand . 
 The name Snowdon is from the Old English for " snow hill " , while the Welsh name – Yr Wyddfa – means " the tumulus " , which may refer to the cairn thrown over the legendary giant Rhitta Gawr after his defeat by King Arthur . As well as other figures from Arthurian legend , the mountain is linked to a legendary <unk> ( water monster ) and the Tylwyth Teg ( fairies ) . 
 = = Height = = 
 A 1682 survey estimated that the summit of Snowdon was at a height of 3 @,@ 720 feet ( 1 @,@ 130 m ) ; in 1773 , Thomas Pennant quoted a later estimate of 3 @,@ 568 ft ( 1 @,@ 088 m ) above sea level at Caernarfon . Recent surveys give the height of the summit as 1 @,@ 085 m ( 3 @,@ 560 ft ) , making Snowdon the highest mountain in Wales , and the highest point in the British Isles outside Scotland . Snowdon is one of three mountains climbed as part of the National Three Peaks Challenge . 
 = = Environment = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The unique environment of Snowdon , particularly its rare plants , has led to its designation as a national nature reserve . In addition to plants that are widespread in Snowdonia , Snowdon is home to some plants rarely found elsewhere in Britain . The most famous of these is the " Snowdon lily " , Gagea serotina , which is also found in the Alps and in North America . It was first discovered by Edward Lhuyd in Wales , and the genus Lloydia ( now included in Gagea ) was later named in his honour by R. A. Salisbury . Snowdon lies in the northern part of Snowdonia National Park , which has also provided some legal protection since the park 's establishment in 1951 . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The rocks which today make up Snowdon and its neighbouring mountains were formed in the Ordovician Period . At that time , most of modern @-@ day Wales was near the edge of Avalonia , submerged beneath the ancient Iapetus Ocean . In the <unk> stage ( 458 to 457 million years ago ) of the Caradoc age , a volcanic caldera formed , and produced ash flows of rhyolitic tuff , which formed deposits up to 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) thick . The current summit is near the northern edge of the ancient caldera ; the caldera 's full extent is unclear , but it extended as far as the summit of Moel <unk> in the south @-@ west . 
 Snowdon and its surrounding peaks have been described as " true examples of Alpine topography " . The summits of Snowdon and Garnedd <unk> are surrounded by cwms , rounded valleys scooped out by glaciation . Erosion by glaciers in adjacent cwms caused the characteristic arêtes of Crib Goch , Crib y <unk> and Y Lliwedd , and the pyramidal peak of Snowdon itself . Other glacial landforms that can be seen around Snowdon include <unk> <unk> , glacial erratics and moraines . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The English name " Snowdon " comes from the Old English <unk> dun , meaning " snow hill " , as Snowdon often has a covering of snow . Although the amount of snow on Snowdon in winter varies significantly , 55 % less snow fell in 2004 than in 1994 . The slopes of Snowdon have one of the wettest climates in Great Britain , receiving an annual average of more than 200 inches ( 5 @,@ 100 mm ) of precipitation . 
 = = = Lakes = = = 
 A number of lakes are found in the various cwms of the Snowdon range . 
 Llyn Llydaw – 1 @,@ 430 feet ( 440 m ) high , 110 acres ( 45 ha ) – lies in Cwm Dyli , Snowdon 's eastern cwm , and is one of Snowdonia 's deepest lakes , at up to 190 ft ( 58 m ) deep . Various explanations of its name have been put forward , including <unk> ( " ash " ) , from ashen deposits along the shore , to Llydaw ( " Brittany " ) . It contains evidence of a crannog settlement , and was the location of a 10 @-@ by @-@ 2 @-@ foot ( 3 m × 0 @.@ 6 m ) dugout canoe described in the Cambrian Journal in 1862 . The lake is significantly coloured by washings from the copper mines nearby , and is used by the Cwm Dyli hydroelectric power station , which opened in 1906 . The lake is crossed by a causeway , built in 1853 and raised in the 20th century to prevent the causeway from flooding frequently . 
 Glaslyn – 1 @,@ 970 feet ( 600 m ) high , 18 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 ha ) – lies higher up Cwm Dyli than Llyn Llydaw . It was originally called Llyn y Ffynnon Glas , and has a depth of 127 feet ( 39 m ) . For a long time , it was believed to be bottomless , and is also the location for various myths . 
 Llyn Ffynnon @-@ y @-@ gwas – 1 @,@ 430 feet ( 440 m ) high , 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) – lies in Cwm <unk> , Snowdon 's north @-@ western cwm , and is passed by the Snowdon Ranger path . It was enlarged by damming for use as a reservoir for use by slate quarries , but the level has since been lowered , and the lake 's volume reduced to 24 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 850 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . 
 Other lakes include Llyn Du 'r Arddu below Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu – 1 @,@ 901 feet ( 579 m ) high , 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) , Llyn Teyrn near Pen @-@ y @-@ pass – 1 @,@ 237 feet ( 377 m ) high , 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) , and several smaller pools . 
 = = Rock climbing = = 
 The Snowdon Massif includes a number of spectacular cliffs , and holds an important place in the history of rock climbing in the United Kingdom . Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu is often colloquially known as ' <unk> ' among climbers , and was the site of the first recorded climb in Britain , in 1798 . It was carried out by Peter Bailey Williams and William Bingley , while searching for rare plants . It is now considered to be one of the best cliffs in Britain for rock climbing . 
 Y Lliwedd was also explored by early climbers , and was the subject of a 1909 climbing guide , The <unk> on Lliwedd by J. M. A. Thompson and A. W. Andrews , one of the first in Britain . Snowdon was used by Edmund Hillary and his group during preparations for their successful 1953 expedition to climb Mount Everest . 
 = = Ascents = = 
 The first recorded ascent of Snowdon was by the botanist Thomas Johnson in 1639 . However , the 18th @-@ century Welsh historian Thomas Pennant mentions a " triumphal fair upon this our chief of mountains " following Edward I 's conquest of Wales in 1284 , which could indicate the possibility of earlier ascents . 
 Snowdon offers some of the most extensive views in the British Isles . On exceptionally clear days , Ireland , Scotland , England , and the Isle of Man are all visible , as well as 24 counties , 29 lakes and 17 islands . The view between Snowdon and Merrick ( southern Scotland ) is the longest theoretical line of sight in the British Isles at 144 miles ( 232 km ) . 
 Snowdon has been described as " probably the busiest mountain in Britain " ; a number of well @-@ established and engineered footpaths lead to Snowdon 's summit from all sides , and can be combined in various ways . The circular walk starting and ending at Pen @-@ y @-@ Pass and using the Crib Goch route and the route over Y Lliwedd is called the Snowdon Horseshoe , and is considered " one of the finest ridge walks in Britain " . The routes are arranged here anticlockwise , starting with the path leading from Llanberis . In winter conditions , all these routes become significantly more dangerous and the Llanberis Mountain Rescue Team state that " additional skills , equipment and knowledge are required " . Many inexperienced walkers have been killed over the years attempting to climb the mountain via the main paths . 
 = = = Llanberis Path = = = 
 The Llanberis Path is the longest route to the summit , and has the shallowest gradient . It follows the line of the Snowdon Mountain Railway , and is considered the easiest and least interesting route to the summit of Snowdon . It is the route used by the annual Snowdon Race , with a record time of less than 40 minutes recorded from the start to the summit . 
 The section of the Llanberis Path beside the railway near the summit has been called the " Killer Convex " ; in icy conditions , this convex slope can send unwary walkers over the cliffs of Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu . Four people died there in February 2009 . 
 = = = Snowdon Ranger Path = = = 
 The Snowdon Ranger Path ( Welsh : Llwybr <unk> ) begins at the youth hostel beside Llyn <unk> , to the west of the mountain , served by the <unk> and Snowdon Ranger railway station . This was formerly the Saracen 's Head Inn , but was renamed under the ownership of the mountain guide John Morton . It is " probably the oldest path to the summit " . 
 The route begins with zigzags through " lush green turf " , before reaching a flatter boggy area in front of Llyn Ffynnon @-@ y @-@ gwas . The path then climbs to Bwlch Cwm <unk> , and then snakes along the ridge above Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu towards the summit . This path meets the railway , the Llanberis Path , the Crib Goch path , and the combined Pyg Track and Miners ' Track all within a short distance , just below the summit . 
 = = = Rhyd Ddu Path = = = 
 The Rhyd Ddu path , also called the Beddgelert Path , leads from the village of Rhyd Ddu , west of Snowdon , gently up on to <unk> , a broad ridge dropping west from the summit . It is considered one of the easier routes to the summit , with the advantage that the summit is visible from the start , but is one of the least used routes . It climbs at a shallow gradient to Bwlch Main , shortly southwest of the summit , from where it climbs more steeply , meeting up with the Watkin Path at a site marked with a large standing stone a few hundred metres from the summit . An alternative start begins at Pitt 's Head on the <unk> road . 
 = = = Watkin Path = = = 
 The Watkin Path is " the most demanding route direct to the summit of Snowdon " , since it starts at the lowest elevation of any of the main routes . It was first conceived by Edward Watkin , a railway owner who had attempted to build a railway tunnel under the English Channel , and had a summer home in Nant <unk> near the start of the path . It was originally designed as a donkey track and opened in 1892 . 
 The start of the Watkin Path has been described as " the prettiest beginning " of the routes up Snowdon . It begins at Bethania on the <unk> and climbs initially through old broadleaved woodland . After leaving the woods , the path climbs past the waterfalls of the Afon Llan to the glacial cirque of Cwm Llan , crossing a disused incline from an abandoned slate quarry . It then reaches Plas <unk> , formerly the home of the quarry manager for the South Snowdon Slate Works beyond , and later used for target practice by commandos during the Second World War . Near Plas <unk> is the large boulder known as Gladstone Rock , which bears a plaque commemorating a speech given in 1892 by William Ewart Gladstone , the then 83 @-@ year @-@ old Prime Minister , on the subject of Justice for Wales . The slate workings in Cwm Llan were opened in 1840 , but closed in 1882 due to the expense of transporting the slate to the sea at Porthmadog . Various buildings , including barracks and dressing sheds , remain . 
 From the slate quarries , the Watkin Path veers to the north @-@ east to reach Bwlch <unk> , the col between Snowdon and Y Lliwedd , which is marked by a large orange @-@ brown cairn . From here , it heads west to meet the Rhyd Ddu Path at a standing stone shortly below the summit of Snowdon . 
 Scenes from Carry On ... Up the Khyber were filmed on the lower part of the Watkin Path in 1968 , with the Watkin Path representing the Khyber Pass in the film . One of the stars of the film , Angela Douglas , unveiled a plaque at the precise location where filming took place in 2005 to commemorate the location filming and it forms part of the North Wales Film and Television Trail , run by the Wales Screen Commission . 
 = = = Over Y Lliwedd = = = 
 The route over Y Lliwedd is more frequently used for descent than ascent , and forms the second half of the Snowdon Horseshoe walk , the ascent being over Crib Goch . It is reached by following the Watkin Path down to Bwlch y <unk> , and then continuing along the ridge to the twin summits of Y Lliwedd . The path then drops down to Cwm Dyli to join the Miners ' Track towards Pen @-@ y @-@ Pass . 
 = = = Miners ' Track = = = 
 The Miners ' Track ( Welsh : Llwybr y <unk> ) begins at the car park at Pen @-@ y @-@ Pass , at an altitude of around 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) , and is the most popular route to the summit of Snowdon . It begins by skirting Llyn Teyrn before climbing slightly to cross the causeway over Llyn Llydaw . It follows the lake 's shoreline before climbing to Glaslyn , from where it ascends steeply towards Bwlch Glas . It is joined for most of this zigzag ascent by the Pyg Track , and on reaching the summit ridge , is united with the Llanberis Path and Snowdon Ranger Path . Derelict mine buildings are encountered along several parts of the path . 
 = = = Pyg Track = = = 
 The " Pyg Track " , or " Pig Track " ( both spellings may be encountered ) , also leads from Pen @-@ y @-@ Pass . The track climbs over Bwlch y Moch on the eastern flanks of Crib Goch , before traversing that ridge 's lower slopes . Above Glaslyn , it is joined by the Miners ' Track for the zigzag climb to Bwlch Glas between Snowdon and Garnedd <unk> . Regarding its name , the website of the Snowdonia National Park Authority states : 
 Nobody knows for certain why this path is called the Pyg Track . It 's possible that it was named after the pass it leads through , Bwlch y Moch ( translated Pigs ' Pass ) as the path is sometimes spelled ' Pig Track ' . Or , maybe because it was used to carry ' <unk> ' ( black tar ) to the copper mines on Snowdon . Another possible explanation is that the path was named after the nearby Pen y <unk> Hotel , popular amongst the early mountain walkers . 
 = = = Crib Goch route = = = 
 The traverse of Crib Goch is " one of the finest ridge walks in Britain " , and forms part of the well @-@ known Snowdon Horseshoe , a circuit of the peaks surrounding Cwm Dyli . The path follows the Pyg Track before separating off from it at Bwlch y Moch and leading up the East ridge of Crib Goch . All routes which tackle Crib Goch are considered mountaineering routes or scrambles . 
 = = Snowdon Mountain Railway = = 
 The Snowdon Mountain Railway ( SMR ) ( Welsh : Rheilffordd yr Wyddfa ) is a narrow gauge rack and pinion mountain railway that travels for 4 @.@ 75 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) from Llanberis to the summit of Snowdon . It is the only public rack and pinion railway in the United Kingdom , and after more than 100 years of operation it remains a popular tourist attraction . Single carriage trains are pushed up the mountain by either steam locomotives or diesel locomotives . It has also previously used diesel railcars as multiple units . The railway was constructed between December 1894 , when the first sod was cut by Enid Assheton @-@ Smith ( after whom locomotive No.2 was named ) , and February 1896 , at a total cost of £ 63 @,@ 800 ( equivalent to £ 6 @,@ 658 @,@ 000 as of 2015 ) . 
 = = View from the summit = = 
 Snowdon offers some of the most extensive views in the British Isles ; on exceptionally clear days , Ireland , ( the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland ) , Scotland , England , and the Isle of Man ( as well as Wales ) are all visible , as well as 24 counties , 29 lakes and 17 islands . From here , it is also possible to see the mountains of the Peak District and South Pennines that surround Manchester . The view between Snowdon and Merrick ( southern Scotland ) is the longest theoretical line of sight in the British Isles at 144 miles ( 232 km ) . In practice atmospheric conditions make such sightings extremely rare and indeed there are no reported sightings . The mountain itself may also be viewed on take off and approach to both Manchester Airport and Liverpool John Lennon Airport on very clear days , and even from Howth Head in Dublin , Ireland . 
 = = Summit buildings = = 
 The first building on the summit of Snowdon was erected in 1838 to sell refreshments , and a licence to sell intoxicating liquor was granted in 1845 . Very basic accommodation was also provided for visitors . When the Snowdon Mountain Railway was opened in 1896 , it added its own accommodation and sales outlet near the summit . 
 During the 1930s , many complaints were received about the state of the facilities at the summit and in 1934 / 5 a new station building was erected in two phases . It was designed by Sir Clough Williams @-@ Ellis and included rooms for visitors and a café . The other operators were bought out and the ramshackle collection of buildings on the summit was cleared . The flat roof was intended to be used as a viewing platform and some photographs show it being used in this way . However , other photographs taken of the café show that the roof leaked , which probably explains why the practice was stopped . The Summit was taken over by government agencies during the war and the accommodation was restricted to staff use afterwards . Having become increasingly dilapidated , this building was described by Prince Charles as " the highest slum in Wales " . Its state led to a campaign to replace the building . In April 2006 , Snowdonia National Park Authority with the support of the Snowdonia Society agreed a deal to start work on a new café and visitor centre complex . By mid @-@ October 2006 the old building had been largely demolished . 
 The new RIBA Award @-@ winning £ 8 @.@ 4 million visitor centre , Hafod Eryri , designed by Ray Hole Architects in conjunction with Arup and built by Carillion , was officially opened on 12 June 2009 by First Minister Rhodri Morgan . The Welsh National Poet , Gwyn Thomas , composed a new couplet for the new building , displayed at its entrance and on the windows , which reads " Copa 'r Wyddfa : yr <unk> <unk> , <unk> , Yn nes at y <unk> / The summit of Snowdon : Here you are nearer To Heaven " . The name Hafod Eryri was chosen from several hundred put forward after a competition was held by the BBC . Hafod is Welsh for an upland summer residence , while Eryri is the Welsh name for Snowdonia . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 In Welsh folklore , the summit of Snowdon is said to be the tomb of Rhitta Gawr , a giant . This is claimed to be the reason for the Welsh name Yr Wyddfa , literally meaning " the tumulus " . Rhitta Gawr wore a cloak made of men 's beards , and was slain by King Arthur after claiming Arthur 's beard . Other sites with Arthurian connections include Bwlch y <unk> , on the ridge between Snowdon and Y Lliwedd , where Arthur himself is said to have died . A cairn , <unk> Arthur , was erected at the site and was still standing as late as 1850 , but no longer exists . According to the folklore , Arthur had Bedivere throw his sword Excalibur into Glaslyn , where Arthur 's body was later placed in a boat to be carried away to <unk> . Arthur 's men then retreated to a cave on the slopes of Y Lliwedd , where they are said to sleep until such time as they are needed . Merlin is supposed to have hidden the golden throne of Britain among the cliffs north of Crib y <unk> when the Saxons invaded . 
 Glaslyn was also the final resting place of a water monster , known as an <unk> ( also the Welsh word for beaver ) , which had plagued the people of the Conwy valley . They tempted the monster out of the water with a young girl , before securing it with chains and dragging it to Glaslyn . A large stone known as Maen Du 'r Arddu , below Clogwyn Du 'r Arddu , is supposed to have magical powers . Like several other sites in Wales , it is said that if two people spend the night there , one will become a great poet while the other will become insane . Llyn Coch in Cwm Clogwyn has been associated with the Tylwyth Teg ( fairies ) , including a version of the fairy bride legend . 
 = Barbara Howard ( artist ) = 
 Helen Barbara Howard , RCA ( March 10 , 1926 - December 7 , 2002 ) was a Canadian painter , wood engraver , <unk> , bookbinder and designer who produced work consistently throughout her life , from her graduation in 1951 from the Ontario College of Art until her unexpected death in 2002 . 
 Her work is represented in many permanent collections , including the National Gallery of Canada , the Art Gallery of Ontario , the British Library , the Bodleian Library in Oxford , England and The Library of Congress in Washington . Her work also hangs in private , public and corporate collections in Canada , England and the United States . 
 = = Life = = 
 Howard was born in Long Branch , Toronto in 1926 , the younger of two children . Her father , Thomas Howard , a secondary school teacher , was an English immigrant . Her mother , Helen Mackintosh , who was born in Winnipeg , was of Scottish ancestry . Having decided early to become an artist , Howard studied at the Ontario College of Art in Toronto from 1948 to 1951 , where she was a pupil of Will Ogilvie , who taught her figure drawing , and Jock Macdonald , who taught her painting and composition . In her final year she won the silver medal in drawing and painting . 
 Howard taught art classes in Toronto until 1953 , when she moved to London , England , where she studied at Saint Martin 's School of Art , immersing herself in the English landscape and the cultural life of postwar London . She also travelled to Europe to visit the art museums of Rome , Venice , Florence , Paris and Madrid , and saw the Paleolithic cave paintings at Lascaux in southwestern France , an experience which influenced many of her later illustrations . In London she met her future husband , the Canadian poet , Richard Outram . Returning to Canada in 1956 , Howard and Outram made their home in Toronto for the next 46 years . 
 In the late 1950s and early sixties Howard showed regularly at the Picture Loan Society , a Toronto gallery established by Douglas Duncan in 1936 to present the work of contemporary Canadian artists such as Emily Carr , Fred Varley , David Milne , <unk> Harris and <unk> Jackson . Several Canadian public collections possess Howard drawings and paintings acquired through the Douglas Duncan estate , as Duncan was also a collector of her work . 
 In 2002 Howard and Outram moved to Port Hope , Ontario but soon after their arrival Howard fell and broke her hip . While undergoing surgery in Peterborough , Ontario she suffered a pulmonary embolism and died on the operating table . 
 = = Work = = 
 Howard and her husband were part of a circle of artists , writers and designers who were interested in visual images , in language and in the book arts . One close associate was the graphic designer Allan Fleming , whose Martlet Press published Twenty @-@ Eight Drawings by Barbara Howard in 1970 , a period when she was drawing the figure . The Canadian wood engraver Rosemary Kilbourn , a close friend since art college , taught Howard to carve images that could be printed in conjunction with text . 
 In 1960 Howard and Outram launched the Gauntlet Press , a small private press which produced hand @-@ bound letterpress volumes of Outram 's poetry and Howard 's wood engravings . These limited editions , prized by collectors , can also be found in such public collections as Library and Archives Canada , the Library of Congress , the British Library and the University of Toronto Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library . Throughout the 1970s and 1980s the Gauntlet Press also issued a series of letterpress broadsheets of Outram 's poems , all of them designed ( and many illustrated ) by Howard . Digital facsimiles of the books and broadsheets of the Gauntlet Press in the collection of the Memorial University of Newfoundland can be viewed at the website dedicated to The Gauntlet Press of Richard Outram and Barbara Howard , together with extensive background material and an exhaustive bibliography . 
 Imagery derived from the natural world was always at the heart of Howard 's painting . Throughout her life she painted horizons , shorelines , skies , sun and water , although she was more concerned with the essence of a subject than with its precise representation . 
 In her sixties she devoted a decade of work to an extensive series of cetacean studies , Encounters with Whales . In his essay Encounters and Recollections in the Art of Barbara Howard and Richard Outram , the poet Jeffery Donaldson writes : " For the most part , these are portraits of the mammals in something like their private element . Their appearances are brief , ecstatic revelations , fortuitous glimpses , sudden soundings . They seem to break forth abruptly from their solitude and then slip away as quickly again . " These enormous canvases , some as large as 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) across , have never been publicly exhibited . 
 In the late 1990s until her death in 2002 , Howard returned to her lifelong fascination with light , night skies , the reflective surface of water . In these last paintings , there is a recurrence of circular elements , an abstraction of natural forms and a balancing of darkness and light . Howard has stated : " In my painting ( as in all my work ) I am deeply involved with light as the movement and inter @-@ action of colours ; the integrity of colour and form , hence with the integrity of the total work which has to do with spirit and abstract essence , not representation . I am preoccupied with life 's ambiguities and dualities and in my later work I am reaching more and more from the dark toward light , freedom , and a transcending exuberance . " 
 Howard 's paintings , drawings , wood engravings and book designs can be viewed on the website Barbara Howard 's Unfolding Visual World . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 With the exception of the very large whale canvases , Howard 's paintings sold steadily throughout her lifetime . However , while she had her champions , she was never a part of the mainstream of Canadian art and so did not attract the kind of public critical attention that attends most successful careers . In her introduction to the catalogue for Howard 's 1980 solo exhibition The Event in the Mind , sculptor Rebecca Sisler wrote : 
 Classification , school ? Barbara Howard 's work defies specific slotting , although we sense her recognition of the heritage left by great masters , Turner being the most obvious . But she draws and paints in direct response to her own muse and as such cannot be aligned to any particular art movement ... ... for in common with other maverick artists throughout art history , her work , although bound to no age , is relevant to all . 
 Writing about Howard 's wood engravings in her 2006 essay Barbara Howard 's <unk> , the artist , curator and academic Martha Fleming states : 
 Wood engraving is a demanding process , and Howard was a virtuoso . [ The creatures she portrayed ] echo the floating , frameless engravings pioneered by Thomas Bewick in the 18th century , and yet they are startlingly modern . As much about form as they are about anatomical accuracy , they hover at the brink of typology but have nothing of zoological rendering 's reduction to taxonomy . Her counterintuitive use of colour upholds the monochrome dignity inherent in the technique . 
 Howard was elected to the Royal Canadian Academy of Arts in 1975 and served on the RCA Council from 1980 @-@ 1982 . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Public collections 
 National Gallery of Canada 
 Art Gallery of Ontario 
 Art Gallery of Hamilton 
 Art Gallery of Peel , Brampton 
 Tom Thomson Art Gallery , Owen Sound 
 Art Gallery of Windsor 
 Art Gallery of Northumberland , Cobourg 
 Museum London , London 
 Art Gallery of Greater Victoria 
 <unk> Art Gallery of Brant 
 Agnes Etherington Art Centre , Kingston 
 Kitchener @-@ Waterloo Art Gallery 
 Rodman Hall , St. Catharines 
 Province of Ontario Collection 
 Corporate collections 
 Mingan Island Cetacean Study ( <unk> ) , Longue @-@ Pointe @-@ de @-@ Mingan , <unk> 
 Imperial Oil ( as Esso Resources ) 
 <unk> Corporation ( then Pan @-@ Canadian Petroleum ) 
 Nortel Networks Corporation ( then Northern Telecom ) 
 Citibank Canada 
 Canadian Tire Corporation 
 Mary Kay Cosmetics 
 Public collections of the Gauntlet Press 
 Library and Archives Canada ( formerly the National Library of Canada ) , Ottawa 
 The Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library , University of Toronto 
 The Gauntlet Press Collection of the Queen Elizabeth II Library , Memorial University of Newfoundland 
 Bruce Peel Special Collections Library , University of Alberta 
 The University of British Columbia Library 
 University of Western Ontario , London , Ontario 
 The <unk> Research Collections , McMaster University , Hamilton , Ontario 
 The Trent University Archives , Peterborough , Ontario 
 The University of Calgary , Alberta , Special Collections 
 The Berg Collection , New York Public Library 
 The Harris Collection of Poetry and Plays , Brown University , Providence , Rhode Island 
 The Library of Congress , Washington , DC 
 University at Buffalo , New York , Special Collections 
 The Houghton Library , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts 
 Bodleian Library , Oxford , England 
 The British Library , London , England 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 The first solo exhibition of Howard 's paintings was at Toronto 's Picture Loan Society in 1957 . Pearl McCarthy , then art critic for the Globe and Mail , wrote that Howard was " far ahead of most landscapists in depth " and described her work as " first class ... the answer to a permanent sensuous desire " . The last solo exhibition of Howard 's paintings and drawings took place posthumously at the Art Gallery of Northumberland , Cobourg , Ontario , in 2006 . 
 Solo exhibitions of Howard 's work and / or the Gauntlet Press 
 Picture Loan Society , Toronto 1957 , 1958 , 1960 , 1965 
 Wells Gallery , Ottawa , 1966 , 1982 , 1984 
 Fleet Gallery , Winnipeg , 1966 
 Victoria College , Toronto , 1966 
 Sisler Gallery , Toronto , 1974 , 1976 
 Hart House , University of Toronto , 1975 
 The Event in the Mind , Prince Arthur Galleries , Toronto , 1980 ; catalogue 
 <unk> Gallery , Toronto , 1983 
 Massey College , Toronto , 1984 
 Latcham Gallery , Stouffville , 1985 
 O 'Keefe Centre , Toronto , 1986 
 National Library of Canada , 1986 
 University College , Toronto , 1987 
 Georgetown Library & Cultural Centre , 1988 
 The Arts and Letters Club of Toronto , 1993 
 E.J. Pratt Library , Victoria University , University of Toronto , 1995 
 Robarts Library , University of Toronto , 1999 
 The Upstairs Gallery , Art Gallery of Northumberland , Port Hope , 2003 
 Seeking Light : Last Paintings and Selected Drawings . Art Gallery of Northumberland , Cobourg , 2006 ; catalogue 
 Group exhibitions 
 Ontario Society of Artists , 1958 , 1959 
 Women 's Committee , Art Gallery of Ontario , 1958 , 1969 
 Douglas Duncan Collection , Victoria College , Toronto , 1962 
 Toronto Collects , Art Gallery of Ontario , 1961 
 Women Artists , Canadian National Exhibition , Toronto , 1961 
 Canadian Artists , Eaton 's College Street , 1961 
 Canadian Society of Graphic Arts , 1958 , 1959 , 1960 , 1963 
 National Home Show , 1960 , 1961 , 1962 
 <unk> Travelling Show , Hart House , 1958 @-@ 9 
 Women 's Committee , London Art Gallery , 1962 
 Canadian Watercolours , Drawings & Prints , National Gallery of Canada , 1966 
 Douglas Duncan Collection , Windsor , London , Hamilton , 1967 
 Drawings and Sculpture , Art Gallery of Ontario , 1976 
 The Living Image , Macdonald Gallery , Toronto ( 3 artists ) ; catalogue 
 R.C.A. Centennial Contemporary Exhibition , Toronto , 1980 
 Inaugural Exhibition , Academy House , R.C.A. , Toronto , 1987 – 88 
 Art Under Fire , Academy House , R.C.A. , Toronto , 1988 
 Fine Printing : The Private Press in Canada . Travelling exhibition : Toronto , Fredericton , Calgary , Grimsby , Saskatoon , Brandon , Pointe Claire , Halifax , Saint John , 1995 – 1997 ; catalogue 
 Women and Texts , University of Leeds , 1997 ( curated by Special Collections , University of Calgary ) ; catalogue 
 Toronto in Print , Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library , 1998 ; catalogue 
 Earthworks , an exhibition of works by Ontario <unk> , John B. Aird Gallery , Toronto , 1998 
 Traces of Land , Traces of People : Contemporary Images of Ontario , Ontario Legislature , Queen ’ s Park , Toronto , Nov. 1999 @-@ July 2000 
 = Not Guilty ( 1910 film ) = 
 Not Guilty is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on Harry Martin who bids goodbye to his blind mother before he leaves the house and soon encounters a fleeing thief . The thief deposits a stolen purse into Harry 's pocket and the police promptly discover and arrest Harry . They take him back to his home where he bids goodbye and is jailed . His blind mother becomes ill , under the false belief that her son is away on a journey . After he learns of this , he breaks out and returns home . The police surround and search the house and Harry flees to another building on a clothesline . Successfully having eluded the police , Harry buys a paper the following morning and discovers that the real thief has turned himself in . The film is known for its early use of a close @-@ up shot to portray the complex action of the thief depositing the purse into Harry 's pocket . The film was released on September 20 , 1910 and met with mixed reviews . The film survives in the Library of Congress archives . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with Harry Martin saying goodbye to his blind mother before leaving the house . About this time Joinville , a thief , has committed a robbery and is being chased down the street by the policemen . Harry and the thief encounter each other on the street and a struggle ensues , Joinville slips the stolen purse into his pocket before fleeing . The police encounter Martin and find the stolen purse before promptly arresting him . Harry 's sweetheart visits Martin 's mother and the police take Harry to his apartment . Harry bids his mother and his sweetheart goodbye , an inter @-@ title car states that Harry does not want his mother to know he has gone away on a journey instead of to jail . 
 Time passes and Harry receives a note from Kate , his sweetheart , that his mother is very ill and wants him to return . In the note , Kate states that it is impossible to prove his innocence . Harry escapes on a passing wagon , concealed in corn or hay , and returns home . The police gather and surround search the home , Harry escapes via a clothesline to another building , successfully eluding the police . The following morning , Harry buys a newspaper from a <unk> and reads of his innocence after the real thief confesses to the crime . The three rejoice at his proven innocence . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Harry Martin 
 Marie Eline as the newspaper boy 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Some of the cast credits are unknown , but most of the 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . The film survives in the Library of Congress , but the other actors in the production are not listed . 
 The film shows novel techniques in film production that were used to assist the viewer in understanding the narrative . In the beginning of the film , when Harry and the thief struggle , a closeup shot is used to show the thief placing the purse into Harry 's pocket . While the two struggle in the previous scene , the close @-@ up shot has both men standing still . Charlie Keil , author of Early American Cinema in Transition , cites this as an attempt to improve the narrative by allowing a complex sequence of events to be examined <unk> by the viewer . Keil also states that shot may have been done to lessen trade press objections to the close @-@ up views by showing the value to the narrative development . When Harry is in jail , he imagines his mother , and this is shown by an inset at the upper right of film . Months after the film had been released , Robert Grau wrote a column in the Moving Picture World which praised the attention to detail in the production for a newspaper which was shown on camera for only a few seconds . Grau states , " I was unable to discern in the few seconds the effect was on view , what means were taken to create the illusion ... and it is consoling to know that the producers of photoplays are aspiring to reach great heights in such matters . " An analysis of the frame shows that it was not so much an illusion as pasting the headline on the edition of August 27 , 1910 of the New York City Herald Tribune . The film also shows a real and dangerous stunt executed by Crane , where he is seen " sliding 40 feet down a <unk> to liberty in a scene that couldn 't have been faked . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on September 20 , 1910 . The film likely had a wide national release , similar to other Thanhouser productions , theater advertisements are known in Missouri , Minnesota , Indiana , and Kansas . In 1915 , years after its national release , the Pennsylvania State Board of Censors of Moving Pictures reviewed the film and approved its content without modification . 
 The film received mixed reception by trade publications . Walton of The Moving Picture News stated , " The tender end , mother , is good ; it 's well acted . What I said about The Doctor 's Carriage I repeat . This theme is far @-@ fetched ; the convict stripes unnecessary . Whoever was at the helm in this picture was just a little bit mixed - as to the course . " The Moving Picture World 's review was more neutral and stated the film was rather engaging and it will keep the audiences interest . The reviewer did not find either specific praise or fault in the actual production itself . The New York Dramatic Mirror was the most detailed in its review . The reviewer states , " There are very strong situations in this picture story , based on the efforts of a young man and his sweetheart to prevent the young man 's mother from knowing that he has been sent to prison . ... In a series of melodramatic scenes that are not as convincing as they might be , we see the son elude the penitentiary officers , and later he returns openly to his home with a newspaper in which is printed the confession of the criminal who had committed the offense of which the son had been convicted . Some of the scenes were handled too abruptly for the best results , but otherwise the acting appears satisfactory . " Bowers notes that the Mirror was not without its detractors and was accused of being a tool of the Edison Trust companies , but reviews for Thanhouser films were amongst the most perceptive . 
 = 1946 National League tie @-@ breaker series = 
 The 1946 National League tie @-@ breaker series was a best @-@ of @-@ three playoff series at the conclusion of Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1946 regular season to decide the winner of the National League ( NL ) pennant . The games were played on October 1 and October 3 , 1946 , between the St. Louis Cardinals and Brooklyn Dodgers . It was necessary after both teams finished the season with identical win – loss records of 96 – 58 . This was the first ever tie @-@ breaker series in MLB history . 
 The first game took place at Sportsman 's Park in St. Louis , and the second , at Brooklyn 's Ebbets Field . The Cardinals swept the Dodgers behind wins from pitchers Howie Pollet and Murry Dickson , thus advancing to the 1946 World Series in which they defeated the Boston Red Sox , four games to three . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker series counted as the 155th and 156th regular season games by both teams , with all events in the games added to regular season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the first season of baseball since the conclusion of World War II , all ballplayers who had served in the military were returning to their former teams . The Cardinals regained Hall of Famer Stan Musial , and the Dodgers reacquired Hall of Famer Pee Wee Reese . The previous season , St. Louis finished second in the NL , and Brooklyn ended the season third , with records of 95 – 59 and 87 – 67 , respectively . In a pre @-@ season poll of 119 sportswriters , 115 picked the Cardinals to win the National League , while none selected the Dodgers . 
 Cardinals manager Eddie Dyer said that talk about his team being a " shoo @-@ in " to win the pennant was devised by Dodgers general manager Branch Rickey to ease the pressure on them , and increase pressure on the Cardinals , noting that he felt Brooklyn was the clear favorite . The Dodgers spent the first month of the season creating a " youth movement " on their club , allowing younger players to have significant playing time . When the team was in first place in the middle of May , however , manager Leo Durocher dropped the idea and instead focused on winning the pennant . Dyer said at the start of the season that as long as Saint Louis was within five games of first place on July 4 , they would win the pennant race . As July 4 came and went , they found themselves seven games behind the Dodgers , and concern grew in St. Louis . 
 The Cardinals rebounded , and on August 22 , after winning both games of a doubleheader against the Philadelphia Phillies , the clubs were tied , 71 – 45 . After the Dodgers had led the league most of the season , the Cardinals were in first place most of September . On September 29 , Saint Louis and Brooklyn were again tied with just one game left to play against the Chicago Cubs and Boston Braves , respectively . The Cardinals lost to the Cubs , 8 – 3 , while the Dodgers lost to the Braves , 4 – 0 , and as a result the two teams were placed in a best @-@ of @-@ three playoff series to determine who would face the Boston Red Sox in the 1946 World Series . The Dodgers chose Ralph Branca to pitch the first game in the series . The Cardinals debated starting either Howie Pollet or Murry Dickson , before deciding on Pollet . 
 = = Game 1 summary = = 
 Pollet started the game by retiring the first three Brooklyn hitters . Eddie Stanky grounded out , Cookie Lavagetto flied out to center field , and Joe Medwick grounded out to end the inning . Branca took the mound in the bottom of the first , striking out Red Schoendienst and allowing a single to Terry Moore . After National League MVP Musial struck out , Enos Slaughter singled and Whitey Kurowski walked to load the bases . Joe Garagiola , Sr. brought in a run before being tagged out to end the inning with the score 1 – 0 . In the second inning , Carl Furillo reached base on an error by Pollet . Pee Wee Reese singled , but Furillo was out at second . Another groundout brought the Cardinals back up , and the Dodgers got all three batters quickly out to end the inning . In the top of the third , Howie Schultz hit a home run on the first pitch he saw , tying the score at 1 – 1 . After three more outs , St. Louis came back up to bat . Moore flied out , then Musial walked , and Slaughter singled . Musial scored on Kurowski 's hit while Slaughter was called out , and after two more singles , the latter bringing in Kurowski , Branca was taken out of the game . 
 Kirby Higbe replaced Branca on the mound , and ended the inning with the Cardinals in the lead , 3 – 1 . Both teams combined for one hit in the fourth inning , a single by Moore . In the top of the fifth , Reese and Bruce Edwards singled , and Schultz grounded out on a bunt . Stan Rojek pinch hit for Higbe , and walked , loading the bases . Stanky grounded into a double play , ending the inning without the Dodgers scoring any runs . In the bottom of the fifth , Hal Gregg replaced Higbe on the mound , and retired the side in order . The sixth inning contained just one baserunner — Schoendienst — who was stranded on first after hitting a single . 
 The top of the seventh started with Furillo flying out to right field . Reese , Edwards , and Schultz all singled after Furillo 's out . Reese scored on Schultz 's hit , but Slaughter threw Edwards out at third base A groundout by Bob Ramazzotti ended the threat with the Cardinals leading , 3 – 2 . Dyer later said he considered this play the one that saved the game for St. Louis . In the bottom of the seventh , the Dodgers <unk> their fourth pitcher , Vic Lombardi . After Musial tripled and Slaughter flied out , he was replaced by Rube Melton , the fifth and final pitcher the Dodgers used . A Garagiola single scored Musial , and Melton got the other two outs in between a wild pitch , making the score 4 – 2 at the end of the seventh . Stanky walked to start the eighth , giving him a league @-@ leading 137 walks for the season . Brooklyn finished the eighth inning leaving two on base , and the Cardinals failed to score in the bottom of the eighth as well , leaving a man on base . In the top of the ninth , Reese and Edwards flied out , and Schultz struck out to end the game , giving the Cardinals a 4 – 2 victory . 
 = = Game 2 summary = = 
 Originally , the Cardinals were wavering between starting Murry Dickson or Harry Brecheen in game two , while the Dodgers were looking to use either Higbe , who had pitched in the previous game , or Joe Hatten ; the two clubs went with Dickson and Hatten . Hatten began the game in the top of the first inning by only allowing one hit to Terry Moore . In the bottom of the first , the Dodgers scored the game 's first run . After Eddie Stanky struck out , and Dick Whitman flied out , Augie Galan singled . He was brought home by a walk and another single . After Carl Furillo flied out , the first inning ended with a score of 1 – 0 . In the top of the second , the Cardinals responded when <unk> Dusak tripled after a Slaughter ground out . Marty Marion hit a sacrifice fly to score Dusak , and after a single by Clyde <unk> , Dickson tripled to score another run , giving St. Louis a 2 – 1 lead , before a fly out ended their half of the inning . Dickson walked Bruce Edwards , but retired the next three batters , leaving the score 2 – 1 at the end of the second inning . 
 Neither team got a hit in the third or fourth innings . The only runners to reach base were Whitey Kurowski and Marion , both on walks . The fifth started that the same way , with Slaughter and Moore flying out . With two outs however , the Cardinals started hitting . Musial doubled , Kurowski walked , Slaughter tripled , and Dusak singled . All but Dusak scored on the hits , bringing the score to 5 – 1 and ending Hatten 's day . Hank Behrman came on in relief . Behrman kept any more runs from scoring , and after another inning in which the Dodgers did not record a hit , the score was 5 – 1 at the end of the fifth . 
 Vic Lombardi replaced Behrman in the top of the sixth . He allowed just one hit to Dickson , keeping the score 5 – 1 when Brooklyn came up to bat . Whitman , Galan , and Dixie Walker all grounded out to end the inning . In the top of the seventh , Lombardi allowed two walks , then Dusak hit a sacrifice bunt , after which Lombardi was replaced by Higbe . Marion hit a sacrifice bunt as well , which allowed Kurowski to score . Higbe quickly got the third out , and the Dodgers again went hitless in the seventh , making the score 6 – 1 at the end of seven innings . In the top of the eighth , Dickson struck out , while Red Schoendienst singled and Moore doubled . Musial was intentionally walked to load the bases , and Kurowski singled , allowing two baserunners to score and making the game 8 – 1 in favor of the Cardinals . After another walk , Higbe was replaced on the pitcher 's mound by Rube Melton , who got the final two outs of the inning . 
 Brooklyn went hitless in the bottom of the eighth . They inserted Harry Taylor to pitch the top half of the ninth , in which , he held St. Louis hitless . With half an inning left to play , the Dodgers began to get hits off of Dickson . Galan doubled , and after Walker flied out , Ed Stevens tripled to score Galan and Furillo singled to score Stevens , after a wild pitch and a walk , Brecheen took over pitching duties for Dickson with St. Louis leading 8 – 3 . Edwards singled off Brecheen and allowed Furillo to score , and after Cookie Lavagetto walked , the score was 8 – 4 with the bases loaded . The Cardinals kept the score from getting any closer , as Brecheen struck out the final two batters to end the game . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Cardinals advanced to the World Series against the Boston Red Sox , whom they defeated four games to three . While the Cardinals were facing the Dodgers , the Red Sox faced a team of American League All @-@ Stars in an exhibition match . During the game , Ted Williams injured his elbow . He recovered in time to play in the World Series , but manager Joe Cronin blamed the injury on having to wait for the three @-@ game series to finish , and pushed for future tie @-@ breakers to be a single game . Cronin got his wish in the American League , as the 1948 American League tie @-@ breaker was only a one @-@ game matchup . However , the National League hosted three more series @-@ style tie @-@ breakers in later seasons before converting to a single @-@ game format . 
 After Brooklyn lost the series , rumors of Durocher leaving to manage the New York Yankees , which had started in the final days of the regular season , resurfaced . Durocher responded by saying that he would remain the manager of the Dodgers " until I die " , quelling any speculation . 
 The two games counted statistically as regular season games . As a result , Musial and Slaughter led the league with 156 games played , which could not have been equaled by anyone but a Brooklyn or St. Louis player . Musial 's two hits in the series gave him a league @-@ leading 228 for the season . Pollet 's nine inning , two earned runs performance lowered his earned run average ( ERA ) to 2 @.@ 10 , and increased his win total to 21 , both of which led the National League , narrowly edging out Johnny Sain 's 20 wins and 2 @.@ 21 ERA . Murry Dickson 's victory in the second game gave him 15 wins and six losses on the season ; this brought his win @-@ loss percentage to .714 , which led the National League . Musial finished the season with a .365 batting average , 124 runs , 50 doubles , 20 triples , 16 home runs , and 103 runs batted in , and won the Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award at the end of the season . 
 = Thomas Bates = 
 Thomas Bates ( 1567 – 30 January 1606 ) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . 
 Bates was born at Lapworth in Warwickshire , and became a retainer to Robert Catesby , who from 1604 planned to kill King James I by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder , and inciting a popular revolt during which a Catholic monarch would be restored to the English throne . Bates was invited to join the conspiracy after he accidentally became aware of it . As he rode with Catesby to prepare for the group 's planned uprising on 5 November 1605 , Guy Fawkes was found guarding the gunpowder stored under the House of Lords and arrested . Bates subsequently accompanied Catesby and his small group of fugitives to Holbeche House in Staffordshire , but left shortly before his master was killed there by government forces on 8 November . He was subsequently captured and taken to London . 
 Bates was the only member of the group to implicate the Jesuits in the conspiracy , but may have done so only to alleviate his punishment . He retracted his statement when it became clear he was to be executed . Three days after his trial on 27 January 1606 , he was hanged , drawn and quartered . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Servant = = = 
 Bates was born at Lapworth in Warwickshire , and was married to Martha Bates . He was employed as a retainer to Sir Robert Catesby 's family , and with his wife lived in a cottage on the Catesby family estate . He was allowed his own servant , as well as his own armour . Bates was considered a loyal and devoted servant to Catesby . 
 Bates was the seventh man to be enlisted into what became known as the Gunpowder Plot , a scheme devised early in 1604 by Catesby to kill King James I by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder , and inciting a popular revolt during which a Catholic monarch would be restored to the English throne . Bates 's involvement in the plot began when he became suspicious of Catesby 's movements . In December 1604 he was invited to his master 's lodgings at Puddle Wharf in London , and questioned there by Thomas Wintour and Catesby , who had noted his suspicion . Bates told them that he thought that they " intended some dangerous matter about the Parliament House , because he had been sent to get a lodging near unto that place . " At that point the two men let Bates in on the secret . 
 In the same month it was announced that because of the plague , the re @-@ opening of Parliament would not be in February , but rather in October . During this delay the conspirators may have dug a tunnel beneath Parliament , although no evidence for its existence has ever been found . The plotters ultimately stored their gunpowder in the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords . In July 1605 the opening of Parliament was again delayed , this time until Tuesday 5 November . Catesby had funded most of the plot , but by August 1605 he was running out of money . During a secret meeting at Bath in August , at which he , Percy and Thomas Wintour were present , the plotters decided that " the company being yet but few " he was to be allowed to " call in whom he thought best " . Bates was uncomfortable with the idea , and was the only member of the conspiracy to object . He was overruled however , and Catesby soon enlisted Ambrose Rookwood , Francis Tresham and Everard Digby . 
 = = = Failure = = = 
 The last details of the plot were finalised in October . Guy Fawkes would light the fuse and then escape across the Thames , while simultaneously a revolt in the Midlands would help to ensure the capture of Princess Elizabeth . Late on Monday 4 November , Bates set out with Catesby and John Wright for the planned revolt . The following day while at Dunstable re @-@ shoeing Catesby 's horse , they were met by Rookwood , who delivered the devastating news that Fawkes had been discovered guarding the gunpowder and arrested . As those conspirators still in London fled the city , the group soon integrated Christopher Wright and Thomas Percy . They rode toward Dunchurch , on horses sent from Everard Digby by prearrangement . They met Robert Wintour ( brother to Thomas ) at Ashby St Ledgers , and Digby at Dunchurch . On 6 November they stole horses from Warwick Castle , and collected stored weapons from Norbrook , near Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . As they continued toward Huddington , and as the government issued a proclamation for the fugitives ' arrest ( Catesby 's servant was listed as Robert Ashfield , probably a mistake for Bates ) , Catesby ordered Bates to deliver a letter to Father Garnet at Coughton Court , asking for his support . Bates 's news proved momentous for the Jesuits ; he overheard Tesimond exclaim " we are all utterly undone " . Garnet 's reply to Catesby begged them to stop their " wicked actions " , and to listen to the pope 's teachings . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 By the time the fugitives and their supporters arrived at Holbeche House on the border of Staffordshire , they were exhausted . <unk> from the rain , they spread out some of the now @-@ soaked gunpowder in front of the fire , to dry out . A spark from the fire landed on the powder and the resultant flames engulfed Catesby , Rookwood , Grant , and another man . At some point between then and the arrival of the Sheriff of Worcester and his men , Bates left the house , possibly with his son and Digby . If he was with the latter , he was captured later the same day and taken to London . Catesby was killed early that day along with Percy , John Wright and his brother Christopher . 
 = = = Imprisonment and execution = = = 
 While imprisoned , on 4 December Bates claimed that Father Oswald Tesimond knew of the plot . In the opinion of author Antonia Fraser however , Bates 's evidence is suspect ; he was of a lower class than his co @-@ conspirators , and could therefore reasonably have assumed he was at more risk of being tortured than the others . Perhaps trying to curry favour with his interrogators , he was the only conspirator to implicate the Jesuits . He later retracted his confession when it became clear that he was to be executed . 
 Bates was charged with high treason , and tried at Westminster Hall on Monday 27 January 1606 , alongside seven of his fellow conspirators . He arrived at the hall separately from the others ; prisons operated on a class @-@ based system and so he was kept at the Gatehouse Prison , rather than the Tower . Only Digby pleaded not guilty . On the morning of 30 January 1606 therefore , Bates was tied to a wattled hurdle and dragged by horse along the street , from the Gatehouse Prison to the western end of St Paul 's Churchyard . There he was present as first Digby , then Robert Wintour , and then Grant , were hanged , drawn and quartered . Bates was the last to ascend the scaffold that day , and met a similarly gruesome end . The following day the four remaining conspirators were executed in the same manner . 
 = Diane Lane = 
 Diane Lane ( born January 22 , 1965 ) is an Oscar nominated American actress . Born and raised in New York City , Lane made her screen debut in George Roy Hill 's 1979 film A Little Romance , starring opposite Sir Laurence Olivier . Soon after , she was featured on the cover of Time magazine and dubbed " the new Grace Kelly " . 
 She has since appeared in several notable films , including the 2002 film Unfaithful , which earned her Academy Award , Golden Globe , and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Best Actress . Lane has also starred in The Outsiders , The Perfect Storm , Under the Tuscan Sun , Cinema Verite , and Man of Steel . Most recently , she has voiced Riley 's mother in the Pixar film Inside Out , starred in Trumbo , and reprised her role as Martha Kent in Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lane was born in New York City . Her mother , Colleen Leigh Farrington , was a nightclub singer and Playboy centerfold ( Miss October 1957 ) , who was also known as " Colleen Price " . Her father , Burton Eugene Lane , was a Manhattan drama coach who ran an acting workshop with John Cassavetes , worked as a cab driver , and later taught humanities at City College . When Lane was 13 days old , her parents separated . Lane 's mother went to Mexico and obtained a divorce while retaining custody of Lane until she was six years old . Lane 's father received custody of her after Lane 's mother moved to her native state , Georgia . Lane and her father lived in a number of residential hotels in New York City and she rode with him in his taxi . 
 When Lane was 15 , she declared her independence from her father and flew to Los Angeles for a week with actor and friend Christopher Atkins . Lane later remarked , " It was reckless behavior that comes from having too much independence too young . " She returned to New York and moved in with a friend 's family , paying them rent . In 1981 , she enrolled in high school after taking correspondence courses . However , Lane 's mother kidnapped her and took her back to Georgia . Lane and her father challenged her mother in court , and six weeks later , she was back in New York . Lane did not speak to her mother for the next three years , but they have since reconciled . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work : From A Little Romance to A Walk on the Moon = = = 
 Lane 's grandmother , Eleanor Scott , was a Pentecostal preacher of the Apostolic denomination , and Lane was influenced theatrically by the demonstrative quality of her grandmother 's sermons . Lane began acting professionally at the age of six at the La MaMa Experimental Theater Club in New York , where she appeared in a production of Medea . When Lane was 12 years old , she had a role in Joseph Papp 's production of The Cherry Orchard with Meryl Streep and Irene Worth . At this time , Lane was enrolled in an accelerated program at Hunter College High School however her grades suffered from her busy schedule . When Lane was 13 , she turned down a role in Runaways on Broadway to make her feature @-@ film debut opposite Laurence Olivier in A Little Romance . Lane won high praise from Olivier , who declared her ' The New Grace Kelly ' . At the same time , Lane was featured on the cover of Time , which declared her one of Hollywood 's " Whiz Kids . " 
 In the early 1980s , Lane made a successful transition from child actor to adult roles . She was cast as the teenaged female outlaw Little Britches in the 1981 Lamont Johnson film , Cattle Annie and Little Britches , with Amanda Plummer in her own debut role as Cattle Annie . Lane 's breakout performances came with back @-@ to @-@ back adaptations of young adult novels by S. E. Hinton , adapted and directed by Francis Ford Coppola : The Outsiders and Rumble Fish , both in 1983 . Both films also featured memorable performances from a number of young male actors who would go on to become leading men in the next decade ( as well as members of the so @-@ called " Brat Pack " ) , including Tom Cruise , Rob Lowe , C. Thomas Howell , Emilio Estevez , Patrick Swayze , Mickey Rourke , Nicolas Cage , and Matt Dillon . Lane 's distinction among these heavily male casts advanced her career while affiliating her with this young generation of male actors . Andy Warhol proclaimed her , " the undisputed female lead of Hollywood 's new rat pack . " 
 However , the two films that could have catapulted her to star status , Streets of Fire ( she turned down Splash and Risky Business for this film ) and The Cotton Club , were both commercial and critical failures , and her career languished as a result . After The Cotton Club , Lane dropped out of the movie business and lived with her mother in Georgia . According to the actress , " I hadn 't been close to my mom for a long time , so we had a lot of homework to do . We had to repair our relationship because I wanted my mother back " . 
 Lane returned to acting to appear in The Big Town and Lady Beware , but Lane had not made another big impression on a sizable audience until 1989 's popular and critically acclaimed TV miniseries Lonesome Dove , and was nominated for an Emmy Award for her role . She came very close to being cast as Vivian Ward in 1990 's blockbuster hit Pretty Woman ( which had a much darker script at the time ) , but due to scheduling , was unable to take the role . Apparently , costume fittings were made for Lane , before the role fell to Julia Roberts . She was given positive reviews for her performance in the independent film My New Gun , which was well received at the Cannes Film Festival . She went on to appear as actress Paulette Goddard in Sir Richard Attenborough 's big @-@ budget biopic of Charles Chaplin , 1992 's Chaplin . Lane won further praise for her role in 1999 's A Walk on the Moon , opposite Viggo Mortensen . One reviewer wrote , " Lane , after years in post @-@ teenaged @-@ career limbo , is meltingly effective . " The film 's director , Tony Goldwyn , described Lane as having " ... this potentially volcanic sexuality that is in no way self @-@ conscious or opportunistic . " Lane earned an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Female Lead . At this time , she was interested in making a film about actress Jean Seberg in which she would play Seberg . 
 = = = Recent work : From Unfaithful to the present = = = 
 In 2000 , Lane had a supporting role as Mark Wahlberg 's love interest in The Perfect Storm . In 2002 , she starred in Unfaithful , a drama film directed by Adrian Lyne and adapted from the French film The Unfaithful Wife . Lane played a housewife who indulges in an adulterous fling with a mysterious book dealer . The film featured several sex scenes , and Lyne 's repeated takes for these scenes were very demanding for the actors involved , especially for Lane , who had to be emotionally and physically fit for the duration . Unfaithful received mostly mixed to negative reviews , though Lane earned widespread praise for her performance . Besides winning the Best Actress National Society of Film Critics Award and the New York Film Critics Circle Award , she also received Best Actress Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations . Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman stated that " Lane , in the most urgent performance of her career , is a revelation . The play of lust , romance , degradation , and guilt on her face is the movie 's real story . " Following Unfaithful , Lane starred in Under the Tuscan Sun , a film based on the best @-@ selling book by Frances Mayes for which Lane won a further Best Actress Golden Globe nomination . This was followed by lead roles in Fierce People , Must Love Dogs , and <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Lane reunited with Richard Gere for the romantic drama Nights in Rodanthe . It is the third film Gere and Lane filmed together , and is based on the novel of the same title by Nicholas Sparks . Lane also co @-@ starred in Jumper and <unk> in the same year . She then appeared in <unk> with Mickey Rourke , which was given a limited theatrical release before being released on DVD in 2009 . While promoting Nights in Rodanthe , she expressed frustration with being typecast and stated that she was " gunning for something that 's not so sympathetic . I need to be a bitch , and I need to be in a comedy . I 've decided . No more Miss Nice Guy . " Lane had even contemplated quitting acting and spending more time with her family if she is unable to get these kinds of roles . She said in an interview , " I can 't do anything official . My agents won 't let me . Between you and me , I don 't have anything else coming out . " 
 In 2010 , Lane starred in Secretariat , a Disney film about the relationship between the 1973 Triple Crown @-@ winning racehorse and his owner , Penny Chenery , whom Lane portrayed . Lane then starred in Cinema Verite ( 2011 ) , an HBO movie about the making of the first reality television show An American Family . Lane earned Emmy , Screen Actors Guild , Satellite , and Golden Globe award nominations for her portrayal of Pat Loud . In 2012 , Lane was featured in the PBS documentary Half the Sky : Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide ( produced by Show of Force along with Fugitive Films ) , which showcased women and girls living under very difficult circumstances and bravely fighting to challenge them . 
 Following the success of Cinema Verite , Lane starred in Zack Snyder 's Superman film Man of Steel , playing Martha Kent . Snyder said of her casting , " We are thrilled to have Diane in the role because she can convey the wisdom and the wonder of a woman whose son has powers beyond her imagination . " She reprised her role in the sequel Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( 2016 ) . In 2015 , Lane appeared in the drama Every Secret Thing ( alongside Dakota Fanning and Elizabeth Banks ) , had a voice role in the Pixar animated feature Inside Out , and co @-@ starred in the biopic Trumbo ( opposite Bryan Cranston and Helen Mirren ) , which received a Screen Actors Guild nomination for Best Ensemble Cast . 
 In the end of 2012 , and before her divorce from Josh Brolin in early 2013 , Lane returned to her theater roots and headlined a production of the David Cromer directed Sweet Bird of Youth ( by Tennessee Williams ) at the Goodman Theatre in Chicago . Lane played Princess <unk> , a fading Hollywood movie star , opposite Finn Wittrock , who portrayed Chance , her attractive gigolo . This was the first time she had done a stage play since 1989 , when she played Olivia in William Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night at the American Repertory Theatre in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Lane returned to theatre in the winter of 2015 , starring with Tony Shaloub in the off @-@ Broadway original production of Bathsheba Doran 's The Mystery of Love and Sex . Nearly four decades after she first appeared on Broadway , Lane will , in September 2016 , star in a play she previously performed in in 1977 : Chekhov 's The Cherry Orchard . While Lane played a child peasant ( with no lines ) in Broadway 's 1977 run of the play , this time she will be playing the lead role of Madame Lyubov Andreyevna <unk> . 
 Forthcoming film roles include the lead in Eleanor Coppola 's Paris Can Wait ( formerly called Bonjour Anne ) , opposite Alec Baldwin . She will also star in Felt alongside Liam Neeson , a film about Mark Felt ( more famously known as Deep Throat ) , the whistleblower of the Watergate scandal . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Lane met actor Christopher Lambert in Paris while promoting The Cotton Club in 1984 . They had a brief affair and split up . They met again two years later in Rome to make a film together , entitled After the Rain , and in two weeks they were a couple again . Lane and Lambert married in October 1988 in Santa Fe , New Mexico . They have a daughter , Eleanor Jasmine , and following a prolonged separation , were divorced in 1994 . 
 Lane became engaged to actor Josh Brolin in July 2003 and they were married on August 15 , 2004 . On December 20 of that year , she called police after an altercation with him , and he was arrested on a misdemeanor charge of domestic battery . Lane declined to press charges , however , and the couple 's spokesperson described the incident as a " misunderstanding " . Lane and Brolin filed for divorce in February 2013 . Their divorce was finalized on December 2 , 2013 . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 Lane is also involved in several charities , including Heifer International , which focuses on world hunger , and Artists for Peace and Justice , a Hollywood organization that supports Haiti relief . However , she tries not to draw attention to her humanitarian efforts : " Sometimes I give with my heart . Sometimes I give financially , but there 's something about [ helping others ] that I think ought to be anonymous . I don 't want it to be a boastful thing . " 
 Lane was featured heavily in the documentary Half The Sky , based on the book Half the Sky : Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide . The documentary had Lane and several other A @-@ list actresses / celebrities visit Africa and other areas where women are oppressed . Lane has become very much an ambassador for this kind of work and charity work in general . 
 On August 22 , 2014 , Diane Lane was honored for her work with Heifer International at its third annual Beyond Hunger : A Place at the Table gala at the Montage Beverly Hills . Lane says working with Heifer International has impacted her life and nurtured the relationship she has with her daughter . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Four days before the New York Film Critics Circle 's vote in 2002 , Lane was given a career tribute by the Film Society of Lincoln Center . A day before that , Lyne held a dinner for the actress at the Four Seasons Hotel . Critics and award voters were invited to both . She went on to win the National Society of Film Critics , the New York Film Critics Circle awards and was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award for Best Actress . In 2003 , she was named ShoWest 's 2003 Female Star of the Year , and was also a co @-@ recipient of the Women in Film Crystal Award honoring outstanding women in entertainment . 
 Lane ranked at No. 79 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Kid Stars . She was ranked No. 45 on AskMen.com 's Top 99 Most Desirable Women in 2005 , No. 85 in 2006 and No. 98 in 2007 . 
 = Iranian subsidy reform plan = 
 The Iranian targeted subsidy plan ( Persian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ‌ <unk> ) also known as the subsidy reform plan was passed by the Iranian Parliament on January 5 , 2010 . The government has described the subsidy plan as the " biggest surgery " to the nation 's economy in half a century and " one of the most important undertakings in Iran 's recent economic history " . The goal of the subsidy reform plan is to replace subsidies on food and energy ( 80 % of total ) with targeted social assistance , in accordance with a Five Year Economic Development Plan and a move towards free market prices in a 5 @-@ year period . The subsidy reform plan is the most important part of a broader Iranian economic reform plan . 
 According to the government , approximately $ 100 billion per year is spent on subsidizing energy prices ( $ 45 billion for the prices of fuel alone ) and many consumable goods including bread , sugar , rice , cooking oil and medicine . However , some experts believe direct subsidies are about $ 30 billion , depending on oil prices . 
 The subsidy system has been inherited from the Iran @-@ Iraq war era but was never abolished . Iran is one of the largest gasoline consumers in the world , ranking second behind the United States in consumption per car . The government subsidy reform has been years in the making for various reasons . Iran 's Supreme Leader has backed the government 's latest subsidy reform plan . 
 = = Objectives = = 
 Iran was the largest provider of fuel subsidies in the world by 2009 . Many Iranian experts agree that these unsustainable subsidies encourage waste among goods , including in the production sector , ranging from gasoline to bread that must be stopped and the only way to do that is to redirect subsidies . 
 The stated goal of the subsidy reform is " to rejuvenate Iran 's economy , increase productivity , give it a new footing and bring it out of the slump it has been in for so long " . Concretely , the government plans to replace the subsidies with targeted social assistance . Consequences of the economic reform plan are that Iran will be less vulnerable to US sanctions because it will reduce fuel imports . The reform plan will also save money for the Iranian people because it will end a multibillion @-@ dollar @-@ a @-@ year contraband ( 17 % percent of fuel production in Iran is smuggled abroad daily ) . Due to subsidies , Iran had long had one of the cheapest gas prices in the world , 10 cents per liter or 40 cents per gallon . 
 Implementation of the plan will reduce waste and consumerism . In fact , according to official data , the higher income strata of the population has enjoyed the same subsidies as the poor until now . On the other side , subsidies reduction will reduce air pollution by reducing car traffic in Tehran . Finally , the subsidy plan will increase social justice through targeted social assistance . According to official data , the richest decile of households benefits 12 times more from gasoline subsidies than the poorest decile . Overall , implementation of the plan will increase productivity , efficiency , competitiveness of Iran 's economy , economic growth , oil exports and per capita income ( all other things being equal ) . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 For implementation of the bill , an entity has been established as a duly authorized governmental company under the name " Targeting Subsidies Organization " . 
 The amount saved by the government , will be distributed as follows : 50 % towards the poorest strata of Iranian society ; 20 % at the government 's disposal ( to compensate for increased costs or as safety net ) ; and the remaining 30 % will be directed towards improving the efficiency of the utility , fuel and energy production infrastructure , public transportation development , industry and farming . 
 The plan will commence with energy , fuel and utilities in the first year and consumable goods will start in the second year . The start of the cuts will coincide with the beginning of the second half of the Iranian year on Sept . 23 , 2010 . At that time , the 2007 Gas rationing plan will come to an end . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In March 2010 , the Iranian Parliament approved a $ 347 billion budget , in which the allocation from subsidies and the oil price were set at $ 20 billion and $ 65 per barrel , respectively . According to the Vice President for Parliamentary Affairs , Iran 's subsidy reforms would save 20 percent of the country 's budget . Iran wants to save up to $ 100 billion on subsidies within three to four years . In 2011 , the Iranian parliament approved a $ 508 billion budget based on $ 80 / barrel oil price . This bill also factors in $ 54 billion from price hikes and subsidy cuts . 
 * Totals may not add up due to rounding and deduction of double @-@ counted items Note : all numbers are in billion dollars . 
 = = = Income data = = = 
 According to the IMF , until recently a four @-@ member Iranian household received an average of $ 4 @,@ 000 a year in subsidies for oil and natural gas , compared with a typical annual income of about $ 3 @,@ 600 a year . 
 In 2010 , Iran 's Department of Statistics announced that 10 million Iranians live under the absolute poverty line and 30 million live under the relative poverty line . President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says implementation of the targeted subsidy system will eradicate unemployment and poverty in Iran within three years . 
 = = = = Data collection = = = = 
 The administration has said earlier that it will be able to allocate different payment amounts to different people . To that end , in 2009 , forms were distributed asking Iranians to report income , assets and property but the question remains on how the government will verify this information gathered by self @-@ reporting . Many people have chosen not to report or withhold information . The administration has categorized the people into three income brackets ; namely lower , middle , and higher for the implementation of the subsidy reform plan . On the other side , it was not clear in what form the compensation would be distributed , direct cash or goods . Another concern is the accuracy of government information on family incomes . 
 In September 2010 , Iran 's Statistics Bureau announced that implementation was delayed by one month because they were still collecting information regarding the financial situation of households and opening bank accounts for them . 
 = = = Plan revision = = = 
 Later in 2010 , the government announced that it had revised its plan because of lack of reliable data on personal incomes . To ease the economic loss from lost subsidies , the government indicated it would distribute $ 40 per person / month ( i.e. 455 @,@ 000 rials / month ) to 90 % of the general population , starting on December 18 , 2010 . 
 = = = Price adjustments = = = 
 The government took control of deciding how much the prices should rise in a year , as long as the subsidy cuts on gasoline and other refined products , natural gas , electricity , water , food ( sugar , rice , cooking oil and bread ) , health and education are between $ 10 and 20 billion dollars annually . Estimates indicate that the government has to increase existing prices by an average of 2 @.@ 5 times to achieve the lower target and by 4 times for the maximum target . According to the IMF , Iranians can expect the first price hike to lift energy product prices between four and 20 times previous levels , with prices surging even higher eventually . 
 = = = = Other determinants = = = = 
 According to the plan , the type of consumption ( i.e. whether agricultural , industrial and civil ) will also be considered when setting energy prices . The subsidy plan will be implemented in proportion with geographical regions because warm regions consume more electricity during summer while cold regions consume more gas during winter . Finally , the time of consumption ( i.e. during peak and off @-@ peak hours ) and the consumption demand ( i.e. whether it is low or high ) will be taken into consideration . 
 Starting in April 2012 , Iran 's consumers have been hit with a wave of rising prices that has now touched laundry detergent and food items such as cooking oil , rice , eggs and dairy products . Since April 2012 , the price of food and other consumer products have risen between 10 and 20 % in some cases . 
 The latest official data comparing prices of foodstuffs in the second week of April 2012 to the corresponding period in 2011 showed dairy products rose about 42 per cent , red meat 47 @.@ 5 per cent , rice about 29 per cent , beans 45 @.@ 7 per cent , vegetables 92 per cent , sugar 33 per cent and vegetable oil 30 per cent . The price of chicken nearly tripled since 2011 . 
 = = = Consumption patterns = = = 
 As of October 2011 , consumption of liquefied petroleum gas , gasoline , kerosene , and diesel has cut between 4 and 19 % , despite the fact that more than 1 million cars have been added to Iran 's fleet . Increased use of compressed natural gas ( CNG ) to fuel cars has also reportedly played a role in this . According to the government , if oil products consumption had not been managed , consumption of gasoline would have increased to 120 million liters per day , while by reforming consumption pattern the figure has fallen to 60 million liters per day . In November 2011 , the Government reported that the subsidy reform plan has saved Iran $ 6 billion . 
 = = = Economic and structural adjustments = = = 
 The reforms target one of the major sources of inefficiency and price distortions in the Iranian economy , and will likely lead to major restructuring in almost all economic sectors . The banking sector in Iran is viewed as a potential hedge against the removal of subsidies , as the plan is not expected to have any direct impact on banks . Experts believe that following the launch of the subsidies reform plan , the electricity industry will undergo significant changes and will become more appealing to private investors . 
 On the other side , the cement industry in Iran is one of the economic sectors that will be hit the hardest in Iran following of the subsidy reform plan , because many Iranian cement factories are energy inefficient ( Notwithstanding possible adjustment and / or liberalization of commodities prices by the government during implementation ) . Taxi , delivery and truck drivers have also been adversely affected by the recent gas price increase . Experts believe that the removal of subsidies is likely to have an adverse impact on the profitability of the automotive sector for at least the next 2 – 3 years . One major element of pressure on producers is the unchanged exchange regime of the Central Bank of Iran , which puts imported products at an advantage by failing to compensate for the relative increase in production costs of domestic producers . 
 = = = Second phase = = = 
 During the second phase , starting in June 2012 , half of the funds from energy and food subsidies will be re @-@ allocated to the people and the remaining 50 % will go to the industrial sector . If approved by the Parliament , the government will pay an extra cash handout of 280 @,@ 000 rials / month to 80 % of the general population ( i.e. people earning less than $ 2000 / month , which is a comfortable income level in Iran ) . In July 2012 , it was announced that implementation of the second phase was suspended awaiting further adjustments by the government and because of raising inflation ( around 22 % as of April 2012 ) . Finally , in fall 2013 , the parliament approved a plan to drop 22 million Iranians — the top 30 percent of earners — from the subsidy system instead . Yet , it was reported in 2014 that out of Iran ’ s population of 77 million , 73 @.@ 6 million registered to receive the cash hand @-@ outs . 
 = = Effects and criticism = = 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 According to earlier critics , even if half of $ 20 billion is passed as part of the compensation to the poorer 50 % of the Iranian society , it will amount to $ 25 per eligible person per month ; " no way near enough to make up for such inflation rates " . 
 Critics say that if the government goes for the top of this range inflation could rise up to 40 % through the economy . The International Monetary Fund , however , has predicted a more moderate rise in inflation of just 32 percent . As of January 2010 , the official inflation rate stands at 15 percent . The cost of living in Iran , according to the Majlis Research Center , could rise by up to 60 percent . Ahmadinejad 's administration contends that the negative side effects will be transient and that the projections are based on out @-@ of @-@ date models . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 According to some western reports , cash payments have been denied to some opponents of the regime during the distribution phase . 
 Ahmad <unk> , a parliamentarian , accused the government of “ violating the law ” and “ mis @-@ implementing ” the plan because it earned <unk> rials ( $ <unk> ) from the cut in subsidies in the first 14 months of its implementation but paid people $ <unk> of compensation in return ( he says ) . 
 It has also been reported that while the subsidy reform plan needs further adaptation and fine @-@ tuning , citizens must separate the questions of public policy from the issues of government legitimacy . The IMF has hailed Iran 's economic reform and asked Iran 's expertise to be transferred to other countries . The Economist Intelligence Unit has also praised Iran 's subsidies reform plan for its positive effect on the economy in 2011 . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 In 2012 , Iran 's head of the <unk> Council , Ayatollah Hashemi Rafsanjani , criticized the government for failing to reinvest the money it saved by restructuring government subsidies . To compensate , the government says it has allowed producers to adjust their prices more liberally and it has given free loans and energy subsidies in some cases . In recent years , income inequality in Iran has declined by different measures , which may be an effect of the subsidy reforms . For example , the income Gini coefficient fell from 0 @.@ <unk> in 2005 to 0 @.@ <unk> in 2010 . Between February 2011 and February 2012 , the government earned 510 trillion rials ( some $ 41 @.@ 6 billion ) by implementing the Subsidy Reform Plan . 
 According to the World Bank : 
 In October 2012 , 179 of 240 members of parliament voted in favor of pausing the subsidy reform , because of high inflation ( exacerbated by the sanctions against Iran ) . Consequently , the growth in consumption of subsidized products rebounded in 2012 . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 In 2014 , Iran started the second phase of its targeted subsidy plan under President Hassan Rohani . Petrol prices were raised by 75 % from 4 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 rials ( $ 0 @.@ 16 to $ 0 @.@ 28 ) per litre which is far from the target price of approx . $ 0 @.@ 90 per litre . As a consequence , fuel smuggling and gasoline imports increased again . 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 Iran 's government reported that the second phase of the subsidy reform plan will continue as originally planned . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 According to the sixth five @-@ year development plan ( 2016 @-@ 2021 ) , the subsidy reform plan is to be extended until 2021 . 
 In 2016 , the Iranian Parliament approved subsidy cuts to 24 Million Iranians . Under the changes , the government must end monthly cash payments of around $ 12 a person for many government employees with income above $ 900 per month and citizens who already receive social welfare . Nevertheless the government is reluctant to comply because this would be " unfair " ( allegedly ) despite the risk of running large budget deficits . 
 = Dr. No ( novel ) = 
 Dr. No is the sixth novel by the English author Ian Fleming to feature his British Secret Service agent James Bond . Fleming wrote the novel in early 1957 at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica . It was first published in the United Kingdom by Jonathan Cape on 31 March 1958 . The novel centres on Bond 's investigation into the disappearance in Jamaica of two fellow MI6 operatives . He establishes that they had been investigating Doctor No , a Chinese operator of a guano mine on the fictional Caribbean island of Crab Key . Bond travels to the island and meets Honeychile Rider and later Doctor No . 
 The novel began as a 1956 screenplay for the producer Henry Morgenthau III for a proposed television show entitled Commander Jamaica . When those plans foundered , Fleming adapted the ideas as the basis for a novel , provisionally titled The Wound Man . The book 's eponymous villain was influenced by Sax Rohmer 's Fu Manchu stories . 
 Dr. No was the first of Fleming 's novels to face widespread negative criticism in Britain ; Paul Johnson of The New Statesman dismissed the book as one of " Sex , Snobbery and Sadism " . When released on the American market it was received more favourably . Dr. No was serialised in The Daily Express , first in an abridged story form and later as a comic strip . The story was adapted in 1962 as the first film in the Bond series , with Sean Connery in the lead role ; in 2008 BBC Radio 4 broadcast a version , with Toby Stephens as Bond . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After recovering from tetrodotoxin poisoning inflicted by the SMERSH agent Rosa Klebb ( in From Russia , with Love ) the MI6 agent James Bond is sent by his superior , M , on a rest cure to the British colony of Jamaica . While there he is instructed to investigate the disappearance of Commander John Strangways , the head of MI6 's Station J in Kingston , and his secretary . Bond is briefed that Strangways had been investigating the activities of Doctor Julius No , a reclusive Chinese @-@ German who lives on the fictional island of Crab Key and runs a guano mine . The island has a colony of roseate spoonbills at one end while local rumour is that a vicious dragon also lives there . The spoonbills are protected by the American National Audubon Society , two of whose representatives died when their plane crashed on No 's airstrip . 
 On his arrival in Jamaica , Bond soon realises that he is being watched , as his hotel room is searched , a basket of poisoned fruit is delivered to the room ( supposedly a gift from the colonial governor ) and a deadly centipede is placed in his bed while he is sleeping . With the help of an old friend , Quarrel , Bond surreptitiously visits Crab Key to establish whether there is a connection between No and the disappearance of the MI6 personnel . Bond and Quarrel meet Honeychile Rider , who is there to collect valuable shells . Bond and Rider are captured by No 's men after Quarrel is burned to death by the doctor 's " dragon " — a flamethrowing armoured swamp buggy designed to keep away trespassers . 
 Bond discovers that No is working with the Russians and has built an elaborate underground facility from which he can sabotage US test missiles launched from Cape Canaveral . No had previously been a member of a Chinese tong , but after he stole a large amount of money from their treasury , he was captured by the organisation . The tong 's leaders had No 's hands cut off as a warning to others , and then shot . Because No 's heart was on the right side of his body ( dextrocardia ) , the bullet missed his heart and he survived . Interested in the ability of the human body to withstand and survive pain , No forces Bond to navigate his way through an obstacle course constructed in the facility 's ventilation system . Bond is kept under observation as he suffers electric shocks , burns and an encounter with large poisonous spiders . The ordeal ends in a fight with a captive giant squid , which he defeats by using improvised weapons . After his escape he encounters Rider , who has been pegged out to be eaten by crabs ; they had ignored her and she managed to escape . 
 Bond kills No by taking over the guano @-@ loading machine at the docks and diverting the flow of guano to bury him alive . Bond and Rider then escape from No 's complex in the " dragon " buggy . 
 = = Background and writing history = = 
 In June 1956 the author Ian Fleming began a collaboration with the producer Henry Morgenthau III on a planned television series , Commander Jamaica , which was to feature the Caribbean @-@ based character James Gunn . When the project foundered , and Fleming could not fashion a new plot for his next Bond novel , he used the idea as the basis for Dr. No . By January 1957 he had published four Bond novels in successive years from 1953 — Casino Royale , Live and Let Die , Moonraker and Diamonds Are Forever . A fifth , From Russia , with Love , was being edited and prepared for production . That month Fleming travelled to his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica to write Dr. No . He followed his usual practice , which he later outlined in Books and Bookmen magazine : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " By the time he returned to London in late February , he had completed a 206 @-@ page first draft , which he initially titled The Wound Man . 
 Although Fleming did not date the event within his novels , John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom wrote books for Ian Fleming Publications — have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . Chancellor put the events of Dr. No in 1956 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in February and March of that year . 
 As with his previous four novels , Fleming came up with the concept of the front cover design ; he considered Honeychile Rider to have a Venus @-@ like quality when introduced in the book and wanted this echoed on the cover . When Fleming commissioned Pat Marriott to illustrate the cover , he instructed that she be shown on a Venus elegans shell . 
 Prior to the release of Dr. No — and unconnected with the book itself — Bernard Bergonzi , in the March 1958 issue of Twentieth Century , attacked Fleming 's work , saying that it contained " a strongly marked streak of voyeurism and sado @-@ masochism " and that the books showed " the total lack of any ethical frame of reference " . The article also compared Fleming unfavourably to John Buchan and Raymond Chandler in both moral and literary measures . The writer Simon Raven , while appreciating Bergonzi had produced a " quiet and well @-@ argued article " , thought that the critic 's conclusion was naïve , and asked " Since when has it been remarkable in a work of entertainment that it should lack a specific ' ethical frame of reference ' ? " Raven continued , saying Fleming " by reason of his cool and analytical intelligence , his informed use of technical facts , his plausibility , sense of pace , brilliant descriptive powers and superb imagination , provides sheer entertainment such as I , who must read many novels , am seldom lucky enough to find " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 In March 1956 Fleming and his friend Ivar Bryce accompanied Robert Cushman Murphy ( of the American Museum of Natural History ) and Arthur Vernay ( of the Flamingo Protection Society ) on a trip to a flamingo colony on Great Inagua in the south of the Bahamas . The colony was 100 square miles ( 260 km2 ) of dense mangrove swamp and salt flats , home to flamingos , egrets and roseate spoonbills ; the location inspired Crab Key . Much of the travel overland on Great Inagua was by a swamp vehicle , a Land Rover fitted with over @-@ large tyres that became the model for the " dragon " used in the story . 
 Fleming 's inspiration for the Doctor No character was Sax Rohmer 's villain Dr Fu Manchu , who featured in books Fleming had read and enjoyed in earlier years . Aspects of the plot were influenced by Rohmer 's work , and Winder observes that the use of the centipede was " a straight steal " from a Fu Manchu novel ; other devices from Rohmer 's novels included Doctor No 's secret lair and the use of the mad scientist trope . 
 After Diamonds Are Forever was published in 1956 , Fleming received a letter from Geoffrey Boothroyd , a Bond enthusiast and gun expert , who criticised the author 's choice of firearm for Bond . Boothroyd suggested that Bond should swap his Beretta for a Walther PPK 7 @.@ 65 mm , an exchange that made it to the novel . Boothroyd also gave Fleming advice on the Berns @-@ Martin triple draw shoulder holster and a number of the weapons used by SMERSH and other villains . In thanks , Fleming gave the MI6 Armourer the name Major Boothroyd in Dr. No and M introduces him to Bond as " the greatest small @-@ arms expert in the world " . 
 As he had done in his previous novels , Fleming borrowed names from his friends and associates to use in his book ; Ivar Bryce 's housekeeper , May Maxwell , became Bond 's Scottish " treasure " May . One of Fleming 's neighbours in Jamaica , and later his lover , was Blanche Blackwell : Fleming named the guano @-@ collecting ship in Dr. No as Blanche . His friend Patricia Wilder found that her nickname of Honey Chile was used for the novel 's main female character , and John Fox @-@ Strangways — a friend from the gentlemen 's club White 's — saw part of his surname being used for the name of the MI6 station chief in Jamaica . Fleming also used the physical descriptions of people he knew ; Quarrel , who previously appeared in the novel Live and Let Die , was based on a Jamaican fisherman who often took Fleming shark fishing . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 In Dr. No , for the first time in the Bond novels , there is friction between Bond and M , brought about because Bond was nearly killed by the SMERSH agent Rosa Klebb in From Russia , with Love . M orders Bond to use a new gun and sends him on a holiday assignment , which Bond resents . The writer Raymond Benson — who later wrote a series of Bond novels — sees M at his most authoritarian in Dr. No , punishing Bond both in terms of stripping him of his gun and then sending him on what both Bond and M considered at first to be a " soft " assignment . 
 Honeychile Rider is one of three women in the Bond canon who have been scarred by rape . This follows a pattern where the women Bond comes across are somehow different to the norm , although Black points out that this gives Bond an opportunity to help and save both Rider and the others . Other female characters in the Bond series have flaws , and Rider has a broken nose — the result of the rape she suffered . The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett , in their analysis of the roles of women in the Bond novels , consider that Rider is " not archetypically feminine " , but is " constructed according to the formula ' equal but yet subordinate ' . " Rider is described in the book as having buttocks like a boy , which brought a response from Fleming 's friend Noël Coward that " I was also slightly shocked by the lascivious announcement that Honeychile 's bottom was like a boy 's . I know that we are all becoming more broadminded nowadays , but really old chap what could you have been thinking of ? " 
 Fleming 's villain was physically disfigured , similar to many of Bond 's later adversaries ; No is 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) tall , with steel pincers for hands and has dextrocardia . Bond describes him as " a giant venomous worm wrapped in grey tin @-@ foil " . Benson considers that No is " a wickedly successful villain " , the best since Hugo Drax in Moonraker , while Time thought No to be " one of the less forgettable characters in modern fiction " . 
 Quarrel was Fleming 's idealised concept of a black person , and the character was based on his genuine liking for Jamaicans , whom he saw as " full of goodwill and cheerfulness and humour " . The relationship between Bond and Quarrel was based on a presumption of Bond 's superiority . Fleming described the relationship as " that of a Scots laird with his head stalker ; authority was unspoken and there was no room for servility " . Winder considers the scenes with Quarrel to be " embarrassingly patronising but nonetheless hypnotic " . 
 = = Style = = 
 In From Russia , with Love Fleming experimented with an unusual narrative structure that saw Bond 's entry into the story delayed until chapter eleven . For Dr. No he returned to the conventional form with which he felt comfortable — that of the thriller writers of the early 20th century . As a result , the story 's villain is closer to the intellectual " gentleman crook " of the golden age of detective fiction , and the novel 's focus is on action at the expense of character development and depth of plot . 
 Benson describes the " Fleming Sweep " as taking the reader from one chapter to another using " hooks " at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader onto the next . He feels that the " Fleming Sweep briskly propels the plot " of Dr. No through chapters that are longer than in previous Bond novels ; the cultural historian Jeremy Black also likes Dr. No 's pacing , despite considering it inconsistent in places . Winder believes that the novel 's plotting is chaotic , although he still feels the book " can be read over and over again with immense pleasure " . 
 Fleming used known brand names and everyday details to produce a sense of realism , which the writer Kingsley Amis calls " the Fleming effect " . Amis describes " the imaginative use of information , whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond 's world ... [ is ] bolted down to some sort of reality , or at least counter @-@ balanced . " The journalist and writer Matthew Parker sees the novel as " the most fantastical , gothic and melodramatic ; and at times frankly , even knowingly , over the top " , while Black considers the fantastic element of Doctor No 's underground lair to be a " weak " and " bizarre " part of the story . When the writer Raymond Chandler reviewed the novel , he thought " that the long sensational business which is the heart of the book not only borders on fantasy . It plunges in with both feet . Ian Fleming 's impetuous imagination has no rules . " Writing in 1963 , Fleming acknowledged his plots were " fantastical while often being based in truth . They go wildly beyond the probable but not , I think , beyond the possible " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Two main themes run through Dr. No : the meaning of power ; and the concept of friendship and loyalty . Bond talks about the meaning of power with several villains in the series . His conversation with Doctor No reveals that the latter believes it can only be secured through the privacy required to maintain the sovereignty of his island . No quotes Carl von Clausewitz 's first principle — about having a secure base from which to operate — in support of his argument . According to Panek , in his examination of 20th century British spy novels , Dr. No " shows a shift towards emphasizing the intellect and organizing power of the individual " , as opposed to a group or nation . Black considers that although it is American assets that are under threat from the Soviet Union , it is British power , through the British agent , that concludes the issue . This is reinforced at the end of the book , when a modern British warship bearing British soldiers is despatched to the island . In Black and Parker 's views , the display of British power , with no assistance from America , portrayed the British Empire as an enduring force . 
 The concept of friendship and loyalty is the second major theme . The relationship between Bond and Quarrel , the Cayman Islander , is mutually felt . According to Lindner , Quarrel is " an indispensable ally " who had assisted Bond in Live and Let Die . Benson sees no racial discrimination in the relationship between the two men and acknowledges that Bond feels genuine remorse and sadness at Quarrel 's death . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Dr. No was released on 31 March 1958 in the UK as a hardcover edition by the publishers Jonathan Cape . A paperback edition was issued by Pan Books in February 1960 ; over 115 @,@ 000 copies were sold that year . The first American edition was published in June 1958 by Macmillan under the name Doctor No . The largest boost in sales of the novel came in 1962 with the release of the film adaptation . In the seven months after the picture 's release , 1 @.@ 5 million copies of the book were sold . In 1964 the novel was serialised in France @-@ Soir for the French market , which led to increased sales of Bond works in that country ; 480 @,@ 000 French @-@ language copies of the six Bond novels were sold that year . Since its initial publication the book has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 For the first time in the Bond series , Fleming encountered harsh criticism . The most virulent came from Paul Johnson of the New Statesman , who opened his review , " Sex , Snobbery and Sadism " , with : " I have just finished what is , without doubt , the nastiest book I have ever read " . He went on to say that " by the time I was a third of the way through , I had to suppress a strong impulse to throw the thing away " . Although he recognised that Bond represented " a social phenomenon of some importance " , he saw this as a negative element , as the phenomenon concerned " three basic ingredients in Dr. No , all unhealthy , all thoroughly English : the sadism of a schoolboy bully , the mechanical , two @-@ dimensional sex @-@ longings of a frustrated adolescent , and the crude , snob @-@ cravings of a suburban adult " . Johnson saw no positives in Dr. No , saying that " Mr Fleming has no literary skill , the construction of the book is chaotic , and entire incidents and situations are inserted , and then forgotten , in a haphazard manner . " 
 Maurice Richardson , of The Observer , considered the novel " the usual sado @-@ masochistic free @-@ for @-@ all , plus octopuses " . The unnamed critic in The Manchester Guardian referred to Johnson 's " sex , snobbery and sadism " complaint . They highlighted the " sinister ... cult of luxury for its own sake " , with Bond 's enjoyment of branded and bespoke products , but disagreed with part of Johnson 's summary that the novel was a sign of moral decay ; rather , " we should be grateful to Mr. Fleming for providing a conveniently accessible safety @-@ valve for the boiling sensibility of modern man . " This reviewer also conceded that while " the casualties take place on a somewhat narrower front than usual , they are heavy " . In April 1958 , Fleming wrote to The Manchester Guardian in defence of his work , referring to both that paper 's review of Dr. No and the article in The Twentieth Century . Fleming partly accepted the criticism concerning the exclusivity of Bond 's objects , such as cigarettes and food , but defended it on the basis that " I had to fit Bond out with some theatrical props " . These included his cocktail , ( " The Vesper " ) and Bond 's diet . Fleming called these devices " vulgar foibles " which he was saddled with , although maybe , he suggested , " Bond 's luxury meals are simply saying ' no ' to toad @-@ in @-@ the @-@ hole and tele @-@ <unk> . " 
 Writing in The Times Literary Supplement , Philip Stead was more generous to Dr. No . Despite thinking that Fleming was offering " too opulent a feast " with the book , Stead argued that Fleming managed to pull this off , where " a less accomplished writer ... would never have got away with this story . " Raymond Chandler reviewed the novel for The Sunday Times and praised as " masterly " Fleming 's depiction of colonial Kingston in the first chapter . Chandler admired Fleming 's writing , which had " an acute sense of pace . ... You don 't have to work at Ian Fleming . He does the work for you . " 
 The reviewer for Time acknowledged the critical storm around Fleming and Dr. No , but was broadly welcoming of the book , writing that while " not all readers will agree that Dr. No ... is magnificent writing , ... pages of it , at least , qualify for Ezra Pound 's classic comment on Tropic of Cancer : ' At last , an unprintable book that is readable ' . " In The New York Times , Anthony Boucher — described by Fleming 's biographer John Pearson as " throughout an avid anti @-@ Bond and an anti @-@ Fleming man " — was again damning of Fleming 's work , saying " it 's harder than ever to see why an ardent coterie so admires Ian Fleming 's tales " . Benson described Boucher 's critique as " true to form " and " a tirade " as Boucher concluded his review by saying : " it is 80 @,@ 000 words long , with enough plot for 8 @,@ 000 and enough originality for 800 . " 
 <unk> Culligan of The Washington Post described the novel as a " thin little whodunit which rocked the British Empire and shook the English Establishment " , adding " Bully for it ! " Culligan admitted that " <unk> though , we enjoyed Dr. No , and if this be sick , sick , sick , gentlemen , make the most of it . " James Sandoe in his book review for The New York Herald Tribune was very positive about Dr. No and thought that it was " the most artfully bold , dizzyingly poised thriller of the decade . You 'd much better read it than read about it . " 
 The writer Simon Winder believes that because Fleming was writing about Jamaica , the result was " perhaps the most attractive of all the Bond books — the most relaxed , the most fiendish , the most confident " . According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th century British spy novels , Fleming knew his outdated view of Jamaica would soon be overtaken by events — as evidenced by the novel 's description of how the Queen 's Club would be lost during independence struggles . According to the cultural historian Michael Denning , this acknowledgement of the end @-@ of @-@ empire leads to a " sense of doom " that is the result of " a shadow of real history hanging over the stories " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Dr. No was serialised in The Daily Express from 19 March to 1 April 1958 . In 1960 the novel was adapted as a daily comic strip in the paper and was syndicated worldwide . The strip , which ran from May to October , was written by Peter O 'Donnell and illustrated by John McLusky . It was reprinted in 2005 by Titan Books as part of the Dr. No anthology that also includes Diamonds Are Forever and From Russia , with Love . In 1962 the American men 's magazine Stag serialised the story , renaming it as " Nude Girl of Nightmare Key " . 
 The film Dr. No was released in 1962 , produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , and directed by Terence Young . It was the first Bond film in the Eon Productions series ; Sean Connery portrayed Bond , with Joseph Wiseman as Doctor No and Ursula Andress as Honeychile Rider . Although the story follows the same general storyline , there are some changes : the film shows No to be an operative of the fictional crime organisation SPECTRE and his island fortress is nuclear @-@ powered ; No is killed not by the mountain of guano , but by drowning in reactor coolant . The novel was dramatised for BBC Radio 4 in May 2008 . The actor Toby Stephens played Bond , while No was played by David Suchet . 
 = Rachel McAdams = 
 Rachel Anne McAdams ( born November 17 , 1978 ) , is a Canadian actress . After graduating from a four @-@ year theatre program at York University in 2001 , she initially worked in Canadian television and film productions such as the drama film Perfect Pie ( 2002 ) ( for which she received a Genie Award nomination ) , the comedy film My Name Is <unk> ( 2002 ) , and the comedy miniseries Slings and Arrows ( for which she won a Gemini Award ) . In 2002 , she made her Hollywood film debut in the comedy The Hot Chick . McAdams found fame in 2004 , with the character of Regina George in the comedy Mean Girls and with her performance in the romantic drama The Notebook . In 2005 , she starred in the romantic comedy Wedding Crashers , the psychological thriller Red Eye , and the family comedy @-@ drama The Family Stone . She was hailed by the media as Hollywood 's new " it girl " , and received a BAFTA nomination for Best Rising Star . 
 After a two @-@ year career break , McAdams appeared in two limited release films in 2008 ; the film noir Married Life and the road trip comedy @-@ drama The Lucky Ones . She returned to prominence in 2009 by appearing in the political @-@ thriller State of Play , the science @-@ fiction romantic drama The Time Traveler 's Wife and the mystery action @-@ adventure film Sherlock Holmes . In 2010 , McAdams appeared in her first star vehicle , the comedy Morning Glory . In 2015 , her most high @-@ profile roles were in season two of HBO 's crime drama True Detective , and as journalist Sacha Pfeiffer in Spotlight . For her performance in Spotlight , she received several award nominations , including for a Screen Actors Guild Award , and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
