 = = Early life = = 
 Rachel McAdams was born in London , Ontario , to Sandra Kay ( née Gale ) , a nurse , and Lance Frederick McAdams , a retired truck driver and furniture mover , and grew up in nearby St. Thomas . She is of English , Irish , Scottish , and Welsh descent ; McAdams ' maternal fifth great @-@ grandfather , James Gray , was a Loyalist ranger during the American Revolution and fled to Canada after the Battles of Saratoga . McAdams is the eldest of three children with a sister , <unk> , a celebrity make @-@ up artist , and a brother , Daniel . She grew up in a Protestant household . When she was four years old , she began figure skating , but turned down an opportunity to move to Toronto when she was nine years old for pair skating training . Then skating became merely " a hobby " . She competed in skating until the age of eighteen , winning regional awards . She has since said that skating prepared her for physical acting , because it trained her to be " in tune " with her body . McAdams was educated at Myrtle Street Public School , and later Central Elgin Collegiate Institute . She did not enjoy academic work and often would pretend to be sick to avoid going to school . Nonetheless , she was active in student life . In addition to playing sports ( including volleyball , badminton , and soccer ) , McAdams served on the student council , participated in the <unk> program , and was a member of the Peer Helping Team . She worked at a McDonald 's restaurant during the summer holidays for three years . 
 McAdams first developed an interest in performing when she was seven years old , and while her parents did not discourage her , they did not " go out and find [ her ] an agent " . She attended both Disney and Shakespeare summer camps as a child . From the age of twelve , McAdams participated in Original Kids Theatre Company , London productions . In her late teens , she directed children 's theatre productions . She also was involved in school stage productions , most notably winning a performance award at the Sears Ontario Drama Festival . She was inspired by two of her teachers , who taught her English and drama , respectively , in the eleventh and twelfth grades . McAdams intended to take Cultural studies at the University of Western Ontario before being persuaded by her drama teacher that a professional acting career was a viable option . She enrolled in York University 's four @-@ year theatre program and graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts honours degree in 2001 . While at university , McAdams worked with the Toronto @-@ based Necessary Angel Theatre Company . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2001 – 05 : Early work and breakthrough = = = 
 In 2001 , McAdams made her television debut in the MTV pilot Shotgun Love Dolls as Beth Swanson , which was filmed during spring break from York University . She also made her Canadian film debut that year in the comedy My Name is <unk> . The Italian @-@ Canadian co @-@ production was filmed in Sicily and it marked her first time on an airplane when she was 22 years old . McAdams later earned a Genie Award nomination in her native Canada for her role as a teenage version of Wendy <unk> 's character in the drama Perfect Pie . In 2002 , she made her Hollywood film debut in the comedy The Hot Chick with Rob Schneider and Anna Faris which McAdams has described as a " huge milestone " in her career . She played a catty high school student who swaps bodies with Schneider 's character , a small @-@ time criminal . The Los Angeles Times felt she " emerges as a young actress of much promise " while the Daily Mail described McAdams and Faris as " talents to watch , but they are let down by everything around them " . The film grossed $ 54 million worldwide . Afterwards , McAdams returned to Canada to star as Kate McNab in the comedy mini @-@ series Slings and Arrows about backstage theatre life at the fictional New Burbage Shakespearean Festival . She was written out of the second season of the program following her success in the United States . She received two Gemini Award nominations for her work on the program , with one win . 
 McAdams ' break @-@ out role came in 2004 , when she starred in the comedy film Mean Girls opposite Lindsay Lohan , Lacey Chabert and Amanda Seyfried . McAdams was 25 years old when she was cast as Regina George , the frenemy of Lohan 's character Cady Heron and the meanest and popular queen bee in the school , and she modelled her character from Alec Baldwin 's performance in the 1992 drama Glengarry Glen Ross . USA Today praised her " comic flair " while The Daily Telegraph found her " delightfully hateful " . The San Francisco Chronicle felt that " McAdams brings glamour and magnetism to Regina , but also the right hint of comic distance . " The film grossed $ 129 million worldwide and earned McAdams two MTV Movie Awards . Mean Girls later reached No. 12 in an Entertainment Weekly list of the Greatest Ever High School Movies . Tina Fey , who co ‑ starred in the film and wrote the screenplay , has credited McAdams with teaching her how to act in front of a camera rather than an audience : " She 's a film actor . She 's not pushing . And so I kind of learned that lesson from watching her . " 
 Afterwards in 2004 , McAdams starred opposite fellow Canadian Ryan Gosling in the romantic drama The Notebook directed by Nick Cassavetes and based on Nicholas Sparks 's novel of the same name . She played Allie Hamilton , a wealthy southern belle who has a forbidden love affair with Gosling 's character Noah Calhoun , a poor labourer . McAdams spent time in Charleston , South Carolina prior to filming to familiarize herself with the southern accent she used , and took ballet and etiquette classes . Filming took place from late 2002 to early 2003 . Although McAdams and Gosling became romantically involved in 2005 , they had a combative relationship on set . " We inspired the worst in each other " , Gosling has said . " It was a strange experience , making a love story and not getting along with your co @-@ star in any way . " At one point , Gosling asked Cassavetes to " bring somebody else in for my off @-@ camera shot " because he felt McAdams was being uncooperative . The New York Times praised the " spontaneous and combustible " performances of the two leads while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times was won over by the " beauty and clarity " of McAdams 's performance . The Chicago Tribune declared her " a real discovery " who " infuses young Allie with that radiant , breathlessly winning ingénue grace and charm that breaks hearts " . The film grossed over $ 115 million worldwide . McAdams won an MTV Movie Award and four Teen Choice Awards . Entertainment Weekly has said that the movie contains the All @-@ Time Best Movie Kiss while the Los Angeles Times has included a scene from the film in a list of the 50 Classic Movie Kisses . The Notebook has appeared on many Most Romantic Movies lists . " I 'm so grateful to have a film that people respond to in that way " , McAdams told Elle in 2011 . " It was a big deal " . 
 In 2005 , McAdams starred in the romantic comedy Wedding Crashers with Owen Wilson , Vince Vaughn and Bradley Cooper . McAdams played the daughter of an influential politician , who is caught in a love triangle with Wilson and Cooper 's characters . McAdams listened repeatedly to Fleetwood Mac 's 1975 song " Landslide " to prepare for emotional scenes and Wilson has said the song made her cry immediately : " It was like turning on a faucet " . She trained for a sailing certification for a boating sequence because her character was said to be an accomplished sailor . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times felt McAdams " makes the most of her underdeveloped character " and " grows more appealing with every new role " . Variety found her " a beguiling presence " who " actually creates a real character – a rarity for females in one of these lad @-@ mag escapades " . From a production budget of $ 40 million , the film grossed over $ 285 million worldwide . 
 Afterwards , McAdams starred opposite Cillian Murphy in Wes Craven 's thriller Red Eye where she played a young hotel manager who is held captive by Murphy 's character while aboard a red @-@ eye flight . Craven has said McAdams was the only actress he considered for the part . She was drawn to the relatable qualities of her character : " She was not some sweaty , tank @-@ top @-@ wearing , Uzi @-@ carrying super woman " . Variety found her " increasingly impressive " while Roger Ebert asserted that " she brings more presence and credibility to her role than is really expected ; she acts without betraying the slightest awareness that she 's inside a genre . Her performance qualifies her for heavy @-@ duty roles . " Upon release , the film , which was made on a budget of $ 26 million , earned over $ 95 million at the worldwide box office . 
 In late @-@ 2005 , McAdams starred in the seasonal family comedy @-@ drama The Family Stone alongside Sarah Jessica Parker , Diane Keaton and Paul Schneider , which gave McAdams an opportunity to play a dishevelled and sardonic sister , rather than the usual " obvious " girlfriend or wife roles . She was eager to work with Keaton and remarked , " It 's never about line counts for me . It 's about the people I get to work with . " Variety noted that " a <unk> but still radiant McAdams proves once again that she 's the real deal , delivering a deliciously feisty performance " . The New York Times felt that her " engaging screen presence holds your attention and sympathy despite the handicap presented by her character 's personality . " The film was a commercial success : it cost $ 18 million to make and grossed over $ 92 million worldwide . 
 = = = 2006 – 10 : Career hiatus and return = = = 
 At this point in her career , McAdams was hailed as " the next Julia Roberts " and the new " Hollywood it girl " . Vanity Fair invited McAdams , along with actresses Scarlett Johansson and Keira Knightley , to appear on its March 2006 cover , the annual Hollywood issue . Upon arrival on the photo set , McAdams discovered it was a nude session , declined and left . She later parted ways with her publicist at the time , who had not informed her in advance . Knightley later recounted , " Quite early on Rachel just said , ' No , I 'm not into that . ' She 's a lovely girl , and I really respect her for doing that . " When asked about the incident in 2008 , McAdams had " no regrets " . 
 McAdams took a break from her film career from 2006 to 2007 . " There were a lot of cooks in the kitchen , a lot of voices around me , and I wanted to step away so I could hear my own voice again " , McAdams said in 2013 . " Truthfully , I never really wanted to be a big movie star . I never even wanted to work outside of Canada , or outside of the theatre . " During that period , McAdams turned down roles in the films The Devil Wears Prada , Casino Royale , Mission : Impossible III and Get Smart . In February 2006 , she made a one @-@ off stage appearance in The Vagina Monologues at St. Lawrence Centre for the Arts , Toronto to raise funds for V @-@ Day . That same year , McAdams received a Rising Star Award nomination from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and hosted the Academy Awards for Technical Achievement . 
 McAdams returned to her film career in 2008 and starred in the 1940s film noir Married Life with Pierce Brosnan and Chris Cooper where she played Kay Nesbitt , a young widow who wins the affections of Brosnan and Cooper 's older characters . In preparation for the role , McAdams studied old films , particularly those of Kim Novak . She has said the film shoot re @-@ energized and re @-@ inspired her and made her eager to continue working more often again . Entertainment Weekly found McAdams " a particularly delightful vision after her two @-@ year intermission " . Variety criticized her break from the big screen but felt that , despite a performance of " tender feeling " , " her natural vivaciousness and spontaneity are <unk> " by the film noir format . The film had a limited release and was a box @-@ office failure . It grossed just over $ 2 million worldwide , failing to recoup its production budget of $ 12 million . 
 Afterwards , McAdams starred in the road trip comedy @-@ drama The Lucky Ones with Tim Robbins and Michael Peña , a story about three Iraq War soldiers on a brief road trip back in the United States . She trained at a real boot camp , at Fort Campbell , Kentucky , prior to filming . In 2011 , McAdams said that Colee Dunn was " probably one of my favorite characters I 've ever played " . The film also had a limited release and The New York Times found her " luminous as always " while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times hailed the performance as " her coming of age as an actress " . " Previously she has been seen mostly as a hot chick or an idealized sweetheart " , he wrote . " Here she is feisty , vulnerable , plucky , warm , funny ... Watch the poignancy of the scene when she meets her boyfriend 's family . " Entertainment Weekly found her " feisty , gorgeous , and as mercurial as a mood ring " . The Lucky Ones is the least commercially successful film of McAdams 's career as of 2012 , having grossed just $ 266 @,@ 967 worldwide . 
 In 2009 , McAdams starred with Russell Crowe , Helen Mirren , and Ben Affleck in the political thriller State of Play , based on the BBC drama television series of the same name . McAdams played Della Frye , an online reporter who investigates a possible conspiracy with Crowe 's character , a veteran print journalist . McAdams visited The Washington Post 's offices and met with politicians on Capitol Hill for her research . Entertainment Weekly felt she was " perfectly cast as an ambitious <unk> " while The Daily Telegraph noted that " McAdams , with her lively eyes and large , expressive forehead , holds her own against Crowe . <unk> , she avoids any temptation to play girly and demure to his grizzled alpha male . " The film grossed over $ 87 million worldwide . 
 Also in 2009 , McAdams starred opposite Eric Bana in the science fiction romantic drama The Time Traveler 's Wife , based on Audrey Niffenegger 's best @-@ selling novel of the same name . McAdams fell " madly in love " with the novel but was initially slightly hesitant to accept the role because Clare Abshire , the long @-@ suffering wife is a " character that people have already cast in their heads " . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said , " I 'd watch the vibrant Rachel McAdams and Eric Bana in anything , but The Time Traveler 's Wife is pushing it . " The Los Angeles Times found her " luminous [ yet ] , sadly , her facility as an actress is mostly wasted . " Writing in The Chicago Tribune , Michael Phillips , in an otherwise tepid review , said of her performance : " Every scene she 's in , even the silly ones , becomes better — truer , often against long odds — because she 's in it . Her work feels emotionally spontaneous yet technically precise . She has an unusually easy touch with both comedy and drama , and she never holds a melodramatic moment hostage . " The film was a commercial success , earning over $ 101 million worldwide . 
 In late 2009 , McAdams starred in the mystery / action @-@ adventure film Sherlock Holmes with Robert Downey , Jr. and Jude Law . She played Irene Adler , an antagonist and love interest of Downey 's title character Sherlock Holmes , and welcomed the opportunity to play a character who is " her own boss and a real free spirit " . Variety felt her character was " not very well integrated into the rest of the story , a shortcoming the normally resourceful McAdams is unable to do much about " . The New York Times stated , " Ms. McAdams is a perfectly charming actress and performs gamely as the third wheel of this action @-@ <unk> tricycle . But Irene feels in this movie more like a somewhat cynical commercial contrivance . She offers a little something for the ladies and also something for the lads , who , much as they may dig fights and explosions and guns and chases , also like girls . " The film was a major commercial success , earning over $ 524 million at the worldwide box office . 
 In 2010 , McAdams starred with her The Family Stone co @-@ star Diane Keaton and Harrison Ford in the comedy Morning Glory directed by Roger Michell , where she played a television producer attempting to improve the poor ratings of a morning television program . The film was billed as a starring vehicle for McAdams . She initially felt she was unsuited to the role saying , " I 'm not funny . So I said , ' if you need me to be funny , you might want to look somewhere else ' " . Michell had a number of dinners with McAdams and persuaded her to join the cast . Since working with Keaton , McAdams has described her as a mentor figure . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said McAdams " gives the kind of performance we go to the movies for " while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times felt she played " as lovable a lead as anyone since Amy Adams in Junebug " in an otherwise " routine " movie . The New York Post was impressed by " her gift for physical comedy " , as was Variety . While the New York Times felt she " plays her role exceptionally well " and is " effortlessly likable " , it called on Hollywood to give her parts " worthy " of her talent . " Ms. McAdams has to rely on her dimples to get by . She does , but she could do better . " The film was a modest commercial success , grossing $ 58 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 40 million . McAdams was disappointed that the film failed to find a larger audience , remarking that " I only hear these businesspeople : ' Well , no one was sure who it was for . ' " 
 = = = 2011 – 14 : Big @-@ name auteur projects = = = 
 In 2011 , McAdams starred in Woody Allen 's fantasy romantic comedy Midnight in Paris with her Wedding Crashers co @-@ star Owen Wilson and Michael Sheen . The film opened the 2011 Cannes Film Festival . McAdams played Inez , the shrewish fiancée of Wilson 's character Gil . Allen wrote McAdams ' part for her , after hearing " glowing reports " from his friend and her former co @-@ star Diane Keaton . He said that he was " crazy about Rachel " and wanted to give her the opportunity to play something other than " beautiful girls " . The film was shot on location in Paris and McAdams has said that the experience " will always have a great place in my heart " . The Guardian criticized that she " has morphed from the sweet thing in Wedding Crashers to the dream @-@ crushing bitch that , according to American comedies , women become once they ensnare their man " . Richard Corliss of Time " felt sorry for McAdams , whose usually winning presence is ground into hostile cliché " . However , the Los Angeles Times felt she " deftly handles a part that is less amiable than usual for her " and The New York Times found her " superbly speeded @-@ up " . It became Allen 's highest grossing film ever in North America and was the most commercially successful independent film of 2011 . With a production budget of $ 17 million , the film has grossed over $ 151 million worldwide . McAdams , along with six other members of the cast , received a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture nomination . Allen won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and the film itself was nominated for three other Academy Awards , including Best Picture . 
 McAdams reprised her role as Irene Adler in the mystery / action @-@ adventure sequel Sherlock Holmes : A Game of Shadows , but the female lead role was played by Noomi Rapace . Joel Silver , the film 's producer , has said that " we always intended to have a different kind of girl for each movie " in the vein of Bond girls . He found it " complicated " to persuade McAdams to return in a smaller role : " She loved being with us , but she hoped to have a bigger role . " The Wall Street Journal felt " she vanishes all too soon in this overproduced , self @-@ enchanted sequel , and so does the spirit of bright invention that made the previous film such a pleasant surprise . " The Huffington Post remarked that she " exhibits far more personality and roguish charm in her few moments here than she did in all of the previous film . Freed from the constraints of being the de @-@ facto love interest , McAdams relishes the chance to go full @-@ villain . " The film has grossed over $ 543 million worldwide . 
 In 2012 , McAdams starred opposite Channing Tatum in the romantic drama The Vow , based on a true story . McAdams and Tatum played a newlywed couple who try to rebuild their relationship after a car crash leaves the wife with no recollections of who he is or their marriage . McAdams was drawn to the " roller coaster " faced by her character and found it interesting that the story was told " through the guy 's eyes " . The New York Times stated that " the <unk> and adorable Rachel McAdams " brings " enough physical charm and emotional warmth to distract from the threadbare setting and the paper @-@ thin plot " . Newsday felt that McAdams , " exuding her usual uncanny warmth on @-@ screen " , " is the real draw " . However , the Los Angeles Times felt she was " wasted " in the role : " She is such an appealing actress that it 's hard not to wish someone could make better use " of her . Time found the film an example of McAdams " coasting " in " unabashedly romantic " movies and asserted that " she 's a much more versatile and clever actress " than such projects would suggest . The film , financed for $ 30 million , was a major commercial success and became her biggest box @-@ office hit in a leading role . It topped the U.S. box office and has grossed over $ 196 million worldwide . 
 In 2013 , McAdams appeared opposite Ben Affleck in Terrence Malick 's romantic drama To the Wonder . McAdams played a horse ranch worker in Oklahoma and the love interest of Affleck 's character . She found Malick to be an " incredibly helpful " director ; they discussed her character in detail and he took her on a tour of the local town , pointing out which house she would have grown up in and where she would have attended school . Upon its U.S. limited theatrical release , the film polarized film critics , some of whom found McAdams ' role to be " fairly small " ; IndieWire noted that " McAdams has the least to do of the principals , but is wonderfully haunted and sad in her brief appearances " . 
 Afterwards , McAdams starred in Brian De Palma 's erotic thriller Passion opposite Noomi Rapace ; they played two business executives in a power struggle . De Palma saw McAdams ' performance in Mean Girls and decided to cast her as Christine . The movie was released in selected theaters in the US , receiving average reviews from critics ; Entertainment Weekly noted that McAdams " uses her sexy billboard smile and emphatic delivery to nail a certain type of troublemaker boss who embeds her aggression in pert ' sincerity ' " while the Los Angeles Times remarked : " McAdams and Rapace are gesturally awkward and wildly miscast — more sorority sisters in a spat than cross @-@ generational power antagonists . " She was honoured a plaque dedicated to her on the St. Thomas Wall of Fame in her hometown of St. Thomas , Ontario . 
 In late 2013 , McAdams starred in Richard Curtis ' romantic comedy @-@ drama About Time with Domhnall Gleeson , where she played the love interest of Gleeson 's character . The story 's time @-@ travel element illustrates the importance of living in the moment . Zooey Deschanel was originally slated to play McAdams 's role but dropped out shortly before filming began . A fan of Curtis for years , McAdams wanted to have the chance to work with him it was supposedly Curtis ' last project as a director . The film was a commercial success at the international box office , and McAdams had a positive reception among critics , with Variety praising her and Gleeson for their " radiant , believable chemistry " which " keeps the film aloft . " 
 In 2014 , McAdams starred opposite Philip Seymour Hoffman in an adaptation of John le Carré 's espionage thriller A Most Wanted Man , directed by Anton Corbijn . Despite learning to speak with German accent as a preparation for her role , reviewers criticized her for it . Vanity Fair noted that McAdams had a " little less success with her accent " than her co @-@ star Hoffman but , nonetheless , she " proves as intelligent , soulful , and magnetic a presence as ever " . In late 2014 , McAdams received a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Critical achievements = = = 
 In 2015 , McAdams appeared as journalist Sacha Pfeiffer in Thomas McCarthy 's ensemble drama Spotlight , about the child @-@ abuse scandal in Boston 's Catholic Church . To prepare for her role , McAdams tried to find out from Pfeiffer herself every detail about her character and her work covering the child molestation allegations , persistently calling and <unk> her texts . " I bugged Sacha a lot and she was very gracious about it , ” McAdams once stated during an interview . The movie garnered universal critical acclaim , mainly for its detailed story and the cast performances . David Sims of The Atlantic wrote that she " exudes a warmth that gets strangers to spill their darkest stories to her " while Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times stated that Pfeiffer was " empathetically played by the protean McAdams " . For her role , McAdams has received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress , Critics ' Choice Movie Award for Best Supporting Actress and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations in the categories of Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role and Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture . 
 McAdams appeared in three other 2015 films . She starred opposite Emma Stone , Bradley Cooper , and Bill Murray in the Cameron Crowe @-@ directed romantic comedy Aloha , playing Cooper 's former girlfriend who is now married and has two children . The movie received a May 29 release , to a negative reaction from critics and audiences alike . She had a supporting role as the wife of Jake Gyllenhaal 's character in the boxing drama Southpaw ( 2015 ) . The film received mixed reviews but A.O. Scott of The New York Times conceded : " It features some pretty appealing players . There are worse things to see at the multiplex than Ms. McAdams playing a tough cookie standing by her man . " Her next movie , Wim Wenders 's drama Every Thing Will Be Fine , received an U.S. limited release in December 2015 . 
 In 2015 television work , McAdams starred as Ani <unk> in the second season of HBO 's anthology crime drama True Detective , alongside Taylor Kitsch , Vince Vaughn and Colin Farrell . While the season received mixed reviews , McAdams 's work was praised . The Guardian remarked : " If there 's anyone with any chance of enjoying a <unk> here it 's probably McAdams – an actor whose characters are more usually associated with the death of the romcom than murders involving people with eyes burned out by acid . Here , her Ani is a convincing mess . " She received a nomination for the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Movie / Miniseries for her role . Also in 2015 , McAdams played Buttercup in a one @-@ off , staged LACMA Live Read of The Princess Bride . 
 Upcoming projects include an animated version of The Little Prince and the superhero film Doctor Strange . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 = = = Environmental activism = = = 
 McAdams is an environmentalist . She ran an eco @-@ friendly lifestyle website <unk> with two of her friends for five years , from 2007 to 2011 . Her house is powered by Bullfrog renewable energy . She travels around Toronto by bicycle and does not own a car , but drives when in Los Angeles because it is " a harder town to cycle in " . She volunteered in Biloxi , Mississippi and Louisiana in fall of 2005 , as part of the clean @-@ up effort following Hurricane Katrina . McAdams sat on a TreeHugger / Live Earth judging panel in 2007 . She appealed for donations during the Canada for Haiti telethon in 2010 . She was involved in Matter of Trust 's " hair boom " efforts following the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill . In 2011 , McAdams supported <unk> , a protest against a proposed limestone mega quarry in <unk> , Ontario . In 2013 , she filmed two promotional videos for the Food & Water First Movement , aiming to preserve prime farmland and source water in Ontario , Canada . In 2014 , she narrated the feature documentary Take Me To The River , which investigates what is being done to try to save iconic rivers . 
 = = = Other causes = = = 
 In 2006 , McAdams took part in the " Day Without Immigrants " demonstration in Los Angeles , protesting the federal government 's attempts to further criminalize illegal immigrants living in the United States . In 2011 , she attended the Occupy Toronto demonstration . In 2013 , McAdams volunteered with Habitat for Humanity in her hometown of St. Thomas . She has also worked with charities including the Sunshine Foundation of Canada , the Alzheimer 's Association , the READ Campaign , and United Way of Canada . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McAdams resides in the Harbord Village neighbourhood of Toronto , Ontario , Canada . She holds a U.S. green card but has remarked , " The world has become so small these days , and most films aren ’ t shot in Hollywood anymore , so there 's no point living there . " She practices kundalini yoga daily . 
 McAdams dated Canadian actor Ryan Gosling from mid ‑ 2005 to mid ‑ 2007 , and they briefly reunited in 2008 . She dated Welsh actor Michael Sheen from mid @-@ 2010 to early 2013 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 McAdams has been given many awards and nominations , including winning one Screen Actors Guild Award , out of three nominations , and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Spotlight . 
 = Solar 2 = 
 Solar 2 is an open world sandbox video game developed by Jay Watts ' video game studio , <unk> . It was released on 17 June 2011 on Steam for Microsoft Windows and on 19 June 2011 on Xbox Live Indie Games for the Xbox 360 . The game was developed with Microsoft 's XNA tools , and its development was inspired by indie games such as flOw . The game follows the player in their mission to accumulate enough mass to become several astronomical objects , eventually becoming a big crunch , which then produces a Big Bang . 
 The game is a sequel to Solar ( 2009 ) , and features most of the same key gameplay elements of its predecessor , expanded and polished considerably . It was developed over ten months and includes a score composed by sound designer and musician JP Neufeld . Solar 2 received mainly positive reviews from video game journalists , scoring 72 out of 100 on aggregate website Metacritic . It was awarded the first prize at the 2011 Microsoft Dream Build Play competition , and was among the video games showcased at the 10th Penny Arcade Expo . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Solar 2 is an open world sandbox video game played from a two @-@ dimensional perspective . The player is given an asteroid , and their main mission is to accumulate enough mass to become several astronomical objects . The game ends when and if the player manages to <unk> enough mass to become a big crunch , which then produces a Big Bang . However , the player is free to not finish the game , and is able to stay at the form of the object of their preference . Six different object are available in the game : small planet , life planet , small star , medium star , large star and black hole . 
 The game takes place in a borderless and randomly generated universe , filled with asteroids , planets , stars and solar systems . Life forms are also present in the game . They appear on planets sufficiently big to store life , and are represented by a variety of ships of different size and attack power . Spaceships are coloured green if they belong to the player 's planet , or to a planet that belongs to the player 's solar system ; red if they belong to an enemy planet or solar system ; and white if they don 't belong to any planet or system . All the spaceships in the map are controlled by the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) , and they will constantly engage in combat against enemy ships , asteroids or planets to destroy them . 
 At the beginning of the game , the player accumulates mass by colliding their asteroid against other asteroids until enough mass has been gathered to become a small planet . From there , the player has to absorb other asteroids to make their planet grow enough to become a life planet ; crashing against other objects will decrease the player 's mass . At this point , life forms will evolve in the planet , creating spaceships , planetary shields and cannons . If the player wishes , they can accumulate more mass until their planet becomes a star . Life forms will disappear , but the player will be able to attract planets to form a solar system , further grow the star by absorbing other planets , or a combination of both . The player can also create multi @-@ star systems by selecting planets from their system and make them absorb asteroids until they become another star . 
 Growing the star will increase its gravitational force , which increases the number of planets the solar system can have . They will also be able to attract solar systems composed of stars with lower mass than that of the player , or being attracted to stars with bigger mass . If both stars collide , they will be reduced to a lesser size within the same type of object . For example , if the player controls a small star and collides against a medium star , the player will be disintegrated while the AI @-@ controlled star will be reduced to a small star . Being reduced from small star to life planet is not possible , as well as being reduced from small planet to asteroid . In these cases , the player is <unk> , with random mass , close to the place where they collided . 
 Solar 2 also includes a variety of achievements and object @-@ oriented missions that can be played at any time . Missions can be found following the directional arrows in the interface , and the AI keeps track of which missions the player has finished . The game also keeps record of several accomplishments the player has reached , such as the distance travelled , the amount of objects and enemies destroyed by the player or the spaceships belonging to the player . Solar 2 allows the player to save progress at any point . A " save system " feature is also present ; it allows the player to save specific configurations of stars and planets that the player has created . The player can respawn from them at any time . 
 = = Development = = 
 Solar 2 was developed by Jay Watts under his video game studio <unk> . Watts , who received a degree in biotechnology from an Australian college , had no previous knowledge of video game development prior to coding Solar 2 's predecessor , Solar , for the Xbox 360 . Development of Solar started in July 2008 as a Flash game . Many of the key gameplay elements featured in the sequel , such as the infinite sandbox , were envisioned during this timespan . In an interview with <unk> , Watts revealed that Thatgamecompany 's indie game flOw was an inspiration for him : " I loved the simplicity of the game and the ambiance . " Solar , released in 2009 , became a commercial success ; it sold 30 @,@ 000 copies and allowed Watts to work full @-@ time on its sequel . 
 Development of Solar 2 lasted for at least ten months . The game was developed using Microsoft XNA , a set of tools focused on video game development created by Microsoft . According to Watts , Solar 2 was " mainly expanding on [ Solar 's ] original idea and polishing it to perfection . " However , he commented that the concept of both games took several design iterations to reach its final version : " I played with many , many ideas before finally settling on what I have now . " Sound designer and musician JP Neufeld composed the game 's score . According to Watts , this was done because there was " no way I could do music as good as he can . " Both the Windows and Xbox 360 version of the game were developed simultaneously . About the Xbox 360 version , Watts commented that " the lack of keyboards and the aging Xbox 360 hardware were a bit tricky , and updating the Xbox version is a huge pain to do . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Solar 2 was released on 17 June 2011 on Steam for Microsoft Windows and on 19 June 2011 on Xbox Live Indie Games for the Xbox 360 . On July 2012 , Watts announced that he was working on Mac OS X and Linux versions of the game . However , given that the original game was developed using the Windows @-@ only XNA platform , he expected the ports to be ready sometime before the end of the year . In October 2012 , the Mac port was announced and released on Steam . The iPad version of the game was released in March 2013 . An Android version was also made available on March 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Solar 2 received a positive response from video game journalists upon release . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the game received an average score of 72 based on 8 reviews . Most critics praised the physics @-@ based gameplay and soundtrack , but criticized the exceedingly difficult missions and somewhat repetitive gameplay . However , the game won the US $ 20 @,@ 000 first prize at the 2011 Microsoft Dream Build Play competition , and became a finalist at the 2011 IndieCade festival . Solar 2 was also among the ten indie video games showcased at the 10th Penny Arcade Expo , held in August 2011 . 
 IGN 's Gord Goble criticized the difficulty of the missions but praised the game 's soundtrack , which he called a combination of " new age @-@ meets @-@ Alan Parsons Project @-@ meets @-@ Pink Floyd @-@ meets @-@ 2001 : A Space Odyssey <unk> . " He also highlighted several features he would have liked to see in the game , such as a more complex universe to explore and the ability to control the life forms in the planets controlled by the player . Graham Smith from PC Gamer was also critical of the missions ' difficulty , although concluded that it was " a good price for a universe . " GamePro 's Nate Ralph mentioned the life forms as the only negative aspect of the game . 
 The iPad and Android versions of Solar 2 were also well received . App Spy 's Andrew <unk> , on his review of the iPad version of the game , highlighted the overall sense that " nothing about the game feels like a waste of time or effort , " but criticized the lack of control over the life forms . Meanwhile , Andrew <unk> from Android Central acknowledged that Solar 2 had all the elements necessary for a great game . 
 = Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Keith Miller was a key member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 and went undefeated in its 34 matches . This unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned the Australians the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 Miller played as a right @-@ arm opening fast bowler and a right @-@ handed middle @-@ order batsman . Along with Ray Lindwall , he formed Australia 's first @-@ choice pace duo , a combination regarded as one of the best of all time . Bradman typically used the pair in short and intense bursts against the English batsmen with the new ball . England had agreed to make a new ball available every 55 overs , more often than usual , allowing the pair more frequent use of a shiny ball that swung at high pace . Miller was also a skillful slips fielder , regarded by his captain as the best in the world . 
 Miller took 13 wickets at an average of 26 @.@ 28 and scored 184 runs in the Tests at an average of 23 @.@ 15 , and played a key role in subduing England 's leading batsmen , Len Hutton and Denis Compton , with a barrage of short @-@ pitched bowling . He troubled Hutton to such an extent in the Tests and tour matches that the batsman was dropped for the Third Test . In the First Test , Miller took seven wickets , including Hutton and Compton twice , bearing a large part of the bowling workload after Lindwall broke down with a groin injury on the first day . In the Second Test at Lord 's , he scored 74 in the second innings to help bat England out of the match . Miller also scored a rapid 58 in the Fourth Test , featuring in a counter @-@ attacking partnership with Neil Harvey that helped Australia to regain the momentum ; they went on to win in the closing minutes of the final day . 
 In all first @-@ class matches , Miller scored 1 @,@ 088 runs at 47 @.@ 30 and took 56 wickets at 17 @.@ 58 . Bradman gave him a lighter bowling workload during the tour matches to keep him fresh for the key battles in the Tests . Miller played many of his more carefree innings in the tour matches , hitting many sixes . He also showed his disdain for Bradman 's obsession with annihilating the opposition . In one match against Essex , he deliberately let himself be bowled first ball to protest against Australia 's ruthless dismantling of the bowling ; the tourists set a world record for the most runs scored in a day of first @-@ class cricket ( 721 ) . 
 Miller 's charisma — coupled with the unprecedented popularity of the Australians — made him much sought after for social events . His friendship with Princess Margaret was particularly scrutinised by the media . 
 = = Background = = 
 Miller had played for Australia in every Test match since the resumption of major cricket following the end of World War II . He had been a specialist batsman at the start of the war , but emerged as a frontline fast bowler during the Victory Tests of 1945 . He made his official Test debut against New Zealand in early 1946 . Since the Test series against England during the 1946 – 47 Australian summer , he had opened the bowling with Ray Lindwall , as well as playing as a frontline batsman , usually at No. 5 . Miller had played a leading role in Australia 's 3 – 0 victory over the hosts in that series . He finished at the top of the Australian Test bowling averages with 16 wickets at 20 @.@ 88 , and was second in the batting averages , scoring 384 runs at 76 @.@ 80 . In particular , his pace and intimidating bouncers had caused much trouble for England 's leading batsmen Len Hutton and Denis Compton , whom he would confront again in 1948 . During that series , he dismissed Hutton thrice and took the wicket of his opening partner Cyril Washbrook twice . Apart from scoring his maiden Test century in the series , Miller also hit three scores over 150 for his state , Victoria , all at high pace with many long @-@ distance shots . 
 Miller had a light workload in the 1947 – 48 home Test series against India . He was not required a great deal , as India were well beaten 4 – 0 , three times by an innings , and his teammates often finished off the opposition before he had an opportunity , particularly with the bat . He was required to bat just once in each Test , accumulating 185 runs at 37 @.@ 00 , including two half @-@ centuries . His bowling duties were also light ; 72 overs yielded nine wickets at 24 @.@ 78 . Both Lindwall and Miller were selected by captain Donald Bradman and his fellow selectors for the 1948 tour of England as the intended new ball pairing . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Along with his teammates , Miller arrived in Southampton in April after a sea voyage from Australia aboard the SS Strathaird . As was the custom , Australia fielded its first @-@ choice team in the traditional tour opener against Worcestershire . Miller was duly selected and started the Invincibles tour strongly . He scored a hard @-@ hitting 50 not out , with five fours and a six , after coming in to bat at No. 9 . His innings was the fastest for the match in terms of runs per minute . He bowled a total of 20 overs for match figures of 1 / 54 as Australia completed an innings victory . His first wicket for the summer was that of opposing captain Allan White . 
 The tour opener was immediately followed by a game against Leicestershire , and this time , Miller was promoted to No. 3 . At the fall of the first wicket , the crowd surged towards the players ' gate , expecting Bradman to enter in his customary batting position . However , Miller emerged instead , and scored an unbeaten 202 in five and a half hours . He featured in a 111 @-@ run second wicket partnership with Sid Barnes , before putting on 159 with Bradman for the third wicket . The hosts compounded their troubles by dropping a trio of chances from Miller . After a late @-@ order collapse , in which no other batsman passed 12 , it was left to last man Bill Johnston to partner Miller from 180 onwards . The pair put on 37 for the tenth wicket before Johnston was out for 12 , having successfully shepherded his partner to a double century . One of Miller 's sixes concussed a spectator , and after his long innings , Bradman did not use his bowling in the first innings , but he was used late in the second innings to take the last two wickets and end with 2 / 10 . Australia completed another innings triumph . 
 The next match against Yorkshire pitted Australia against Hutton ; it was thus an opportunity for both parties to gain a psychological advantage before the Tests . Bowling medium @-@ paced off breaks , Miller removed Hutton for five after the Yorkshireman had struggled for an hour in the middle . He finished with 6 / 42 as the home team were rolled for 71 on a wet wicket in cold and blustery conditions . Miller took four of the last six wickets as the hosts fell from 4 / 45 to 71 and had bowled almost unchanged , sending down 23 @.@ 3 of the 54 @.@ 3 overs . In reply , Australia struggled to reach 101 , including a counter @-@ attacking 34 from Miller , which was the highest individual score for the low @-@ scoring match . He came to the crease at 4 / 38 and scored 34 of the next 48 runs added , before falling at 7 / 86 . He hit two sixes in his innings , including one from the first ball that he faced . He then took 3 / 49 in the second innings as Yorkshire fell for 89 to leave Australia a victory target of 60 . However , he was dismissed for two , caught at long off after attempting to hit a six from the spin of Johnny Wardle to leave the score at 3 / 13 . Australia ’ s batsmen continued to struggle and fell to 6 / 31 — effectively seven wickets down with Sam Loxton injured and unable to bat — before stumbling home without further loss . It was the closest the Australians came to defeat for the whole tour and Miller was instrumental in preserving their unbeaten record . 
 After three consecutive three @-@ day matches , with only one rest day between nine scheduled days of cricket , Bradman rested Miller for the next match against Surrey at The Oval , which Australia won by an innings . He returned to take seven wickets in the next fixture against Cambridge University . In the first innings , he resumed his battle with John Dewes , whom he had tormented during the Victory Tests in 1945 . This time , Dewes put a thick towel under his shirt for protection against an anticipated short @-@ pitched barrage . Miller set up Dewes with a short ball , before <unk> him . He then took the last three wickets to end with 5 / 46 as the hosts were bowled out for 167 in the first innings . Miller was not required to bat as Australia amassed 4 / 414 declared in its only effort with the bat . In the second innings , he took 2 / 29 as Australia completed an innings victory . 
 Miller was involved in a famous incident in the next match against Essex . Australia elected to bat and had already amassed 2 / 364 when he came to the crease midway through the first day . The previous partnership for the second wicket between Bradman and Bill Brown had plundered 219 runs from the Essex bowlers in 90 minutes . Miller took guard and deliberately let the first ball from Trevor Bailey hit the stumps , much to Bradman 's displeasure . He flicked his hair back and walked away . He later said that he was making a protest against the one @-@ sided nature of the contest , as Australia went on to set a world record of 721 runs , the most in one day of first @-@ class cricket . Former Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton said " under the circumstances at Southend , I could well understand his [ Miller ’ s ] feelings " . Miller regained his competitive instinct when given the ball in the first innings , taking the first three wickets to reduce the hosts to 3 / 13 . He ended with 3 / 14 as the hosts were skittled for 83 , but then bowled only two wicketless overs as Bradman enforced the follow on ; Australia won by an innings and 451 runs , its largest winning margin for the season . Bradman rested Miller for the next game against Oxford University , which Australia won by an innings . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the Tests , Australia took on the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's ; it was effectively a dress rehearsal for the Tests , as the MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Ashes . It was Miller 's first match at the home of cricket since the Victory Tests . Bradman ’ s men batted first and Miller came to the crease at 3 / 200 to join Lindsay Hassett . The pair put on 80 for the fourth wicket before Hassett fell for 51 . Brown then partnered Miller for another 63 runs before he was out . Ian Johnson then came in and accompanied Miller to the close of play on the first evening . The latter reached his century in 165 minutes and was 114 at stumps , with Australia at 5 / 407 . The next day , the partnership extended to 155 runs before Miller fell at 6 / 498 . His innings had taken 250 minutes , with 20 fours and three sixes . The Australians attempted to gain a psychological advantage ahead of the Tests by attacking the off spin of Jim Laker . They hit nine sixes from the Englishman on the second morning . Miller 's dismissal triggered a collapse and Australia lost 5 / 54 to be all out for 552 . Miller and Lindwall then attempted to maintain their ascendancy over Hutton before the Tests . On this occasion , Hutton held off the pair with 52 and 64 , but his teammates could not , as the MCC fell to defeat by an innings and 158 runs . However , Miller was able to account for Bill Edrich and twice claimed Jack Robertson , ending with figures of 3 / 28 and 1 / 37 as Australia enforced the follow on . Test batsman Edrich had been prolific in recent English seasons , and was expected to be one of the key batsmen in the forthcoming Anglo @-@ Australian match ; Robertson was thought to be in contention for England selection but two low scores against Miller saw him overlooked . In addition to his performance on the field , Miller solved some off @-@ field problems . The MCC — which administered cricket at the time — provided him with legal assistance in his contract dispute with Rawtenstall . The Australian all @-@ rounder had signed a contract to play for the club in the Lancashire League , but failed to honour it . Rawtenstall dropped the dispute after being offered compensation . 
 Miller was rested for the next match against Lancashire , which resulted in Australia 's first non @-@ victory for the tour after the first day was lost to rain . He returned against Nottinghamshire and scored 51 of Australia 's total of 400 . His wicket prompted the loss of 5 / 45 as the tourists were bowled out . Miller took a wicket in each innings , including that of Test batsman Reg Simpson , to end with a total of 2 / 67 as Australia drew its second consecutive match . The next match against Hampshire saw Australia run into difficulty with Bradman resting under the rotation policy . Miller bowled 19 overs without reward , taking 0 / 39 as Hampshire batted first and scored 195 . In reply , Australia was in trouble after rain turned the pitch into a sticky wicket . Miller came in at 2 / 38 and launched a counter @-@ attack , scoring 39 of the 53 runs added before he fell with the score at 5 / 91 . The remainder of the Australians folded quickly , losing 6 / 26 to be all out for 117 , ceding a first innings lead of 78 , the first time during the tour that they had been behind on the first innings . Miller 's top score of 39 included three consecutive sixes from the bowling of Charlie Knott , whose bowling troubled the Australians the most and ended with 5 / 57 . He helped ensure that they did not capitalise on their lead and set a large target , taking 5 / 25 and bowling three of his victims . The tourists dismissed Hampshire for 103 , leaving a target of 182 , which Australia achieved with eight wickets to spare without Miller having to bat . He was rested for the match against Sussex at Hove , after six consecutive days of cricket . In its last match before the Tests , Australia completed an innings victory in just two days . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Leading into the Tests , Fingleton speculated that the English batsmen would have great difficulty against Miller and Lindwall , claiming that their prolific scoring against low @-@ quality bowling in county cricket would hinder their ability to adapt to the demands of facing world @-@ class opposition . Miller set the tone for Australia after England won the toss and batted first on the opening morning of the First Test at Trent Bridge . There had been overnight rain , which meant that the pitch would initially be favourable towards fast bowlers . Opening the bowling with Lindwall , he induced an edge from Washbrook in his first over , but it went to ground . In his second over , Miller bowled Hutton with a faster ball , leaving England at 1 / 9 . In his second over , Miller bowled Hutton for three with a faster ball that skidded off the pitch to leave England at 9 / 1 . The ball went between bat and pads as Hutton moved forward onto his front foot . The journalist and former Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly criticised Hutton for not moving his leg across to the pitch of the ball , thereby leaving a gap between bat and pad , but also praise Miller for his ability to make occasional deliveries skid on faster , surprising the batsman . 
 Miller beat Washbrook 's bat twice in one over soon after lunch , but was unable to extract an edge . Miller then had a hand in another wicket , when Johnston removed Joe Hardstaff junior for a duck . Johnston induced an edge , which flew to the slips after the batsman had attempted a cut ; the catch was described by Wisden as " dazzling " . Miller dived and balanced himself on his spine , before catching the ball to leave England at 4 / 46 . Two runs later , he bowled Compton , who was attempting a leg sweep . The batsman ’ s leg stump was knocked out of the ground as he moved across the stumps . As a result , half the English team were out with only 48 runs on the board after 100 minutes of play . England fell to 8 / 74 , but recovered with an 89 @-@ run ninth @-@ wicket partnership between Alec Bedser and Laker . Miller ended the innings by removing Laker — caught behind for 63 — leaving England all out for 165 . The paceman ended with 3 / 38 from 19 overs . 
 On the second day , Miller came in at 2 / 121 and was dismissed for a duck without further addition to Australia 's total . He failed to pick Laker 's arm ball , which went straight on instead of turning in , clipped the outside edge and was taken at slip by Edrich . The hard @-@ hitting Miller had come in at No. 4 , a position usually occupied by vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett , a more sedate batsman , indicating that Bradman may have been looking to attack , but the change in batting order failed . 
 After Australia finished at 509 on the third day to take a 344 @-@ run lead , Miller opened the bowling with Johnston , as Lindwall had broken down in the first innings and was unable to take to the field . Miller removed Washbrook for one , caught behind by Tallon from a top @-@ edged hook shot . Washbrook was displeased with the decision and gestured to a red mark on his shirt , indicating his opinion that the ball did not touch the willow , but made a noise upon brushing his clothing . Miller continued his battle with Hutton and Compton , although he resorted to bowling off spin from a shorter run to conserve energy late in the day . 
 Hutton then hit three fours in quick succession from Miller ’ s bowling to reach his fifty . The paceman responded to the spate of boundaries by reverting to pace and bowling a series of bouncers , including five in the last over of the day . One of these struck Hutton high on his left ( front ) arm . The batsmen survived , but the bowler received a hostile reaction from the crowd throughout his barrage of short @-@ pitched bowling , including shouts of " Bodyline " . At the time , bowlers of the pace of Lindwall and Miller were rare , and persistently aiming at the upper bodies of batsmen had not yet become a mainstream practice . However , as only Australia possessed international quality bowlers of such pace , opposition teams could not use retaliation as a means of deterrence . In addition , the original practitioners of Bodyline , Harold Larwood and Bill Voce , were both from Nottinghamshire , and were later excluded from Test selection for England after being blamed for the ill @-@ feeling caused by their tactics . The Nottinghamshire supporters were still angry with how their players had been removed and were not happy that Miller was able to do something that they saw to be equivalent . For his part , Miller appeared to be amused by the crowd reaction and revelled in it , grinning and flicking his hair . Hutton had the last word , glancing Miller for a four from the final ball of the day . England were 2 / 121 at stumps on the third day , with Hutton and Compton still at the crease . Miller was widely jeered and heckled as he walked off the field at the end of play — the crowd regarded his bowling as intimidatory . The crowd surged towards him as he walked up the steps into the dressing room , but no altercation eventuated . O 'Reilly defended Miller 's use of short @-@ pitched deliveries , pointing out that he had not employed a packed leg side field and had allowed the batsman the opportunity to score from hook and pull shots if he was willing to try ; in contrast the packed Bodyline field meant that batsmen would find little reward for such shots and defensive play would only lead to dismissal . 
 The third day was followed by a rest day on Sunday , so play resumed on the fourth morning , a Monday , with England still 223 runs in arrears . The Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club ( NCCC ) secretary H. A. Brown broadcast an appeal to the gallery via the public address system , urging them to refrain from barracking Miller . 
 Let us keep Nottingham a place where Test matches can continue to be played . On Saturday the Australian , Miller , was booed and there was much subsequent publicity in the press . These Australians are great sportsmen . They stood by the Empire in the war and we should always be pleased to greet them . Let us show them how really pleased we are and give them a warmhearted greeting this morning . 
 The crowd responded by clapping when the Australians took to the field . The chairman of the NCCC reportedly apologised to Bradman in private regarding the crowd reaction to Miller . Taking the new ball in the fifth over of the day , Miller delivered no bouncers in the morning ; the first hour of play was punctuated by bad light and weather . In the overcast conditions , Miller bowled a relatively full length and swung the ball ; one of his deliveries beat Hutton and narrowly missed his stumps . Shortly after the resumption of play amid dark skies , he bowled Hutton with an off cutter . As in the first innings , Hutton played forward to a ball without getting his front foot close to the bat , resulting in the delivery moving through the gap into the stumps . This prompted the entrance of Hardstaff , and on the third ball , he shaped to cut at a wide ball , and it again flew low to second slip as it did in the first innings . However , this time Arthur Morris was in the position because Miller was bowling , and the former dropped the catch . It was part of an eventful over ; Hardstaff played and missed at one ball , inside edged another and then outside edged a ball through the slips for four runs . During the morning session , Bradman used Miller for 11 overs in a row in an attempt to pressure the Englishmen . 
 Soon after reaching his century late in the day , Compton edged to the slips from Miller 's bowling , but Johnson dropped the catch . Charlie Barnett then edged Johnston into the slips , where Miller completed a difficult catch . Compton then hit Miller for four , provoking the paceman 's first bouncer of the day . Compton hooked it away for two and the next delivery slipped out of Miller 's hand and cleared the batsman ’ s head on the full , provoking some jeering in the crowd . This type of delivery is known as a beamer and is illegal because it poses a physical danger to the batsman . England reached stumps at 6 / 345 , just one run ahead of the tourists , with Compton on 154 . 
 The next day , Miller bowled a fast bouncer at Compton , who moved into position to hook , before changing his mind and attempting to evade the ball . Compton lost balance and threw his legs apart , trying to avoid stepping onto his stumps . However , he was unsuccessful and was out hit wicket for 184 . Compton had batted for 413 minutes and hit 19 fours . Fingleton said that it was " a most depressing end to an innings that will live always " . Compton 's fall at 7 / 405 meant that there were no frontline batsmen left , leaving the English bowlers exposed to the visitors ' attack without specialist support . Australia quickly finished off the hosts ' innings ; Miller bowled Laker for four , before Evans reached 50 and England finished at 441 , leaving Australia with a victory target of 98 in three hours . The Australian paceman ended with 4 / 125 for the innings and 7 / 163 for the match , having removed England 's two leading batsmen in both innings and bowled 63 overs — more than his usual workload — because Lindwall was injured . 
 As the players were walking back to the pavilion after England 's innings , Miller received another hostile reception . One spectator threatened him with violence , prompting the Australian to grab him by his coat collar , challenging him to enter the Australian dressing room . The spectator declined . Miller was not required to bat as Australia went on to win by eight wickets . 
 After the heavy bowling workload at Trent Bridge , Bradman rested Miller for the innings win against Northamptonshire , which started the day after the Test . Miller returned for another match against Yorkshire , albeit with a lighter bowling load . He scored 20 in the first innings and made a duck in the second . Nevertheless , he opened the bowling in the first innings with the intention of keeping the pressure on Hutton . Miller was unable to dismiss his arch @-@ rival , but Ernie Toshack did . The paceman was barracked by the spectators , who shouted " What about Larwood " in response to the repeated short @-@ pitched bowling during his six wicketless overs . Bradman spared Miller from bowling in the second innings because of a back complaint , attempting to preserve him for the upcoming Test at Lord ’ s . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 After a day of rest following the second Yorkshire match , Australia proceeded to the Second Test at Lord 's , with Miller still unable to bowl . He came in to bat in the first innings with Australia at 3 / 166 on the first afternoon after electing to bat . Bedser bowled three consecutive outswingers ; the fourth ball swung the other way , and Miller was hit on the pads not offering a shot , believing that the ball would have curved away past the stumps . The umpire upheld England ’ s appeal for leg before wicket ( lbw ) and Miller was out for four . O 'Reilly said that Miller 's display was more akin to that of a tail @-@ ender with minimal skill than that of a frontline batsman , and blamed his poor form with the bat on an excessive bowling workload imposed on him by Bradman . Australia went on to make 350 , but suffered a blow when Lindwall 's injury flared up in the first over . However , Lindwall continued through the pain . Bradman threw Miller the ball , hoping that the all rounder would reverse his decision not to bowl and take inspiration from Lindwall . The injured bowler returned the ball , citing his back . His gesture generated news headlines among journalists who believed that he had disobeyed Bradman . 
 Although Bradman claimed that the exchange had been amicable , others disputed this . Teammate Barnes later claimed that Miller had retorted by suggesting that Bradman — a very occasional slower bowler — bowl himself . Barnes said that the captain " was as wild as a battery @-@ stung brumby " and warned his unwilling bowler that there would be consequences for his defiance . According to unpublished writings in Fingleton 's personal collection , Bradman chastised his players in the dressing room at the end of the play , saying " I 'm 40 and I can do my full day 's work in the field . " Miller reportedly snapped " So would I — if I had fibrositis " ; Bradman had been discharged from the armed services during World War II on health grounds , whereas most of the team had been sent into battle . Miller had crash @-@ landed while serving as a fighter pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force in England and had suffered chronic back trouble since then . 
 England fell to 4 / 46 after Lindwall and Johnston 's new ball burst , but Compton and Yardley fought back to take the score to 133 without further loss . Compton edged Johnston into the slips , where Miller took a low catch , dismissing the batsman for 53 . Soon after , Johnston removed Evans for nine , caught by a diving Miller after lashing out at a wide ball outside off stump to leave the hosts at 7 / 145 . 
 Australia bowled England out for 215 at the beginning of the third day to take a 135 @-@ run first innings lead . This had increased to 431 when Miller came to the crease with the score at 3 / 296 during the afternoon . English captain Yardley was on a hat @-@ trick , having removed Hassett first ball after the fall of Barnes . Miller survived a loud lbw appeal on the hat @-@ trick ball before hitting a six into the grandstand and reaching stumps on 22 , with Australia at 4 / 329 . He resumed on the fourth morning with Brown and reached lunch on 63 with the tourists at 4 / 409 . Miller was reprieved when he lofted a ball high into the air ; Tom Dollery stood right under it and dropped the catch . During this time , the new ball became available , but England opted not to use it immediately , as the wet conditions had made it slippery . However , after a period of spin , the new ball was taken , and Miller hit three boundaries to pass 50 , and the run rate lifted . It appeared that aside from the need to score quickly in preparation for the declaration , Miller found the new ball easier to see than its muddied predecessor . Miller hooked Coxon repeatedly , and drove Bedser for many runs . After lunch , Miller proceeded to attack at every opportunity before the declaration . He was out for 74 , playing a hook shot that was caught by Bedser at square leg from Laker . Australia declared at 7 / 460 to set England a target of 596 . 
 England reached 3 / 106 by stumps on the fourth day , but the final day started poorly when Compton edged the second ball of the day — bowled by Johnston — to a diving Miller at second slip . Compton aimed a square drive , but the delivery was Johnston 's variation ball , which went away instead of into the batsman . It took the outside edge and flew to a diving Miller , who knocked the ball upwards before falling on his back and completing the catch as the ball went down . Compton stood his ground and waited for the umpire to confirm whether Miller had caught the ball cleanly , and was duly given out by the unhesitating umpire . O 'Reilly described Miller 's effort as " perhaps the very best slips catch of the whole series and ... a real match @-@ winner . " Just as in the first innings , Compton ’ s dismissal precipitated a collapse , and Australia dismissed England for 186 to complete victory by 409 runs . 
 After the end of the Lord 's Test , Miller attended a concert and party , before returning to the team hotel after dawn the next morning , just before breakfast . Bradman noticed this and addressed him as " Keith " , rather than his nickname Nugget . Australia was due to play Surrey at The Oval on the same day . Bradman won the toss and elected to field . Instead of deploying him to his usual slips position , the Australian skipper sent Miller to field on the fine leg boundary as a punishment for his late night out . Between overs , the banished player had to walk to the opposite end of the ground to be in position for the bowler from the other end . One of the spectators felt sorry for him and lent his bicycle , which the Australian used to cycle around the edge of the ground between overs . Soon after , Bradman brought his all rounder into a fielding position closer to the playing centre . Miller eventually scored nine in his only innings and was asked to bowl just one over in the second innings , as Australia completed victory by ten wickets . He had a quiet period on the cricket field during July , which generated less media stories than his celebrity appearances at social functions and classical music concerts during this time . The match against Surrey was immediately followed by a match against Gloucestershire in Bristol , where Miller scored 51 , featuring in a partnership of 136 with Morris ( 290 ) . Australia piled on 7 / 774 declared , its largest score of the season , before proceeding to victory by an innings and 363 runs . Acting captain Hassett allowed Miller to rest and he did not bowl during the match . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 The efforts of Miller and Lindwall against Hutton throughout the season had led the English selectors to drop the Yorkshireman for the Third Test at Old Trafford . The Australians were surprised by the move and thought that it was a blunder , as they rated Hutton to be England ’ s best batsman . 
 Miller had a quiet match . He did not bowl in the first innings as England batted first and posted 363 . The closest he came to a catch was when Yardley edged to him in slips on the half @-@ volley . When Australia batted , he came to the crease and joined Morris with the score at 3 / 82 and the pair took the score to 3 / 126 at stumps on the second day . He was on 23 and Morris had made 48 . The run rate picked up in the last 50 minutes of the day as the pair added 44 runs ; Miller was the more attacking of the Australian duo during this time . The next day , Australia struggled against the new ball in the first hour . Miller was beaten three times in one Bedser over before Dick Pollard trapped him for 31 , prompting a middle @-@ order collapse of 3 / 37 , before the tourists recovered to end at 221 , avoiding the follow on by eight runs . 
 Miller returned to the bowling crease in England 's second innings . He immediately broke through Washbrook 's defences , only to see the ball graze the stumps without dislodging the bails . After two Miller outswingers had evaded the outside edge of Washbrook , the batsman appeared unsettled . One bouncer was hit over square leg in an uncontrolled manner for a four , and another flew in the air , narrowly evading Loxton at fine leg . However , Miller did not take a wicket and ended with 0 / 15 from 14 overs , but again caught Compton . Not for the first time during the season , the Australian paceman earned the ire of the crowd after launching a series of short @-@ pitched balls at Edrich , apparently in retaliation for the Englishman 's bouncing of Lindwall . The paceman struck Edrich on the body before Bradman intervened and ordered him to stop his short @-@ pitched barrage . In another incident , Miller was playing poker with the Englishmen during a rain delay . When the weather cleared , Hassett beckoned him to return to the field for the resumption of play . The request was refused , and the poke match continued against the English players who were not currently batting . He won the pot and pocketed the money , before hurriedly running onto the ground late . When he was on the field and approaching the centre , Miller pulled the money out of his pockets . He brandished the notes to the crowd and taunted his English colleagues . The match ended in a draw after the entire fourth day and half of the fifth day was washed out . England declared upon the resumption of play on the final day and set Australia a target of 317 for victory . The tourists reached 1 / 92 to ensure a draw . 
 Between Tests , Australia had one tour match against Middlesex at Lord 's . Bradman rested Miller as Australia won by ten wickets , giving him an eight @-@ day break between the Tests . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 The teams moved to Headingley for the Fourth Test at Leeds . Hutton was recalled and the home team won the toss and batted first . England tallied 496 , its highest score of the series . Miller took the last wicket of Yardley to finish with 1 / 43 . Generally unthreatening throughout the innings , he bowled only 17 @.@ 1 overs ; the other frontline bowlers sent down at least 33 each . The innings started badly for Miller . He bowled below his full pace and his opening over yielded three full tosses . In Miller ’ s first over , Hutton scored the first boundary of the day , driving past mid @-@ off . He felt his legs for muscle strains , and after two overs that O ’ Reilly described as " very innocuous " , Miller was taken off . Nursing fitness concerns , Miller was forced to bowl medium @-@ paced off breaks on the second day as England proceeded to 2 / 423 and appeared to be in complete control , before losing 8 / 73 . In reply , Australia was struggling at 3 / 68 on the third morning . Neil Harvey — playing his first Ashes Test — joined Miller at the crease . Both had walked out in the same over , as Pollard removed Bradman and Hassett in the space of three balls . Australia was more than 400 behind , and if England were to remove the pair quickly , they would expose Australia 's lower order and give themselves an opportunity to win by taking a hefty first innings lead . Harvey asked his senior partner " What ’ s going on here , eh ? Let 's get stuck into ' em " . The pair launched a counterattack , with Miller taking the lead . He hoisted Laker 's first ball over square leg for six . Miller shielded the left @-@ handed Harvey from Laker , as his partner was struggling against the off breaks that were turning away from him , especially one that spun , bounced , and beat his outside edge . The all rounder drilled one off @-@ drive from Laker for four , and after mis @-@ hitting the next to the amusement of the crowd , struck the off spinner flat over his head , almost for six into the sightscreen . This allowed Australia to seize the initiative , and Harvey joined in during the next over . The left @-@ hander hit consecutive boundaries against Laker , the second of which almost cleared the playing area . He followed this with another boundary to reach 44 . Miller then lifted Laker for a six over long off , hitting a spectator in the head , and another over long on from Yardley 's bowling to move from 42 to 54 . He drove the next ball through cover for four . Yardley responded by stacking his leg side with outfielders and bowling outside leg stump , challenging Miller to another hit for six . The batsman obliged , but edged the ball onto wicket @-@ keeper Evans ' head ; Edrich dived forward and caught the ball on the rebound at short fine leg . The crowd was in raptures at both the batting and Edrich 's catch . 
 The partnership had yielded 121 runs in only 90 minutes , and Wisden likened it to a " hurricane " . Cricket commentator John Arlott described the innings as the most memorable that he had witnessed . He said " Miller played like an emperor ... Every stroke would have been memorable but each one had bettered its predecessor " , saying that his batting had raised cricket " to a point of aesthetic beauty " . Fingleton said that he had never " known a more enjoyable hour " of " delectable cricket " . He acclaimed Miller 's innings as " one of the rarest gems in the Test collection of all time " and " a moment to live in the cricket memory " . O 'Reilly said that Miller and Harvey had counter @-@ attacked with " such joyful abandon that it would have been difficult , if not absolutely impossible , to gather from their methods of going about it that they were actually retrieving a tremendously difficult situation " . 
 The momentum swung in Australia 's favour . Harvey scored 112 , while Loxton made 93 , hitting a further five sixes from Laker . Lindwall added 77 late in the afternoon as Australia finished at 9 / 457 on the fourth day , having added 394 in one day 's play . At the start of the second innings , Miller bowled a tight opening spell and the English openers scored only five from his six overs as they tried to establish a solid start . Miller took 1 / 53 in the second innings , removing Bedser and catching Compton yet again as Australia was set a world record chase of 404 on the final day in just 345 minutes . A 301 @-@ run second wicket partnership between Morris and Bradman set up the run @-@ chase and Miller came in with the score at 2 / 358 . He made only 12 but Australia won by seven wickets to set a new world record and take a 3 – 0 series lead . 
 The day after the Test , the Australians moved onto their next match against Derbyshire , where Miller scored 57 and took 3 / 31 in the first innings . He took the first two wickets to reduce the hosts to 2 / 26 before they recovered to 240 in reply to Australia ’ s 361 . In the second innings he bowled only two overs as Australia won by an innings . In a rain @-@ affected draw against Glamorgan , Miller took 2 / 41 in the hosts ' first innings of 197 before compiling a hard @-@ hitting 84 . Coming in to join Hassett with the score at 2 / 67 , he struck five sixes and seven fours . He hit one of the sixes with one hand , sending it 20 rows into the crowd . Taking his bottom hand off the bat , he had effectively played a left @-@ handed tennis @-@ style backhand , This sent the ball from Allan Watkins off his pads into the fine leg region . Miller then attacked the local captain Wilf Wooller , hitting him over the sightscreen with straight drives from consecutive balls and lofting a third six over long off . He was finally dismissed while attempting another six ; Australia 's first innings was washed out at 3 / 215 . 
 Miller was rested for the nine @-@ wicket win against Warwickshire . He returned against Lancashire . On the final day , Lancashire batsman Jack Ikin had reached 99 after being repeatedly hit by bouncers . Bradman took the new ball and gave it to Miller , who refused to bowl , saying that he felt Ikin deserved a century . The Australian skipper gave the ball to Lindwall , who promptly removed Ikin for 99 . Miller had a light workload for the match , scoring 24 and 11 , and taking a total of 1 / 32 from 16 overs . In the next game , he came in with Australia in difficulty at 5 / 133 , and scored 55 in faster than even time against Durham in the last match before the Fifth Test . The match was a two @-@ day fixture that was not given first @-@ class status . Miller took 1 / 17 as the hosts fell to 5 / 73 in reply to Australia 's 282 when rain ended the match at the end of the opening day . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 The teams proceeded to The Oval for the Fifth Test . England elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . Analysts questioned the move and predicted that Bradman would have bowled if he had won the toss . 
 Dewes and Hutton opened for England . Yardley attracted criticism for exposing the debutant Dewes to the new ball attack of Lindwall and Miller . Dewes took a single from Lindwall ’ s opening over and thus faced the start of the second over , which was bowled by Miller , who had troubled him in the past . During the Victory Tests in 1945 , Miller had repeatedly dismissed Dewes , and during a match for Cambridge University against the Australians earlier in the season , the English batsman used towels to pad his torso against the Australian paceman 's short balls . During his short innings , Dewes was visibly nervous and kept on moving around , unable to stand still . 
 Miller caused a stoppage after his first ball to sprinkle sawdust on the slippery and damp crease . With his second ball , he bowled Dewes — who was playing across the line — middle stump for one with an inswinger to leave England at 2 / 1 . He then removed Jack Crapp caught behind from an outside edge for a 23 @-@ ball duck , leaving England at 4 / 23 as play was adjourned for lunch . The paceman ended with 2 / 5 from eight overs as Lindwall ( 6 / 20 ) cut down the home team for 52 with a display of express swing bowling . In his last Test innings for the summer , Miller scored five before overbalancing , falling forward , and being stumped . Australia made 389 and led by 337 on the first innings on the second afternoon . Bowling for the second time , Miller struck Crapp in the head with a bouncer , before bowling him for nine . He then extracted an edge from Hutton — who fell for 64 , having top @-@ scored in both innings — to wicket @-@ keeper Tallon , leaving England at 4 / 153 . Miller ended with 2 / 22 as Australia won by an innings and took a 4 – 0 series win . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman ’ s quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Miller was rested for the innings victory over Kent , but played against the Gentlemen of England at Lord 's against an amateur team with many Test players . He scored 69 , putting on 157 with Hassett , before being dismissed after attempting a third consecutive hooked boundary . Australia declared at 5 / 610 and Miller took a match total of 3 / 76 in another innings victory , including the wickets of Yardley and Martin Donnelly . In the following match against Somerset , Miller had a light workload , scoring an unbeaten 37 at No. 8 as Australia made 5 / 560 declared , and then bowling only eight overs and taking one wicket as Australia claimed victory by an innings and 374 runs after bowling out the hosts for 115 and 71 . He was then rested from the match against South of England , which ended in a rain @-@ affected draw . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson Gower 's XI . During the last Australian tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted that only six current Test players be allowed to represent for the hosts . The Australian skipper then fielded a full @-@ strength team . Miller returned for the match at Scarborough , but did little , scoring one in his only innings and bowling eight overs without success in a match that ended in a rain @-@ affected draw . 
 This left only two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland to complete the tour . Miller played in the first game and scored six in his only innings and did not take a wicket , before being rested for the second match . Australia won both matches by an innings . As a result , Australia finished the tour with 25 wins and nine draws . They had gone through the summer without defeat . 
 When asked about the three most beautiful things in England , Miller said " The hills of Derbyshire , the leg sweep of Denis Compton and Princess Margaret " . He had gained a high profile in England during the Victory Tests of 1945 , when he played with a carefree manner in the aftermath of six years of devastating war . Coupled with his good looks , this made him a popular celebrity throughout the country . In 1948 , he was sought out for many social functions , such as at music or theatrical performances , and at dinner receptions with members of the Royal Family , peerage and political leaders . His friendship with Princess Margaret — the second daughter of King George VI — was the subject of widespread media speculation as to whether a romantic liaison was involved . 
 = = Role = = 
 During the tour , Miller generally played in the Tests as an opening bowler alongside Lindwall and as a middle @-@ order batsman , coming in at No. 4 or No. 5 . His batting ability was such that he played as a specialist batsman even when he was unable to bowl due to injury , such as during the Second Test . Miller wanted to play purely as a batsman , feeling that the workload of bowling would hinder his productivity with the willow . However , Bradman was intent on going through the tour undefeated , and utilised his bowling options to the full , to maximise the Australians ’ chances of winning . Lindwall and Miller were the first @-@ choice pace duo , regarded as one of the greatest speed pairings in the history of cricket , whereas the latter was just one of many accomplished batsmen in the team . As a result , the Australian skipper valued his all rounder more as an opening bowler . Miller ended the Tests with 184 runs at 26 @.@ 28 and 13 wickets at 23 @.@ 15 from 138 @.@ 1 overs and took eight catches . 
 During the Tests , Miller usually batted at No. 5 , except in the Fourth Test when he batted at No. 4 due to the injury @-@ enforced absence of opener Barnes , which resulted in a reshuffle in the batting order . Miller totalled 1 @,@ 088 first @-@ class runs for the tour , the seventh highest aggregate , although his average of 47 @.@ 30 was only the eighth highest in the squad . During the tour matches , he batted in a variety of positions , as did all of the squad , because Bradman used a rotation system to rest his team because many matches were played consecutively . 
 When fit , Miller opened the Test bowling with Lindwall , and the pair bowled in short and fiery bursts with the new ball . The English cricket authorities had agreed to make a new ball available every 55 overs . The pre @-@ existing rule stipulated that a replacement ball would be available every 200 runs , which usually took much more time to accumulate . This played directly into the hands of the Australians with their vastly stronger pace attack , as a new ball is ideal for fast bowling . Bradman thus wanted to preserve his two first @-@ choice bowlers for a fresh attack every 55 overs . With 13 wickets in the Tests , Miller was third among the Australians behind Lindwall and Johnston , who took 27 apiece . Due to his fragility , Miller was used sparingly compared to the other four Australian frontline bowlers : Lindwall , Johnston , Toshack and Johnson . Toshack and Johnson each delivered more than 170 overs despite playing in one less Test , while Lindwall bowled 224 and Johnston 306 in five matches . In all first @-@ class matches , Miller took 56 wickets at 17 @.@ 58 and held onto 20 catches . There were many consecutive matches during the tour with no intervening rest day , so Bradman ensured that his leading pace duo remained fresh for the new ball bursts in the Tests by giving them a smaller proportion of the bowling during the tour matches . During all first @-@ class matches , Johnston bowled 851 @.@ 1 overs , Johnson 668 , Lindwall 573 @.@ 4 and Toshack 502 , while Miller bowled only 429 @.@ 4 overs . Doug Ring — who was only selected in one Test — bowled 542 @.@ 4 overs , while all rounders Colin McCool and Loxton bowled 399 @.@ 4 and 361 @.@ 2 overs respectively . McCool did not play in any Tests , while Loxton was only entrusted with 63 overs against England . As such , in some tour matches , Miller was not asked to bowl at all , in order to keep him fresh for the Tests . 
 After the tour , Bradman was full of praise for Miller , although somewhat critical of his aggressive batting , which the Australian captain thought to be reckless : 
 One of the most volatile cricketers of any age . Long , rangy , athletic type — drove the ball with tremendous power — tried to hit sixes with abandon . Many of them would have been prodigious . Would have been a far better player had he curbed this propensity and showed more judgement in his hitting . Dangerous bowler with the new ball , swinging it both ways not much short of [ Ray ] Lindwall 's speed . [ ... ] In 1948 he was the best slip field in the world . Altogether , a crowd @-@ pleasing personality ... whose limitations were caused mainly by his own failure to concentrate . 
 Bradman criticised Miller 's hitting of sixes ( 26 ) , feeling that his mercurial all rounder lacked restraint and concentration . In contrast , Fingleton praised Miller 's attitude to cricket , saying " He is never one to accept runs when they are there for the taking ... I acknowledge myself the supreme believer in Miller as a cricketer . He had given me joy in the game approached by others . " With respect to his persistent bouncing of Hutton and Compton , Fingleton said that it was up to England to develop bowlers of express pace — which they lacked at the time — to retaliate against or deter the Australians from pursuing such tactics . Miller 's persistent disagreements with Bradman soon caught up with him , despite the latter 's retirement after the tour . During Bradman 's testimonial match , Miller bowled three consecutive bouncers at his retired captain , dismissing him with the last of these and drawing an angry look . Bradman was one of three members of the national selection panel , and Miller was dropped for the next series against South Africa in 1949 – 50 . Although Bradman denied voting for the omission , most of the players in the team did not believe this . 
 = Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana Andriandrazaka = 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana Andriandrazaka ( also <unk> ) was King of Avaradrano in the central highlands of Madagascar from 1710 to 1730 , and king of neighboring Ambohidrabiby after defeating his brother , Andrianavalonimerina . He was a son of Andriamasinavalona , sovereign of the former Kingdom of Imerina , and his wife <unk> . Sometime during his life Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana adopted Rakotomavo , who would later succeed him as King Andriambelomasina . 
 As a child , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana was sent to live in a village that his father named Ambohimanga . As a young man , his father granted him the region of Avaradrano surrounding the village , and while his father still lived he managed the daily affairs of state in Avaradrano without taking the title of king . He declared Ambohimanga the capital of the region , building numerous structures on the site and adding its first set of defensive walls , ditches and gates . The site 's historic and cultural significance was recognized in 2001 when UNESCO declared it a World Heritage Site , the only one in the cultural category in Madagascar . He became an independent king upon his father 's death and the resulting partition of the Kingdom of Imerina in 1710 , from which he received Avaradrano , the easternmost and largest territory . He died around 1730 and was buried at Ambohimanga . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana Andriandrazaka was a son of Andriamasinavalona , monarch of the former Kingdom of Imerina , and his wife Queen <unk> . As a child , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana was sent to live in a village that his father named Ambohimanga , where he occupied a house at a place called <unk> . 
 As a young man he married <unk> . Oral history provides two conflicting accounts of their marriage . According to one version , the couple had no children of their own , leading the king to adopt the eight daughters and five sons of his sister <unk> . In another version , at least some of the five sons and eight daughters issued from the king 's marriage , and his son Rakotomavo was adopted from a woman called Rangorimanana . The remaining four sons were named <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The names of only three of his eight daughters are preserved in the oral histories : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Adoption of Rakotomavo = = = 
 Two accounts exist regarding the adoption of Rakotomavo , whom Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana designated to rule after him as King Andriambelomasina . According to the first version , Rakotomavo and <unk> were sons of Rangorimanana . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana sent messengers to <unk> to bring the boys to him with the instructions to take note of which child stood closer to the central pillar ( andry , symbolic of strength ) of their mother 's house . When the boys entered the house , Rakotomavo stood closer to the pillar . The children 's relatives refused to allow the messengers to take the children , so the king sent them back with rice , milk , honey and other goods and successfully lured the boys away . 
 In another version of the story , the king adopted all of the children of his sister Rangorimanana . He then devised a test to determine which one would succeed him . He requested his messengers to bring the children a package including lemons , meat , honey , rice , milk and a reed , and to note which child took the reed and stood near the central pillar of the house ; this child was Rakotomavo . 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana selected Rakotomavo to succeed him and assigned the child to be the guardian of his sacred zebu herd . Members of the powerful Tsimahafotsy clan of Ambohimanga declared that his throne name would be Andriambelomasina . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana became an independent king upon his father 's death in 1710 and the consequent partition of the Kingdom of Imerina , from which he received the eastern quadrant of Avaradrano , the largest piece . He established his capital at the village of Ambohimanga ; the cultural and historical significance of this site was recognized by UNESCO in 2001 when it was declared Madagascar 's first cultural World Heritage Site . Throughout his reign as King of Avaradrano ( 1710 – 1730 ) , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana fought to strengthen the authority of his governance at Ambohimanga and attract residents to settle in the surrounding villages while battling his brothers to increase the land under his control . 
 = = = Expansion and management of territory = = = 
 The expansion of Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana 's realm began with the capture of his brother Andrianavalonimerina 's territory , which he ruled from Ambohitrabiby . The king led his brother to believe that they were on friendly terms and that they should work together to support one another . When the king launched a surprise attack on Ambohitrabiby , his brother was unprepared to deflect the offensive and Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana successfully seized control of the territory , which he incorporated into his own . 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana gave four of his sons fiefdoms to rule . His son <unk> was given Alasora and lived there with his brother <unk> , who was not given a fief of his own to rule . He gave <unk> the fief of <unk> and designated <unk> to rule at <unk> . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana gave his adoptive son Rakotomavo the capital of Ambohimanga to rule after his death ; Rakotomavo succeeded Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana as King Andriambelomasina . 
 = = = Fortification of Ambohimanga = = = 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana was the first to systematically establish a network of defenses around the royal residence on the hilltop of Ambohimanga . He built the site 's defensive walls and its first set of seven gates . He also undertook three expansions of the settlement , beginning with the expansion of Bevato , which he surrounded by trenches , and the creation of a southern gateway called Ambavahadikely . This expansion was followed by the construction of trenches bordering a second adjoining space to the northeast with three access points . These he named Ambavahadikely , <unk> , and <unk> , the latter a natural gateway formed by two boulders . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana then expanded toward the west to a series of natural defenses , including stony cliffs and steep forested slopes that obviated the need to dig defensive trenches ; he instead constructed several additional gates which he named <unk> , <unk> and Ambavahadiantandranomasina . In addition , the king sanctified a number of stones on the site . A stone he named Fidasiana became the site where all future sovereigns were to stand during their enthronement ceremony . He laid this stone at Ambohimanga with Andriamborona , the hill 's first permanent occupant , in honor of Andriamborona 's willingness to vacate the hill for the establishment of Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana 's capital . The king buried white and red pearls and a piastre beneath the stone , sacrificed a zebu on it , and declared that it would thereafter ensure the protection and sanctity of Ambohimanga . He also assigned two other stones at <unk> and <unk> key roles in the royal circumcision ceremony . 
 = = = Decrees = = = 
 This king established a number of enduring traditions in Imerina . A law imposing a fine on a homeowner whose house fire destroys neighboring property was promulgated by Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana . He also established the rule that all citizens of Ambohimanga or Antananarivo should pass to offer hasina to the sovereign and wish him or her a long life if a fire ever broke out in their city , and that citizens should likewise congratulate the owners of houses that were spared from destruction if a fire had occurred nearby . He designated specific areas where water could be drawn for use in royal circumcision ceremonies . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana also created three formal ways of pronouncing a sacred and binding oath ; these included the <unk> <unk> ( striking the surface of a body of water with a stick ) , the <unk> <unk> ( striking a calf with a spear ) and the <unk> <unk> ( drinking water mixed with ashes taken from a king 's tomb ) . After capturing Ambohitrabiby , he obliged all the andriana ( nobles ) and other powerful figures in the community there to formalize their allegiance to him by enacting one of these oaths . 
 = = Death = = 
 Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana died around 1730 at Ambohimanga . His successor , King Andriambelomasina , entombed him at the Mahandrihono compound within the rova at Ambohimanga . 
 = Breathe ( Kylie Minogue song ) = 
 " Breathe " is a song by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue from her sixth studio album , Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) . The song was released on 16 March 1998 , as the third single from the album , and her final one for the label , Deconstruction Records . " Breathe " was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Minogue with Dave Ball and Ingo Vauk . Backed by synthesisers and keyboards , it is an electronica track . The lyrics revolve around contemplation and calmness . " Breathe " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , some who highlighted the track as an album stand @-@ out and commended the lyrical and vocal delivery . However , some critics were unimpressed by the composition . 
 Released in Australia , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , it peaked at number twenty @-@ three and fourteen on the Australian Singles Chart and the UK Singles Chart , respectively . This was her last charting single in the UK until her 2000 single " Spinning Around " . To promote " Breathe " , Minogue performed the song on Top of the Pops and her Intimate and Live Tour . Kieran Evans directed the song 's music video , which features Minogue floating in an open airspace with spiral effects that were generated by CGI . The video was positively received for the production and the visual effects . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Breathe " is about contemplation and holding back emotions . The lyrics were written by Minogue in Tokyo during her trips with her boyfriend , Stéphane Sednaoui , in late @-@ 1995 . She explained the idea came to mind when her friends were worried about her being silent : " My girlfriend told me ' You don 't realize how loud you are when you are quiet ' . " She felt that it was " typical " of her to be thinking and " deciding what was wrong " because she felt that things in her head " were not clear . " 
 " Breathe " is an electronica song that lasts a duration of four minutes and thirty @-@ eight seconds . Minogue composed the bridge section using a synthesiser and keyboards . Livingston Brown played the bass guitar , and Steve Sidelnyk played the drums on the track ; other additional instruments were handled by Ball and Vauk . " Breathe " was recorded in London , England at Ball and Vauk 's home studio 's while additional recording was handled at Mayfair Studios . Minogue flew to Chicago , USA to re @-@ record her vocals for the remix by American producer and disc jockey , Todd Terry . 
 = = Release and commercial response = = 
 " Breathe " was released on 16 March 1998 as the third single from Impossible Princess . It was her final single for the labels , Deconstruction and BMG . Like " Did It Again " , " Breathe " appeared as a double @-@ set of CD singles . The CD set features remixes and the album version , where the first set includes an interactive music video of " Did It Again " . The artwork for the singles was shot by Sednaoui , who had photographed the album cover and photo shoot for Impossible Princess . Both CD sets feature close @-@ up shots of Minogue 's face , individually taken from different directions . The song was released as a promotional CD and cassette single in the UK and in vinyl format in Spain , Australia and the UK . 
 " Breathe " debuted at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart on the week end of 21 March 1998 . The song lasted four weeks in the chart . The song was the fourth highest debut single from that week , the highest being Spice Girls ' single " Stop " at number 2 . This became Minogue 's twenty @-@ eighth consecutive top forty single . " Breathe " and " Did It Again " were equally Minogue 's highest charting singles from Impossible Princess . " Breathe " debuted and peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Australian Singles Chart on the week end of 26 April 1998 . The song lasted thirteen weeks in the top fifty , one of her longest spanning singles in the chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Breathe " received mostly positive commentary from music critics . Michael R. Smith from Daily Vault said " Breathe " and album track " Did It Again " are " most notable for the videos that went along with them and are fair representations of the album at large ( which should be the purpose of singles ) , though there are many more undiscovered gems here . " Nick Levine from Digital Spy selected the song as the album 's best track by writing " Truth be told , this album lacks an absolute classic to match ' Confide in Me ' , but ' Breathe ' – subtle but sneakily catchy with it – could be one of [ Minogue ] ' s most underrated singles . " While reviewing Minogue 's 2004 compilation , Ultimate Kylie , Jaime Gill from Yahoo ! Music gave it a mixed review by writing " Beginning in 1994 with the gorgeously glacial , <unk> synthetic ' Confide In Me ' , Kylie enjoyed brief success before fans fled in droves from awkward faux @-@ rock like ' Some Kind of Bliss ' ( not included ) and flimsy house like ' Breathe ' . " Reviewing her 2002 compilation , Hits + , Mackenzie Wilson from Allmusic commended Minogue 's " seductive vocals " on " Breathe " , " Automatic Love " and " Confide in Me " . 
 Chris True , also from Allmusic , selected the song as a standout track on her Greatest Hits 87 @-@ 97 album . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard listed " Breathe " at four on their " Kylie Minogue Primer : The Top 10 Past Hits You Need to Know " stating " ' Breathe ’ is the obvious stand out , sounding almost like a Nine Inch Nails throwaway in its opening seconds and morphing into a silky , sexy defence of Minogue 's experimental side . " Louis Virtel from The Backlot listed " Breathe " at number 14 on their " Kylie Minogue ’ s 50 Best Songs , in Honor of Her Birthday " and said " ' Breathe ' would be a meditative masterpiece if it weren 't so confrontational , deadpan , and sexually domineering . Impossible Princess unassuming heart stopper trips into unexpected carnality in its choruses , assuring you ' It won ’ t be long now ' as you try to time your hyperventilation . " According to Tom Parker , who provided the special edition album notes for Impossible Princess , " [ ' Breathe ' ] is a seductive electronic groove , with a hypnotic subtlety and timelessness befitting the theme inward contemplating and resolve . " Larry Flick from Billboard said that " Breathe " is a " user @-@ friendly jam " which is " largely due to its big @-@ beat electronic groove and ear @-@ tickling pop chorus . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video was directed by Welsh film director Kieran Evans . " Breathe " was Evan 's directional debut and he went on to work for Heavenly Films , a sister project of British record label Heavenly Recordings . It opens with close @-@ up shots of Minogue 's body parts . Throughout the video , a giant glass orb is seen on the screen and a mysterious light is shown . From there onwards , it shows Minogue in an airspace of spiral effects , all produced by green screen and CGI effects . In the second verse , it has three shots of Minogue layering over top , with one of the scenes having her singing the track . The video then finishes with Minogue floating away , being an in @-@ set of her own eye , which was seen at the start of the video . For the radio @-@ video version , the song is sped up at a faster tempo . 
 One of the shots of the video was used as the album cover for her 2002 greatest hits compilation , Confide in Me . The music video is featured on other of Minogue 's releases including The Kylie Tapes 94 – 98 , Greatest Hits 1987 – 1999 , Kylie Minogue : Artist Collection and the most recent was on her 2004 DVD , Ultimate Kylie . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Minogue performed " Breathe " in April 1998 on The Ben Elton Show , and on the Australian evening TV series , Hey Hey It 's Saturday . The song was included on several live shows including the Top of the Pops , The National Lottery Live and Live & Kicking music show . 
 Minogue included the song on the Intimate and Live Tour . The song was featured on the second segment for the tour for which Minogue wore a black , long @-@ collared shirt and three @-@ quarter pants , similar to the " Indie Kylie " costume from her music video ' Did It Again ' . Like the rest of the costumes on the tour , including the performance of " Breathe " , it features Minogue with a lot of " princess " -inspired outfits . The performance was recorded on 30 June and 1 July at Capitol Theatre in Sydney , and appeared on the related CD and DVD . " Breathe " was performed by Minogue on Money Can 't Buy , a one @-@ off concert show held on 15 November 2003 at Hammersmith Apollo , London , to promote her ninth studio album Body Language . The " Bardello " act of the concert commenced with a mashup of " Breathe " and " Je t 'aime ... moi non plus " , a 1969 French duet between Serge Gainsbourg and Jane Birkin . Craig McLean from the Daily Telegraph described the backup dancers during this segment as " Tour de France cyclists moonlighting as Moulin Rouge hostesses . " The performance was later added to Minogue 's Body Language Live DVD from the concert . 
 In 2011 , Minogue sang an acoustic version while on her 2011 Aphrodite World Tour . In 2012 , the orchestral version of the song didn 't make the track list of The Abbey Road Sessions but was uploaded on Minogue 's official YouTube account . In 2014 and 2015 , Minogue sampled the song as an introduction for her Kiss Me Once Tour and Kylie Summer 2015 Tour <unk> . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Breathe " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from both maxi @-@ single liner notes . 
 = = = Song credits = = = 
 Kylie Minogue – vocals , song writing , production , synthesiser , keyboards 
 Dave Ball – songwriting , production , other instruments 
 Ingo Vauk – songwriting , production , other instruments 
 Livingstone Brown – bass guitar 
 Steve Sidelnyk – drums , percussion 
 Richard Lowe – engineer , mixing 
 Sunny <unk> – engineer , mixing 
 = = = Cover credits = = = 
 Kylie Minogue – model 
 Stephane Sednaoui – photographer , designer 
 Farrow Design – cover sleeve programmer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Twyford Down = 
 Twyford Down is an area of chalk downland lying directly to the southeast of Winchester , Hampshire , England . It is situated near the South Downs National Park , next to St. Catherine 's Hill . The down has been used as a settlement since pre @-@ Roman times , and has hosted a fort and a chapel , as well as being a popular 17th and 18th century coaching route . 
 In 1991 , the down became the site of a major road protest against the completion of a section of the M3 motorway from London to the south coast of England . There had been plans since the 1970s to replace an earlier 1930s @-@ built bypass of Winchester , which became regularly congested due to design features that had become out of date . This became problematic due to the lack of available land between Winchester College and St. Catherine 's Hill . After several public inquiries , particularly with problems using the water meadows near the college , a route was chosen that took the motorway over the down , ultimately in a cutting . Although protesting against the M3 had been ongoing since the early 1970s , the protest @-@ action on top of the down , described in 1994 as the most controversial British motorway project ever to start construction , attracted a wider group of classes of people than had previously been the case , and included physical violence from onsite security officers . 
 The motorway was completed as planned , and provided an important link of continuous motorway between Greater London and the South Coast ports . Nevertheless , the protests attracted interest from the national media , and drew attention to this form of campaigning . Subsequent road schemes were altered to take greater account of the environment or cancelled altogether . Several protesters at Twyford Down subsequently went on to form campaign groups such as the Campaign for Better Transport . 
 = = History = = 
 Twyford Down sits to the southeast of Winchester and the northeast of Twyford , and is part of the Winchester @-@ East Meon Anticline . The down 's 142 @-@ metre ( 466 ft ) summit , known as Deacon Hill , is towards the north @-@ eastern edge of the area which is renowned for its dramatic rolling scenery and ecologically rich grassland . Its history can be traced back to pre @-@ Roman times . Along it run a series of trackways known as " <unk> " , which resulted from farmers herding animals to surrounding markets . St Catherine 's Hill , in the centre of the down has been identified as a human settlement more than 3 @,@ 000 years ago and pre @-@ dates the foundation of Winchester . In the 3rd century , a fort was constructed on the hill , while in the 12th , a Norman chapel was constructed on the site . During the Middle Ages , paths along the down formed part of the Pilgrim 's Trail from Winchester to Normandy via Portsmouth . This is commemorated by the modern Pilgrims ' Trail which crosses the down . 
 In 1675 , John Ogilby noted that the main coaching route from London to Southampton ran over the top of the down , going directly from Alresford to Twyford , avoiding Winchester . This remained the main coaching route until about 1800 , when an alternative route via Winchester ( now mostly the A31 and former A33 ) was formed . During this time , and up to the 19th century , the area was sometimes known as <unk> Down after the nearby village of <unk> . 
 Hockley Golf Club was established as a private members ' club on the down in 1914 . 
 = = The M3 motorway extension = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Outline strategic planning for the route of what was to be later known as the M3 motorway had begun in the late 1930s . The route was to link London to Basingstoke , in order to reduce the pressure on the A30 . Detailed planning for the first phase of construction , a 40 miles ( 64 km ) section , between Sunbury on Thames and Popham , began in 1962 @-@ 3 . The 26 miles ( 42 km ) section , between <unk> and Popham , where the A30 and the A303 separated , opened in June 1971 ; this was followed by the Sunbury to <unk> section which opened in July 1974 . The second phase was to extend the motorway 10 miles ( 16 km ) southwards between Popham and Winchester , ending at Compton . Planning began with the first public inquiry which was held in 1971 , to set the line of the motorway , and this second section was opened in 1985 . The third and final phase was to extend the motorway from Winchester to Southampton and the M27 motorway , and the northern part of this section was to impact on Winchester 's bypass . 
 Winchester had been a traffic bottleneck for many years as several major routes passed through the historic city centre , including the A31 , A33 and A34 , as well as smaller routes like the A272 . In the 1930s , a by @-@ pass was planned to the east of the city , passing immediately west of St. Catherine 's Hill , opening to traffic on 1 February 1940 . Construction of this had been controversial as it affected the Itchen Valley and offered only a partial solution to congestion , with some people calling instead for a by @-@ pass to the north and west of Winchester . 
 As a 1930s road construction project , the bypass was built to then @-@ contemporary standards , including at @-@ grade crossings at Bar End and at Hockley . As time progressed , the bypass became more and more of a bottleneck as roads around it were improved to higher standards , particularly after the opening of the A33 Chandler 's Ford Bypass in 1968 and the A34 King 's Worthy Link the following year , which meant all long distance traffic , as opposed to merely that from London to Southampton , was using the bypass . Morgan Morgan @-@ Giles described the bypass as " utterly inadequate and dangerous , as everybody who lives in or near Winchester will agree . The accident figures are appalling . Therefore , a new motorway somewhere to relieve the traffic is urgently needed . " The crossing at Bar End was grade separated in 1973 , but the junction at Hockley remained a key point of congestion . 
 = = = Public inquiries = = = 
 At this point , the option of going over or through Twyford Down had not been considered , and the alignment of the proposed six @-@ lane M3 motorway ( three lines in each direction ) was to run through the Itchen valley roughly west of the existing four @-@ lane bypass . This would also require the realignment of the Itchen Navigation into the water meadows . However , there would be further screening of the motorway and pedestrian access to St. Catherine 's Hill from the city . These proposals had gone through two public inquiries in 1971 and 1976 , respectively . The first in 1971 , the line order inquiry , had considered the proposed route of the motorway ; and in 1973 the government approved this route . The second inquiry , in 1976 , was to consider both the stopping up of side roads and the compulsory purchase orders for the land needed to build the motorway . The latter inquiry in particular had drawn significant objection from protesters , including masters from Winchester College . Morgan @-@ Giles argued in parliament to support the scheme , pointing out that Winchester and the Down had been cut off since construction of the old bypass anyway , and growth of Southampton Docks meant that improved links from London and the Midlands would become increasingly essential . This schema was eventually rejected due to intensifying local pollution and disturbance . 
 In 1981 , Kenneth Clarke , then the Secretary of State for Transport , stated that , since the route of the M3 was then fixed as far as Bar End , to the north of St. Catherine 's Hill , that its route from there to Compton would undergo a fresh study , specifically stating that the Winchester Bypass should continue to be operational during construction of any new road , and that environmental matters were a key concern . By February 1983 , consulting engineers Mott Hay and Anderson had submitted a recommendation to complete the M3 through Twyford Down . Following the completion of the motorway to Bar End in the summer of 1985 , the junction at Hockley was the only set of traffic lights between London and Southampton . 
 The Ministry of Transport ( <unk> ) had trouble purchasing the land required to complete the route past Winchester . The land required , east of the city on Twyford Down , was owned by Winchester College , which refused to sell the land to the government because part was a water meadow . The desired route , however , had been chosen to avoid St. Catherine 's Hill , and pass to the south . Proposals were made for a tunnel through Twyford Down , but the estimated cost for this was £ 75 million more than the estimated cost for a cutting , and the government dismissed the plans . The final route chosen ran to the south of St. Catherine 's Hill , taking 1 @.@ 91 hectares ( 4 @.@ 7 acres ) ( approximately 4 @.@ 5 % ) of the Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , and went to a public inquiry in 1985 , where the then Planning Officer of Winchester City Council described the route as " bold " and an " imaginative solution " In February 1992 , the M3 was improved between Southampton and Compton , and soon afterwards work began on clearing the route across the down . Part of the contract stipulated that the old bypass would be removed and restored to nature , restoring direct access to St. Catherine 's Hill . 
 = = = Physical protests = = = 
 Protests against the completion of the M3 had been ongoing since 1973 , with the formation of the M3 Joint Action Group by David Pare . The group gathered together a petition of 19 @,@ 000 , of which 11 @,@ 227 were Winchester residents . The group was also active in distributing leaflets to the local community . 
 In March 1992 , two travellers pitched a camp on the down , and discovered from local ramblers about the Bar End - Compton contract , meaning the land they were sitting on would soon be excavated . In response , noting that public inquiries had failed to stop construction , they decided to gather support . In May 1992 , environmental organisations attempted to take Department for Transport to the High Court , stating that the road was against the government 's own environmental protection laws . The European Commission dropped the case that August . David Croker , who had become head of the protest group Twyford Down Association , said they " had come to depend on the European Commission so we 're very disappointed . " 
 The principal arguments of the protesters were their concern about making wildlife species , such as the <unk> Blue butterfly , extinct , putting a highly visible scar on the landscape , and that they believed the new motorway would not adequately resolve traffic problems . 
 Protesters demonstrated their opposition to the road 's construction by blocking the path of construction equipment , but generally not involving themselves in physical altercations . They were met by security officers from Group 4 . In December 1992 , in view of a film crew from The Observer , a protester was assaulted by five officers . Another protester , according to a report by local MP John Denham , was strangled by officers and left unconscious on top of the Down for 30 minutes . Maggie Lambert , then a mature photography student , took numerous photographs of the protest , and challenged an injunction which suggested she had been involved with direct action . While Lord Justice Mann admitted there was no evidence to suggest she had done anything more than take photographs , the injunction was upheld . <unk> Rebecca Lush Blum , who had stayed on the down from September to the night of eviction , later claimed " It was a horrific experience and very violent . We were dragged through thorns and we were being kicked and punched and someone pulled out a clump of my hair . " In March 1993 , Kenneth Carlisle , then Minister for Roads and Traffic , refused to order an inquiry into any wrongdoing or excessive force by security officers , stating it was a matter for the police . 
 The protest attracted different classes of people , the majority of which were peaceful . According to Denham , a popular phrase amongst those protesting was " I never thought that I would find myself doing something like this . " Stephen Ward , who had been involved in the original 1970s protest , decided in early 1993 that excessive force was being used against protesters , and started keeping a log of events . He used this log when defending other protesters in court , visited those who had been imprisoned , and offered them bail . He subsequently established a legal precedent of the right for protesters and demonstrators to have a witness while being questioned . 
 = = = Outcome = = = 
 The motorway section that was eventually constructed through Twyford Down completed the route of the M3 motorway . This removed traffic from the earlier Winchester Bypass , allowing its closure , and significantly reduced heavy traffic volumes from the village of Twyford . When interviewed for The Independent , local residents said the removal had transformed the place , one adding " St. Catherine 's Hill used to be cut off from Winchester by the A33 . Now there 's open , peaceful countryside . It 's wonderful . " To redress the loss of 1 @.@ 91 hectares ( 4 @.@ 7 acres ) of SSSI land , the old route of the A33 was planted with 7 @.@ 2 hectares ( 18 acres ) of species @-@ rich grassland under the supervision and monitoring of The Institute of Terrestrial Ecology . 
 In 1994 , a government committee concluded that building more roads encourages more traffic and that the way to ease congestion and pollution was to take measures to control car use rather than accommodate more . When Labour came to power in 1997 , most of the road schemes were cancelled . 
 In 2000 , campaigners mounted legal action to preserve an area of grassland created on the route of the old A33 Winchester bypass in mitigation of the land lost to the motorway which was threatened by a Park and Ride site . The legal action failed and the campaigners claimed that they had been betrayed for a second time . Land was provided elsewhere in mitigation . 
 In 2004 , Winchester Cathedral received £ 86 @,@ 000 from the Highways Agency in compensation for increased traffic noise from the M3 . The Rev. Michael Till explained that " the noise comes beaming straight across The Close . It does change life having a perpetual background noise " . Also in that year , veterans of a Twyford Down protest threatened a new campaign of direct action in response to 200 new road @-@ building proposals in the government 's recently unveiled ten @-@ year transport plan . Rebecca Lush Blum went on to found Road Block in 2005 , which became part of the Campaign for Better Transport ( UK ) in 2007 . Veteran road protester Chris Gillam believes that his efforts in protesting against Twyford Down , where he took an active role in confronting security officers and crawling under razor wire , helped later road schemes , such as the Hindhead Tunnel to be planned with greater consideration about the environment . 
 In 2012 , several of the original protesters returned to the down to hold a 20th anniversary celebration of the protest . 
 In 2011 , Twyford Down became part of the western extremity of the South Downs National Park , having previously been designated as part of the East Hampshire AONB ( Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ) . 
 = Fernão Pires de Andrade = 
 Captain Fernão Pires de Andrade ( also spelled as Fernão Peres de Andrade ; in contemporary sources , <unk> ( <unk> ) Perez <unk> ) ( died 1552 ) was a Portuguese merchant , pharmacist , and official diplomat under the explorer and Portuguese Malacca governor Afonso de Albuquerque . His encounter with Ming China in 1517 — after initial contacts by Jorge Álvares and Rafael <unk> in 1513 and 1516 , respectively — marked the resumption of direct European commercial and diplomatic contact with China . ( Even though there were Europeans in Medieval China , notably Marco Polo , that period of contact had been interrupted by the fall of the Yuan dynasty . ) Although de Andrade 's mission was initially a success that allowed a Portuguese embassy to proceed all the way to Beijing , relations were soon spoiled by culminating events that led to an extremely negative impression of the Portuguese in China . This included acts of his brother Simão that enraged the Chinese , false reports of the Portuguese being cannibals of kidnapped Chinese children and true reports of their conquest of Malacca , a loyal Ming tributary state . <unk> trade and relations between Portugal and the Ming dynasty would not resume until the late 1540s and the 1557 establishment of Portuguese rule over Macau . 
 Andrade was referred to as a " <unk> " ( <unk> ) in Ming dynastic archives . <unk> comes from Franques or Franks , which was a generic name the Muslims called Europeans since the Crusades , and which spawned the Indian @-@ Southeast Asian term <unk> . The Chinese adopted the convention when they first thought the Portuguese were related to those Muslim guides and interpreters during Fernão 's first encounter and before Europeans directly convened with Chinese . 
 = = Voyages abroad = = 
 = = = India , Sumatra , and Malacca = = = 
 Fernão Pires de Andrade commanded a vessel in the naval venture of the Portuguese explorer and conqueror Afonso de Albuquerque from Cochin in India to conquer the Malacca Sultanate in 1511 . The Portuguese historian João de Barros ( 1496 – 1570 ) wrote that when a violent storm arose as Albuquerque 's fleet entered the vast waters between Sri Lanka and Aceh , a ship commanded by Simão Martinho was sunk , but his entire crew was rescued by Fernão and taken aboard his ship . To make up for this loss , the Portuguese captured and commandeered five ships from Gujarat that were sailing between Malacca and Sumatra . The small fleet of Albuquerque engaged an enemy " junk " ship of the Malaccan " Moors " near an island between <unk> and <unk> . According to Barros , they fought against this ship for two days . The enemy crew employed tactics of lighting fire to its own ship as a means to burn Albuquerque 's ships as they employed ramming techniques and close @-@ range volleys of artillery . Although the ship surrendered ; the Portuguese gained such an admiration for the junk and its crew that they nicknamed it O Bravo ( The Brave Junk ) . The Portuguese crew pleaded with Fernão Pires to convince Albuquerque that the crew should be spared and viewed vassals of Portugal who were simply unaware of who they were actually fighting . Albuquerque eventually agreed to this . 
 While writing of Afonso de Albuquerque 's ventures in Sumatra , João de Barros noted that the Chinese were the first to control trade between Sumatra and India , and noted the presence of Chinese people living in Sumatra . Barros also noted that while Fernão Pires was loading Southeast Asian spices onto his ship in Pacem ( a kingdom in Sumatra ) in order to sell or present them as gifts in China , two different kings were killed and their position usurped . Apparently the usurpation of kings caused little tumult or crisis in this state , as Barros noted any leader there was believed by the locals not to have divine right to rule if he was able to be killed by a royal kinsman . Historian Mark Dion notes that Fernão related the same story in his writing , only adding that a Muslim in their society was the only acceptable replacement as ruler . 
 = = = Initial contact with China = = = 
 After the conquest of Malacca in 1511 , not only did the Portuguese monopolize the European spice trade , but they also met and traded avidly with Chinese merchants . When Portuguese under Diogo Lopes de Sequeira had earlier arrived in Malacca in 1509 to open trade relations , he was supported by the local Chinese merchants there ( along with Javanese and Tamil merchants ) . D <unk> sent Jorge Álvares to explore northward ; his expedition sailed along the coast of Guangdong in 1513 and hoisted a flag on " Tuen Mun island " . This mission was followed up later that year by Rafael <unk> , who later traded with Chinese merchants of Canton in 1516 . He provided an enticing report to other Portuguese on the lucrative trade in China . This prompted Andrade to speed up the course of his mission while stalled in Malacca and debate with his crew on whether to go to China or Bengal . 
 = = = Mission of Manuel I to China = = = 
 = = = = Choosing the ambassadors = = = = 
 King Manuel I authorized a trade mission in 1517 when Andrade set sail with 7 cannon @-@ armed merchant vessels with a Muslim interpreter on June 17 , 1517 . Andrade had been chosen for this mission in Lisbon back in 1515 , so that — as a pharmacist — he could investigate the types of pharmaceutical drugs used in East Asia for the benefit of the Portuguese and Europe . Florentine merchant Giovanni da Empoli , who had written a report about trade with China while stationed in India , was also chosen for the mission as the chief commercial agent between the Portuguese and Chinese . However , Giovanni would die in China during the early mission on October 15 , 1517 when the ship he was on accidentally caught on fire . Tomé Pires , a royal apothecary who had also traveled to India and written a landmark work in 1515 on Asian trade , was chosen as the chief ambassador for the mission . 
 = = = = First contact = = = = 
 Although the mission was stalled once they lost a ship in the Strait of Malacca , they nonetheless landed at the Pearl River estuary on August 15 with eight ships and negotiated with Chinese officials for possible silk and porcelain trade at Canton . The Chinese naval commander of Nantou ( under the jurisdiction of Zhongshan , located at the mouth of the Pearl River ) stalled Andrade 's small fleet of ships for an entire month while Andrade waited for permission to sail upriver to Canton . After Andrade threatened to sail upriver without permission , the naval commander finally decided to let him pass , granting him pilots to assist his travel . 
 Once the ships sailed into port at Canton , they alarmed the Chinese residents and officials there by discharging cannon fire , what they believed was a friendly salute since the Chinese merchants had done so when the Portuguese earlier arrived in Malacca . Chinese officials became even more cautious in dealing with the Portuguese , since the deposed King of Malacca had been a loyal tributary to the imperial Ming court . The Portuguese explained that in deposing the Malaccan king , they were helping the Chinese merchants there who were being oppressed under his rule . In the eyes of the Canton officials , this added further negative speculations about the Portuguese visitors , because private Chinese overseas trade was banned under the current hai jin laws that stated only the Chinese government could conduct foreign trade . 
 Although the local Canton officials watched the Portuguese and their ships closely , once the provincial authorities arrived at Canton they greeted the Portuguese with a warm reception , providing them comfortable lodgings and had their trade goods brought ashore . The Chinese became suspicious once again of Andrade , this time for being a spy , when he sent a ship along the Fujian coast to look for further trade prospects , but he left a good impression when he gave the order that any locals who might be harmed by a Portuguese should seek him for redress . Besides exploring Fujian , Andrade sent one of his captains named Jorge de Mascarenhas to explore the Ryukyu Islands after he heard of their beauty while stationed in Malacca . 
 = = = = Andrade 's brother and spoiled relations = = = = 
 Simão de Andrade , brother to Fernão Pires , sailed from Malacca to China with a small crew on three junks in August 1519 . Simào immediately made a bad impression upon the Chinese when he built a fort at the center of Tuen Mun , an island designated for all foreigners to trade . Soon after , Simão ceremoniously executed a Portuguese and barred other foreigners ( mostly Siamese and other South East Asians ) from trading on the island , which drew even more attention to him . When a Chinese official visited the island and began reasserting Ming authority over it , Simão became aggressive and hit him , knocking the official 's hat off . 
 The greatest offense to the Chinese was the supposed kidnapping of children by the Portuguese so they could eat them . In reality , Simão had earned the Portuguese a bad reputation for buying young Chinese slaves , presumably some of whom were kidnapped after Simão offered local Chinese huge sums of money for child slaves . In fact , some boys and girls from wealthy Chinese families were later found by Portuguese authorities at Diu in western India . However , there were no official reports of Simão 's abuses , even though he stayed until September 1520 ; yet rumors of his behavior ( which became associated with all Portuguese ) no doubt reached as far as the court of Beijing , which would soon condemn the Portuguese for this and other reasons . 
 Although he had left Canton , Simão de Andrade landed at Xiamen and Ningbo , establishing settlements there . Simào continued to defy local Chinese laws at Ningbo , and when his men were cheated on a trade deal with a Chinese man in 1545 , Simão sent a band of armed men into the town , pillaged it , and took local women and young girls as their captives . The outraged locals banded together and slaughtered the Portuguese under Simão . A similar episode occurred later when Coelho de Sousa seized the house of a wealthy foreign resident in Jinzhou of Fujian , which led authorities to cut off supplies to the Portuguese ; the Portuguese then attacked and ransacked a nearby village for supplies , which prompted Chinese authorities to destroy thirteen of their ships while thirty Portuguese survivors of this settlement fled to the Portuguese settlement at Macau in 1549 . 
 = = = = End of the mission = = = = 
 The embassy party left behind in Canton in 1518 proceeded north in January 1520 with the rest of the Portuguese under Tomé Pires and Fernão Pires de Andrade . The embassy reached Nanjing , where the Zhengde Emperor was touring in May 1520 , granting the Portuguese embassy a quick audience . However , further diplomatic negotiations were to be resumed once the emperor returned to Beijing ; hence , the Portuguese embassy was sent there to wait for the emperor 's return . 
 Although no Chinese sources detail the event , Portuguese sources tell of how the Portuguese were summoned on the first and fifteenth days of each lunar month to ceremoniously prostrate themselves before a wall of the Forbidden City to seek another audience with the emperor . From Beijing , the Portuguese embassy heard reports that the emperor reached Tongzhou in January 1521 and had the rebel Prince of Ning executed there . The Portuguese embassy had also become aware that ambassadors from the exiled King of Malacca were sent to Beijing seeking assistance from the Chinese emperor in expelling the conquering Portuguese so that their king could be reinstalled there . The Portuguese also knew of two officials in the Censorate — Qiu Daolong and He Ao — who sent memorials to the throne that condemned the Portuguese conquest of Malacca and that their embassy should be rejected . There were also reports sent to Beijing by Canton officials stating that the Portuguese were bothersome foreigners who sought to build their own trading post . 
 With the death of the Zhengde Emperor on April 19 , 1521 , mourning ceremonies were initiated that cancelled all other ceremonies , including the reception of foreign embassies . The newly appointed Grand Secretary , Yang Tinghe , soon turned against the powerful eunuch influence at court , which had grown even more powerful under the Zhengde Emperor . Although Ming officials were of the opinion that only foreign tributary states listed during the beginning of the dynasty should be accepted at court , it was the eunuchs who wanted to expand commercial ties with new foreign countries . These desires were given free rein under the Zhengde Emperor , who was intrigued with and desired to learn about foreign and exotic peoples . However , with his death , eunuch influence at court was challenged by Yang Tinghe , who announced the rejection of the Portuguese embassy under Pires and Andrade the day after the emperor 's death ; the embassy was forced to leave and arrived back in Canton in September . 
 = = = Open hostility to reopening of relations = = = 
 Earlier , in April and May 1521 , five Portuguese ships docked at Tuen Mun to begin trading , but were ordered to leave once officials came to the region to announce the emperor 's death . The Portuguese refused this demand , so the Chinese sent a naval squadron to drive them out , sinking one ship , killing many , and taking the rest as prisoners ( First Battle of Tamao ) . Two more Portuguese vessels arrived in June , were attacked by Chinese ships , but were able to fend off the Chinese attack . Three more Portuguese ships barely fended off another attack in September , the same month that Fernão Pires de Andrade and Tomé Pires arrived back at Canton . Ming authorities would not permit Fernão and Pires to see the prisoners captured in the sea battles and made inventories of their goods and the goods captured from the Portuguese ships . 
 In August 1522 , Martim Afonso de Melo Coutinho arrived at Tuen Mun with three ships , unaware of the conflict and expecting to meet with Chinese officials on establishing consent for a Portuguese trade base in China . Two of his ships were captured in a surprise Chinese attack , while the survivors escaped back to Portugal on the third ship ( see Second Battle of Tamao ) . These encounters and others with the Portuguese brought the first breech @-@ loading culverins into China , mentioned even by the philosopher and scholar @-@ official Wang Yangming in 1519 when he suppressed Zhu <unk> 's rebellion in Jiangxi . 
 The prisoners of these sea battles were eventually executed in 1523 for crimes of " robbery in the high seas " and cannibalism , while Tomé Pires was kept prisoner so that he could write letters to the King of Portugal , the Viceroy of Portuguese India , and the Governor of Malacca conveying the new Ming emperor 's message that the Portuguese should leave Malacca and restore it to the rightful rule of its deposed king . By some accounts , Fernão Pires de Andrade simply died while imprisoned ; others say Andrade was one of those beheaded when a crime of false credentials was placed upon him after a court examined if his embassy was legitimate or spurious due to negative accounts of the Portuguese ( i.e. acts committed by those such as Fernão Pires ' brother Simào ) . Tomé Pires died while living as a prisoner in China ; there is speculation on whether Tomé Pires died in 1524 or 1540 . Two survivors of this embassy were still alive around 1536 , when they sent letters to Malacca and Goa detailing plans for how the Portuguese could capture Canton by force . Other survivors of these missions retired to nearby <unk> ( Lampa ) in Guangdong , where a trade post would exist for several decades ; in 1537 , there were written records of the Portuguese having three warehouses at Lampa , Shangchuan Island , and Macau , and were initially allowed there with the excuse of drying their goods in a storm . 
 Despite initial hostilities , good relations between the Portuguese and Chinese would resume in 1549 with annual Portuguese trade missions to Shangchuan Island , following an event where the Portuguese helped Ming authorities eliminate coastal pirates . In 1554 , Leonel de Sousa — a later Governor of Macau — established positive relations through an agreement with Cantonese authorities and in 1557 the Ming court finally gave consent for a permanent and official Portuguese trade base at Macau . Although Fernão Pires de Andrade and his Portuguese comrades were the first to open up China to the West , another significant diplomatic mission reaching all the way to Beijing would not be carried out until an Italian , the Jesuit Matteo Ricci ( 1552 – 1610 ) ventured there in 1598 . 
 = National Football League = 
 The National Football League ( NFL ) is a professional American football league consisting of 32 teams , divided equally between the National Football Conference ( NFC ) and the American Football Conference ( AFC ) . The NFL is one of the four major professional sports leagues in North America , and the highest professional level of American football in the world . The NFL 's 17 @-@ week regular season runs from the week after Labor Day to the week after Christmas , with each team playing 16 games and having one bye week . Following the conclusion of the regular season , six teams from each conference ( four division winners and two wild card teams ) advance to the playoffs , a single @-@ elimination tournament culminating in the Super Bowl , played between the champions of the NFC and AFC . 
 The NFL was formed in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) before renaming itself the National Football League for the 1922 season . The NFL agreed to merge with the American Football League ( AFL ) in 1966 , and the first Super Bowl was held at the end of that season ; the merger was completed in 1970 . Today , the NFL has the highest average attendance ( 67 @,@ 591 ) of any professional sports league in the world and is the most popular sports league in the United States . The Super Bowl is among the biggest club sporting events in the world and individual Super Bowl games account for many of the most watched television programs in American history , all occupying the Nielsen 's Top 5 tally of the all @-@ time most watched U.S. television broadcasts by 2015 . The NFL 's executive officer is the commissioner , who has broad authority in governing the league . 
 The team with the most NFL championships is the Green Bay Packers with thirteen ; the team with the most Super Bowl championships is the Pittsburgh Steelers with six . The current NFL champions are the Denver Broncos , who defeated the Carolina Panthers 24 – 10 in Super Bowl 50 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and history = = = 
 On August 20 , 1920 , a meeting was held by representatives of the Akron Pros , Canton Bulldogs , Cleveland Indians , Rock Island Islanders and Dayton Triangles at the Jordan and Hupmobile auto showroom in Canton , Ohio . This meeting resulted in the formation of the American Professional Football Conference ( <unk> ) , a group who , according to the Canton Evening Repository , intended to " raise the standard of professional football in every way possible , to eliminate bidding for players between rival clubs and to secure cooperation in the formation of schedules " . Another meeting held on September 17 , 1920 resulted in the renaming of the league to the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) . The league hired Jim Thorpe as its first president , and consisted of 14 teams . Only two of these teams , the Decatur Staleys ( now the Chicago Bears ) and the Chicago Cardinals ( now the Arizona Cardinals ) , remain . 
 Although the league did not maintain official standings for its 1920 inaugural season and teams played schedules that included non @-@ league opponents , the APFA awarded the Akron Pros the championship by virtue of their 8 – 0 – 3 ( 8 wins , 0 losses , and 3 ties ) record . The first event occurred on September 26 , 1920 when the Rock Island Independents defeated the non @-@ league St. Paul Ideals 48 @-@ 0 at Douglas Park . On October 3 , 1920 , the first full week of league play occurred . The following season resulted in the Chicago Staleys controversially winning the title over the Buffalo All @-@ Americans . In 1922 , the APFA changed its name to the National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 In 1932 , the season ended with the Chicago Bears ( 6 @-@ 1 @-@ 6 ) and the Portsmouth Spartans ( 6 @-@ 1 @-@ 4 ) tied for first in the league standings . At the time , teams were ranked on a single table and the team with the highest winning percentage ( not including ties , which were not counted towards the standings ) at the end of the season was declared the champion ; the only tiebreaker was that in the event of a tie , if two teams played twice in a season , the result of the second game determined the title ( the source of the 1921 controversy ) . This method had been used since the league 's creation in 1920 , but no situation had been encountered where two teams were tied for first . The league quickly determined that a playoff game between Chicago and Portsmouth was needed to decide the league 's champion . The teams were originally scheduled to play the playoff game , officially a regular season game that would count towards the regular season standings , at Wrigley Field in Chicago , but a combination of heavy snow and extreme cold forced the game to be moved indoors to Chicago Stadium , which did not have a regulation @-@ size football field . Playing with altered rules to accommodate the smaller playing field , the Bears won the game 9 @-@ 0 and thus won the championship . Fan interest in the de facto championship game led the NFL , beginning in 1933 , to split into two divisions with a championship game to be played between the division champions . The 1934 season also marked the first of 12 seasons in which African Americans were absent from the league . The de facto ban was rescinded in 1946 , following public pressure and coinciding with the removal of a similar ban in Major League Baseball . 
 The NFL was always the foremost professional football league in the United States ; it nevertheless faced a large number of rival professional leagues through the 1930s and 1940s . Rival leagues included at least three separate American Football Leagues and the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , on top of various regional leagues of varying caliber . Three NFL teams trace their histories to these rival leagues , including the Los Angeles Rams ( who came from a 1936 iteration of the American Football League ) , the Cleveland Browns and San Francisco 49ers ( the last two of which came from the AAFC ) . By the 1950s , the NFL had an effective monopoly on professional football in the United States ; its only competition in North America was the professional Canadian football circuit , which formally became the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) in 1958 . With Canadian football being a different football code than the American game , the CFL established a niche market in Canada and still survives as an independent league . 
 A new professional league , the fourth American Football League ( AFL ) , began play in 1960 . The upstart AFL began to challenge the established NFL in popularity , gaining lucrative television contracts and engaging in a bidding war with the NFL for free agents and draft picks . The two leagues announced a merger on June 8 , 1966 , to take full effect in 1970 . In the meantime , the leagues would hold a common draft and championship game . The game , the Super Bowl , was held four times before the merger , with the NFL winning Super Bowl I and Super Bowl II , and the AFL winning Super Bowl III and Super Bowl IV . After the league merged , it was reorganized into two conferences : the National Football Conference ( NFC ) , consisting of most of the pre @-@ merger NFL teams , and the American Football Conference ( AFC ) , consisting of all of the AFL teams as well as three pre @-@ merger NFL teams . 
 Today , the NFL is considered the most popular sports league in North America ; much of its growth is attributed to former Commissioner Pete Rozelle , who led the league from 1960 to 1989 . Overall annual attendance increased from three million at the beginning of his tenure to seventeen million by the end of his tenure , and 400 million viewers watched 1989 's Super Bowl XXIII . The NFL established NFL Properties in 1963 . The league 's licensing wing , NFL Properties earns the league billions of dollars annually ; Rozelle 's tenure also marked the creation of NFL Charities and a national partnership with United Way . Paul Tagliabue was elected as commissioner to succeed Rozelle ; his seventeen @-@ year tenure , which ended in 2006 , was marked by large increases in television contracts and the addition of four expansion teams , as well as the introduction of league initiatives to increase the number of minorities in league and team management roles . The league 's current Commissioner , Roger Goodell , has focused on reducing the number of illegal hits and making the sport safer , mainly through fining or suspending players who break rules . These actions are among many the NFL is taking to reduce concussions and improve player safety . 
 = = = Season and playoff development = = = 
 From 1920 to 1934 , the NFL did not have a set number of games for teams to play , instead setting a minimum . The league mandated a 12 @-@ game regular season for each team beginning in 1935 , later shortening this to 11 games in 1937 and 10 games in 1943 , mainly due to World War II . After the war ended , the number of games returned to 11 games in 1946 and to 12 in 1947 . The NFL went to a 14 @-@ game schedule in 1961 , which it retained until switching to the current 16 @-@ game schedule in 1978 . Proposals to increase the regular season to 18 games have been made , but have been rejected in labor negotiations with the National Football League Players Association ( NFLPA ) . 
 The NFL operated in a two @-@ conference system from 1933 to 1966 , where the champions of each conference would meet in the NFL Championship Game . If two teams tied for the conference lead , they would meet in a one @-@ game playoff to determine the conference champion . In 1967 , the NFL expanded from 15 teams to 16 teams . Instead of just evening out the conferences by adding the expansion New Orleans Saints to the seven @-@ member Western Conference , the NFL realigned the conferences and split each into two four @-@ team divisions . The four conference champions would meet in the NFL playoffs , a two @-@ round playoff . The NFL also operated the Playoff Bowl ( officially the Bert Bell Benefit Bowl ) from 1960 to 1969 . Effectively a third @-@ place game , pitting the two conference runners @-@ up against each other , the league considers Playoff Bowls to have been exhibitions rather than playoff games . The league discontinued the Playoff Bowl in 1970 due to its perception as a game for losers . 
 Following the addition of the former AFL teams into the NFL in 1970 , the NFL split into two conferences with three divisions each . The expanded league , now with twenty @-@ six teams , would also feature an expanded eight @-@ team eight playoff , the participants being the three division champions from each conference as well as one ' wild card ' team ( the team with the best win percentage ) from each conference . In 1978 , the league added a second wild card team from each conference , bringing the total number of playoff teams to ten , and a further two wild card teams were added in 1990 to bring the total to twelve . When the NFL expanded to 32 teams in 2002 , the league realigned , changing the division structure from three divisions in each conference to four divisions in each conference . As each division champion gets a playoff bid , the number of wild card teams from each conference dropped from three to two . 
 = = Corporate structure = = 
 At the corporate level , the National Football League considers itself a trade association made up of and financed by its 32 member teams . Up until 2015 , the league was an unincorporated nonprofit 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) association . Section 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) of the Internal Revenue Code provides an exemption from federal income taxation for " Business leagues , chambers of commerce , real @-@ estate boards , boards of trade , or professional football leagues ( whether or not administering a pension fund for football players ) , not organized for profit and no part of the net earnings of which <unk> to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual . " . In contrast , each individual team ( except the non @-@ profit Green Bay Packers ) is subject to tax because they make a profit . The NFL gave up the tax exempt status in 2015 following public criticism ; in a letter to the club owners , Commissioner Roger Goodell labeled it a " distraction " , saying " the effects of the tax exempt status of the league office have been mischaracterized repeatedly in recent years ... Every dollar of income generated through television rights fees , licensing agreements , sponsorships , ticket sales , and other means is earned by the 32 clubs and is taxable there . This will remain the case even when the league office and Management Council file returns as taxable entities , and the change in filing status will make no material difference to our business " . As a result , the league office might owe around US $ 10 million , but is no longer required to disclose the salaries of its executive officers . 
 The league has three defined officers : the commissioner , secretary , and treasurer . Each conference has one officer , the president . The commissioner is elected by affirmative vote of two @-@ thirds or 18 ( whichever is greater ) of the members of the league , while the president of each conference is elected by an affirmative vote of three @-@ fourths or ten of the conference members . The commissioner appoints the secretary and treasurer and has broad authority in disputes between clubs , players , coaches , and employees . He is the " principal executive officer " of the NFL and also has authority in hiring league employees , negotiating television contracts , disciplining individuals that own part or all of an NFL team , clubs , or employed individuals of an NFL club if they have violated league bylaws or committed " conduct detrimental to the welfare of the League or professional football " . The commissioner can , in the event of misconduct by a party associated with the league , suspend individuals , hand down a fine of up to US $ 500 @,@ 000 , cancel contracts with the league , and award or strip teams of draft picks . 
 In extreme cases , the commissioner can offer recommendations to the NFL 's Executive Committee up to and including the " cancellation or forfeiture " of a club 's franchise or any other action he deems necessary . The commissioner can also issue sanctions up to and including a lifetime ban from the league if an individual connected to the NFL has bet on games or failed to notify the league of conspiracies or plans to bet on or fix games . The current Commissioner of the National Football League is Roger Goodell , who was elected in 2006 after Paul Tagliabue , the previous commissioner , retired . 
 = = Clubs = = 
 The NFL consists of 32 clubs divided into two conferences of 16 teams in each . Each conference is divided into four divisions of four clubs in each . During the regular season , each team is allowed a maximum of 53 players on its roster ; only 46 of these may be active ( eligible to play ) on game days . Each team can also have a 10 @-@ player practice squad separate from its main roster , but the practice squad may only be composed of players who were not active for at least nine games in any of their seasons in the league . A player can only be on a practice squad for a maximum of three seasons . 
 Each NFL club is granted a franchise , the league 's authorization for the team to operate in its home city . This franchise covers ' Home Territory ' ( the 75 miles surrounding the city limits , or , if the team is within 100 miles of another league city , half the distance between the two cities ) and ' Home Marketing Area ' ( Home Territory plus the rest of the state the club operates in , as well as the area the team operates its training camp in for the duration of the camp ) . Each NFL member has the exclusive right to host professional football games inside its Home Territory and the exclusive right to advertise , promote , and host events in its Home Marketing Area . There are several exceptions to this rule , mostly relating to teams with close proximity to each other : the San Francisco 49ers and Oakland Raiders only have exclusive rights in their cities and share rights outside of it ; and teams that operate in the same city ( e.g. New York Giants and New York Jets ) or the same state ( e.g. California , Florida , and Texas ) share the rights to the city 's Home Territory and the state 's Home Marketing Area , respectively . 
 Every NFL team is based in the contiguous United States . Although no team is based in a foreign country , the Buffalo Bills played one home game every season at Rogers Centre in Toronto , Ontario , as part of the Bills Toronto Series from 2008 to 2013 , and the Jacksonville Jaguars will play one home game a year from 2013 to 2016 at Wembley Stadium in London , England , as part of the NFL International Series . Mexico also has hosted an NFL regular @-@ season game , a 2005 game between the San Francisco 49ers and Arizona Cardinals known as " Fútbol Americano " , and 39 international preseason games were played from 1986 to 2005 as part of the American Bowl series . The Raiders and Houston Texans will play a game in Mexico City at Estadio Azteca on November 21 , 2016 . 
 According to Forbes , the Dallas Cowboys , at approximately US $ 4 billion , are the most valuable NFL franchise and the most valuable sports team in the world . Also , all 32 NFL teams rank among the Top 50 most valuable sports teams in the world ; and 14 of the NFL 's owners are listed on the Forbes 400 , the most of any sports league or organization . 
 = = Season format = = 
 The NFL season format consists of a four @-@ week preseason , a seventeen @-@ week regular season ( each team plays 16 games ) , and a twelve @-@ team single @-@ elimination playoff culminating in the Super Bowl , the league 's championship game . 
 = = = Preseason = = = 
 The NFL preseason begins with the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game , played at Fawcett Stadium in Canton . Each NFL team is required to schedule four preseason games , two of which must be at its home stadium , but the teams involved in the Hall of Fame game , as well as any teams playing in an American Bowl game , play five preseason games . Preseason games are exhibition matches and do not count towards regular @-@ season totals . Because the preseason does not count towards standings , teams do not focus on winning games ; instead , they are used by coaches to evaluate their teams and by players to show their performance , both to their current team and to other teams if they get cut . The quality of preseason games has been criticized by some fans , who dislike having to pay full price for exhibition games , as well as by some players and coaches , who dislike the risk of injury the games have , while others have felt the preseason is a necessary part of the NFL season . 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 Currently , the thirteen opponents each team faces over the 16 @-@ game regular season schedule are set using a pre @-@ determined formula : 
 The National Football League runs a seventeen @-@ week , 256 @-@ game regular season . Since 2001 , the season has begun the week after Labor Day and concluded the week after Christmas . The opening game of the season is normally a primetime home game for the league 's defending champion . 
 Most NFL games are played on Sundays , with a Monday night game typically held at least once a week and Thursday night games occurring on most weeks as well . NFL games are not normally played on Fridays or Saturdays until late in the regular season , as federal law prohibits professional football leagues from competing with college or high school football . Because high school and college teams typically play games on Friday and Saturday , respectively , the NFL cannot hold games on those days until the third Friday in December . NFL games are rarely scheduled for Tuesday or Wednesday , and those days have only been used twice since 1948 : in 2010 , when a Sunday game was rescheduled to Tuesday due to a blizzard , and in 2012 , when the Kickoff game was moved from Thursday to Wednesday to avoid conflict with the Democratic National Convention . 
 NFL regular season matchups are determined according to a scheduling formula . Within a division , all four teams play fourteen out of their sixteen games against common opponents - two games ( home and away ) are played against the other three teams in the division , while one game is held against all the members of a division from the NFC and a division from the AFC division as determined by a rotating cycle ( three years for the conference the team is in , and four years in the conference they are not in ) . The other two games are intraconference games , determined by the standings of the previous year - for example , if a team finishes first in its division , it will play two other first @-@ place teams in its conference , while a team that finishes last would play two other last @-@ place teams in the conference . In total , each team plays sixteen games and has one bye week , where they do not play any games . 
 Although the teams any given club will play are known by the end of the previous year 's regular season , the exact dates , times , and home / away status for NFL games are not determined until much later because the league has to account for , among other things , the Major League Baseball postseason and local events that could pose a scheduling conflict with NFL games . During the 2010 season , over 500 @,@ 000 potential schedules were created by computers , 5 @,@ 000 of which were considered " playable schedules " and were reviewed by the NFL 's scheduling team . After arriving at what they felt was the best schedule out of the group , nearly 50 more potential schedules were developed to try and ensure that the chosen schedule would be the best possible one . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 Following the conclusion of the regular season , a twelve @-@ team single elimination tournament , the NFL Playoffs , is held . Six teams are selected from each conference : the winners of each of the four divisions as well as two wild card teams ( the two remaining teams with the best overall record ) . These teams are seeded according to overall record , with the division champions always ranking higher than either of the wild card teams . The top two teams ( seeded one and two ) from each conference are awarded a bye week , while the remaining four teams ( seeded 3 @-@ 6 ) from each conference compete in the first round of the playoffs , the Wild Card round , with the third seed competing against the sixth seed and the fourth seed competing against the fifth seed . The winners of the Wild Card round advance to the Divisional Round , which matches the lower seeded team against the first seed and the higher seeded team against the second seed . The winners of those games then compete in the Conference Championships , with the higher remaining seed hosting the lower remaining seed . The AFC and NFC champions then compete in the Super Bowl to determine the league champion . 
 The only other postseason event hosted by the NFL is the Pro Bowl , the league 's all @-@ star game . The Pro Bowl is held the week before the Super Bowl . The Pro Bowl is not considered as competitive as a regular @-@ season game because the biggest concern of teams is to avoid injuries to the star players . 
 = = Trophies and awards = = 
 = = = Team trophies = = = 
 The National Football League has used three different trophies to honor its champion over its existence . The first trophy , the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup , was donated to the NFL ( then APFA ) in 1920 by the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Corporation . The trophy , the appearance of which is only known by its description as a " silver loving cup " , was intended to be a traveling trophy and not to become permanent until a team had won at least three titles . The league awarded it to the Akron Pros , champions of the inaugural 1920 season ; however , the trophy was discontinued and its current whereabouts are unknown . 
 A second trophy , the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy , was issued by the NFL from 1934 to 1969 . The trophy 's namesake , Ed Thorp , was a referee in the league and a friend to many early league owners ; upon his death in 1934 , the league created the trophy to honor him . In addition to the main trophy , which would be in the possession of the current league champion , the league issued a smaller replica trophy to each champion , who would maintain permanent control over it . The current location of the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy , like that of its predecessor , is unknown . The predominant theory is that the Minnesota Vikings , the last team to be awarded the trophy , somehow misplaced it after the 1969 season . 
 The current trophy of the NFL is the Vince Lombardi Trophy . The Super Bowl trophy was officially renamed in 1970 after Vince Lombardi , who as head coach led the Green Bay Packers to victories in the first two Super Bowls . Unlike the previous trophies , a new Vince Lombardi Trophy is issued to each year 's champion , who maintains permanent control of it . Lombardi Trophies are made by Tiffany & Co. out of sterling silver and are worth anywhere from US $ 25 @,@ 000 to US $ 300 @,@ 000 . Additionally , each player on the winning team as well as coaches and personnel are awarded Super Bowl rings to commemorate their victory . The winning team chooses the company that makes the rings ; each ring design varies , with the NFL mandating certain ring specifications ( which have a degree of room for deviation ) , in addition to requiring the Super Bowl logo be on at least one side of the ring . The losing team are also awarded rings , which must be no more than half as valuable as the winners ' rings , but those are almost never worn . 
 The conference champions receive trophies for their achievement . The champions of the NFC receive the George Halas Trophy , named after Chicago Bears founder George Halas , who is also considered as one of the co @-@ founders of the NFL . The AFC champions receive the Lamar Hunt Trophy , named after Lamar Hunt , the founder of the Kansas City Chiefs and the principal founder of the American Football League . Players on the winning team also receive a conference championship ring . 
 = = = Player and coach awards = = = 
 The NFL recognizes a number of awards for its players and coaches at its annual NFL Honors presentation . The most prestigious award is the AP Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) award . Other major awards include the AP Offensive Player of the Year , AP Defensive Player of the Year , AP Comeback Player of the Year , and the AP Offensive and Defensive Rookie of the Year awards . Another prestigious award is the Walter Payton Man of the Year Award , which recognizes a player 's off @-@ field work in addition to his on @-@ field performance . The NFL Coach of the Year award is the highest coaching award . The NFL also gives out weekly awards such as the FedEx Air & Ground NFL Players of the Week and the Pepsi MAX NFL Rookie of the Week awards . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 In the United States , the National Football League has television contracts with four networks : CBS , ESPN , Fox , and NBC . In general , CBS televises afternoon games in which the away team is an AFC team , and Fox carries afternoon games in which the away team belongs to the NFC . In fall 1984 , the <unk> camera system was used for the first time in a live telecast , at a preseason National Football League game in San Diego between the Chargers and 49ers , and televised by CBS . 
 Since 2011 , the league has reserved the right to give games that , under the contract , would normally air on one network to the other network . CBS also carries a package of five games on Thursday nights during the 2014 season . NBC carries the primetime Sunday Night Football package and seven Thursday night games , which includes the NFL Kickoff game and a primetime Thanksgiving Day game . ESPN carries all Monday Night Football games . The NFL 's own network , NFL Network , carries all Thursday Night Football games , including those on CBS and NBC ( except the Thanksgiving and kickoff games , which remain exclusive to NBC ) . 
 The Super Bowl television rights are rotated on a three @-@ year basis between CBS , Fox , and NBC . In 2011 , all four stations signed new nine @-@ year contracts with the NFL , each running until 2022 ; CBS , Fox , and NBC are estimated by Forbes to pay a combined total of US $ 3 billion a year , while ESPN will pay US $ 1 @.@ 9 billion a year . The league also has deals with Spanish @-@ language broadcasters NBC Universo , Fox Deportes and ESPN Deportes , which air Spanish language dubs of their respective English @-@ language sister networks ' games . The league 's contracts do not cover preseason games , which individual teams are free to sell to local stations directly ; a minority of preseason games are distributed among the league 's national television partners . 
 Through the 2014 season , the NFL had a blackout policy in which games were ' blacked out ' on local television in the home team 's area if the home stadium was not sold out . Clubs could elect to set this requirement at only 85 % , but they would have to give more ticket revenue to the visiting team ; teams could also request a specific exemption from the NFL for the game . The vast majority of NFL games were not blacked out ; only 6 % of games were blacked out during the 2011 season , and only two games were blacked out in 2013 and none in 2014 . The NFL announced in March 2015 that it would suspend its blackout policy for at least the 2015 season . According to Nielsen , the NFL regular season since 2012 was watched by at least 200 million individuals , accounting for 80 % of all television households in the United States and 69 % of all potential viewers in the United States . NFL regular season games accounted for 31 out of the top 32 most @-@ watched programs in the fall season and an NFL game ranked as the most @-@ watched television show in all 17 weeks of the regular season . At the local level , NFL games were the highest @-@ ranked shows in NFL markets 92 % of the time . Super Bowls account for the 22 most @-@ watched programs ( based on total audience ) in US history , including a record 167 million people that watched Super Bowl XLVIII , the conclusion to the 2013 season . 
 In addition to radio networks run by each NFL team , select NFL games are broadcast nationally by Westwood One ( known as Dial Global for the 2012 season ) . These games are broadcast on over 500 networks , giving all NFL markets access to each primetime game . The NFL 's deal with Westwood One was extended in 2012 and will run through 2017 . 
 The NFL , as a one @-@ time experiment , distributed the October 25 , 2015 International Series game from Wembley Stadium in London between the Buffalo Bills and Jacksonville Jaguars . The game was live streamed on the Internet exclusively via Yahoo ! , except for over @-@ the @-@ air broadcasts on the local CBS @-@ TV affiliates in the Buffalo and Jacksonville markets . 
 In 2015 , the NFL began sponsoring a series of public service announcements to bring attention to domestic abuse and sexual assault in response to what was seen as poor handling of incidents of violence by players . 
 = = Draft = = 
 Each April ( excluding 2014 when it took place in May ) , the NFL holds a draft of college players . The draft consists of seven rounds , with each of the 32 clubs getting one pick in each round . The draft order for non @-@ playoff teams is determined by regular @-@ season record ; among playoff teams , teams are first ranked by the furthest round of the playoffs they reached , and then are ranked by regular @-@ season record . For example , any team that reached the divisional round will be given a higher pick than any team that reached the conference championships , but will be given a lower pick than any team that did not make the divisional round . The Super Bowl champion always drafts last , and the runner @-@ up always drafts next @-@ to @-@ last . All potential draftees must be at least three years removed from high school in order to be eligible for the draft . Underclassmen that have met that criterion to be eligible for the draft must write an application to the NFL by January 15 renouncing their remaining college eligibility . Clubs can trade away picks for future draft picks , but cannot trade the rights to players they have selected in previous drafts . 
 Aside from the 32 picks each club gets , compensatory draft picks are given to teams that have lost more compensatory free agents than they have gained . These are spread out from rounds 3 to 7 , and a total of 32 are given . Clubs are required to make their selection within a certain period of time , the exact time depending on which round the pick is made in . If they fail to do so on time , the clubs behind them can begin to select their players in order , but they do not lose the pick outright . This happened in the 2003 draft , when the Minnesota Vikings failed to make their selection on time . The Jacksonville Jaguars and Carolina Panthers were able to make their picks before the Vikings were able to use theirs . Selected players are only allowed to negotiate contracts with the team that picked them , but if they choose not to sign they become eligible for the next year 's draft . Under the current collective bargaining contract , all contracts to drafted players must be four @-@ year deals with a club option for a fifth . Contracts themselves are limited to a certain amount of money , depending on the exact draft pick the player was selected with . Players who were draft eligible but not picked in the draft are free to sign with any club . 
 The NFL operates several other drafts in addition to the NFL draft . The league holds a supplemental draft annually . Clubs submit emails to the league stating the player they wish to select and the round they will do so , and the team with the highest bid wins the rights to that player . The exact order is determined by a lottery held before the draft , and a successful bid for a player will result in the team forfeiting the rights to its pick in the equivalent round of the next NFL draft . Players are only eligible for the supplemental draft after being granted a petition for special eligibility . The league holds expansion drafts , the most recent happening in 2002 when the Houston Texans began play as an expansion team . Other drafts held by the league include an allocation draft in 1950 to allocate players from several teams that played in the dissolved All @-@ America Football Conference and a supplemental draft in 1984 to give NFL teams the rights to players who had been eligible for the main draft but had not been drafted because they had signed contracts with the United States Football League or Canadian Football League . 
 Like the other major sports leagues in the United States , the NFL maintains protocol for a disaster draft . In the event of a ' near disaster ' ( less than 15 players killed or disabled ) that caused the club to lose a quarterback , they could draft one from a team with at least three quarterbacks . In the event of a ' disaster ' ( 15 or more players killed or disabled ) that results in a club 's season being cancelled , a restocking draft would be held . Neither of these protocols has ever had to be implemented . 
 = = Free agency = = 
 Free agents in the National Football League are divided into restricted free agents , who have three accrued seasons and whose current contract has expired , and unrestricted free agents , who have four or more accrued seasons and whose contract has expired . An accrued season is defined as " six or more regular @-@ season games on a club 's active / inactive , reserved / injured or reserve / physically unable to perform lists " . Restricted free agents are allowed to negotiate with other clubs besides their former club , but the former club has the right to match any offer . If they choose not to , they are compensated with draft picks . Unrestricted free agents are free to sign with any club , and no compensation is owed if they sign with a different club . 
 Clubs are given one franchise tag to offer to any unrestricted free agent . The franchise tag is a one @-@ year deal that pays the player 120 % of his previous contract or no less than the average of the five highest @-@ paid players at his position , whichever is greater . There are two types of franchise tags : exclusive tags , which do not allow the player to negotiate with other clubs , and non @-@ exclusive tags , which allow the player to negotiate with other clubs but gives his former club the right to match any offer and two first @-@ round draft picks if they decline to match it . 
 Clubs also have the option to use a transition tag , which is similar to the non @-@ exclusive franchise tag but offers no compensation if the former club refuses to match the offer . Due to that stipulation , the transition tag is rarely used , even with the removal of the " poison pill " strategy ( offering a contract with stipulations that the former club would be unable to match ) that essentially ended the usage of the tag league @-@ wide . Each club is subject to a salary cap , which is set at US $ 143 @.@ 28 million for the 2015 season , US $ 10 million more than in 2014 and US $ 20 million more than in 2013 . 
 Members of clubs ' practice squads , despite being paid by and working for their respective clubs , are also simultaneously a kind of free agent and are able to sign to any other club 's active roster ( provided their new club is not their previous club 's next opponent within a set number of days ) without compensation to their previous club ; practice squad players cannot be signed to other clubs ' practice squads , however , unless released by their original club first . 
 = The Unquiet Dead = 
 " The Unquiet Dead " is the third episode of the first series of the British science @-@ fiction television programme Doctor Who , first broadcast on 9 April 2005 on BBC One . It was written by Mark Gatiss and directed by Euros Lyn . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) and his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) travel to Victorian Cardiff on Christmas , 1869 where there have been sightings of strange gas @-@ like creatures . The Doctor and Rose team up with Charles Dickens ( Simon Callow ) to investigate Mr Sneed ( Alan David ) , a man who runs a funeral parlour where it seems that corpses have come to life . It is revealed that the gaseous Gelth ( voiced by Zoe Thorne ) have entered Cardiff through a Rift , and wish to survive by taking over the corpses . 
 " The Unquiet Dead " is the first episode of the revival to be set in the past , and was intended to show the series ' range . The original brief and script included a focus on mediums and was grimmer in tone , but it evolved into a story about zombies and became more of a " romp " . Callow , who had researched Dickens as well as portraying him on multiple occasions , accepted to guest star in " The Unquiet Dead " because he felt the historical figure was written accurately . The episode also features a guest appearance by actress Eve Myles ; Myles would go on to play Gwen Cooper in the Doctor Who spin @-@ off series Torchwood from 2006 . As contemporary Cardiff , location of the Doctor Who production , did not have enough Victorian architecture , the episode was filmed in Swansea . Computer generated imagery ( CGI ) was used as the main visual effect for the Gelth . " The Unquiet Dead " was seen by 8 @.@ 86 million viewers in the United Kingdom on first broadcast . It attracted generally positive reception , although some reviewers criticised some plot points and lack of moral dilemma . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor attempts to pilot the TARDIS to Naples in 1860 to show Rose the past , but ends up in Cardiff in 1869 instead , on Christmas Eve . At a nearby funeral parlour , run by Gabriel Sneed and his servant Gwyneth , the corpse of the late Mrs. Peace has been taken over by a blue vapour . She rises from her coffin and kills her mourning grandson before lurching away from the parlour . Gwyneth , a clairvoyant , senses that the corpse is going to see Charles Dickens at a nearby theater . In the middle of his performance , the blue vapour leaves Mrs. Peace and scares the audience away . The commotion attracts the attention of the Doctor and Rose , who rush to investigate . Sneed and Gwyneth arrive and capture the corpse , but are confronted by Rose and end up kidnapping her as well . Meanwhile , Dickens accuses the Doctor of ruining the performance , but after the Doctor gushes over his literary genius , Dickens offers to help . 
 At the funeral parlour , Rose wakes up along with the newly @-@ reanimated corpses of Mrs. Peace and Mr. Redpath . The Doctor and Dickens arrive and break into the parlour just in time to rescue Rose . After hearing about the trouble with the corpses , the Doctor convinces Gwyneth to help him hold a séance to attempt to communicate with the dead . The blue vapors fill the room and reveal that they are the remains of the Gelth , a once @-@ corporeal alien race until they were devastated by the Time War . They plead with the Doctor to open the rift that exists in the basement of the parlour and allow them to cross over . The Doctor offers the Gelth temporary use of the corpses until he can transport them to a place where they can build new bodies , using Gwyneth as a bridge to cross the Rift . 
 Gwyneth stands in the middle of an arch and opens the rift , allowing the Gelth to cross over . The number of Gelth is much greater than anticipated , and their true motive is revealed : they intend to kill the living to give themselves more hosts and take over the planet . One of the animated bodies strangles Sneed to death , allowing another Gelth to possess his body . Dickens flees the parlour , and Rose and the Doctor are trapped in a part of the basement . Outside , Dickens realises that the beings are affected by gas and returns to the house . He extinguishes the gaslights and turns the gas on full , pulling the Gelth out of the bodies . The Doctor tells Gwyneth to send the Gelth back and close the rift , but she cannot close it or leave . Instead she takes out a box of matches , intending to ignite the gas and kill the Gelth along with herself . The Doctor determines that Gwyneth is already dead , and that by opening the rift , she had doomed herself . The Doctor , Rose , and Dickens flee the parlour just before it explodes and burns . 
 The Doctor and Rose head back to the TARDIS , and Dickens thanks them for their help . He decides to leave immediately for London to patch up things with his family , and to finish The Mystery of Edwin <unk> . The Doctor and Rose say their goodbyes and disappear in the TARDIS , and the astounded Dickens walks away through the streets of Cardiff , greeting everyone he passes and quoting A Christmas Carol : " God bless us , everyone ! " 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 When looking into Rose 's mind , Gwyneth is frightened and breaks off contact when she sees " the things you 've seen ... the darkness ... the Big Bad Wolf ! " The phrase " bad wolf " recurred in most of the stories in this season , culminating in the episode " Bad Wolf " and finally explained in " The Parting of the Ways " . The Doctor reacts visibly when the Gelth mention the Time War ; the event had been alluded to in " Rose " and " The End of the World " , when the Doctor told Rose that his people had been destroyed in a war . The Cardiff rift reappears in the episodes " Boom Town " and " Utopia " , and is a direct or indirect element in many of the alien encounters in the spin @-@ off series Torchwood , set in Cardiff . The events of the episode are referenced in The Unicorn and the Wasp , when Donna compares the absurdity of the episode 's events to " meeting Charles Dickens , surrounded by ghosts , at Christmas " . and " The End of the World " , when the Doctor told Rose that his people had been destroyed in a war . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Executive producer and head writer Russell T Davies came up with the concept of " The Unquiet Dead " . As the third episode of the revived series , it was designed to continue to show the range of the programme by exploring the past , after the contemporary " Rose " and far @-@ future " The End of the World " . The episode also reintroduces the TARDIS ' habit of taking the Doctor to the wrong places , something that had not yet happened in the revived series . Davies felt that it was important for an episode to be set in Cardiff as that is where the new series is produced , and wanted the story to be set in Victorian times and feature Charles Dickens . Davies ' original brief also included " fake mediums " , and Gatiss originally set it in a " spiritualist hotel " , which had fake mediums ( such as a character named Mrs <unk> ) on the lower floors and Mr Sneed on the top , though he was unaware he was a true medium . However , Gwyneth became a more popular character with the production team , and she took on much of the medium role . Gatiss was also more interested in possession and zombies . Mrs Sneed was another character that was cut out of the episode ; Gatiss believed she was unnecessary as Gwyneth was the " heart " of the story . 
 The working titles for this story included " The <unk> Horror " and " The Angels of <unk> " . The original draft was grimmer , including details about the previous death of Gwyneth 's younger brother , but in subsequent drafts the story became more of a " romp " . Gatiss stated that the name " Gelth " simply popped into his head . Gatiss was encouraged to personify the Gelth , which he originally questioned because he felt that monsters whispering " Doctor " was a cliché ; producer Phil Collinson remarked that perhaps it was a cliché because it worked well . The Rift was added into the plot to simplify the Gelth 's origins . 
 Gatiss originally resisted having Dickens star in the episode , as traditionally the Doctor only mentioned meeting historical figures , but he eventually warmed to the idea . As A Christmas Carol fan , Gatiss wanted to set the episode at Christmas . He later realised that Dickens ' journey in the episode mirrored that of Ebenezer Scrooge . In one scene , Gatiss wanted the knocker on a door behind Dickens to briefly show the Gelth 's face in reference to A Christmas Carol , but this visual effect was not done . The episode originally began in the TARDIS , as Gatiss wanted the first glimpse of 1860 to be through Rose 's eyes . While this changed , Gatiss still wanted to show how great travelling in time is . It was scripted that snow would blow into the TARDIS when the doors opened , but this was cut because of budget reasons . Davies requested a scene in which the Doctor takes Rose to the future to see a world filled with walking corpses — the result if they had left before defeating the Gelth — but this was too expensive to film . During the scene in which the Doctor and Dickens are talking in the coach , the driver was supposed to shout down to them ( referencing a Dickens work ) and the coach was to crash , but this was also too expensive . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Simon Callow , who portrayed Dickens , was considered apt since he possessed extensive knowledge of the author and had experience playing the character and recreating his public readings . Callow contended that for him to agree to play Dickens , the script would have to be a sufficiently high quality . When he heard that the author was to feature in Doctor Who his heart " sank " as he felt fiction has a tendency to posit the author as " a kind of all @-@ purpose Victorian literary character and really understand little , if anything , about him , his life or his books " . Director Euros Lyn noted that the material being of interest to Callow was key to getting him involved . Promoting his role in Doctor Who , Callow stated that writer Mark Gatiss knew " exactly what Dickens is all about " and " very cleverly connects his idealism ... with the Doctor 's desire to save the world " . Callow was also pleased that the episode portrayed Dickens as he was towards the end of his life : ill and sad rather than energetic . In the 2011 episode " The Wedding of River Song " , Callow returned to reprise his role as Dickens briefly . 
 Eve Myles , who played Gwyneth , was initially not supposed to film the episode as she was booked for another role in theatre . However , her agent notified Myles of the role and Myles ' was keen to audition for the series due to its reputation and Eccleston being " one of my favourite actors of all time " . After inadvertently attending the audition in a T @-@ shirt emblazoned with an image of two naked women kissing under the slogan " I support <unk> Colonies " , Myles was convinced she had not got the part ; her appearance contrasted grossly with Gwyneth 's personality . After being notified of her success Myles did not want to prioritise between her theatre commitments and Doctor Who ; her agent decided that she would appear in the episode . Russell T Davies was enamoured by her performance , which he felt confirmed that the actress was " one of Wales 's best @-@ kept secrets " , and subsequently wrote her a lead role in the Doctor Who spin @-@ off Torchwood . Myles ' Torchwood character Gwen Cooper is intimated to be related to Gwyneth in " Journey 's End " after the Doctor asks Gwen about her family history . Alan David was cast as Mr Sneed ; Gatiss was pleased with the casting , as he had grown up watching David . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 Filming took place in September and October 2004 . Although the story is set in 19th century Cardiff , the production was actually filmed in Swansea and Monmouth , as there were not enough Victorian @-@ looking buildings left in Cardiff . Cardiff 's New Theatre was used for the theatre in which Dickens is telling a story at the beginning of the episode . An empty Victorian children 's home in Penarth was used for Sneed 's parlour . Based on research of Victorian morgues , the production team selected red and sepia as the main color scheme . 
 Small pieces of paper were sprayed as snow , which caused a problem as it scared the horses . However , the snow falling from the sky was a foam substance . The actors who played the dead bodies possessed by the Gelth had simple make @-@ up , with just shading and contact lenses and no prosthetics . The production team was mindful of the programme 's audience , and decided to not have any missing facial features . Originally , visual effects company The Mill planned the computer @-@ generated effects ( CGI ) to just be the " ethereal swirl " , but in the seance scene they ran into the challenge of animating the Gelth 's mouth . The Gelth turning red during the seance scene was a " last @-@ minute " change to the visual effects . The Mill overshot their quota of CGI for the episode , and compensated with small swirls in shots that focused on other characters . The head speaking was in fact actress Zoe Thorne , who had been filmed separately and used as a template for animation . In other scenes , Thorne had the challenge of matching her voice @-@ overs to the actors who portrayed the bodies animated by the Gelth . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Unquiet Dead " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 9 April 2005 . In the United States , the episode aired on 24 March 2006 on the Sci @-@ Fi Channel . Overnight figures showed that the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 3 million viewers in the UK , an audience share of 37 % . When final ratings were calculated , figures rose to 8 @.@ 86 million . The episode also received an Appreciation Index of 80 . " The Unquiet Dead " received some criticism from parents , who felt that it was " too scary " for their young children ; the BBC dismissed the complaints , saying that it had never been intended for the youngest of children . 
 Doctor Who novelist and Faction Paradox creator Lawrence Miles posted a scathing review of " The Unquiet Dead " on the Internet within an hour of its broadcast , focusing on a perceived political subtext suggesting that asylum seekers ( the Gelth ) are really all evil and out to exploit liberal generosity ( the Doctor ) . He criticised the script for promoting xenophobia and " claiming that all foreigners were invaders " , especially as the top stories in the news were about immigration into Britain . The review produced considerable backlash on the Internet , mainly over his comments about writer Mark Gatiss . Miles was personally contacted and ran into trouble with his publishers . Miles deleted the review and posted a revision , though the original is still available on another of his websites . 
 Dek Hogan of Digital Spy stated he " really enjoyed " the episode and it was " beautifully dark " . He later described it as " a chilling tale " and " a cracker " . Now Playing magazine reviewer Arnold T Blumburg gave " The Unquiet Dead " a grade of A- , describing it as " spectacular " , though he noted there were " a few hiccups , such as the weak and convenient plot point that forces the Gelth ... to be drawn out of their human hosts by the mere presence of gas " . He also criticised Eccleston for making the Doctor appear an " ineffectual goof " , and noted that he played no role in the resolution . In 2013 , Mark Braxton of Radio Times described the episode as " a sparkling script , as crisp and inviting as a winter wonderland " , praising the magical atmosphere and the treatment of Dickens . However , he felt that " the spectral <unk> are all a bit Raiders of the Lost Ark " . In Who Is the Doctor , a guide to the revived series , Graeme Burk felt that " The Unquiet Dead " was " terribly , terribly disappointing " on first viewing , as Rose and the Doctor 's characterisation did not drive the plot and the story was reduced to playing it safe and being " ordinary " , as it just made the aliens evil instead of discussing their morality . Despite this , he wrote that the story was still enjoyable , with a " delightfully ludicrous " set @-@ up , " vividly realized " period setting , and the characterisation of Dickens . Burk 's coauthor , Robert Smith ? [ sic ] , called the episode a " complete mess " . He felt that Gatiss was attempting to recreate the classic series , but that it came across as " half @-@ hearted " . He felt that there was no moral dilemma and Sneed underwent an unsettling character change . While he noted that Eccleston and Piper were " excellent " , he felt that Rose and the Doctor 's developing relationship was not subtle . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Unquiet Dead " reviews at Outpost Gallifrey 
 " The Unquiet Dead " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Alexander Shulgin = 
 Alexander Theodore " Sasha " Shulgin ( June 17 , 1925 – June 2 , 2014 ) was an American medicinal chemist , biochemist , pharmacologist , <unk> , and author . He is credited with introducing MDMA ( ecstasy ) to psychologists in the late 1970s for <unk> use and for the discovery , synthesis and personal bioassay of over 230 psychoactive compounds for their psychedelic and <unk> potential . 
 In 1991 and 1997 , he and his wife Ann Shulgin authored the books PIHKAL and <unk> ( standing for <unk> and <unk> I Have Known And Loved ) , which extensively described their work and personal experiences with these two classes of psychoactive drugs . Shulgin performed seminal work into the descriptive synthesis of many of these compounds . Some of Shulgin 's noteworthy discoveries include compounds of the 2C * family ( such as 2C @-@ B ) and compounds of the <unk> family ( such as DOM ) . 
 Due in part to Shulgin 's extensive work in the field of psychedelic research and the rational drug design of psychedelic drugs , he has since been dubbed the " godfather of psychedelics " . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Shulgin was born in Berkeley , California to Theodore Stevens Shulgin ( 1893 – 1978 ) and Henrietta D. ( Aten ) Shulgin ( 1894 – 1960 ) . His father was born in Russia , while his mother was born in Illinois . Both Theodore and Henrietta were public school teachers in Alameda County . 
 Shulgin began studying organic chemistry as a Harvard University scholarship student at the age of 16 . In 1943 he dropped out of school to join the U.S. Navy . While serving on USS Pope in the Navy during World War II , Shulgin was given a glass of orange juice by a nurse prior to surgery for a thumb infection . Shulgin drank the juice and , assuming that powder at the bottom of the glass was a sedative , fell asleep rapidly . Upon waking he learned that the powder was undissolved sugar . The experience made him aware of the influence of placebos over the human mind . 
 After serving in the Navy Shulgin returned to Berkeley , California , and in 1954 earned his Ph.D. in biochemistry from the University of California , Berkeley . Through the late 1950s Shulgin completed post @-@ doctoral work in the fields of psychiatry and pharmacology at University of California , San Francisco . After working at Bio @-@ Rad Laboratories as a research director for a brief period , he began work at Dow Chemical Company as a senior research chemist . 
 At this time he had a series of psychedelic experiences that helped to shape his further goals and research , the first of which was brought on by mescaline . " I first explored mescaline in the late ' 50s .... Three @-@ hundred @-@ fifty to 400 milligrams . I learned there was a great deal inside me . " 
 Shulgin later reported personal revelations that " had been brought about by a fraction of a gram of a white solid , but that in no way whatsoever could it be argued that these memories had been contained within the white solid ... I understood that our entire universe is contained in the mind and the spirit . We may choose not to find access to it , we may even deny its existence , but it is indeed there inside us , and there are chemicals that can catalyze its availability . " 
 Shulgin 's professional activities continued to lean in the direction of <unk> , furthered by his personal experiences with psychedelics . But during this period he was unable to do much independent research . His opportunity for further research came in 1961 after his development of <unk> , the first biodegradable pesticide , a highly profitable product . In his book PIHKAL , Shulgin limits his pesticide days at Dow Chemical to one sentence in 978 pages . Dow Chemical Company , in return for <unk> 's valuable patent , gave Shulgin great freedom . During this time , he created and patented drugs when Dow asked , and published findings on other drugs in journals such as Nature and the Journal of Organic Chemistry . Eventually , Dow Chemical requested that he no longer use their name on his publications . 
 In late 1966 , Shulgin left Dow in order to pursue his own interests . He first spent two years studying neurology at the University of California , San Francisco School of Medicine , leaving to work on a consulting project . He set up a home @-@ based lab on his property , known as " the Farm " , and became a private consultant . He also taught classes in the local universities and at the San Francisco General Hospital . Through his friend Bob Sager , head of the U.S. DEA 's Western Laboratories , Shulgin formed a relationship with the DEA and began holding pharmacology seminars for the agents , supplying the DEA with samples of various compounds , and occasionally serving as an expert witness in court . In 1988 , he authored a then @-@ definitive law enforcement reference book on controlled substances , and received several awards from the DEA . 
 = = Independent research = = 
 In order to work with scheduled psychoactive chemicals , Shulgin obtained a DEA Schedule I license for an analytical laboratory , which allowed him to synthesize and possess any otherwise illicit drug . Shulgin set up a chemical synthesis laboratory in a small building behind his house , which gave him a great deal of career autonomy . Shulgin used this freedom to synthesize and test the effects of potentially psychoactive drugs . 
 In 1976 , Shulgin was introduced to MDMA by a student in the medicinal chemistry group he advised at San Francisco State University . MDMA had been synthesized in 1912 by Merck and patented in 1912 as an intermediate of another synthesis in order to block competitors , but was never explored in its own right . Shulgin went on to develop a new synthesis method , and in 1976 , introduced the chemical to Leo Zeff , a psychologist from Oakland , California . Zeff used the substance in his practice in small doses as an aid to talk therapy . Zeff introduced the substance to hundreds of psychologists and lay therapists around the nation , including Ann ( born Laura Ann <unk> ) , whom Alexander Shulgin met in 1979 , and married in 1981 . It was her fourth marriage , and she had had four children . 
 After judicious self @-@ experiments , Shulgin enlisted a small group of friends with whom he regularly tested his creations , starting in 1960 . They developed a systematic way of ranking the effects of the various drugs , known as the Shulgin Rating Scale , with a vocabulary to describe the visual , auditory and physical sensations . He personally tested hundreds of drugs , mainly analogues of various phenethylamines ( family containing MDMA , mescaline , and the 2C * family ) , and <unk> ( family containing DMT and psilocin ) . There are a seemingly infinite number of slight chemical variations , which can produce variations in effect — some pleasant and some unpleasant , depending on the person , substance , and situation — all of which are meticulously recorded in Shulgin 's lab notebooks . Shulgin published many of these objective and subjective reports in his books and papers . 
 In 1994 , two years after the publication of PIHKAL , the DEA raided his lab . The agency requested that Shulgin turn over his license for violating the license 's terms , and he was fined $ 25 @,@ 000 for possession of anonymous samples sent to him for quality testing . In the 15 years preceding the publication of PIHKAL , two announced and scheduled reviews failed to find any irregularities . Richard Meyer , spokesman for DEA 's San Francisco Field Division , has stated that , " It is our opinion that those books are pretty much cookbooks on how to make illegal drugs . Agents tell me that in clandestine labs that they have raided , they have found copies of those books . " 
 Prior to his 2010 health issues , Shulgin had been working on a series of N @-@ <unk> <unk> including 5 @-@ MeO @-@ <unk> and 5 @-@ MeO @-@ MALT . 
 = = Declining health and death = = 
 Shulgin spent most of his later life at the Farm in Lafayette , California . On April 8 , 2008 , at the age of 82 , he underwent surgery to replace a defective aortic valve . On November 16 , 2010 , he suffered a stroke , from which he largely recovered . Also at the close of 2010 , a skin @-@ grafting surgery saved his left foot from being amputated . Around this time , Shulgin began showing early signs of dementia , mostly severe loss of short @-@ term memory . With progression of the dementia since 2010 , his wife Ann Shulgin had been trying to sell part of their property to raise more money to cover care costs . 
 On April 17 , 2014 , Ann Shulgin reported on Facebook that her husband had developed liver cancer , and in a May 31 update on Facebook she said that , although appearing frail , he seemed to be experiencing his last moments in peace and without pain . On June 2 , 2014 , Shulgin died at home in bed surrounded by family , at the age of 88 . 
 = = Societies = = 
 Shulgin was a member of Mensa International and frequently attended Mensa events in California . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 with Manning , Tania & ; Daley , Paul ( 2011 ) . The Shulgin Index Vol 1 : Psychedelic <unk> and Related Compounds . Berkeley : Transform Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 9630096 @-@ 3 @-@ 0 . . 
 with Perry , Wendy ( 2002 ) . The Simple Plant <unk> . Berkeley : Transform Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 9630096 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 . . 
 with Shulgin , Ann ( 1997 ) . " A New Vocabulary " . In Forte , Robert . <unk> and the Future of Religion . Berkeley : Council on Spiritual Practices . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 01 @-@ 3 . . 
 with Shulgin , Ann ( 1997 ) . <unk> : The Continuation . Berkeley : Transform Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 9630096 @-@ 9 @-@ 9 . . 
 with Shulgin , Ann ( 1991 ) . PIHKAL : A Chemical Love Story . Berkeley : Transform Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 9630096 @-@ 0 @-@ 5 . . 
 Controlled Substances : Chemical & Legal Guide to Federal Drug Laws . Berkeley : Ronin Publishing . 1988 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 50 @-@ X. . 
 = Sahure = 
 Sahure ( meaning " He who is close to Re " ) was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh , the second ruler of the Fifth Dynasty , who reigned for about 12 years in the early 25th century BC . Sahure is considered to be one of the most important kings of the Old Kingdom of Egypt , his reign being a political and cultural high point of the 5th Dynasty . He was probably the son of his predecessor Userkaf with queen Neferhetepes II , and was in turn succeeded by his son Neferirkare Kakai . 
 During Sahure 's time on the throne , Egypt had important trade relations with the Levantine coast . Sahure launched several naval expeditions to modern day Lebanon to procure cedar trees , people ( possibly slaves ) and exotic items . He also ordered the earliest attested expedition to the land of Punt , which brought back large quantities of myrrh , malachite and electrum . Sahure is shown celebrating the success of this venture in a relief from his mortuary temple which shows him tending a myrrh tree in the garden of his palace named " Sahure 's splendor soars up to heaven " . This relief is the only one in Egyptian art depicting a king gardening . Sahure sent further expeditions to the mines of turquoise and copper in Sinai . He also possibly ordered military campaigns against Libyan chieftains in the Western Desert , bringing back livestock to Egypt . 
 Sahure had a pyramid built for himself in Abusir , thereby abandoning the royal necropolises of Saqqara and Giza , where his predecessors had built their pyramids . This decision was possibly motivated by the presence of the sun temple of Userkaf in Abusir , the first such temple of the 5th Dynasty . The Pyramid of Sahure is much smaller than the pyramids of the preceding 4th Dynasty but the decoration of his mortuary temple is more elaborate . The causeway and mortuary temple of his pyramid complex were once adorned by over 10 @,@ 000 m2 ( 110 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of fine reliefs , which made them renowned in antiquity . The architects of Sahure 's pyramid complex introduced the use of palmiform columns ( that is columns whose capital has the form of palm leaves ) , which would soon become a hallmark of ancient Egyptian architecture . Sahure is also known to have constructed a sun temple called " The Field of Ra " , and although it is yet to be located it is presumably in Abusir as well . 
 = = Family = = 
 = = = Parentage = = = 
 Excavations at the pyramid of Sahure in Abusir under the direction of Miroslav Verner and Tarek El @-@ Awady in the early 2000s provide a picture of the royal family of the early 5th Dynasty . In particular , reliefs from the causeway linking the valley and mortuary temples of the pyramid complex reveal that Sahure 's mother was queen Neferhetepes II . She was the wife of pharaoh Userkaf , as indicated by the location of her pyramid immediately adjacent to that of Userkaf , which makes Userkaf the father of Sahure in all likelihood . This is further confirmed by the discovery of Sahure 's cartouche in the mortuary temple of Userkaf at Saqqara , indicating that Sahure finished the structure started most probably by his father . 
 This contradicts an older , alternative theory according to which Sahure was the son of queen <unk> I , believed to be the wife of the last pharaoh of the preceding 4th Dynasty , <unk> . Following the discoveries of Verner and El @-@ Awady in Abusir this theory is now considered obsolete . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Sahure is known to have been succeeded by Neferirkare Kakai , who was believed to his brother until 2005 . On this year , a relief originally adorning the causeway of Sahure 's pyramid and showing Sahure seated in front of two of his sons , Ranefer and Netjerirenre , was discovered by the Egyptologists Miroslav Verner and Tarek El @-@ Awady . Next to Ranefer 's name the text " Neferirkare Kakai king of Upper and Lower Egypt " had been added , indicating that Ranefer was Sahure 's son and assumed the throne under the name " Neferirkare Kakai " at the death of his father . Since both Ranefer and Netjerirenre are given the titles of " King eldest son " , Verner and El @-@ Awady speculate that they may have been twins and that Netjerirenre may have later seized the throne for a brief reign under the name " Shepseskare " . The same relief further depicts queen <unk> , who was thus most likely Sahure 's consort and the mother of Ranefer ( Neferirkare Kakai ) and Netjerirenre . Three more sons , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are shown on reliefs from Sahure 's mortuary temple , but the identity of their mother is unknown . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 The relative chronology of Sahure 's reign is well established by historical records and contemporary artefacts , showing that he succeeded Userkaf and was in turn succeeded by Neferirkare Kakai . The Turin canon , a king list written during the 19th Dynasty in the early Ramesside era ( 1292 – 1189 BC ) , credits him with a reign of 12 years 5 months and 12 days . In contrast , the near contemporary annal of the 5th Dynasty known as the Palermo Stone preserves his 2nd , 3rd , 5th and 6th years on the throne as well as his final year of reign and even records the day of his death as the 28th of Shemu II ( 9th month ) . The document notes six or seven cattle counts , which would indicate a reign of at least 12 full years if the Old Kingdom cattle count was held biennially ( i.e. every 2 years ) as this annal document implies for the early 5th Dynasty . If this assumption is correct and Sahure 's highest attested date was the year after the 6th count rather than his 7th count as Wilkinson believes , then this date would mean that Sahure died in his 13th year and should be given a reign of 13 years 5 months and 12 days . This number would be only one year more than the Turin Canon 's 12 @-@ year figure for Sahure . It is also closer to the 13 years figure given in Manetho 's Aegyptiaca , a history of ancient Egypt written in the 3rd century BC . 
 Sahure appears in two further historical records : on the third entry of the Karnak king list , which was made during the reign of Thutmose III ( 1479 – 1425 BC ) and on the 26th entry of the Saqqara Tablet dating to the reign of Ramses II ( 1279 – 1213 BC ) . Neither of these sources give his reign length . The absolute dates of Sahure 's reign are uncertain but most scholars date it to the first half of the 25th century BC . 
 = = = Foreign activities = = = 
 Trade and tribute 
 Historical records and surviving artefacts suggest that contacts with foreign lands were numerous during Sahure 's reign . Furthermore , these contacts seem to have been mostly economic rather than military in nature . Reliefs from his pyramid complex show that he possessed a navy comprising 100 @-@ cubits long boats ( c . 50 m , 160 ft ) , some of which are shown coming back from Lebanon laden with the trunks of precious cedar trees . Other ships are represented loaded with " Asiatics " , both adults and children , who were possibly slaves . A unique relief depicts several Syrian brown bears , presumably brought back from the Levantine coast by a naval expedition as well . These bears appear in association with 12 red @-@ painted one @-@ handled jars from Syria and are thus likely to constitute a tribute . 
 Trade contacts with Byblos certainly took place during Sahure 's reign and indeed excavations of the temple of <unk> @-@ <unk> yielded an alabaster bowl inscribed with Sahure 's name . There is further corroborating evidence for trade with the wider Levant during the 5th Dynasty , with a number of stone vessels inscribed with cartouches of pharaohs of this dynasty discovered in Lebanon . Finally , a piece of thin gold stamped to a wooden throne and bearing Sahure 's cartouches has been purportedly found during illegal excavations in Turkey among a wider assemblage known as the " <unk> Treasure " . The existence of the treasure is now widely doubted however . 
 In his last year on the throne , Sahure sent the first documented expedition to the fabled land of Punt . The expedition is said to have come back with 80 @,@ 000 measures of myrrh , along with malachite and electrum . Because of this , Sahure is often credited with establishing an Egyptian navy . However , it is known today that preceding Egyptian kings had a high seas navy too , in particular Khufu during whose reign the oldest known harbor , Wadi al @-@ <unk> , on the Red Sea was operating . Nonetheless , the reliefs from Sahure 's pyramid complex remain the " first definite depictions of seagoing ships in Egypt " ( Shelley <unk> ) . 
 In his last year of reign Sahure sent another expedition abroad , this time to the copper and turquoise mines of Wadi Maghareh and Wadi <unk> in Sinai , which had been active since at least the beginning of the 3rd Dynasty . This expedition brought back over 6000 units of copper to Egypt and also produced two reliefs in Sinai , one of which shows Sahure in the traditional act of smiting Asiatics and boasting " The Great God smites the Asiatics of all countries " . 
 Military campaigns 
 Sahure 's military career is known primarily from reliefs from his mortuary complex . It apparently consisted of campaigns against the Libyans in the Western desert . The campaigns yielded various livestock and Sahure is shown smiting local chieftains . The Palermo stone corroborates some of these events and also mentions expeditions to Sinai and to the exotic land of Punt . However , this same scene of the Libyan attack was used two hundred years later in the mortuary temple of Pepi II ( <unk> – <unk> BC ) and in the temple of Taharqa at Kawa , built some 1800 years after Sahure 's lifetime . In particular , the same names are quoted for the local chieftains . Therefore , there is the possibility that Sahure too was copying an even earlier representation of this scene . 
 = = = Activities in Egypt = = = 
 The majority of Sahure 's activities in Egypt recorded in the Palermo stone are religious in nature . During the 5th year of his reign alone the stone mentions the making of a divine barge , possibly in Heliopolis , the exact quantity of daily offerings of bread and beer to Ra , Hathor , Nekhbet and Wadjet fixed by the king and the gift of land to various temples . 
 Archeological evidence suggests that Sahure 's building activities were concentrated in Abusir , where he constructed his pyramid and probably his sun temple as well . This temple , the second sun temple of the 5th Dynasty and yet to be located , is known to have existed thanks an inscription on the Palermo stone where it is called " <unk> Re " , meaning " The Field of Ra " . Reliefs which once adorned the temple have been found embedded in the walls of that of Nyuserre Ini ( <unk> – <unk> BC ) , which suggests either that Nyuserre used Sahure 's temple as a quarry for construction materials or that he constructed his temple on the same site . The palace of Sahure , called " <unk> <unk> Sahure " , " Sahure 's splendor soars up to heaven " , is known from an inscription on tallow containers discovered in February 2011 in Neferefre 's mortuary temple . The palace was likely located on the shores of the Abusir lake . The fragment of a statue with the name of the king was discovered in 2015 , in <unk> . 
 South of Egypt , a stele bearing Sahure 's name was discovered in the diorite quarries located in the desert north @-@ west of Abu Simbel in Lower Nubia . Even further south , Sahure 's cartouche has been found in a graffiti in <unk> and on seal impressions from Buhen at the second cataract of the Nile . 
 = = Pyramid complex = = 
 The main pyramid of Sahure 's mortuary complex exemplifies the decline of pyramid building , both in terms of size and quality . Yet , the accompanying mortuary temple is considered to be the most sophisticated one built up to that time . With its many architectural innovations , such as the use of palmiform columns , the overall layout of Sahure 's complex would serve as the template for all mortuary complexes constructed from Sahure 's reign until the end of the Old Kingdom , some 300 years later . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Sahure chose to construct his pyramid complex in Abusir , thereby abandoning both Saqqara and Giza , which had been the royal necropolises up to that time . A possible motivation for Sahure 's decision was the presence of the sun temple of Userkaf . 
 = = = Mortuary temple = = = 
 Sahure 's mortuary temple was extensively decorated with an estimated 10 @,@ 000 m2 ( 110 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of fine reliefs . Many surviving fragments of the reliefs which decorated the temple walls are of very high quality and much more elaborate than those from preceding mortuary temples . Several reliefs from the temple and causeway are unique in Egyptian art . These include a relief showing Sahure tending a myrrh tree in his palace in front of his family , a relief depicting brown bears and a relief showing the bringing of the pyramidion to the main pyramid and the ceremonies following the completion of the complex . The many reliefs of the mortuary and valley temples also depict , among other things , a counting of foreigners by or in front of the goddess Seshat and the return of an Egyptian fleet from Asia , perhaps Byblos . Some of the low relief @-@ cuttings in red granite are still in place at the site . Decorated reliefs from the upper part of the causeway represent the procession of over 150 personified funerary domains created for the cult of Sahure , demonstrating the existence of a sophisticated economic system associated to the king 's funerary cult . 
 The mortuary temple featured the first palmiform columns of any Egyptian temple , massive granite architraves inscribed with Sahure 's titulary overlaid with copper , black basalt flooring and granite dados . 
 = = = Pyramid = = = 
 The pyramid of Sahure reached 47 m ( 154 ft ) at the time of its construction , much smaller than the pyramids of the preceding 4th Dynasty . Its inner core is made of roughly hewn stones organized in steps and held together in many sections with a thick mortar of mud . This construction technique , much cheaper and faster to execute than the stone @-@ based techniques of the 4th Dynasty , fared much worse over time . Owing to this , Sahure 's pyramid is now largely ruined and amounts to little more than a pile of rubble showing the crude filling of debris and mortar constituting the core , which became exposed after the casing stones were stolen in antiquity . 
 While the core was under construction , a corridor was left open leading into the shaft where the grave chamber was built separately and later covered by leftover stone blocks and debris . This construction strategy is clearly visible in later unfinished pyramids , in particular the Pyramid of Neferefre . This technique also reflects the older style from the 3rd Dynasty seemingly coming back into fashion after being temporarily abandoned by the builders of the five great pyramids at Dahshur and Giza during the 4th Dynasty . 
 The entrance at the north side is a short descending corridor lined with red granite followed by a passageway ending at the burial chamber with its gabled roof comprising large limestone beams . Today these beams are damaged , which weakens the pyramid structure . Fragments of the sarcophagus were found here in the burial chamber , when it was first entered by John Shae Perring in the mid 19th century . The colossal roof blocks of Sahure 's temple weighed up to about 220 tons based on estimates by Perring . He estimated the size of the largest blocks at 35 feet by 9 feet by 12 feet . One end of these blocks was tapered so the estimated volume is 95 cubic meters or 2 @.@ 4 tons . The mortuary complex immediately around the pyramid also comprises a second pyramid built for the Ka of the king . 
 = = Court Officials = = 
 A number of officials serving Sahure during his lifetime are known from their tombs . These include : 
 <unk> : chief physician of Sahure , he asked the king that a false door be made for his tomb , to which the king agreed . Sahure had the false door made of fine Tura limestone , carved and painted blue in his presence . The king wished a long life to his physician , telling him : " As my nostrils enjoy health , as the gods love me , may you depart into the cemetery at an advanced old age as one revered " . 
 <unk> : priest of the cult of Userkaf during the reigns of Sahure and Neferirkare Kakai , then vizier for the latter . 
 Persen : also known as <unk> , he was a mortuary priest in the funerary cult of Sahure 's mother <unk> . His mastaba tomb is located close to <unk> 's pyramid in Saqqara . 
 Ptahshepses : probably born during the reign of Menkaure , Ptahshepses was high priest of Ptah and royal manicure , later promoted to vizier under king Nyuserre Ini . 
 <unk> : royal prince , son of <unk> and vizier under Userkaf and Sahure . 
 <unk> : priest of Sahure during the king 's lifetime , then vizier of Neferirkare Kakai . Buried in a mastaba in Saqqara . 
 <unk> : vizier during Sahure 's reign , attested in the mortuary temple . Unlike <unk> , <unk> seems to have been non @-@ royal . This indicates that Sahure pursued Userkaf 's policy of appointing non @-@ royal people to high offices . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = In the Old Kingdom = = = 
 Sahure 's most immediate legacy is his funerary cult , which continued until the end of the Old Kingdom some 300 years after his death . A total of 22 agricultural estates were established to produce the goods necessary for this cult . Several priests serving this cult or in Sahure 's sun temple during the later 5th and 6th Dynasties are known thanks to inscriptions and artefacts from their tombs in Saqqara and Abusir : 
 <unk> : priest of the sun temple of Sahure during the 6th Dynasty . 
 <unk> : served as priest of Sahure during the reigns of Neferirkare Kakai and Nyuserre Ini . He was also priest of Ra and Hathor in Neferirkare 's sun temple , priest of Neferirkare , priest in Nyuserre Ini 's and Neferirkare Kakai 's pyramid complexes and Overseer of the Two Granaries . 
 <unk> : priest of the cult of Sahure and overseer of the scribes of the granary during the 5th Dynasty . 
 <unk> : priest of the cults of Userkaf and Sahure , buried in a mastaba in Saqqara . 
 <unk> : priest of the cult of Sahure , priest of Ra in the sun @-@ temple of Userkaf and holder of the title of royal acquaintance , buried in Giza . 
 <unk> : priest of the cults of kings of the 4th to early 5th dynasty including Userkaf and Sahure , buried in a mastaba at Abusir . 
 Another legacy of Sahure is his pyramid complex : its layout became the template for all subsequent pyramid complexes of the Old Kingdom and some of its architectural elements , such as its palmiform columns , became hallmarks of Egyptian architecture . 
 = = = In the Middle Kingdom = = = 
 At the beginning of the Middle Kingdom period , in the early 12th Dynasty ( 1991 – 1802 BC ) , pharaoh Senusret I ( 1971 – 1926 BC ) commissioned a statue of Sahure . The statue was located in the temple of Karnak and it probably belonged to a group of portraits of deceased kings . 
 The statue of Sahure , now in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo ( catalog number CG <unk> ) , is made of black granite and is 50 cm ( 20 in ) tall . Sahure is shown enthroned , wearing a pleated skirt and a round curly wig . Both sides of the throne bear inscriptions identifying the work as a portrait of Sahure made on the orders of Senusret I. 
 Another indication that Sahure had not faded from memory during the Middle Kingdom is the Westcar Papyrus , which was written during the 12th Dynasty . The papyrus tells the mythical story of the origins of the 5th Dynasty , presenting kings Userkaf , Sahure and Neferirkare Kakai as three brothers , sons of Ra and a woman named <unk> . 
 = = = In the New Kingdom and later times = = = 
 As a deceased king , Sahure continued to receive religious offerings during the New Kingdom . This is best attested by the " Karnak king list " , a list of royal ancestors inscribed on the walls of the Karnak temple during the reign of Thutmose III of the 18th Dynasty . Unlike other ancient Egyptian king lists , the kings are not listed in chronological order . This is because the purpose of the list was purely religious rather than historical : its aim was to name the deceased kings to be honored in the Karnak temple . 
 During the 19th Dynasty , prince <unk> , a son of Ramesses II , undertook restoration works throughout Egypt on pyramids and temples which had fallen into ruin . Inscriptions on the stone cladding of the pyramid of Sahure show that it was restored at this time . This is possibly because , from the mid 18th Dynasty onwards , the mortuary temple of Sahure served as a sanctuary for the goddess Sekhmet . In the second part of the 18th Dynasty and during the 19th Dynasty numerous visitors left inscriptions , stelae and statues in the temple . Activities seemed to have continued on @-@ site for a long time , as shown by graffiti dating from the 26th Dynasty ( 664 – 525 BC ) until the Ptolemaic period ( 332 – 30 BC ) . 
 = No Time for It = 
 " No Time for It " is a song recorded by American recording artist Fantasia for her fifth studio album , The Definition Of ... ( 2016 ) . It was released on January 7 , 2016 , as the lead single from the album . American producer Brian Kennedy wrote " No Time for It " in collaboration with songwriters Lance Eric Shipp and Paris " PJ " Jones . Backed by synths , snares , and an organ , it is a mid @-@ tempo track with lyrics that revolve around blocking out drama and negativity in favor of professional and financial success . Fantasia described the song as a continuation of her " rock soul " sound , which she introduced on her previous album Side Effects of You ( 2013 ) . 
 To promote " No Time for It " , Fantasia released a lyric video on February 4 , 2016 . On March 24 , she released an acoustic version of the song through a music video . The black @-@ and @-@ white video portrays Fantasia singing accompanied by a guitar and xylophone . Critics praised the acoustic arrangement and music video as " nice [ and ] subdued " and " stirring " . 
 Critical response to " No Time for It " was mixed ; some critics praised its sound and composition while others criticized the single as too safe , the production as reminiscent of album filler , and Fantasia 's vocal performance as too subdued and restrained in comparison to her live performances . Commercially , the song peaked at number six on the United States Billboard Adult R & B Songs chart . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 " No Time for It " was written by Lance Eric Shipp and Paris " PJ " Jones in collaboration with the song 's producer Brian Kennedy . The single expands on the " rock soul " sound Fantasia introduced on her previous album Side Effects of You . Fantasia defined " rock soul " as encompassing multiple music genres and explained its direction was an attempt to combine her soulful childhood singing in church with " a certain side of [ her ] that wants to tap into that whole rock world " . She described the recording process for the single and album as coming with " great sacrifice " and being her step " to open the door to a new chapter of life " . She wrote that the song 's title and lyrics were influenced by her beliefs that : " there are some things in life that I simply have ' No Time for It ' " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " No Time for It " is pop , R & B , and soul song that lasts for three minutes and twenty @-@ six seconds . It is composed in the key of D @-@ flat major using common time and a slow tempo of 135 beats per minute . Latoya Cross of Jet referred to the song as having a " smooth tempo " and being a continuation of Fantasia 's " rock soul " vibe . Instrumentation is provided by " a polished , percolating mix of synths and <unk> snares " and an organ . Matthew Scott Donnelly of PopCrush wrote that the song 's instrumental backing was provided by " zippy , untiring drums and <unk> effects " ; Elias Leight of Vogue described it was an " iconoclast " with a " de rigueur quiver of programmed hi @-@ hats " and " <unk> synth melody and bass line " that could appeal to listeners of hip hop music . Time 's Maura Johnston referred to the song as being " slinky " and " lighter @-@ than @-@ air " , and Jay Cridlin of the Tampa Bay Times called it " sleek " and " poppy " . 
 Throughout the track , Fantasia describes blocking out drama and negativity . Samantha Callender of The Source wrote that the lyrics are a list of : " all the things Fantasia has no time for ( basically everything except money ) " . In the chorus , the lyrics include : " You wanna tell me how it is , but there ’ s no time for it / You wanna tell me how you feel , but there 's no time for it " , with Fantasia singing in " a cool collected manner " to contrast with the biting lyrics . Idolator 's Mike Wass described the song as a " catchy mid @-@ tempo anthem " and the lyrics , such as " Bitch , no time for the haters tripping " , are examples of how " Fantasia has always been the <unk> " . According to Johnston , the lyrics act as a " kiss @-@ off " and " a salvo aimed right at any <unk> who fill their hours with loose talk " . Ariana Gordon of Music Times wrote that the lyrics were reflective of Fantasia 's attempt to move beyond her past struggles ( her attempted suicide , affair with a married man , home foreclosure , and toxic relationships with family members ) and piece together her personal and professional lives . 
 = = Release and acoustic version = = 
 On January 6 , 2016 , Fantasia announced " No Time for It " would be the lead single from the album The Definition Of ... through her official Instagram account ; Fantasia wrote : " This month my new single will be born and I ’ m speaking nothing but the truth " and revealed its promotional cover . The following day , the song premiered on Fantasia ’ s official Vevo channel ; explicit and clean versions were digitally released at the iTunes Store . It was Fantasia 's first release after joining the management roster of Primary Wave Music . According to Fantasia , " No Time for It " was chosen by the label to be the album 's first single . Fantasia was initially hesitant about releasing the song , saying " At first I was thinking , ‘ Is that a record to come back with ? ’ ” . She later said it " set the atmosphere " for her future singles . Jourdan Miller of BreatheHeavy wrote the release : " is perfectly timed seeing how the singing reality competition is on its way out , cause we all have no time for it " . On February 4 , 2016 , Fantasia released a lyric video for the song . The single was included on the set list for the Fantasia & Anthony Hamilton : Live in Concert ( 2016 ) . 
 On March 24 , 2016 , she released a music video of an acoustic version of the song on her official Vevo account . The following day , it was released at the iTunes Store . The video is filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white and features Fantasia in : " a short , black leather dress and backed by only a guitar and xylophone " . Elle Breezy of Singersroom wrote , " She doesn ’ t take it all the way there like we know she can , but it ’ s still a nice , subdued performance " . A review from Rap @-@ Up praised the release as " a stirring acoustic rendition of her empowering song " and noted that Fantasia " breaks it all the way down " in the video . B. Cakes of <unk> commended the video as personal and intimate , describing it as : " a candid woman @-@ to @-@ woman ( or woman @-@ to @-@ man ) talk with one of her detractors " ; Cakes praised the decision to release an acoustic remix to keep the focus on the lyrics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " No Time for It " received mixed responses from music critics . Jeff Benjamin of Fuse praised " No Time for It " as a " lush kiss @-@ off track " . Benjamin described the song as embodying the " same feisty attitude we know and love Tasia for " and indicated " a ton of promise " for the release of its parent album . Matthew Scott Donnelly commended the song as " setting a brand new era into motion " , calling it " breezy @-@ yet @-@ declarative " and " a here @-@ I @-@ am declaration " . A critic from the Omaha World @-@ Herald praised Fantasia for " her powerful , soulful vocals " and described the song as showing her " in the midst of an R & B resurgence " . Carl Chery and Cori Murray of Essence magazine listed " No Time for It " as one of the songs marking a " resurgence of R & B " , while Johnston included the song on her list of the " Best Songs of 2016 So Far " . 
 Negative reviews were critical of the song 's production and Fantasia 's vocal performance . In the nationally syndicated Rickey Smiley Morning Show , Rickey Smiley criticized the song as : " more of a filler record that you have on while you 're cleaning the house or washing dishes " . Smiley said the singer was lacking her typical vocal acrobatics in comparison to her performance of Karyn White 's song " Superwoman " at the 2015 Soul Train Music Awards . Mike Wass wrote that the song did not command attention on the first listen and lacked big pop hooks in comparison to the album track " Ugly " . Kevin Apaza of <unk> criticized the song as being too safe and predictable , calling its production dated and " [ v ] <unk> early 2000s " and saying that Fantasia is " sleeping on her laurels " . Apaza recommended that Fantasia or RCA should release a remix with either Kelly Rowland or " some other R & B princess " to " prevent this single [ from ] fall [ ing ] quick into oblivion " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " No Time for It " achieved little success after its release . On the week of January 30 , 2010 , the song debuted on the United States ' Adult R & B Songs Billboard chart at number 24 . It peaked at number six on the week of April 16 , after spending a total of eight weeks on the chart . The song remained in the chart 's top twenty until the week of July 9 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers . 
 Management 
 ASCAP / Kennedy <unk> Music 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Mark A Pitts , Brian Kennedy Seals , Lance Eric Shipp 
 Performer – Fantasia 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = M @-@ 19 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 19 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The trunkline begins northeast of Detroit at a junction with Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) near New Haven and runs northward to a junction with M @-@ 142 just east of Bad Axe in The Thumb region of the Lower Peninsula . The highway runs through mostly rural and agricultural areas , connecting several small communities . 
 Dating back to the original signposting of the state highway system , M @-@ 19 initially connected Detroit with Port Huron and Port Austin in 1919 . In late 1926 , the routing was altered to shorten it to Bad Axe on the north and Richmond on the south . Additional changes in the 1950s and 1960s updated the highway to finish paving the roadway and extend it southward to its present terminus . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 19 begins at a junction with I @-@ 94 near New Haven at the interchange for exit 247 . The highway runs to the northwest along New Haven Road into town where it turns northeasterly on Gratiot Avenue to run parallel to I @-@ 94 . Outside of New Haven , the landscape along the highway is composed of mostly farm fields on the way to Richmond . Once the trunkline enters that city , it turns northwesterly and then northward along Main Street before exiting town . Continuing north , M @-@ 19 travels through mostly rural areas and agricultural fields and continues as such , through the community of Memphis . The trunkline crosses out of Macomb County into St. Clair County in the middle of town . M @-@ 19 crosses the Belle River and continues to a junction with I @-@ 69 at exit 184 , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) west of Port Huron . From here the route continues north , passing through the small , rural community of Emmett , where M @-@ 19 crosses a branch line of the Canadian National Railway that also carries Amtrak 's Blue Water passenger route . 
 North of Emmet , M @-@ 19 runs through farm fields at the base of The Thumb to Brockway , where it crosses Mill Creek and has a junction with M @-@ 136 . North of Brockway the road jogs to the west passing east of the Yale Airport , a small grass landing strip just southeast of the city of Yale . The trunkline passes through Yale where it serves as Main Street in the small community . North of town , the surroundings open up into agricultural fields once again as the road continues its trek northward , crossing into Sanilac County . Across the county line , M @-@ 19 passes through small rural communities such as Peck and Speaker . About 26 miles ( 42 km ) north of Yale , the road approaches the city of Sandusky , the county seat of Sanilac County . The road runs through residential areas into the center of town . Once downtown , the highway meets M @-@ 46 ; M @-@ 19 turns west , to follow M @-@ 46 , running concurrently for about five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) . 
 After the two trunklines separate in Elmer , M @-@ 19 heads back northward as it enters rural and agricultural areas again . The highway heads due north for the next 30 miles ( 48 km ) passing through Argyle . M @-@ 19 crosses into Huron County south of <unk> . In that community , the highway crosses a branch line of the Huron and Eastern Railway . At a junction northeast of the Huron County Memorial Airport , M @-@ 19 reaches its northern terminus at M @-@ 142 just east of the city of Bad Axe . 
 M @-@ 19 is maintained by MDOT like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 19 were the 19 @,@ 737 vehicles daily south in Richmond ; the lowest counts were the 1 @,@ 482 vehicles per day in Emmet . No section of M @-@ 19 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 When the state 's highway system was initially signed in 1919 , M @-@ 19 was signposted from Detroit northeasterly to Port Huron before turning westward to run concurrently along M @-@ 21 and curving northerly to run to Bad Axe . From there it continued on to a terminus in Port Austin . When the United States Numbered Highway System was approved on November 11 , 1926 , the southernmost segment from Detroit to Port Huron was assigned to the then @-@ new US Highway 25 ( US 25 ) . M @-@ 19 was removed from M @-@ 21 and realigned from Yale southward through Emmet to connect to US 25 in Richmond . The northern end was truncated to end to the east of Bad Axe . 
 In 1956 , a realignment of M @-@ 90 shortened the concurrency of that highway with M @-@ 19 . By the middle of 1960 , the last 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) segment of the highway was paved between Elmer and Argyle . When US 25 was moved to follow a completed segment of the I @-@ 94 freeway in 1963 , M @-@ 19 was extended southerly along Gratiot Avenue from Richmond to New Haven and on to the freeway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Midvinterblot = 
 Midvinterblot ( Swedish for Midwinter 's sacrifice ) is a painting created for the hall of the central staircase in Nationalmuseum in Stockholm by the Swedish painter Carl Larsson in 1915 . It is Sweden 's most debated painting . 
 The painting depicts a legend from Norse mythology in which the Swedish king <unk> was sacrificed in order to avert a famine . After a long controversy it was rejected by the museum , but the debate resurfaced again in the late 20th century , after which it was finally honoured with the place where Carl Larsson intended it to be . 
 = = Background = = 
 Larsson was commissioned to decorate all the walls of the central staircase in the museum except for one , and he wanted to decorate the last wall as well . He intended the last wall to present a contrast to the other illustrations of the staircase . Whereas the painting Gustav Vasa enters Stockholm 1523 presented a midsummer theme with a triumphant king , Larsson wanted the last illustration to be a midwinter theme with a king who sacrificed himself for his people . 
 = = Evolution of the work = = 
 = = = First version = = = 
 The earliest known sketch ( № 236 ) is made in graphite and is located in the Carl Larsson museum in Sundborn . It was dated by Karl Axel Arvidsson to a time shortly after the visit to Copenhagen in 1910 . In July , Larsson started to paint a large version , which was finished in January 1911 , but it is only preserved in a photograph . It is based on the early sketch but it presents a richer set of figures in the foreground . The early version was put on display in Nationalmuseum without receiving any official comments . There was no formal order and no official contest had been declared , and the initiative was only Larsson 's . 
 An anonymous writer calling himself " Archaeologist " voiced harsh criticism in Dagens Nyheter on February 20 , 1911 . The writer stated that there were several anachronisms in the painting and which had been combined freely . The anonymous writer called the temple a " summer restaurant " decorated with motives from the Biological museum in Stockholm and he considered the dresses in the painting to be as preposterous as a Swedish farm with camels walking around the dunghill . 
 = = = Second version = = = 
 The criticism against the artistic freedom of giving a personal interpretation of a distant historic event , could have been directed at many other historic paintings of the 19th century . The criticism against Midvinterblot would be in the same vein during the following years . Larsson retorted that he would happily delegate the task to a younger talent — but he made a second version in oil ( № 237 ) in which he made the temple wider and where he added an executioner in the centre . The sets of characters were more closely assembled and the frieze @-@ like quality was enhanced . 
 = = = Third version = = = 
 Some major changes were introduced in a third watercolour painting ( № 238 ) which he made during the autumn of 1913 . This version was given the text En <unk> . En <unk> <unk> för folket ( " a dream vision , a king sacrificed for his people " ) , a text which was possibly added in the hope that it would not be considered to be an attempt at a historically faithful reconstruction . 
 The most essential change consisted of a more monumental composition . The temple had been enlarged considerably and given a more stern shape , and the figures had been more closely assembled and they formed an unbroken relief @-@ like row . The sketch was put on exhibition in the museum in November 1913 and in a letter to Ludvig Looström , the director of the museum , Larsson offered the painting for 35 @,@ 000 Swedish kronor . 
 This version was criticised even before the museum board had had time to present their own view . August Brunius , who had expressed his enthusiasm for the Gustav Vasa painting , reacted against the choice of subject , like most critics . The choice of subject was only aggravated by the way it was presented . Brunius felt the painting to be unreal , unbelievable and not very relevant for the modern Swedes of the early 20th century . 
 On January 17 , 1914 , the museum 's board presented their ambivalent view on the painting . The majority of the board seconded the motion that Larsson was to finish Midvinterblot for the museum wall , but they added the reservation that the main scene with the sacrifice of a king should be excluded or downplayed . The director of the museum , Looström , objected to the board 's ruling , and he declared the painting to illustrate a " ritual killing " and he would rather the wall remain empty . Carl Larsson received the ruling of the board as a confirmation that the museum accepted his painting , but he declared that he would not make the suggested changes , nor would he accept the suggestion that the painting should be installed in the Stockholm City Hall instead . 
 Even Larsson 's good friend and <unk> Georg <unk> joined the critics , but he could not sway Larsson 's determination either , although Larsson probably took his criticism hardest . The archaeologist <unk> <unk> , who was probably identical to the anonymous writer who had initiated the criticism , launched additional criticism in Svenska Dagbladet against the lack of historical authenticity in the painting . The distance in dating between the objects in the painting were given as at least 2000 years and <unk> thought that the painting was unacceptable in the museum building . Larsson stated that he intentionally included objects that would be from the distant past in relation to the setting of the painting , and that he did not see these as anachronisms , because he imagined the subjects would be antiquarians who kept ancient items as ritual objects . 
 On March 1 , 1914 , Larsson , who was by then ostracized , wrote a letter to the minister of religious affairs and declared that he resigned from the task of illustrating the museum wall . 
 = = = The final versions and rejection = = = 
 In May 1914 , Carl Larsson resumed the work on the painting on his own initiative . During 1915 , he presented a painted sketch ( № 239 ) , which was largely consistent with the previous painting . The king had been remade based on an oil painting ( № 240 ) that Larsson had made with a male model named Rydberg in 1914 . The king 's position was more pathetically composed and expressive and it agreed more with the change of emphasis that had taken place during the evolution of the work after Larsson 's decision that the sacrifice was voluntary . 
 A new figure , a wizard , had been added to the left of the sleighs and the lion guardians at the entry of the temple , which had received a noticeably Chinese character . The colours are forceful and there are considerable amounts of gold , something that Larsson intended as a disclaimer of the common notion that pre @-@ history was gray . 
 Before the final decision , both the board and Carl Larsson knew that the minister of religious affairs was favourable towards the new painting . However , a majority of the board , including the former director Looström and his successor Richard Bergh , was against it , and only two were in favour . Instead , the board asked Larsson to make a different painting . Larsson did not answer initially , but he declared in the press that he still considered Midvinterblot to be among the greatest and most beautiful works he had ever made . 
 The minister asked for expert advice and the debate continued in the newspapers . There were suspicions that there was a political side to the animosity between Bergh and Larsson , but these suspicions were convincingly dispelled much later by Prince <unk> , Duke of <unk> in a personal letter . 
 A book published by Nationalmuseum in 1992 on Carl Larsson claims that the most immediate and natural explanation for the ultimate rejection of the painting was the fact that time had rendered the painting unfashionable . Because of the long debate , the painting became a survivor from a time past and it could not meet the modernist ideals of the new century . 
 The final version was exhibited where it was intended to be in June 1915 . In the following year , it was shown at the art gallery Liljevalchs konsthall as its first exhibit was dedicated to Carl Larsson , Bruno Liljefors and Anders Zorn . It was tentatively shown again in Nationalmuseum during the period 1925 – 1933 . In 1942 , the painting was stored in the Museum of Sketches in Lund . 
 According to the book by Nationalmuseum , the controversy concerned Carl Larsson 's personal prestige and the ideals that he stood for , but his contemporaries would turn more and more indifferent to these ideals . The events embittered his last years and he declared in his autobiography that the controversy broke him down and that he admitted it with anger . It is clear that he began to identify himself with the work and it is possible that he also identified himself with the sacrificed king , as he primarily saw conspiracies and bad intentions behind the opposition . This identification was made apparent in his self @-@ portrait , in 1916 , where he presented himself as king <unk> , and which he donated to Sundborn parish where he lived . 
 = = The later controversy and eventual acceptance = = 
 During 1983 – 1984 , the painting was exhibited at the Swedish Museum of National Antiquities in Stockholm , and after this exhibit an art dealer offered to donate or sell the painting to Nationalmuseum . The board rejected the offer with the statement that the Old Norse motif was more appropriate for the Museum of National Antiquities , which at the time still shared the same building as Nationalmuseum . When the Museum of National Antiquities had been moved to a building of its own , the painting should be moved there too . 
 After this rejection , the painting was sold to a Swedish art collector who offered to sell it to the Museum of National Antiquities for 12 million Swedish kronor . This offer caused a controversy in which people debated if the painting belonged to Nationalmuseum or the Museum of National Antiquities . In this debate where there were exaggerations in both directions , people claimed that the painting was both an unsurpassed masterpiece of Swedish art and a work of suspect morality . In 1987 , it was sold by Sotheby 's in London to a Japanese art collector . 
 In 1992 , Nationalmuseum celebrated its bicentennial anniversary and dedicated the exhibit to Carl Larsson . The Japanese owner lent the painting to the museum and when the 300 @,@ 000 visitors of the late 20th century could see the work for the first time in the hall where it was intended to be , the general opinion changed . 
 In 1997 , Nationalmuseum bought the painting from the collector ordered a frame for stretching the canvas from Per <unk> , a carpenter in <unk> , Dalarna , and installed it permanently where Carl Larsson had intended it to be . 
 The painting is mentioned in the book ' Midwinter Blood ' by Marcus Sedgwick , where it plays an important role . 
 = Oregon and California Railroad Revested Lands = 
 The Oregon and California Railroad Revested Lands ( commonly known as O & C Lands ) , are approximately 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 ha ) of land located in eighteen counties of western Oregon . Originally granted to the Oregon & California Railroad to build a railroad between Portland , Oregon and San Francisco , California , the land was <unk> to the United States government by act of Congress in 1916 and is currently managed by the United States Bureau of Land Management . 
 Since 1916 , the 18 counties where the O & C lands are located have received payments from the United States government as compensation for the loss of timber and tax revenue , beginning as a 50 % share of timber revenue on those lands but changing over the years as timber production decreased . The governments of several of the counties have come to depend upon the O & C land revenue as an important source of income for schools and county services . 
 The most recent source of income from the lands , an extension of the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self @-@ Determination Act of 2000 , was last renewed in 2013 but at vastly reduced spending levels , leaving some counties scrambling to find new sources of funding . In late 2013 , the United States House of Representatives was considering a bill that would resume the funding and increase timber harvests to provide additional income to the counties . 
 = = Origin = = 
 As part of the U.S. government 's desire to foster settlement and economic development in the western states , in July 1866 , Congress passed the Oregon and California Railroad Act . This act made 3 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 ha ) of land available for any company that built a railroad from Portland , Oregon to San Francisco . The land was to be distributed by the state of Oregon in 12 @,@ 800 @-@ acre ( 5 @,@ 200 ha ) land grants for each mile of track completed . Two companies , both of which named themselves the Oregon Central Railroad , began a competition to build the railroad , one on the west side of the Willamette River and one on the east side . The two lines would eventually merge and reorganize as the Oregon and California Railroad . In 1869 , Congress changed how the grants were to be distributed , requiring the railroads to sell land along the line to settlers in 160 @-@ acre ( 65 ha ) parcels at $ 2 @.@ 50 per acre . The land was distributed in a checkerboard pattern , with sections laid out for 20 miles ( 32 km ) on either side of the rail corridor with the government retaining the alternate sections for future growth . 
 By 1872 , the railroad had extended from Portland to Roseburg . Along the way , it created growth in Willamette Valley towns such as Canby , Aurora , and Harrisburg , which emerged as freight and passenger stations , and provided a commercial lifeline to the part of the river valley above Harrisburg where steamships were rarely able to travel . As the railroad made its way into the Umpqua Valley , new townsites such as Drain , Oakland , and <unk> were laid out . 
 = = Land fraud = = 
 Perhaps the most significant aspect of the railroad was that it provided access to Oregon 's vast forests for large @-@ scale logging operations . But despite the large number of grants , it was difficult to sell to actual settlers because much of the land was not only heavily forested ( chiefly in Douglas @-@ fir and Western Hemlock ) , but rugged and remote ; moreover , the railroads soon realized that the land was much more valuable if sold in larger plots to developers and timber companies . As a result , some individuals posed as settlers to purchase the land at the $ 2 @.@ 50 per acre rate and then promptly deeded them back to the railroad , which amassed the smaller plots into larger ones and resold them at a higher price to timber interests . 
 A scheme to circumvent the settler grants altogether soon emerged . A railroad official hired a surveyor and logger named Stephen A. Douglas <unk> to round up people from Portland saloons , and then take them to the land office where they would register for an O & C parcel as a settler , and then promptly resell to the railroad for bundling with other plots and resale to the highest bidder , typically as much as $ 40 an acre . In 1904 , an investigation by The Oregonian uncovered the scandal , by which time it had grown to such a magnitude that the paper reported that more than 75 % of the land sales had violated federal law . 
 Between 1904 and 1910 , nearly a hundred people were indicted in connection with the fraud , including U.S. Senator John H. Mitchell , U.S. Representatives John N. Williamson and Binger Hermann , and U.S. Attorney John Hicklin Hall . 
 = = <unk> of lands = = 
 As the land fraud trials reached their conclusion , attention also turned to the Southern Pacific Railroad ( which had acquired the O & C in 1887 ) . Not only had the company violated the terms of the grant agreement , but in 1903 , declared it was terminating land sales — in violation of the grant agreement — either as a hedge against future increases in land values or to retain the timber profits for itself . 
 A series of lawsuits between the State of Oregon , the United States government , and the railroads ensued . Another lawsuit was brought by Portland attorney and future U.S. Representative Walter Lafferty on behalf of 18 western Oregon counties , which sued to claim revenue from timber sales on the O & C lands . The cases worked their way up to the United States Supreme Court , which ruled in 1915 in Oregon & California R. Co. v. United States that despite the violation of grant terms , the railroad had been built and the railroad company should be compensated . In 1916 , Congress passed the Chamberlain – Ferris Act , which revested the remaining 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 acres of land to the United States government , and compensated the railroad at $ 2 @.@ 50 per acre from an account , the Oregon and California land grant fund , funded by timber sales from the land . Oregon counties affected by the <unk> of land were also to be compensated from the fund . 
 The Chamberlain – Ferris Act did not ease the financial trouble faced by many of the O & C counties ; very little timber revenue was actually generated from the land , and many counties now had large percentages of their land owned by the federal government , denying them a source of property tax revenue . As these problems compounded into the 1920s , the 18 counties organized the Association of O & C Counties ( <unk> ) to give itself a voice in Washington , D.C .. One of its cofounders , Douglas County district attorney and future U.S. Senator Guy Cordon , began lobbying Oregon 's congressional delegation for relief . In 1926 , a bill introduced by Oregon Senator Robert N. Stanfield , which became known as the Stanfield Act , was passed . This law provided that the U.S. government pay the counties in lieu of property taxes they would have received if the land were privately owned . But since the U.S. government was to be reimbursed from timber revenues , and since timber revenue remained low , very few payments were actually made to the counties , and Congress began to work on new legislation . 
 = = The O & C Act = = 
 In 1937 , Congress again sought to ensure federal funding for the 18 O & C counties . The Oregon and California Revested Lands Sustained Yield Management Act of 1937 ( 43 U.S.C. § <unk> ) , commonly referred as the O & C Act , directed the United States Department of the Interior to harvest timber from the O & C lands ( as well as the Coos Bay Wagon Road Lands ) on a sustained yield basis . The legislation returned 50 percent of timber sales receipts to the counties , and 25 percent to the U.S. Treasury to reimburse the federal government for payments made to the counties prior to establishment of the Act . The law specifically provided that the lands be managed , including reforestation and protection of watershed , to ensure a permanent source of timber , and therefore , revenue to the counties . 
 Under the O & C Act , the Department of the Interior under its General Land Office and later succeeded by the Bureau of Land Management , managed more than 44 billion board feet of standing inventory in 1937 into more than 60 billion board feet by the mid @-@ 1990s , and harvested more than 44 billion board feet over that time period . In 1951 , the U.S. Treasury had been fully reimbursed , and the 25 percent of the revenue that had previously gone to the Treasury now reverted to the counties ; in 1953 , the counties opted to divert that money to maintenance of the land and roads , reforestation , as well as recreational facilities and other improvements . A 1970 GAO report contained an estimate that from its implementation through 1969 , the counties had received a total of $ 300 million as a result of the Act . The authors of the report also estimated that most counties received more from the government payments than they would have if the land had been held privately . 
 The O & C Act achieved what the previous legislation had failed to do : provide a stable revenue to the counties . This revenue became a vital part of the budgets of the O & C counties , paying for county @-@ provided services such as law enforcement and corrections and health and social services . With this funding seemingly guaranteed , the counties kept other taxes much lower than other counties in the state , increasing their dependence on the timber payments . For example , the property tax in Curry County is 60 cents per $ 1 @,@ 000 of assessed value , far below the state average of $ 2 @.@ 81 per $ 1000 . 
 = = Decline in timber revenue and revised Congressional action = = 
 In 1989 , annual timber harvest revenue on federal forest land nationwide peaked at $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . Following that year , the impact of overharvesting and increased environmental concerns began to negatively impact timber sales on the O & C lands . In 1994 , the federal Northwest Forest Plan was implemented . Designed to guide forest management of federal lands while protecting old @-@ growth forest habitat for endangered species such as the Northern spotted owl , the plan restricted the land available for timber harvest . By 1998 , revenue on federal forest lands fell to a third of the peak 1989 revenue , with areas in the Northwest particularly hard @-@ hit . 
 To offset the effects of the loss of timber revenue , in 1993 , President Bill Clinton proposed a 10 @-@ year program of payments , set at 85 percent of the average O & C Act payments from 1986 to 1990 , and declining 3 percent annually . These " spotted owl " or " safety net " payments were passed by Congress as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( Pub.L. 103 – 66 ) . 
 With the payments set to expire in 2003 , work began in 1999 to seek an extension to the payments . The O & C counties joined with other rural counties ( including 15 of Oregon 's other 18 counties ) that also faced falling timber revenues to lobby Congress for another solution . In 2000 , Congress passed the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self @-@ Determination Act ( Pub.L. 106 – 393 ) , which authorizes western counties , including the O & C counties , to receive federal payments to compensate for loss of timber revenue until 2006 . Payments to O & C counties , which included O & C revenue as well as revenue on Forest Service land , averaged about $ 250 million per year from 2000 to 2006 . The act was extended for one year in 2007 , and in 2008 , a four @-@ year extension was included in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 that phased out the program by 2012 . The extension expired on September 30 , 2011 and the final payment of just over $ 40 million was delivered to the O & C counties in early 2012 . 
 In late 2011 , Oregon Senators Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley proposed legislation to extend the payments for another five years . The move was backed by Governor John Kitzhaber and the entire Oregon congressional delegation . Republican and Democratic members of Oregon 's congressional delegation also proposed setting aside some of the federal land in Oregon as public trusts in which half would be designated for harvest to provide revenue for the counties , and half designated as a conservation area . President Barack Obama 's proposed 2013 United States federal budget included $ 294 million to extend the program for fiscal year 2013 with a plan to continue the payments for four more years , with the amount declining 10 % each year . 
 In March 2012 , the U.S. Senate added an amendment to the surface transportation bill that authorized a one @-@ year extension to the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self @-@ Determination Act . Oregon counties would have received a total of $ 102 million from the legislation in 2012 , to be divided among all 33 counties that currently receive payments . In 2008 , Oregon received $ 250 million from the program . The full transportation bill , including the amendment , passed the Senate by a 74 – 22 vote , but the U.S. House of Representatives refused to vote on the Senate bill , instead passing a three @-@ month extension to the current transportation bill that did not contain a county payments extension . In July 2012 , the Secure Rural Schools Act renewal amendment was included in the transportation bill approved by Congress and signed by the President . This was widely expected to be the last renewal of the program , but in September 2013 , Congress passed another one @-@ year extension to the program , though again at reduced levels . 
 = = Future of the O & C counties = = 
 With future revenue uncertain , several Oregon counties now face a severe financial crisis to pay for county services , including law enforcement , social services , justice and corrections systems , election services and road maintenance among others . With county services required by state law and bankruptcy not permitted , counties have considered merging to save costs , and explored new sources of revenue . 
 One of the hardest @-@ hit counties , Curry County , introduced a ballot measure to add a 3 % sales tax to pay for county services . Oregon is one of only five states in the United States with no county or state sales tax , and the tax has been voted down regularly by voters whenever it has been proposed ( though some areas assess a gas tax , and two cities in tourist areas , Ashland and <unk> , assess a local tax on prepared food ) . In Josephine County , after a proposed property tax increase to pay for law enforcement was defeated in May 2012 , the sheriff 's office reduced its staff by 2 / 3 and released inmates from the county jail to reduce spending . Lane County released 96 prisoners from its prisons and laid off 40 law enforcement personnel to cut costs . 
 In 2012 , the Oregon Legislative Assembly passed a law to allow O & C counties to use timber funds previously reserved for road maintenance to pay for law enforcement patrols . 
 In late 2013 , the House passed a forest management bill co @-@ sponsored by Oregon Representatives Peter <unk> , Greg Walden , and Kurt Schrader that would include increased timber harvests on O & C lands along with resumption of some Secure Rural Schools funding . President Obama has indicated he is likely to veto the bill . 
 = Terma ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Terma " is the ninth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 1 , 1996 . It was directed by Rob Bowman , and written by Frank Spotnitz and series creator Chris Carter . " Terma " featured guest appearances by John Neville , Nicholas Lea and Fritz Weaver . The episode helped explore the series ' overarching mythology . " Terma " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 , being watched by 17 @.@ 34 million viewers during its original airing . 
 FBI special agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and assistant director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) attend a United States Senate hearing , while Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) attempts to escape from a Russian gulag . " Terma " is a two @-@ part episode , continuing the plot from the previous episode , " Tunguska " . 
 Several scenes in " Terma " were inspired by the novels of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn , while its tagline — changed to " E pur si muove " from the usual " The truth is out there " — is a reference to Galileo Galilei 's investigation by the Roman Inquisition . " Terma " features a climactic explosion at an oil refinery wellhead , requiring the physical effects staff to ignite a 300 feet ( 91 m ) plume of flammable liquids . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Having been imprisoned in a gulag in Krasnoyarsk , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) learns that Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) is a double agent working for the Russian taskmasters . Mulder is able to escape from the camp while taking Krycek hostage , although the two become separated in the confusion . Krycek is found by a group of men whose left arms have all been amputated , and has his arm forcibly severed to prevent his involvements in black oil vaccination tests . 
 Meanwhile , Vasily Peskow ( Jan <unk> ) , a former KGB agent , has come out of retirement and traveled to America . While there , he assassinates Bonita <unk> @-@ Sayre , a doctor working for the Syndicate to develop a black oil vaccine . From here , Peskow tracks down <unk> @-@ Sayre 's test subjects , testing a Russian vaccine on them before killing them to cover his tracks . 
 Mulder has been able to return to America with the help of a group of Russian peasants , and rejoins his partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Scully and assistant director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) had been detained by a United States Senate committee seeking to uncover Mulder 's whereabouts , but the committee was adjourned upon Mulder 's arrival . The agents attempt to track down Peskow , following a trail of murders in Boca Raton , Florida . However , the assassin is able to outwit the agents , and destroys the last of the oil @-@ containing rocks seen in the previous episode in an oil @-@ well explosion . He returns to Russia , where it is revealed that he had been hired for this task by Krycek . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's title refers to <unk> , a set of Buddhist teachings hidden from the world . Series creator Chris Carter felt these represented the secrets kept by the Syndicate . The opening credits of the episode saw the series ' usual tagline of " The truth is out there " replaced with " E pur si muove " . The phrase , Italian for " and yet , it moves " , is attributed to astronomer Galileo Galilei , when forced by the Roman Inquisition to denounce his belief in heliocentrism . The episode 's gulag scenes were inspired by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 's novels The Gulag Archipelago ( 1973 ) and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich ( 1963 ) . 
 Shots of the oil refinery seen in the episode were filmed at a thermal energy station situated in Port Moody , British Columbia . The climactic oil @-@ well explosion was achieved through physical effects , with crew member Dave Gauthier building a replica wellhead in a disused rock quarry , through which liquid was piped at pressures of 250 pounds per square inch ( 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 Pa ) to create a plume 300 feet ( 91 m ) high . This wellhead was rigged to spray oil @-@ colored water for shots of the plume itself , which was switched with a remote control to a stream of kerosene and liquid propane for the shots involving the oil catching fire . 
 Actor Nicholas Lea , who plays recurring character Alex Krycek , worked with a Russian @-@ speaking vocal coach to ensure that his dialogue was delivered with the correct accent and stresses . Malcolm Stewart , who portrayed NASA scientist Dr. Sacks in the episode , had previously appeared in several earlier episodes of the series , including " Pilot " , the second season episode " 3 " , and the third season 's " Avatar " . Carter has called " Terma " , along with its companion piece " Tunguska " , " an action piece from beginning to end " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Terma " premièred on the Fox network on December 1 , 1996 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 4 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 6 with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 17 @.@ 34 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B- , finding that it contained too much " vamping for time " , without enough focus on any of the individual plot threads . Handlen felt that the plot thread based on the murder of the Well @-@ Manicured Man 's doctor friend should have been the episode 's focus , and derided the " pomposity " of the dialogue elsewhere in the episode . Based on an advance viewing of the episode 's script , Entertainment Weekly rated " Terma " an A- , praising the " arms race " plotline . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Terma " one star out of five , comparing it unfavourably with the previous episode . Shearman and Pearson described the episode as " awful " , noting that there " is virtually no structure to it at all " . The episode 's dialogue was described as being " dreadful , boring and facile " , with its long , clumsy lines and " ever more complex and ever less interesting " speeches . 
 = Oddfellows ( album ) = 
 Oddfellows is the fourth studio album by musical supergroup Tomahawk . The album is the first to feature new bass player Trevor Dunn , who has replaced previous member Kevin Rutmanis . Oddfellows was recorded live in the Easy Eye Sound Studio in Nashville , Tennessee , after a brief period of rehearsal . Guitarist Duane Denison favored the location as its cheaper studio costs allowed for longer periods of song @-@ writing . 
 The album was released on January 29 , 2013 through the record label Ipecac Recordings . The release of Oddfellows was preceded by a single , " Stone Letter " , first released on November 23 , 2012 as part of Record Store Day 's " Black Friday " event . Reviews for Oddfellows have been positive , and Dunn 's presence has been seen by critics as a positive addition . The album reached chart positions in several countries , including the United Kingdom , Australia , Belgium and the United States . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the departure of previous bass player Kevin Rutmanis , Oddfellows features new band member Trevor Dunn on bass . Dunn had previously worked with singer Mike Patton in the bands Mr. Bungle and Fantômas . The album was recorded over six days in Easy Eye Sound Studios in Nashville , Tennessee , and produced by Collin Dupuis and the band . Dupuis had previously worked with the band The Black Keys , whose singer Dan Auerbach owns Easy Eye Sound . Cartoonist Ivan Brunetti has provided the album 's cover artwork . 
 Drummer John Stanier has described the band as " the absolute simplest , most professional ensemble I have ever been involved with , by far " . The band planned to meet and rehearse for a week before recording the album , but upon getting together again , Patton experienced a death in the family which resulted in him leaving for several days . The band eventually reconvened to rehearse for what Stanier recalls as " a day and a half " . Denison felt positively about the process of recording in Nashville , finding that the cheaper studio costs meant he could allow his compositions to " gestate " for longer during his writing process . 
 Fifteen tracks were recorded for the album , thirteen of which were included on its release . Spin magazine 's Christopher R. Weingarten has described the record as featuring a mix of genres , including " <unk> , smoky , Morricone @-@ jazz " and " the types of epic , majestic choruses that Patton diehards might remember from the final Faith No More LP , Album of the Year " . Denison has described the album 's sound as just being that of " a rock band " , adding " I think we ’ re a very clever , intense sort of spooked @-@ out , dangerous rock band , but still a rock band " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Oddfellows was released on January 29 , 2013 through Ipecac Recordings , the label owned by Patton . The album had been completed for several months by this point , but its release date was moved back as the band 's members did not have time to promote an earlier release . To support the album 's release , the band played at the Voodoo Experience music festival in New Orleans , Louisiana in October 2012 ; and the Austin , Texas Fun Fun Fun Fest , along with several tour dates in the United States in October and November . 
 The band initially announced the release of " Waratorium " as a seven @-@ inch record as part of Record Store Day 's " Black Friday " event on November 23 , 2012 ; eventually releasing " Stone Letter " instead . The single featured illustrations by Brunetti , and was released as a digital download on December 4 , 2012 . Its accompanying music video was directed by Vincent Forcier , using concert footage from Tomahawk 's 2012 concerts . Another music video was also made for the title track . 
 Oddfellows debuted at number sixteen on the UK Rock Chart album countdown on February 9 , 2013 , spending one week in the chart . In the United States , Oddfellows recorded positions in several of Billboard magazine 's charts — reaching a peak position of 69 on the Billboard 200 , 12 on the Alternative Albums listings , second place on the Hard Rock Albums chart , and ninth on the Independent Albums chart . Oddfellows also reached chart positions in Australia , Belgium and Finland . The album reached number 37 on the ARIA Charts , 137 in the Ultratop countdown , and 26 in The Official Finnish Charts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Oddfellows has received mostly positive reviews since its release . Review aggregation website Metacritic lists the album as having an average rating of 79 out of 100 , based on twenty reviews . 
 Writing for AllRovi , Jason Lymangrover rated the album four stars out of five . Lymangrover praised both Dunn 's bass playing and Patton 's vocals , and felt that the album was " a welcome return to form " , similar in sound to their 2001 debut album . Jason Heller of The A.V. Club awarded the album an " A − " . Heller felt that Oddfellows featured " tighter songs and sturdier structures " than the band 's previous work , which he considered comparable to that of a jam band . Drowned in Sound 's Kev Eddy scored Oddfellows eight out of ten , comparing it favorably to the work of Patton 's earlier band Faith No More . Eddy felt that the album was less experimental than previous Tomahawk records , but that its restraint was positive and accessible . Paige <unk> of Revolver magazine scored the album four out of five , calling it a " surprising , thoroughly consistent return @-@ to @-@ form " . <unk> considered " Stone Letter " , " Waratorium " and " <unk> " to be the album 's highlights , and earmarked it as " the first contender for hard @-@ rock album of the year " . 
 Spin magazine 's Grayson Currin rated Oddfellows seven out of ten , finding that it " presents a tide of ideas , information , and intrigue " . Currin felt that the album attempted to blend both art rock and mainstream rock sounds , but was more successful when aiming solely for experimentation — finding " I Can Almost See Them " and " A Thousand Eyes " to be examples of this . Consequence of Sound writer Len <unk> awarded Oddfellows three stars out of five , finding that Dunn 's bass playing improves the band 's sound without altering it radically . <unk> felt that the album rewarded patient listeners but did not provide memorable hooks or melodies , and compared its " laid back " sound to that of Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds . 
 Cole Waterman of PopMatters awarded the album a score of eight out of ten , finding the record to be the group 's " most accessible by far " . Waterman described the album 's composition as " catchy " , finding it to be an appropriate response to the band 's previous album Anonymous ; he also highlighted the " absurdist " tone of the record 's lyrics — pointing out " South Paw " and " Waratorium " as particular examples of this . Pitchfork Media 's Paul Thompson scored Oddfellows 6 @.@ 8 out of ten , considering it " Tomahawk 's most straightforward , stripped @-@ down release to date " . Thompson considered the group 's main dynamic to consist of Denison 's compositions and Patton 's vocals , finding that bass player Dunn " hangs back here , ably holding down the low end without <unk> himself " . Thompson also debated the effect that the album 's short germination period had on its overall composition , believing that the brief recording time lent the record " a feeling that , whenever you get these guys in the same room , this music [ ... ] just comes tearing out " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Tricia Tanaka Is Dead = 
 " Tricia Tanaka Is Dead " is the tenth episode of the third season of the American drama television series Lost , and the show 's 59th episode overall . The episode was written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by Eric Laneuville . The character of Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks , as he reminisces over his father ( guest star Cheech Marin ) abandoning his family for seventeen years . On the island , Hurley works with Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) to repair an old Volkswagen camper van while Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) ponders what to do about the still @-@ captured Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) . 
 In interviews , Garcia , Dae Kim , and Holloway commented that they had a lot of fun shooting their scenes , as they had not worked together for a while . The episode marked the first appearance of recurring guest actor Cheech Marin . It first aired on February 28 , 2007 , in the United States on ABC , with an estimated 12 @.@ 78 million viewers . The episode received mixed reviews , with many praising its humor but still noting that little was learned concerning the show 's overall mythology . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Young Hurley ( Caden <unk> ) joins his father , David Reyes ( Cheech Marin ) , over an old Camaro that they want to repair . It won 't start however , and David assures him good things happen when you believe they will , and that in this world you have to " make your own luck . " While leaving for Las Vegas , David gives Hurley a chocolate bar and promises to return soon . 
 Now an adult , Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) watches as his new Mr. Cluck 's chicken restaurant gets hit by a meteorite , killing those inside , including Tricia Tanaka ( Sung @-@ Hi Lee ) , the <unk> who just interviewed him about his lottery winnings . Hurley arrives home , telling his mother his intent to go to Australia to end the bad luck curse he believes was bestowed upon him after he won the lottery . She tries to disprove the curse by revealing his father has returned to them after seventeen years . Suspecting his father of only wanting the lottery money , Hurley reacts angrily . David brings his son to a tarot card reader ( Suzanne Krull ) , who tells Hurley she can ' remove ' the curse before admitting that David paid her to say this . Hurley vows to give the money away , and begins packing for Australia . David acknowledges he just returned for the money , but approves of Hurley 's decision and promises he will be waiting for him when Hurley gets back . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 On the island , Hurley sorrowfully speaks to Libby 's grave about what happened to Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) after they were taken by the Others . Hurley learns that Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) believes that Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) sees visions of Charlie 's death . Hurley believes this and tells Charlie that he thinks he brings bad luck . Vincent the dog shows up with a mummified human arm , leading Hurley to a Volkswagen camper van on its side underneath the foliage . Inside is a skeleton wearing a DHARMA Initiative jumpsuit sporting the name " Roger " on its chest and the Swan station 's logo . On the beach , Hurley 's requests for help are turned down . Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , who doesn 't understand what Hurley is saying , is roped into helping . 
 Hurley finds beer in the van and a returned Sawyer outside . He learns from Sawyer that he and Kate escaped but Jack is still prisoner . Hurley is very optimistic about the future and volunteers Sawyer to help him fix the van . Meanwhile , Desmond refuses to tell Charlie when he will die . Kate informs Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) of all she knows about the Others and then leaves , saying she 's going to get help to rescue Jack , but she won 't say from whom . 
 Hurley , Jin and Sawyer raid the van and find maps and beer . Meanwhile , Hurley tells Charlie to stop moping and help him start the car , saying that he might die doing it but they should make their own luck , face death , and possibly win . Hurley eventually convinces the others to push the van to a slope in order to get it started . Despite Sawyer 's warnings , Hurley goes through with the plan . Charlie declares " victory or death " and rides with Hurley , as Sawyer and Jin push the vehicle down the steep hill . At first it looks as though they will crash , but the van starts just in time . Later , the entire group enjoys a ride . 
 Hurley is later left with the van and continues driving . Jin gives Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) a flower , Charlie talks with Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) and Sawyer brings some beer for Kate but finds that she isn 't around . Meanwhile , Kate meets up with John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) and Sayid on her way to find Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) , who she hopes to get help from . Locke reveals he has compass readings from Mr. Eko 's stick . Kate 's recruiting of Rousseau seems to fail until she mentions her suspicions about Alex , who helped Kate escape , being Rousseau 's daughter . 
 = = Production = = 
 Having worked with executive producer Carlton Cuse on Nash Bridges , guest actor Cheech Marin was called by Cuse requesting he appear on Lost , to which Marin responded " You know , that sounds like a lot of fun ... It 's in Hawaii , right ? I can do that ! ' " Cuse later commented , " He 's quite a good actor . People only think of him as the <unk> @-@ smoking ' 70s dude . But he played Tyne Daly 's love interest in Judging Amy . C 'mon ! " 
 While shooting the episode , Jorge Garcia noted " the group on the beach has been quite big . They laid out the most cast chairs I 've ever seen at one time since the pilot and it 's been fun . " Garcia previewed his character 's flashback in a New York Post interview , " [ it is ] the kind of relationship Hurley has with his father and how it 's changed from when he was a kid now that he 's an adult and a lottery winner . He finds something on the island that brings him back to that time and that 's how it all gets started " . Actor Josh Holloway was told that an emotional undercurrent of the episode concerned his failed relationship with Kate . Holloway commented that Sawyer is thinking I have " my beer ... but I don 't have my girl . He 's worried , and drowning it with beer " . 
 To help train the dog playing Vincent for the episode 's needed scenes , Madison was given the fake arm to take home and play with ; when finally brought on the set , the crew had difficulty shooting her because Madison would bring and drop off the arm slightly differently each time , causing trouble recreating the same camera angles . Actor Daniel Dae Kim described their scenes with the beer in the DVD special features , " The comedic scenes with Josh were so much fun to play because it was a lighter side . A nice change of pace . " Like their characters , the actors had not been in scenes together in a while , so Dae Kim thought it " was fun to catch up and have fun in the process " . The episode featured Hurley driving a bus down a hill . To create this scene , Garcia had to drive the bus down a small hill " very stead [ <unk> ] " to ensure the cameraman could record it all ; towards the end however , they told Garcia to just " go for it " , allowing him to " cut loose a little " . For the close @-@ up shots of Garcia and Dominic Monaghan , the production crew would shake the bus to simulate driving , and brush various pieces of foliage across the windshield to make it seem the bus was hitting bushes or trees . A stunt double standing in for Garcia performed the largest hill in the drive down ; they were unable to rehearse due to getting rained out , so their first rehearsal was done on film . Dae Kim commented that " it was just great to have as much fun on camera as we do off camera " , and that there was no real acting that day , as they were all enjoying themselves as much as their characters . The Volkswagen campus van — still in operating condition — along with Hurley 's Camaro , were later auctioned off with other Lost props and costumes at the Santa Monica Airport in 2010 . 
 The song " <unk> " by Three Dog Night is used several times in the episode , both in Hurley 's flashbacks and on the Island . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its original American broadcast on February 28 , 2007 , an estimated 12 @.@ 78 million viewers tuned into the episode , making it the 24th most watched television program of the week . 
 After what he felt was a period of bad episodes culminating with " Stranger in a Strange Land " , critic Andrew Dignan of Slant Magazine praised " Tricia Tanaka Is Dead " as a " palate cleanser , reminding us that this show is meant to be , above all else , fun " . He described the episode as an " expected pleasure , disarming in a way [ Lost ] hasn 't been since Season One , back before these people became jaded by " Others " and consumed with tedious busy work while the show 's producers figured out what frequently disappointing direction to push them in next . " Dignan did however acknowledge that others might not have found the episode as enjoyable as he did . Erin Martell of TV Squad wasn 't sure what to think of the episode , believing that it was " entertaining " but produced nothing new for viewers . She did note that the characters are now in place to take action for following episodes , and hoped that the episode 's " slow @-@ moving events " were " building up to some serious resolution " . Rather than dismiss the episode for lacking a mythology @-@ related storyline , Jeff Jensen from Entertainment Weekly called it " a joyous and poignant hour of television " , and said that it " could very well be a cleverly crafted allegory for the history of The Dharma Initiative on The Island . " 
 New York Magazine put " Tricia Tanaka Is Dead " as third of its list of " Twenty Most Pointless Lost Episodes " , claiming that " because with all his other problems , daddy issues don 't feel like something that needs to be thrown at Hurley " and David could have been written as a positive character " just to add some variation to the bad @-@ dad overkill on this show " . IGN ranked " Tricia Tanaka Is Dead " as the second worst Lost episode , above only " Stranger in a Strange Land " , explaining " Is there a better metaphor that Lost was running in circles at this point in Season 3 than seeing several of the castaways driving in circles on the island , with goofy grins on their faces ? ... With a dull story on the island and flashbacks weakly giving Hurley the requisite daddy issues so many of the other characters already had , it was clear Lost needed to make a big change soon to recapture what was special about the show . Thankfully , they did . " A similar list by the Los Angeles Times ranked the episode much higher at 31 , writing " The haters need to shut up . This is a nearly pure embrace of the Lost ethos . You make your own fate up until the moment when you don 't . " 
 Various reviewers praised Jorge Garcia 's performance , with one believing the episode " was a reminder that Garcia 's not only a wonderful ( and much needed ) comedic outlet for the show but a fine actor who specializes in intimate dramas of anxiety and self @-@ realization " . 
 Garcia submitted this episode for consideration for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Actinide = 
 The actinide / <unk> / or <unk> / <unk> / ( IUPAC nomenclature ) series encompasses the 15 metallic chemical elements with atomic numbers from 89 to 103 , actinium through lawrencium . 
 The actinide series derives its name from the first element in the series , actinium . The informal chemical symbol An is used in general discussions of actinide chemistry to refer to any actinide . All but one of the actinides are f @-@ block elements , corresponding to the filling of the 5f electron shell ; lawrencium , a d @-@ block element , is also generally considered an actinide . In comparison with the lanthanides , also mostly f @-@ block elements , the actinides show much more variable valence . They all have very large atomic and ionic radii and exhibit an unusually large range of physical properties . While actinium and the late actinides ( from americium onwards ) behave similarly to the lanthanides , the elements thorium through neptunium are much more similar to transition metals in their chemistry . 
 All actinides are radioactive and release energy upon radioactive decay ; naturally occurring uranium and thorium , and synthetically produced plutonium are the most abundant actinides on Earth . These are used in nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons . Uranium and thorium also have diverse current or historical uses , and americium is used in the ionization chambers of most modern smoke detectors . 
 Of the actinides , primordial thorium and uranium occur naturally in substantial quantities and small amounts of persisting natural plutonium have also been identified . The radioactive decay of uranium produces transient amounts of actinium and protactinium , and atoms of neptunium and plutonium are occasionally produced from transmutation reactions in uranium ores . The other actinides are purely synthetic elements . Nuclear weapons tests have released at least six actinides heavier than plutonium into the environment ; analysis of debris from a 1952 hydrogen bomb explosion showed the presence of americium , curium , berkelium , californium , einsteinium and fermium . 
 In presentations of the periodic table , the lanthanides and the actinides are customarily shown as two additional rows below the main body of the table , with placeholders or else a selected single element of each series ( either lanthanum or lutetium , and either actinium or lawrencium , respectively ) shown in a single cell of the main table , between barium and hafnium , and radium and rutherfordium , respectively . This convention is entirely a matter of aesthetics and formatting practicality ; a rarely used wide @-@ formatted periodic table inserts the lanthanide and actinide series in their proper places , as parts of the table 's sixth and seventh rows ( periods ) . 
 = = Discovery , isolation and synthesis = = 
 Like the lanthanides , the actinides form a family of elements with similar properties . Within the actinides , there are two overlapping groups : transuranium elements , which follow uranium in the periodic table — and transplutonium elements , which follow plutonium . Compared to the lanthanides , which ( except for promethium ) are found in nature in appreciable quantities , most actinides are rare . The most abundant , or easily synthesized actinides are uranium and thorium , followed by plutonium , americium , actinium , protactinium and neptunium . 
 The existence of transuranium elements was suggested by Enrico Fermi based on his experiments in 1934 . However , even though four actinides were known by that time , it was not yet understood that they formed a family similar to lanthanides . The prevailing view that dominated early research into transuranics was that they were regular elements in the 7th period , with thorium , protactinium and uranium corresponding to 6th @-@ period hafnium , tantalum and tungsten , respectively . Synthesis of transuranics gradually undermined this point of view . By 1944 an observation that curium failed to exhibit oxidation states above 4 ( whereas its supposed 6th period homolog , platinum , can reach oxidation state of 6 ) prompted Glenn Seaborg to formulate a so @-@ called " actinide hypothesis " . Studies of known actinides and discoveries of further transuranic elements provided more data in support of this point of view , but the phrase " actinide hypothesis " ( the implication being that " hypothesis " is something that has not been decisively proven ) remained in active use by scientists through the late 1950s . 
 At present , there are two major methods of producing isotopes of transplutonium elements : irradiation of the lighter elements with either neutrons or accelerated charged particles . The first method is most important for applications , as only neutron irradiation using nuclear reactors allows the production of sizeable amounts of synthetic actinides ; however , it is limited to relatively light elements . The advantage of the second method is that elements heavier than plutonium , as well as neutron @-@ deficient isotopes , can be obtained , which are not formed during neutron irradiation . 
 In 1962 – 1966 , there were attempts in the United States to produce transplutonium isotopes using a series of six underground nuclear explosions . Small samples of rock were extracted from the blast area immediately after the test to study the explosion products , but no isotopes with mass number greater than 257 could be detected , despite predictions that such isotopes would have relatively long half @-@ lives of α @-@ decay . This <unk> was attributed to spontaneous fission owing to the large speed of the products and to other decay channels , such as neutron emission and nuclear fission . 
 = = = From actinium to uranium = = = 
 Uranium and thorium were the first actinides discovered . Uranium was identified in 1789 by the German chemist Martin Heinrich Klaproth in pitchblende ore . He named it after the planet Uranus , which had been discovered only eight years earlier . Klaproth was able to precipitate a yellow compound ( likely sodium diuranate ) by dissolving pitchblende in nitric acid and neutralizing the solution with sodium hydroxide . He then reduced the obtained yellow powder with charcoal , and extracted a black substance that he mistook for metal . Only 60 years later , the French scientist Eugène @-@ Melchior Péligot identified it with uranium oxide . He also isolated the first sample of uranium metal by heating uranium tetrachloride with potassium . The atomic mass of uranium was then calculated as 120 , but Dmitri Mendeleev in 1872 corrected it to 240 using his periodicity laws . This value was confirmed experimentally in 1882 by K. Zimmerman . 
 Thorium oxide was discovered by Friedrich Wöhler in the mineral , which was found in Norway ( 1827 ) . Jöns Jacob Berzelius characterized this material in more detail by in 1828 . By reduction of thorium tetrachloride with potassium , he isolated the metal and named it thorium after the Norse god of thunder and lightning Thor . The same isolation method was later used by Péligot for uranium . 
 Actinium was discovered in 1899 by André @-@ Louis Debierne , an assistant of Marie Curie , in the pitchblende waste left after removal of radium and polonium . He described the substance ( in 1899 ) as similar to titanium and ( in 1900 ) as similar to thorium . The discovery of actinium by Debierne was however questioned in 1971 and 2000 , arguing that Debierne 's publications in 1904 contradicted his earlier work of 1899 – 1900 . The name actinium comes from the Greek <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , meaning beam or ray . This metal was discovered not by its own radiation but by the radiation of the daughter products . Owing to the close similarity of actinium and lanthanum and low abundance , pure actinium could only be produced in 1950 . The term actinide was probably introduced by Victor Goldschmidt in 1937 . 
 Protactinium was possibly isolated in 1900 by William Crookes . It was first identified in 1913 , when Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth Göhring encountered the short @-@ lived isotope 234mPa ( half @-@ life 1 @.@ 17 minutes ) during their studies of the 238U decay . They named the new element brevium ( from Latin brevis meaning brief ) ; the name was changed to protoactinium ( from Greek πρῶτος + <unk> meaning " first beam element " ) in 1918 when two groups of scientists , led by the Austrian Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn of Germany and Frederick Soddy and John Cranston of Great Britain , independently discovered 231Pa . The name was shortened to protactinium in 1949 . This element was little characterized until 1960 , when A. G. Maddock and his co @-@ workers in the U.K. produced 130 grams of protactinium from 60 tonnes of waste left after extraction of uranium from its ore . 
 = = = Neptunium and above = = = 
 Neptunium ( named for the planet Neptune , the next planet out from Uranus , after which uranium was named ) was discovered by Edwin McMillan and Philip H. Abelson in 1940 in Berkeley , California . They produced the 239Np isotope ( half @-@ life = 2 @.@ 4 days ) by bombarding uranium with slow neutrons . It was the first transuranium element produced synthetically . 
 Transuranium elements do not occur in sizeable quantities in nature and are commonly synthesized via nuclear reactions conducted with nuclear reactors . For example , under irradiation with reactor neutrons , uranium @-@ 238 partially converts to plutonium @-@ 239 : 
 <formula> 
 In this way , Enrico Fermi with collaborators , using the first nuclear reactor Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , obtained significant amounts of plutonium @-@ 239 , which were then used in nuclear weapons . 
 Actinides with the highest mass numbers are synthesized by bombarding uranium , plutonium , curium and californium with ions of nitrogen , oxygen , carbon , neon or boron in a particle accelerator . So , nobelium was produced by bombarding uranium @-@ 238 with neon @-@ 22 as 
 <formula> . 
 The first isotopes of transplutonium elements , americium @-@ 241 and curium @-@ 242 , were synthesized in 1944 by Glenn T. Seaborg , Ralph A. James and Albert Ghiorso . Curium @-@ 242 was obtained by bombarding plutonium @-@ 239 with 32 @-@ MeV α @-@ particles 
 <formula> . 
 The americium @-@ 241 and curium @-@ 242 isotopes also were produced by irradiating plutonium in a nuclear reactor . The latter element was named after Marie Curie and her husband Pierre who are noted for discovering radium and for their work in radioactivity . 
 Bombarding curium @-@ 242 with α @-@ particles resulted in an isotope of californium <unk> ( 1950 ) , and a similar procedure yielded in 1949 berkelium @-@ 243 from americium @-@ 241 . The new elements were named after Berkeley , California , by analogy with its lanthanide homologue terbium , which was named after the village of Ytterby in Sweden . 
 In 1945 , B. B. Cunningham obtained the first bulk chemical compound of a transplutonium element , namely americium hydroxide . Over the next three to four years , milligram quantities of americium and microgram amounts of curium were accumulated that allowed production of isotopes of berkelium ( Thomson , 1949 ) and californium ( Thomson , 1950 ) . Sizeable amounts of these elements were produced only in 1958 ( Burris B. Cunningham and Stanley G. Thomson ) , and the first californium compound ( 0 @.@ 3 µg of <unk> ) was obtained only in 1960 by B. B. Cunningham and J. C. <unk> . 
 Einsteinium and fermium were identified in 1952 – 1953 in the fallout from the " Ivy Mike " nuclear test ( 1 November 1952 ) , the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb . Instantaneous exposure of uranium @-@ 238 to a large neutron flux resulting from the explosion produced heavy isotopes of uranium , including uranium @-@ 253 and uranium @-@ 255 , and their β @-@ decay yielded einsteinium @-@ 253 and fermium @-@ 255 . The discovery of the new elements and the new data on neutron capture were initially kept secret on the orders of the U.S. military until 1955 due to Cold War tensions . Nevertheless , the Berkeley team were able to prepare einsteinium and fermium by civilian means , through the neutron bombardment of plutonium @-@ 239 , and published this work in 1954 with the disclaimer that it was not the first studies that had been carried out on the elements . The " Ivy Mike " studies were declassified and published in 1955 . The first significant ( <unk> ) amounts of einsteinium were produced in 1961 by Cunningham and colleagues , but this has not been done for fermium yet . 
 The first isotope of mendelevium , 256Md ( half @-@ life 87 min ) , was synthesized by Albert Ghiorso , Glenn T. Seaborg , Gregory R. Choppin , Bernard G. Harvey and Stanley G. Thompson when they bombarded an 253Es target with alpha particles in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron of Berkeley Radiation Laboratory ; this was the first isotope of any element to be synthesized one atom at a time . 
 There were several attempts to obtain isotopes of nobelium by Swedish ( 1957 ) and American ( 1958 ) groups , but the first reliable result was the synthesis of 256No by the Russian group ( Georgy Flyorov et al . ) in 1965 , as acknowledged by the IUPAC in 1992 . In their experiments , Flyorov et al. bombarded uranium @-@ 238 with neon @-@ 22 . 
 In 1961 , Ghiorso et al. obtained the first isotope of lawrencium by irradiating californium ( mostly californium @-@ 252 ) with boron @-@ 10 and boron @-@ 11 ions . The mass number of this isotope was not clearly established ( possibly 258 or 259 ) at the time . In 1965 , 256Lr was synthesized by Flyorov et al. from 243Am and 18O . Thus IUPAC recognized the nuclear physics teams at Dubna and Berkeley as the co @-@ discoverers of lawrencium . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 Thirty @-@ one isotopes of actinium and eight excited isomeric states of some of its nuclides were identified by 2010 . Three isotopes , 225Ac , 227Ac and 228Ac , were found in nature and the others were produced in the laboratory ; only the three natural isotopes are used in applications . Actinium @-@ 225 is a member of radioactive neptunium series ; it was first discovered in 1947 as a decay product of uranium @-@ 233 , it is an α @-@ emitter with a half @-@ life of 10 days . Actinium @-@ 225 is less available than actinium @-@ 228 , but is more promising in <unk> applications . Actinium @-@ 227 ( half @-@ life 21 @.@ 77 years ) occurs in all uranium ores , but in small quantities . One gram of uranium ( in radioactive equilibrium ) contains only 2 × 10 − 10 gram of 227Ac . Actinium @-@ 228 is a member of radioactive thorium series formed by the decay of 228Ra ; it is a β − emitter with a half @-@ life of 6 @.@ 15 hours . In one tonne of thorium there is 5 × 10 − 8 gram of 228Ac . It was discovered by Otto Hahn in 1906 . 
 Twenty nine isotopes of protactinium are known with mass numbers 212 – 240 as well as three excited isomeric states . Only 231Pa and 234Pa have been found in nature . All the isotopes have short lifetime , except for protactinium @-@ 231 ( half @-@ life 32 @,@ 760 years ) . The most important isotopes are 231Pa and 233Pa , which is an intermediate product in obtaining uranium @-@ 233 and is the most affordable among artificial isotopes of protactinium . 233Pa has convenient half @-@ life and energy of γ @-@ radiation , and thus was used in most studies of protactinium chemistry . Protactinium @-@ 233 is a β @-@ emitter with a half @-@ life of 26 @.@ 97 days . 
 Uranium has the highest number ( 25 ) of both natural and synthetic isotopes . They have mass numbers of 217 – 242 , and three of them , 234U , 235U and 238U , are present in appreciable quantities in nature . Among others , the most important is 233U , which is a final product of transformations of 232Th irradiated by slow neutrons . 233U has a much higher fission efficiency by low @-@ energy ( thermal ) neutrons , compared e.g. with 235U . Most uranium chemistry studies were carried out on uranium @-@ 238 owing to its long half @-@ life of 4 @.@ 4 × 109 years . 
 There are 19 isotopes of neptunium with mass numbers from 225 to 244 ; they are all highly radioactive . The most popular among scientists are long @-@ lived 237Np ( t1 / 2 
 = 2 @.@ 20 × 106 years ) and short @-@ lived 239Np , 238Np ( t1 / 2 ~ 2 days ) . 
 Sixteen isotopes of americium are known with mass numbers from 232 to 248 . The most important are 241Am and 243Am , which are alpha @-@ emitters and also emit soft , but intense γ @-@ rays ; both of them can be obtained in an isotopically pure form . Chemical properties of americium were first studied with 241Am , but later shifted to 243Am , which is almost 20 times less radioactive . The disadvantage of 243Am is production of the short @-@ lived daughter isotope 239Np , which has to be considered in the data analysis . 
 Among 19 isotopes of curium , the most accessible are 242Cm and 244Cm ; they are α @-@ emitters , but with much shorter lifetime than the americium isotopes . These isotopes emit almost no γ @-@ radiation , but undergo spontaneous fission with the associated emission of neutrons . More long @-@ lived isotopes of curium ( 245 – 248Cm , all α @-@ emitters ) are formed as a mixture during neutron irradiation of plutonium or americium . Upon short irradiation , this mixture is dominated by curium @-@ 246 , and then curium @-@ 248 begins to accumulate . Both of these isotopes , especially 248Cm , have a longer half @-@ life ( 3 @.@ 48 × 105 years ) and are much more convenient for carrying out chemical research than 242Cm and 244Cm , but they also have a rather high rate of spontaneous fission . 247Cm has the longest lifetime among isotopes of curium ( 1 @.@ 56 × 107 years ) , but is not formed in large quantities because of the strong fission induced by thermal neutrons . 
 Fourteen isotopes of berkelium were identified with mass numbers 238 – 252 . Only 249Bk is available in large quantities ; it has a relatively short half @-@ life of 330 days and emits mostly soft β @-@ particles , which are inconvenient for detection . Its alpha radiation is rather weak ( 1 @.@ 45 × 10 − 3 % with respect to β @-@ radiation ) , but is sometimes used to detect this isotope . 247Bk is an alpha @-@ emitter with a long half @-@ life of 1 @,@ 380 years , but it is hard to obtain in appreciable quantities ; it is not formed upon neutron irradiation of plutonium because of the β @-@ stability of isotopes of curium isotopes with mass number below 248 . 
 Isotopes of californium with mass numbers 237 – 256 are formed in nuclear reactors ; californium @-@ 253 is a β @-@ emitter and the rest are α @-@ emitters . The isotopes with even mass numbers ( 250Cf , 252Cf and 254Cf ) have a high rate of spontaneous fission , especially 254Cf of which 99 @.@ 7 % decays by spontaneous fission . Californium @-@ 249 has a relatively long half @-@ life ( 352 years ) , weak spontaneous fission and strong γ @-@ emission that facilitates its identification . 249Cf is not formed in large quantities in a nuclear reactor because of the slow β @-@ decay of the parent isotope 249Bk and a large cross section of interaction with neutrons , but it can be accumulated in the isotopically pure form as the β @-@ decay product of ( pre @-@ selected ) 249Bk . Californium produced by reactor @-@ irradiation of plutonium mostly consists of 250Cf and 252Cf , the latter being predominant for large neutron <unk> , and its study is hindered by the strong neutron radiation . 
 Among the 16 known isotopes of einsteinium with mass numbers from 241 to 257 the most affordable is 253Es . It is an α @-@ emitter with a half @-@ life of 20 @.@ 47 days , a relatively weak γ @-@ emission and small spontaneous fission rate as compared with the isotopes of californium . Prolonged neutron irradiation also produces a long @-@ lived isotope 254Es ( t1 / 2 = 
 275 @.@ 5 days ) . 
 Nineteen isotopes of fermium are known with mass numbers of 242 – 260 . 254Fm , 255Fm and 256Fm are α @-@ emitters with a short half @-@ life ( hours ) , which can be isolated in significant amounts . 257Fm ( t1 / 2 
 = 100 days ) can accumulate upon prolonged and strong irradiation . All these isotopes are characterized by high rates of spontaneous fission . 
 Among the 15 known isotopes of mendelevium ( mass numbers from 245 to 260 ) , the most studied is 256Md , which mainly decays through the electron capture ( α @-@ radiation is ≈ 10 % ) with the half @-@ life of 77 minutes . Another alpha emitter , 258Md , has a half @-@ life of 53 days . Both these isotopes are produced from rare einsteinium ( 253Es and 255Es respectively ) , that therefore limits their availability . 
 Long @-@ lived isotopes of nobelium and isotopes of lawrencium ( and of heavier elements ) have relatively short half @-@ lives . For nobelium 11 isotopes are known with mass numbers 250 – 260 and 262 . The chemical properties of nobelium and lawrencium were studied with 255No ( t1 / 2 = 
 3 min ) and 256Lr ( t1 / 2 = 35 s ) . The longest @-@ lived nobelium isotope 259No has a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 5 hours . 
 = = Distribution in nature = = 
 Thorium and uranium are the most abundant actinides in nature with the respective mass concentrations of 1 @.@ 6 × 10 − 3 % and 4 × 10 − 4 % . Uranium mostly occurs in the Earth 's crust as a mixture of its oxides in the minerals uraninite , which is also called pitchblende because of its black color . There are several dozens of other uranium minerals such as carnotite ( <unk> · 3H2O ) and <unk> ( Ca ( UO2 ) 2 ( PO4 ) 2 · nH2O ) . The isotopic composition of natural uranium is 238U ( relative abundance 99 @.@ 2742 % ) , 235U ( 0 @.@ <unk> % ) and 234U ( 0 @.@ 0054 % ) ; of these 238U has the largest half @-@ life of 4 @.@ 51 × 109 years . The worldwide production of uranium in 2009 amounted to 50 @,@ 572 tonnes , of which 27 @.@ 3 % was mined in Kazakhstan . Other important uranium mining countries are Canada ( 20 @.@ 1 % ) , Australia ( 15 @.@ 7 % ) , Namibia ( 9 @.@ 1 % ) , Russia ( 7 @.@ 0 % ) , and Niger ( 6 @.@ 4 % ) . 
 The most abundant thorium minerals are <unk> ( ThO2 ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and monazite , ( ( Th , Ca , Ce ) PO4 ) . Most thorium minerals contain uranium and vice versa ; and they all have significant fraction of lanthanides . Rich deposits of thorium minerals are located in the United States ( 440 @,@ 000 tonnes ) , Australia and India ( ~ 300 @,@ 000 tonnes each ) and Canada ( ~ 100 @,@ 000 tonnes ) . 
 The abundance of actinium in the Earth 's crust is only about 5 × 10 − 15 % . Actinium is mostly present in uranium @-@ containing , but also in other minerals , though in much smaller quantities . The content of actinium in most natural objects corresponds to the isotopic equilibrium of parent isotope 235U , and it is not affected by the weak Ac migration . Protactinium is more abundant ( 10 − 12 % ) in the Earth 's crust than actinium . It was discovered in the uranium ore in 1913 by Fajans and Göhring . As actinium , the distribution of protactinium follows that of 235U . 
 The half @-@ life of the longest @-@ lived isotope of neptunium , 237Np , is negligible compared to the age of the Earth . Thus neptunium is present in nature in negligible amounts produced as intermediate decay products of other isotopes . Traces of plutonium in uranium minerals were first found in 1942 , and the more systematic results on 239Pu are summarized in the table ( no other plutonium isotopes could be detected in those samples ) . The upper limit of abundance of the longest @-@ living isotope of plutonium , 244Pu , is 3 × 10 − 20 % . Plutonium could not be detected in samples of lunar soil . Owing to its scarcity in nature , most plutonium is produced synthetically . 
 = = Extraction = = 
 Owing to the low abundance of actinides , their extraction is a complex , multistep process . Fluorides of actinides are usually used because they are insoluble in water and can be easily separated with redox reactions . Fluorides are reduced with calcium , magnesium or barium : 
 <formula> 
 Among the actinides , thorium and uranium are the easiest to isolate . Thorium is extracted mostly from monazite : thorium diphosphate ( Th ( PO4 ) 2 ) is reacted with nitric acid , and the produced thorium nitrate treated with tributyl phosphate . Rare @-@ earth impurities are separated by increasing the pH in sulfate solution . 
 In another extraction method , monazite is decomposed with a 45 % aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide at 140 ° C. Mixed metal hydroxides are extracted first , filtered at 80 ° C , washed with water and dissolved with concentrated hydrochloric acid . Next , the acidic solution is neutralized with hydroxides to pH 
 = 5 @.@ 8 that results in precipitation of thorium hydroxide ( Th ( OH ) 4 ) contaminated with ~ 3 % of rare @-@ earth hydroxides ; the rest of rare @-@ earth hydroxides remains in solution . Thorium hydroxide is dissolved in an inorganic acid and then purified from the rare earth elements . An efficient method is the dissolution of thorium hydroxide in nitric acid , because the resulting solution can be purified by extraction with organic solvents : 
 Th ( OH ) 4 + 4 HNO3 → Th ( NO3 ) 4 + 4 H2O 
 Metallic thorium is separated from the anhydrous oxide , chloride or fluoride by reacting it with calcium in an inert atmosphere : 
 ThO2 + 2 Ca → 2 CaO + Th 
 Sometimes thorium is extracted by electrolysis of a fluoride in a mixture of sodium and potassium chloride at 700 – 800 ° C in a graphite crucible . Highly pure thorium can be extracted from its iodide with the crystal bar process . 
