 = Wall Street ( 1987 film ) = 
 Wall Street is a 1987 American drama film , directed and co @-@ written by Oliver Stone , which stars Michael Douglas , Charlie Sheen , Daryl Hannah and Martin Sheen . The film tells the story of Bud Fox ( Sheen ) , a young stockbroker who becomes involved with Gordon Gekko ( Douglas ) , a wealthy , unscrupulous corporate raider . 
 Stone made the film as a tribute to his father , Lou Stone , a stockbroker during the Great Depression . The character of Gekko is said to be a composite of several people , including Owen Morrisey , Dennis Levine , Ivan Boesky , Carl Icahn , Asher Edelman , Michael Ovitz , Michael Milken , and Stone himself . The character of Sir Lawrence Wildman , meanwhile , was modeled on the prominent British financier and corporate raider Sir James Goldsmith . Originally , the studio wanted Warren Beatty to play Gekko , but he was not interested ; Stone , meanwhile , wanted Richard Gere , but Gere passed on the role . Stone went with Douglas even though he had been advised by others in Hollywood not to cast him . 
 The film was well received among major film critics . Douglas won the Academy Award for Best Actor , and the film has come to be seen as the archetypal portrayal of 1980s excess , with Douglas ' character memorably declaring that " greed is good . " It has also proven influential in inspiring people to work on Wall Street , with Sheen , Douglas , and Stone commenting over the years how people still approach them and say that they became stockbrokers because of their respective characters in the film . 
 Stone and Douglas reunited for a sequel titled Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps , which was released theatrically on September 24 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1985 , Bud Fox ( Charlie Sheen ) is working as a junior stockbroker in New York City at Jackson Steinem & Co . He wants to work with his hero , Gordon Gekko ( Michael Douglas ) , a legendary Wall Street player . After calling Gekko 's office 59 days in a row trying to land an appointment , Bud visits Gekko on his birthday with a box of Gekko 's favorite , contraband Cuban cigars . Impressed at his sheer boldness , Gekko grants Bud an interview . Bud pitches him stocks , but Gekko is unimpressed . Desperate , Bud provides him some inside information about Bluestar Airlines , which Bud learned in a casual conversation from his father , Carl ( Martin Sheen ) , the union leader for the company 's maintenance workers . Intrigued , Gekko tells Bud he will think about it , but also that he " [ looks ] at a hundred deals a day , " but " [ chooses ] one . " A dejected Bud returns to his office . However , Gekko places an order for Bluestar stock and becomes one of Bud 's clients . Gekko gives Bud some capital to manage , but the other stocks Bud selects lose money . 
 Gekko gives Bud another chance , and tells him to spy on British CEO Sir Lawrence Wildman ( Terence Stamp ) and discern Wildman 's next move . Bud learns that Wildman is making a bid for a steel company . Through Bud 's spying , Gekko makes big money , and Wildman is forced to buy Gekko 's shares off him to complete his takeover . 
 Bud becomes wealthy , enjoying Gekko 's promised perks , including a penthouse on Manhattan 's Upper East Side and a trophy girlfriend , interior decorator Darien ( Daryl Hannah ) . Bud is promoted to a senior stockbroker as a result of the large commission fees he is bringing in from Gekko 's trading , and is given a corner office with a view . He continues to maximize inside information and use friends as straw buyers to provide more income for him and Gekko . Unknown to Bud , several of his trades attract the attention of the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
 Bud pitches a new idea to Gekko : buy Bluestar Airlines and expand the company , with Bud as president , using savings achieved by union concessions and the <unk> pension . Even though Bud is unable to persuade his father to support him and Gekko , he is able to get the unions to push for the deal . Soon afterward , Bud learns that Gekko plans to dissolve the company and sell off Bluestar 's assets in order to access cash in the company 's pension plan , leaving Carl and the entire Bluestar staff unemployed . Although this would leave Bud as a very rich man , he is angered by Gekko 's deceit and racked with the guilt of being an accessory to Bluestar 's impending destruction , especially after his father suffers a heart attack . Bud resolves to disrupt Gekko 's plans , and breaks up with Darien when she refuses to go against Gekko , her former lover . 
 Bud devises a plan to drive up Bluestar 's stock before manipulating it back down . He and the other union presidents then secretly meet with Wildman and arrange for him to buy controlling interest in Bluestar at a significant discount . Gekko , realizing that his stock is plummeting , dumps his remaining interest in the company on Bud 's advice . However , when Gekko learns on the evening news that Wildman is buying Bluestar , he realizes that Bud engineered the entire scheme . Bud triumphantly goes back to work at Jackson Steinem the following day , only to be arrested for insider trading . 
 Sometime later , Bud confronts Gekko in Central Park . Gekko physically assaults Bud as he berates him for his role with Bluestar and accuses him of ingratitude for several of their illicit trades . Following the confrontation , it is revealed that Bud has turned state 's evidence and was wearing a wire to record his encounter with Gekko . He turns the wire tapes over to the authorities , who suggest that he may get a lighter sentence in exchange for helping them make a case against Gekko . Later on , Bud 's parents drive him down FDR Drive towards the New York State Supreme Court Building downtown to answer for the crimes he committed under Gekko 's influence . Carl tells him he did right in saving the airline . The film ends with Bud going up the steps of the courthouse , knowing that while he is likely going to prison and his career is ruined , he now has a clear conscience , and that all is right with the corporate world again . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Michael Douglas as Gordon Gekko 
 Charlie Sheen as Bud Fox 
 Daryl Hannah as Darien Taylor 
 Martin Sheen as Carl Fox 
 John C. McGinley as Marvin 
 Terence Stamp as Sir Larry Wildman 
 James Karen as Harry Lynch 
 Hal Holbrook as Lou Mannheim 
 Sean Young as Kate Gekko 
 James Spader as Roger Barnes 
 = = Production and origins = = 
 After the success of Platoon ( 1986 ) , Stone wanted film school friend and Los Angeles screenwriter Stanley Weiser to research and write a screenplay about quiz show scandals in the 1950s . During a story conference , Stone suggested making a film about Wall Street instead . The director pitched the premise of two investment partners getting involved in questionable financial dealings , using each other , and they are tailed by a prosecutor as in Crime and Punishment . The director had been thinking about this kind of a movie as early as 1981 and was inspired by his father , Lou Stone , a broker during the Great Depression at Hayden Stone . 
 The filmmaker knew a New York businessman who was making millions and working long days putting together deals all over the world . This man started making mistakes that cost him everything . Stone remembers that the " story frames what happens in my movie , which is basically a Pilgrim ’ s Progress of a boy who is seduced and corrupted by the allure of easy money . And in the third act , he sets out to redeem himself " . Stone asked Weiser to read Crime and Punishment , but Weiser found that its story did not mix well with their own . Stone then asked Weiser to read The Great Gatsby for material that they could use , but it was not the right fit either . Weiser had no prior knowledge of the financial world and immersed himself in researching the world of stock trading , junk bonds , and corporate takeovers . He and Stone spent three weeks visiting brokerage houses and interviewing investors . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Weiser wrote the first draft , initially called Greed , with Stone writing another draft . Originally , the lead character was a young Jewish broker named Freddie Goldsmith , but Stone changed it to Bud Fox to avoid the stereotype that Wall Street was controlled by Jews . Reportedly , Gordon Gekko is said to be a composite of several people : Wall Street broker Owen Morrisey , an old friend of Stone 's who was involved in a $ 20 million insider trading scandal in 1985 , Dennis Levine , Ivan Boesky , corporate raider Carl Icahn , art collector Asher Edelman , agent Michael Ovitz , and Stone himself . For example , the famous " Greed is good " line was based on a speech by Boesky where he said , " Greed is right " . 
 According to Edward R. Pressman , producer of the film , " Originally , there was no one individual who Gekko was modeled on " , he adds , " But Gekko was partly Milken " . Also , Pressman has said that the character of Sir Larry Wildman was " modeled on Jimmy Goldsmith " , the famous Anglo @-@ French billionaire and corporate @-@ raider . 
 According to Weiser , Gekko 's style of speaking was inspired by Stone . " When I was writing some of the dialogue I would listen to Oliver on the phone and sometimes he talks very rapid @-@ fire , the way Gordon Gekko does " . Stone cites as influences on his approach to business , the novels of Upton Sinclair , Sinclair Lewis and Victor Hugo , and the films of Paddy Chayefsky because they were able to make a complicated subject clear to the audience . Stone set the film in 1985 because insider trading scandals culminated in 1985 and 1986 . This led to anachronisms in the script , including a reference to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster , which had not yet occurred . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Stone met with Tom Cruise about playing Bud Fox , but the director had already committed to Charlie Sheen for the role . Stone liked the " stiffness " of Sheen 's acting style and used it to convey Bud 's naivete . Michael Douglas had just come off heroic roles like the one in Romancing the Stone and was looking for something dark and edgy . The studio wanted Warren Beatty to play Gekko , but he was not interested . Stone initially wanted Richard Gere but the actor passed , so Stone went with Douglas despite having been advised by others in Hollywood not to cast him . Stone remembers , " I was warned by everyone in Hollywood that Michael couldn 't act , that he was a producer more than an actor and would spend all his time in his trailer on the phone " . Nevertheless , Stone found out that " when he 's acting he gives it his all " . Stone said that he saw " that villain quality " in Douglas and always thought he was a smart businessman . Douglas remembers that when he first read the screenplay , " I thought it was a great part . It was a long script , and there were some incredibly long and intense monologues to open with . I ’ d never seen a screenplay where there were two or three pages of single @-@ spaced type for a monologue . I thought , whoa ! I mean , it was unbelievable " . For research , he read profiles of corporate raiders T. Boone Pickens and Carl Icahn . 
 Stone gave Charlie Sheen the choice of Jack Lemmon or Martin Sheen to play his father in the film , and Sheen picked his father . The elder Sheen related to the moral sense of his character . Stone cast Daryl Hannah as Bud Fox 's materialistic girlfriend Darien Taylor , but felt that she was never happy with the role and did not know why she accepted it . He tried to explain the character to Hannah repeatedly , and thought that the materialism of the character conflicted with Hannah 's idealism . Stone said later that he was aware early on that she was not right for the part . " Daryl Hannah was not happy doing the role and I should have let her go . All my crew wanted to get rid of her after one day of shooting . My pride was such that I kept saying I was going to make it work " . Stone also had difficulties with Sean Young , who made her opinions known that Hannah should be fired and that she should play that role instead . Young would show up to the set late and unprepared . She did not get along with Charlie Sheen , which caused further friction on the set . In retrospect , Stone felt that Young was right and he should have swapped Hannah 's role with hers . Stone admits that he had " some problems " with Young , but was not willing to confirm or deny rumors that she walked off with all of her costumes when she completed filming . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Stone wanted to shoot the movie in New York City and that required a budget of at least $ 15 million , a moderate shooting budget by 1980s standards . The studio that backed Platoon felt that it was too risky a project to bankroll and passed . Stone and producer Edward R. Pressman took it to 20th Century Fox and filming began in April 1987 and ended on July 4 of the same year . According to Stone , he was " making a movie about sharks , about feeding frenzies . Bob [ director of photography Robert Richardson ] and I wanted the camera to become a predator . There is no <unk> until you get to the fixed world of Charlie ’ s father , where the stationary camera gives you a sense of immutable values " . The director saw Wall Street as a battle zone and " filmed it as such " including shooting conversations like physical confrontations and in ensemble shots had the camera circle the actors " in a way that makes you feel you 're in a pool with sharks " . 
 Jeffrey " Mad Dog " Beck , a star investment banker at the time with Drexel Burnham Lambert , was one of the film 's technical advisers and has a cameo appearance in the film as the man speaking at the meeting discussing the breakup of Bluestar . Kenneth Lipper , investment banker and former deputy mayor of New York for Finance and Economic Development , was also hired as chief technical adviser . At first , he turned Stone down because he felt that the film would be a one @-@ sided attack . Stone asked him to reconsider and Lipper read the script responding with a 13 @-@ page critique . For example , he argued that it was unrealistic to have all the characters be " morally bankrupt " . Lipper advised Stone on the kind of computers used on the trading floor , the accurate proportion of women at a business meeting , and the kinds of extras that should be seated at the annual shareholders meeting where Gekko delivers his " Greed is good " speech . Stone agreed with Lipper 's criticism and asked him to rewrite the script . Lipper brought a balance to the film and this helped Stone get permission to shoot on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange during trading hours . Lipper and Stone disagreed over the character of Lou Mannheim . Stone shot a scene showing the honest Mannheim giving in to insider trading , but Lipper argued that audiences might conclude that everyone on Wall Street is corrupt and insisted that the film needed an unimpeachable character . Stone cut the scene . 
 Stone also consulted with Carl Icahn , Asher Edelman , convicted inside trader David Brown , several government prosecutors , and Wall Street investment bankers . In addition , traders were brought in to coach actors on the set on how to hold phones , write out tickets , and talk to clients . Stone asked Lipper to design a six @-@ week course that would expose Charlie Sheen to a cross section of young Wall Street business people . The actor said , " I was impressed and very , very respectful of the fact that they could maintain that kind of aggressiveness and drive " . 
 Douglas worked with a speech instructor on breath control in order to become better acclimatized to the fast rhythm of the film 's dialogue . Early on in the shoot , Stone tested Douglas by enhancing his " repressed anger " , according to the actor . At one point , Stone came into Douglas ' trailer and asked him if he was doing drugs because " you look like you haven 't acted before " . This shocked Douglas , who did more research and worked on his lines again and again , pushing himself harder than he had before . All of this hard work culminated with the " Greed is good " speech . Stone planned to use a Fortune magazine cover in exchange for promotional advertisements , but Forbes magazine made a similar offer . Stone stuck with Fortune , which upset Forbes publisher Malcolm Forbes , who turned down a later request to use his private yacht . Stone switched from 12- to 14 @-@ hour shooting days in the last few weeks in order to finish principal photography before an impending Directors Guild of America strike and finished five days ahead of schedule . Sheen remembered that Stone was always looking at the script and at his watch . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The original score composed by Stewart Copeland was released on LP record in 1988 with the first 5 tracks are from Talk Radio , followed by a CD version in 1993 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film has come to be seen as the archetypal portrayal of 1980s excess , with Douglas advocating " greed , for lack of a better word , is good " . Wall Street defines itself through a number of morality conflicts putting wealth and power against simplicity and honesty , and an attack on the value system of extreme competitiveness where ethics and the law are simply irrelevant parts of the show . 
 Carl ( Martin Sheen 's character ) represents the working class in the film : he is the union leader for the maintenance workers at Bluestar . He constantly attacks big business , money , mandatory drug screening , greedy manufacturers , and anything that he sees as a threat to his union . The conflict between Gekko 's relentless pursuit of wealth and Carl Fox 's leftward leanings form the basis of the film 's subtext . This subtext could be described as the concept of the two fathers battling for control over the morals of the son , a concept Stone had also used in Platoon . In Wall Street the hard @-@ working Carl Fox and the cutthroat businessman Gordon Gekko represent the fathers . The producers of the film use Carl as their voice in the film , a voice of reason amid the creative destruction brought about by Gekko 's unrestrained personal philosophy . 
 A significant scene in the film is a speech by Gekko to a shareholders ' meeting of <unk> Paper , a company he is planning to take over . Stone uses this scene to give Gekko , and by extension , the Wall Street raiders he personifies , the chance to justify their actions , which he memorably does , portraying himself as a liberator of the company value from the ineffective and excessively compensated executives . The inspiration for the " Greed is good " speech seems to have come from two sources . The first part , where Gekko complains that the company 's management owns less than three percent of its stock , and that it has too many vice presidents , is taken from similar speeches and comments made by Carl Icahn about companies he was trying to take over . The defense of greed is a paraphrase of the May 18 , 1986 , commencement address at the UC Berkeley 's School of Business Administration , delivered by arbitrageur Ivan Boesky ( who himself was later convicted of insider trading charges ) , in which he said , " Greed is all right , by the way . I want you to know that . I think greed is healthy . You can be greedy and still feel good about yourself " . 
 Wall Street is not a wholesale criticism of capitalism , but of the cynical , quick @-@ buck culture of the 1980s . The " good " characters in the film are themselves capitalists , but in a more steady , hardworking sense . In one scene , Gekko scoffs at Bud Fox 's question as to the moral value of hard work , quoting the example of his ( Gekko 's ) father , who worked hard his entire life only to die in debt . Lou Mannheim , the films ' archetypal mentor , says early in the film , that " good things sometimes take time " , referring to IBM and Hilton — in contrast , Gekko 's " Greed is Good " credo typifies the short @-@ term view prevalent in the 1980s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wall Street was released on December 11 , 1987 , in 730 theaters and grossed $ 4 @.@ 1 million on its opening weekend . It went on to make $ 43 @.@ 8 million in North America . 
 The film has a 78 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes and a 56 metascore on Metacritic . In his review for The New York Times , Vincent Canby , while quite critical of the film overall , praised Douglas ' work as " the funniest , <unk> performance of his career " . Roger Ebert gave the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and praised it for allowing " all the financial wheeling and dealing to seem complicated and convincing , and yet always have it make sense . The movie can be followed by anybody , because the details of stock manipulation are all filtered through transparent layers of greed . Most of the time we know what 's going on . All of the time , we know why " . Time magazine 's Richard Corliss wrote , " This time he works up a salty sweat to end up nowhere , like a triathlete on a treadmill . But as long as he keeps his players in venal , perpetual motion , it is great scary fun to watch him work out " . In his review for the Globe and Mail , Jay Scott praised the performances of the two leads : " But Douglas 's portrayal of Gordon Gekko is an oily triumph and as the kid Gekko thinks he has found in Fox ( ' Poor , smart and hungry ; no feelings ' ) , Charlie Sheen evolves persuasively from gung @-@ ho capitalist child to wily adolescent corporate raider to morally appalled adult " . Rita Kempley in the Washington Post wrote that the film " is at its weakest when it preaches visually or verbally . Stone doesn 't trust the time @-@ honored story line , supplementing the obvious moral with plenty of <unk> " . 
 Michael Douglas won the Academy Award for Best Actor and thanked Oliver Stone for " casting me in a part that almost nobody thought I could play " . However , Daryl Hannah 's performance was not as well received and earned her a Razzie for Worst Supporting Actress , thus making this the only film to date to win both an Oscar and a Razzie . The " quintessential financial high @-@ roller 's attire " of Michael Douglas in the movie , designed by Alan Flusser , was emulated in the 1980s by yuppies . 
 Wall Street enjoyed renewed interest in 1990 when the cover of Newsweek magazine asked , " Is Greed Dead ? " after 1980s icons like Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky ran afoul of insider trading laws . Over the years , the film 's screenwriter Stanley Weiser has been approached by numerous people who told him , " The movie changed my life . Once I saw it I knew that I wanted to get into such and such business . I wanted to be like Gordon Gekko " . In addition , both Charlie Sheen and Michael Douglas still have people come up to them and say that they became stockbrokers because of their respective characters in the film . In recent years , Stone was asked how the financial market depicted in Wall Street has changed and he replied , " The problems that existed in the 1980s market grew and grew into a much larger phenomenon . Enron is a fiction , in a sense , in the same way that Gordon Gekko 's buying and selling was a fiction ... Kenny Lay — he 's the new Gordon Gekko " . Entertainment Weekly magazine 's Owen Gleiberman recently commented that the film , " reveals something now which it couldn 't back then : that the Gordon <unk> of the world weren 't just getting rich — they were creating an alternate reality that was going to crash down on all of us " . 
 A 20th @-@ anniversary edition was released on September 18 , 2007 . New extras include an on @-@ camera introduction by Stone , extensive deleted scenes , " Greed is Good " featurettes , and interviews with Michael Douglas and Martin Sheen . 
 In reviewing the film 's sequel 23 years later , Variety noted that though the original film was " intended as a cautionary tale on the pitfalls of unchecked ambition and greed , Stone 's 1987 original instead had the effect of turning Douglas ' hugely charismatic ( and Oscar @-@ winning ) villain into a household name and boardroom icon -- an inspiration to the very power players and Wall Street wannabes for whom he set such a terrible example " . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 2007 , The New York Times reported that a sequel , Money Never Sleeps , was in pre @-@ production . Michael Douglas reprised his role as Gordon Gekko . The film focused on Gekko , recently released from prison , and re @-@ entering a much more chaotic financial world than the one he once oversaw . Charlie Sheen reprised his character of Bud Fox in a cameo role . Daryl Hannah was not involved in the sequel . 
 In April 2009 , 20th Century Fox confirmed that the sequel was still in development and announced that Oliver Stone would direct . In addition , Shia LaBeouf was cast , with Josh Brolin . Javier Bardem had been considered , but dropped out due to scheduling conflicts . The film was released on September 24 , 2010 . 
 = Siva ( 1989 Telugu film ) = 
 Siva ( also spelt Shiva ) is a 1989 Indian Telugu @-@ language crime drama film written and directed by Ram Gopal Varma in his directorial debut . Produced by Akkineni Venkat and Yarlagadda Surendra under their banners of Annapurna Studios and SS Creations , Siva starred Akkineni Nagarjuna , Amala , and Raghuvaran . The film 's basic plot , adapted from Bruce Lee 's Way of the Dragon ( 1972 ) , revolves around the conflict between college student @-@ turned @-@ gangster Siva and Bhavani , a reputed crime boss mentored by the politician Machiraju . Siva explores the concepts of student exploitation by anti @-@ social elements and the impact of crowd psychology . 
 Varma 's script was based on his experiences as a student at Siddhartha Engineering College in Vijayawada . Tanikella Bharani wrote the dialogue . Ilaiyaraaja composed Siva 's soundtrack and score , and S. Gopala Reddy was its director of photography . Thota Tharani and <unk> were the film 's art director and editor , respectively . Its principal photography began on 16 February 1989 , and was completed in 55 working days . Except for three days of shooting in Madras ( now Chennai ) , Siva was filmed in Andhra Pradesh . 
 Produced on a budget of ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million , Siva was released on 5 October 1989 to critical acclaim , primarily for its technology and sound design . Although Venkat and Surendra expected the film to have average earnings , it was commercially successful ; Siva completed a 100 @-@ day run in 22 centres and a 175 @-@ day run in five centres . It was the only Telugu film screened at the International Film Festival of India , held on 19 January 1990 . In addition to the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Telugu , Siva won three Nandi Awards : Best Director ( Varma ) , Best First Film of a Director , and Best Dialogue Writer ( Bharani ) . A documentary titled Exploring Shiva after 25 Years was released on the film 's silver anniversary ; it is the first documentary about a Telugu film . 
 Siva , which attained cult status , is considered Nagarjuna 's breakthrough film . It is credited with the introduction of steadicam and new sound recording techniques in Telugu cinema , encouraging filmmakers to explore a variety of themes and make experimental films . For the April 2013 centennial of Indian cinema , CNN @-@ News18 included Siva on its list of 100 greatest Indian films of all time . Its Tamil @-@ dubbed version , Udhayam , was also successful . Varma remade the film twice in Hindi with the same title . The first , starring Nagarjuna , Amala and Raghuvaran , performed well at the box office , but the second , with Mohit Ahlawat and Priyanka Kothari , did not . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Siva , a student , comes to Vijayawada from a nearby town to pursue his education . He lives with his brother Sharath 's family , and enrolls in the <unk> College of Arts and Sciences . Although Sharath and his daughter Keerthi get along well with Siva , his wife considers him a financial burden . Siva befriends a group of students and falls in love with Asha , sister of the honest police inspector Venkat . 
 The college 's ( unopposed ) student @-@ union president , J. Durga Rao ( known as J. D. ) is the lowest rung in a gang ladder reaching through the gangster Ganesh to crime boss Bhavani . Bhavani uses the network to support his mentor Machiraju , a politician . Although J. D. is arrested many times , Bhavani continues to bail him out . When J. D. teases Asha on campus , Siva attacks him with a bicycle chain ; a rivalry then develops between him and Ganesh . 
 The incident encourages Siva 's friends to ask him to stand for the student @-@ union presidency , but he wants them to nominate Naresh ( one of the group ) instead . Ganesh 's attempts to pacify Siva fail , and Bhavani learns about him . He considers Siva a potential replacement for J. D. , whose weakness annoys him . 
 Naresh is fatally assaulted by J. D. and Bhavani 's henchmen , and is taken to hospital . Siva retaliates , infuriating Bhavani . When Siva 's friends attend a wedding , they are attacked by Ganesh and others . One of Siva 's friends , Malli , is murdered and Siva swears revenge . Sensing a risk to Sharath 's family after an attempt on Keerthi 's life , Siva leaves their house and moves into his friend Chinna 's hostel . 
 He agrees to contest the student @-@ union presidential election . Bhavani cheats labour @-@ union leader Krishna Reddy , who changes his allegiance to Siva . Around this time , Asha and Siva marry . Bhavani begins attacking and murdering Siva 's close aides , and Siva ensures that Sharath relocates to Visakhapatnam as a part of his job . Siva attacks Bhavani 's henchmen , and helps Venkat arrest Ganesh . 
 Machiraju sees Siva as a potential replacement for Bhavani , and stops supporting the latter . Bhavani learns about Siva 's relationship to Sharath , and kidnaps Keerthi . Ganesh appears in court , and an arrest warrant is issued for Bhavani . Insulted and humiliated , Bhavani kills Keerthi and Machiraju . Siva and Bhavani later duel on a shopping @-@ complex terrace . Bhavani commits suicide , and Siva walks out as Asha and Venkat watch in dismay . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After he graduated with a degree in civil engineering from Siddhartha Engineering College in Vijayawada , Ram Gopal Varma opened a video @-@ rental shop in <unk> . Noting his son 's interest in films , <unk> <unk> ( a former sound recordist for Annapurna Studios ) helped Varma join the teams of Collector Gari <unk> ( 1987 ) and Rao Gari Illu ( 1988 ) as an assistant director . Varma befriended actor Akkineni Nagarjuna , and filmmakers Akkineni Venkat and Yarlagadda Surendra . He presented his script for <unk> to them . When Nagarjuna rejected it , Varma presented another script based on his life as a student in Vijayawada . He earlier narrated this script to filmmaker <unk> Raghavendra Rao who suggested few changes because of its serious tone . Varma watched Rao 's <unk> <unk> ( 1986 ) and backed out after understanding Rao 's point of view . 
 When Rao Gari Illu was nearly completed , Varma asked co @-@ director Siva Nageswara Rao to join him . He approached Tanikella Bharani to write the dialogue after observing his work in Ladies Tailor ( 1985 ) and Shri <unk> Recording Dance Troupe ( 1987 ) . Bharani found the plot ( as described by Varma ) similar to those of K. S. R. Das ' films . Varma rejected Bharani 's comic version , and asked to rewrite it as a crime drama . Although Bharani 's usual fee was ₹ 25 @,@ 000 , he received ₹ 35 @,@ 000 for Siva . <unk> and Teja , who later pursued career as filmmakers , joined the film 's crew as assistant directors . 
 Venkat and Surendra produced Siva under their banners of Annapurna Studios and SS Creations , respectively . The production began in February 1989 . Varma wanted M. M. Keeravani to compose the film 's soundtrack and score , since Keeravani had assisted K. Chakravarthy on Rao Gari Illu . As both were inexperienced , Keeravani suggested that Varma choose a more seasoned technician and Ilaiyaraaja was signed instead . S. Gopala Reddy , Thota Tharani and <unk> were the film 's director of photography , art director and editor , respectively . Gopala Reddy was inspired by Gordon Willis ' work in Francis Ford Coppola 's crime drama , The Godfather ( 1972 ) . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Siva is Nagarjuna 's 17th film as an actor . Varma found him the only actor who could understand his perspective . Nagarjuna and Varma had discussed astronomy and realised that they shared similar sensibilities . That , and Varma 's passion for and dedication to films , prompted Nagarjuna to work with him . Amala , who worked with Nagarjuna in Prema <unk> ( 1990 ) , was chosen as the female lead . Siva was the first film in her career where the script was explained shot by shot . When Varma approached Rohini to dub Amala 's portions , she agreed to dub for Amala only after watching about three reels of footage . 
 Varma chose Raghuvaran to play the local crime boss , Bhavani . Varma wanted him to underplay the character , which was based on real life . Before accepting the role , Raghuvaran studied the mannerisms and lifestyles of mob leaders and criminals in Mumbai for 20 days . Varma wanted to name the characters played by Nagarjuna and Raghuvaran as Bhavani and Siva respectively . At Nagarjuna 's request , he reversed the names . Varma chose newcomers Chakravarthy , <unk> , and <unk> to play J. D. , Chinna , and Naresh after auditioning them at Annapurna Studios . <unk> , one of Varma 's assistant directors , played a comic role of a server in the college canteen . He recommended Varma to cast Sushma for Keerthi 's role . 
 <unk> was initially supposed to play J. D. , but the role went to Chakravarthy . Varma met the latter on the film 's sets and asked him to perform a scene of his choice . Despite an unsuccessful screen test , Varma selected Chakravarthy after a meeting on the next day after observing the depth in his expression . <unk> actors such as Murali Mohan , Gollapudi Maruti Rao , Kota Srinivasa Rao , Subhalekha Sudhakar , and <unk> played supporting roles . Bharani agreed to play Bhavani 's assistant , Nanaji , at Varma 's insistence . Producer Akkineni Venkat made a cameo appearance as one of Bhavani 's clients , and Siva Nageswara Rao dubbed his portion . Brahmaji was cast as Bhavani 's henchman . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Varma read about steadicam in American Cinematographer , and enquired about the possibility of a similar camera in India . After learning that steadicam was available in Chennai for four years and was already obsolete , Varma decided to use it despite Gopala Reddy 's apprehension . Varma chose Rasool Ellore over Rajiv Menon and <unk> to assist Gopala Reddy with the steadicam . Principal photography began on 16 February 1989 , and wrapped in 55 working days . Except for three days in Chennai , the film was shot in Andhra Pradesh . 
 The scenes of the protagonist 's college life were filmed at Keyes High school , near Secunderabad Junction railway station . A school wall was demolished and a gate was repaired for the film 's opening scene . Raghuvaran was carried away during the shoot of few action sequences and slapped Brahmaji for nearly six times in a row . To avoid such issues in the case of murder scenes , Varma decided to complete few of them by using plain close @-@ ups of the victims . Sudhakar 's murder scene was filmed near <unk> in Ranga Reddy district . Gopala Reddy and Ellore placed a camera in a bag and ran behind him for a shaky effect . In the cycle @-@ chain scene in which Siva uses a cycle chain to fight with J. D. , the hand pulling the chain was Ellore 's ; in the next shot , Nagarjuna is shown holding the chain . The scene in which Naresh is killed near his home was filmed in the streets of <unk> Rao Nagar . The cycle chase scenes were filmed in <unk> and the slums behind Yashoda Hospitals . The bus chase scene was shot in <unk> . The film 's climax was filmed at the <unk> complex in Secunderabad , and Bhavani 's suicide was filmed on a set at Venus Studios in Chennai . 
 Several romantic scenes with Nagarjuna and Amala were initially filmed at <unk> Movies in Secunderabad . Dissatisfied with the results , Varma reshot them at the Osman Ali House . <unk> Sundar choreographed the songs , and " <unk> Brahma " was filmed at the <unk> Caves in Vishakhapatnam . The film crew had to crawl into the caves , making Siva the first Telugu film shot in its interiors . The remaining songs were filmed on sets at Annapurna Studios . Srinivasa Rao filmed his scenes in one day . The fights , choreographed by Varma , featured hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and attacks with hooks as he was trained in kickboxing . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Siva explores the exploitation of students by anti @-@ social elements against a mafia backdrop and the impact on them of crowd psychology . It also focuses on politics and betrayal in the scene where Bhavani murders Machiraju and his enemy <unk> . As a student , Varma observed and participated in gang wars and student politics besides analysing the impact of a gangster 's lifestyle and body language on students . Those experiences inspired him to begin writing Siva . 
 Most of the characters , including Bhavani , were inspired by real life . Bhavani was based on Radha , an actual crime boss with a reputation for violence in Vijayawada ; Bhavani , like Radha , is also a woman 's name . Siva 's character was comparatively fictitious whom Varma considered an " ideal person " making the society " too dramatic " . Siva was partially based on Varma 's friend , Golla Ravi , who lived in <unk> . Assistant director Krishna Vamsi found the film 's story similar to Rahul Rawail 's Arjun ( 1985 ) . Varma said that Arjun was an inspiration for Siva , since Sunny Deol 's title character in Arjun was a hero who " does not bend to forces larger than himself " . Apart from Arjun , Varma was also inspired by Govind Nihalani 's <unk> Satya ( 1983 ) and Dilip Shanker 's Kaal Chakra ( 1988 ) . 
 The basic plot of Bruce Lee 's Way of the Dragon ( 1972 ) was adapted by Varma for Siva . In Way of the Dragon , Lee comes from Hong Kong to work in a Chinese restaurant in Rome and fights local gangsters who try to intimidate the owners ; this leads to a rivalry with a crime boss ( played by Chuck Norris ) . In Siva , Nagarjuna comes from a nearby town to Vijayawada to further his education , fights gangsters and develops a rivalry with Raghuvaran . While Lee and Norris fight at the Colosseum at the climax of Way of the Dragon , Nagarjuna and Raghuvaran duel on a building terrace in Siva . 
 In addition to Way of the Dragon , Varma adapted scenes from a number of other films . Malli 's mother slapping a police inspector for failing to save him was inspired by Steven Spielberg ’ s Jaws ( 1975 ) , and the cycle chase scene was based on a similar scene in Arjun . A scene in which goons demand donations to build a temple for Ganesha was from Kaal Chakra . Although Varma wanted to film a fight between Nagarjuna and Chakravarthy during a football match ( based on a similar scene in 1978 's Damien : Omen II ) , Venkat was indifferent to the idea . 
 = = Music = = 
 The five @-@ song soundtrack album and background score of Siva were composed by Ilaiyaraaja , with Veturi Sundararama Murthy writing the lyrics of " <unk> Brahma " , " <unk> " , and " Kiss Me Hello " . Sirivennela Sitaramasastri wrote the lyrics for the remaining two songs : " Botany " and " <unk> " . S. P. Balasubrahmanyam , S. Janaki , K. S. Chithra , and Mano were the singers . Due to a strike in Madras , Ilaiyaraaja and Varma completed the background score in Mumbai . The producers suggested Varma to use stock tunes instead for the score . Nagarjuna noticed this and asked them to provide what Varma asked for , and offered to pay the additional expenses incurred if any . For an action scene , Ilaiyaraaja used moving string music ; when Varma asked why , he answered : " They have come here to study and they are fighting . So I just felt sad for them " . 
 Varma was impressed with <unk> Chatterjee 's work in <unk> <unk> ( 1988 ) and recruited him as Siva 's sound designer . Ismail Darbar , who later composed the music for Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam ( 1999 ) and Devdas ( 2002 ) , worked with Ilaiyaraaja on Siva as a violinist . The soundtrack was successful , and Chatterjee 's sound design was critically acclaimed . Varma dedicated the background score of his Rowdy ( 2014 ) , composed by Sai Karthik , to Ilaiyaraaja . Adapting the background score of the cycle @-@ chase scene in Rowdy , Varma said that his main interest was " to bring back this composition to express the great idea of the genius [ Ilaiyaraaja 's ] 1989 soundtrack ( of Siva ) to 2014 " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Siva was produced on a budget of ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million . Venkat and Surendra retained the distribution rights for Nizam , Vishakhapatnam and the East and West Godavari regions . Released on 5 October 1989 , it was critically acclaimed , with major praise directed towards its usage of technology and sound design . The distributors were concerned about the film 's violence , saying that it would alienate women and families ( whom the film industry believed were the majority of the audience ) . Although Venkat and Surendra expected that the film would have average earnings , Siva was a commercial success and earned ₹ 10 million in the Nizam region alone ( a first in Telugu cinema ) . In addition to ₹ 50 @,@ 000 , Varma received five percent of Siva 's profits . The film had a 100 @-@ day run in 22 centres and a 175 @-@ day run in five centres . It was the only Telugu film screened at the International Film Festival of India , held on 19 January 1990 at the Empire Theatre in Kolkata . For the April 2013 centennial of Indian cinema CNN @-@ News18 included Siva on its list of 100 greatest Indian films of all time , calling it a " completely new take on student politics and the ideologies driving it " and saying that the film 's ideas " found a reflection in many university elections during a later stage " . 
 The Tamil remake rights to Siva were initially sold for ₹ 100 @,@ 000 . After the film 's release , Venkat and Surendra dubbed it into Tamil as Udhayam and sold its distribution rights for ₹ 8 @.@ 5 million . Released on 12 January 1990 in 24 centres , Udhayam was commercially successful and earned more than ₹ 20 million . Akkineni Nageswara Rao advised Varma to place an advertisement thanking the audience for the film 's success . Varma opposed it , believing that a film 's success should be credited to the production team and its failure attributed to the director . When Varma 's second film , <unk> <unk> ( 1991 ) under @-@ performed at the box office , Siva 's success was considered accidental . In addition to the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Telugu , Siva won three Nandi Awards : Best Director ( Varma ) , Best First Film of a Director , and Best Dialogue Writer ( Bharani ) . 
 = = Remakes = = 
 Siva was remade by Varma in Hindi as Shiva in 1990 , and was Nagarjuna 's acting debut in Hindi cinema . It was the last Hindi film with Amala in a lead role . Minor changes were made to the remake 's cast and crew . All the songs in the Telugu version were used unchanged except for " Botany " , which was reshot at Acharya N. G. Ranga Agricultural University in <unk> . Telugu filmmaker Puri Jagannadh was cast as one of Nagarjuna 's friends in the remake . Jagannadh wanted to assist Varma and approached him for an opportunity . Varma insisted Jagannadh to act and he obliged , feeling that this experience would teach him something . Produced in association with <unk> <unk> Rao on a budget of ₹ 11 @.@ 5 million , Shiva was released on 7 December 1990 and was successful in Mumbai and Kolkata . 
 During the production of James ( 2005 ) , Varma planned to remake Siva . The second remake , also entitled Shiva , featured Mohit Ahlawat and Priyanka Kothari as the characters played by Nagarjuna and Amala in the original . Unlike Siva , the protagonist in the second remake is an honest man who joins the Mumbai Police as a new recruit ; the cycle @-@ chain scene and Raghuvaran 's character were omitted . Shiva received negative reviews ; Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com wrote that the film " dare [ d ] to ridiculously rest on the incapable shoulders of a non @-@ acting cast " , and nastiness was " defined as a scowling ogre " . Director <unk> Banerjee acknowledged Siva as a source of inspiration for his 2006 Bengali film Kranti . 
 = = Documentary , digitisation , and sequel plans = = 
 In September 2014 , Siva was digitally remastered for theatrical release . Supriya Yarlagadda of Annapurna Studios said that the decision to remaster and digitise was made after observing the challenges in storing and preserving old film prints . The process ( carried out in Mumbai ) took a year , and the film 's colour and sound quality were enhanced to meet current standards . At the time , Varma said that he would release a documentary on the making of the film entitled Exploring Shiva after 25 Years . The first documentary based on a Telugu film , it provided a " holistic view of the film " and featured interviews with the cast and crew and segments on its sound and filming locations . The documentary was released on 5 October 2014 , coinciding with Siva 's silver anniversary . 
 A silver jubilee event was held on 7 October 2014 in Hyderabad , where Nagarjuna announced that Siva 's digitised version would be released on 17 October 2014 on nearly 100 screens . In April 2015 , Varma told Indo @-@ Asian News Service that the digitised release was postponed until 15 May because of restoration delays . In September Nagarjuna said that a sequel to Siva would be a viable alternative to a digitised version , and proposed a film about Siva , Asha , and their two sons . <unk> Varma to develop a script , he asked the director to cast Amala , Naga Chaitanya and Akhil Akkineni . The sequel would reportedly be produced by Annapurna Studios . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence on film personalities = = = 
 Siva , which attained cult status in Telugu cinema , is one of the first Telugu films produced after the migration of Telugu film industry from Madras to Hyderabad to feature characters speaking the Telangana dialect . The film made Nagarjuna a superstar in Telugu cinema ; it changed his career , and earned him a reputation for encouraging new directors . Nagarjuna considered Siva a milestone in his personal life as well since he and Amala , who were in a relationship during the film 's shoot , decided to marry after its completion . According to filmmaker V. V. Vinayak and writer <unk> <unk> , Siva divided Telugu cinema into two eras : before and after the film . With Siva , Varma was credited with the introduction of steadicams and new sound recording techniques in Telugu films . Within a year of the film 's release , more than ten steadicams were imported into India . Siva attracted the young audience during its theatrical run , and its success encouraged filmmakers to explore a variety of themes and make experimental Telugu films . 
 Bharani broke through as an actor and dialogue writer with the film . Chakravarthy , <unk> and <unk> achieved success with Siva , and the former two adapted J. D. and Chinna as screen names . Kannada actor and filmmaker Upendra reworked the narrative of Om ( 1995 ) when he found the previous version similar to Siva . Telugu filmmaker S. S. Rajamouli understood the importance of heightening tension in action sequences , and the impact created by proper use of sound after watching Siva . <unk> Vaitla , Sudheer Varma , and Praveen Sri were inspired by Siva to pursue careers as directors ; Sri assisted Ram Gopal Varma before he made his directorial debut with <unk> 2 ( 2010 ) . Music director Munna Kasi was inspired by Ilaiyaraaja 's work in Siva , and wanted to work with Varma after he graduated . On the rise of antisocial @-@ element @-@ based scripts in Tamil cinema , trade analyst Sreedhar Pillai said in May 2002 that Siva 's Tamil @-@ dubbed version ( Udhayam ) was the " forerunner " of city @-@ based crime films . 
 Tamil actor Ganesh Venkatraman was " mesmerised " as a child by Siva , admiring Nagarjuna and carrying a cycle chain in his <unk> . About the impact of Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) on Indian cinema , Rana Daggubati said that regional films can gain national acceptance for their content and cited the success of Siva and Roja ( 1992 ) as examples . In March 2016 , Karthi said that he admired Nagarjuna after seeing Siva and <unk> <unk> ( 1989 ) and found working with him in Oopiri ( 2016 ) " a great chance to know him . " 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The cycle @-@ chain scene became popular , with people telling Varma that they broke a cycle chain after seeing Siva ; the director called them the " ultimate example of how imagination can take over and become a reality in time " . The chain used in the film is currently owned by Chakravarthy . Film @-@ poster designers Anil and Bhanu said that posters should be designed to make a subconscious impact on the viewer , citing the title logo of Siva ( with Nagarjuna and the cycle chain ) as an example . Inspired by Varma 's work in Siva , Rajamouli composed the action sequence during the intermission of his directorial debut Student No. 1 ( 2002 ) , and followed the shot division of the cycle @-@ chain scene for the same . 
 Chakravarthy agreed to play the antagonist in Naga Chaitanya 's acting debut , Josh ( 2009 ) , and said that its makers are " trying to get JD of Shiva who actually ran away mid way from college " . Bangalore Mirror and other reviewers noted similarities between Josh and Siva , which Chaitanya called a " coincidence " . Chaitanya 's films , <unk> ( 2011 ) — produced by Varma — and Autonagar Surya ( 2014 ) , were noted for similarities to Siva . Siva was parodied in several films such as Lakshmi ( 2006 ) , Oosaravelli ( 2011 ) , Katha Screenplay <unk> Appalaraju ( 2011 ) ( also directed by Varma ) , and <unk> ( 2012 ) . 
 Amala listed Siva with Pushpaka Vimana ( 1987 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1987 ) , Agni Natchathiram ( 1988 ) , and <unk> <unk> ( 1991 ) as her most memorable films . <unk> Chandrahasan <unk> of The Hindu listed Siva for the letter S in the July 2015 " ABCD of Telugu cinema " . In August 2015 , Pooja <unk> of The Times of India included the film on her list of " Telugu movies one must watch before dying " . Fahad <unk> of The Hindu compared Siva to Mother India ( 1957 ) , Sholay ( 1975 ) , Mr. India ( 1987 ) , Agneepath ( 1990 ) , and <unk> ( 1990 ) , noting that their antagonists became more popular than their heroes . 
 = Return to Sender ( Dexter ) = 
 " Return to Sender " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American television drama series Dexter , which first aired on November 5 , 2006 on Showtime in the United States . The episode was written by Timothy Schlattmann and was directed by Tony Goldwyn . In the episode , Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) investigates a murder scene where one of his own victims has returned after he disposed of the body . Meanwhile , his girlfriend Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) tries to prevent her husband Paul from attending their daughter 's birthday party , and Lt. María LaGuerta ( Lauren Vélez ) considers adopting a young witness of the murder whom she finds at the crime scene . 
 Though set in Miami , Florida , the episode was filmed at various locations in and around Los Angeles , California including a salvage yard , a field by Tujunga Wash and a waterfront house on Hibiscus Island . Goldwyn , who Erik King said was " a joy to work with " , allowed actor C.S. Lee to improvise and David Zayas to memorize his Spanish lines in English and translate them mentally during each take . " Return to Sender " received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While eating breakfast at Rita 's house , Dexter is called to a crime scene , only to discover that it is the same salvage yard where he committed a double murder the previous night . He finds Valerie Castillo 's ( Valerie Dillman ) body lying in the Airstream trailer where he killed her and her husband Jorge ( José Zúñiga ) , despite having thrown the corpses into the ocean . He deduces that the " Ice Truck Killer " — a serial killer with whom Dexter has a personal connection — dived underwater to retrieve the woman 's body and plant it in the trailer . In the yard , LaGuerta , Sgt. James Doakes ( Erik King ) and Dexter 's sister Debra ( Jennifer Carpenter ) discover a young Cuban boy , Oscar ( Cesar Flores ) , hiding in the trunk of a car who claims to have seen somebody take Valerie into the trailer . He begins to fear discovery , and experiences his first nightmare : Debra is a serial killer with an identical modus operandi to Dexter . As the investigation proceeds , he attempts to shoot down each of his colleagues ' leads on the case . When Debra asks him to read through her report on the killer , profiling a man sharing many of Dexter 's characteristics , he second @-@ guesses her theory and she is hurt . Worried about coming under suspicion , he throws all of his knives overboard from his boat , but while looking at the blood drops from his victims , he notices that Valerie 's slide has a happy face etched into the blood . He realizes that this is a hint from the Ice Truck Killer , and plants Jorge 's fingerprints and a dry drop of Valerie 's blood onto a knife , which he hides in a car at the salvage yard . He convinces Doakes to organize another search of the yard , where an officer ( Denver <unk> ) finds the knife . After successfully framing Jorge for Valerie 's murder , Dexter discovers that Oscar 's description of the man who " saved " him from Valerie is in fact Jesus Christ . 
 Meanwhile , Rita dissuades her abusive husband Paul from attending their daughter Astor 's ( Christina Robinson ) birthday party after he is released early from prison . Doakes takes Debra to dinner with his mother ( Vernee Watson @-@ Johnson ) and sisters , while LaGuerta bonds with Oscar and considers adopting him until his uncle ( Gabriel Salvador ) arrives to take him home . 
 In flashbacks , a teenage Debra ( Haley King ) pleads with her father Harry ( James Remar ) to bring her on his and Dexter 's ( Devon Graye ) hunting trips . When Harry forbids her from joining them , she steals his gun and practices shooting cans by herself . Later , Debra lashes out at Dexter in jealousy of the time that he spends alone with their father . 
 = = Production = = 
 The day of filming in the salvage yard , which took place at LA Japanese Auto Parts in Sun Valley , California , was abnormally hot according to Lauren Vélez . The Airstream trailer in which Dexter 's victim is found was brought into the salvage yard for filming externally , but was assembled on a studio sound stage for shooting scenes inside the trailer . Erik King remarked that the trailer was dirty , odorous and humid — " all the things we needed it to be " . Other filming locations included a waterfront house on Hibiscus Island in Biscayne Bay , Florida as the Castillos ' home , an empty field next to Sun Valley 's Tujunga Wash where a young Debra practices shooting with Harry 's pistol , and a house in a residential neighborhood of Long Beach , California which stands in for Dexter 's childhood home . 
 King said that Tony Goldwyn was " a joy to work with " , while Vélez called him " an absolute actors ' director " . Shooting a scene in which Det . Angel Batista converses with a witness entirely in Spanish , David Zayas did not feel confident to memorize all of his Spanish lines . Instead , he learned his lines in English and translated the dialogue mentally during each take . In a scene between Dexter and Vince Masuka ( C.S. Lee ) , Masuka pauses after examining a corpse and says , " I 'm hungry . " Michael C. Hall said that " C.S. [ Lee 's ] ad libs are different every time . When he said , ' I 'm hungry , ' that was the only take that I didn 't laugh . " When asked about improvising on the show , Lee said that the writers " come up with some good lines themselves . [ ... ] So I pretty much leave it up to them . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Return to Sender " was generally praised by critics . Eric Goldman of IGN wrote that the episode 's " most interesting facet " was its flashbacks to Dexter 's youth from Debra 's perspective , though he felt that the young Debra 's hasty apology to Dexter after insulting him was " a slightly cheesy moment " . He thought that LaGuerta 's bonding with Oscar " was okay , but [ the storyline ] fell a little flat " . TV Guide 's Paula Paige " love [ d ] " the episode , saying that " It just keeps getting better and better " , but was unsure " what Deb having dinner with the Doakes ' family has to do with anything " . Writing for TV Squad , Jonathan Toomey opened his review of " Return to Sender " by saying , " Dexter did it again . <unk> me . Amazed me . Edge of my seat for the whole hour . " He was amused that Debra 's profile of Valerie 's murderer matched Dexter , but was uninterested in Rita 's storyline with her husband . 
 Both Malene Arpe of the Toronto Star and Daniel Fienberg of Zap2it were disappointed with the episode 's audio commentary featuring Jennifer Carpenter , Erik King , Lauren Vélez and David Zayas on the first season DVD . 
 = 1990 Strangeways Prison riot = 
 The 1990 Strangeways Prison riot was a 25 @-@ day prison riot and rooftop protest at Strangeways Prison in Manchester , England . The riot began on 1 April 1990 when prisoners took control of the prison chapel , and the riot quickly spread throughout most of the prison . The riot and rooftop protest ended on 25 April when the final five prisoners were removed from the rooftop , making it the longest prison riot in British penal history . One prisoner was killed during the riot , and 147 prison officers and 47 prisoners were injured . Much of the prison was damaged or destroyed with the cost of repairs coming to £ 90 million . 
 The riot sparked a series of disturbances in prisons across England , Scotland and Wales , resulting in the British government announcing a public inquiry into the riots headed by Lord Woolf . The resulting Woolf Report concluded that conditions in the prison had been intolerable , and recommended major reform of the prison system . The Guardian newspaper described the report as a blueprint for the restoration of " decency and justice into jails where conditions had become intolerable " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Manchester 's Strangeways Prison , which opened in 1868 , was a " local prison " designed to hold prisoners from the surrounding area , mainly those on remand or serving sentences of less than five years . At the time of the riot , the main prison consisted of six wings connected by a central rotunda known as the Centre . Convicted adult prisoners were held in wings A , B , C and D , and convicted young offenders were held in E wing , which was physically separated from the Centre by gates . Convicted prisoners on Rule 43 ( a ) were held on landings C1 and C2 of C wing , and remand prisoners on Rule 43 ( a ) were held on the fourth landing on E wing . F wing contained administrative offices on the lower floor and the chapel on the upper floor . Remand prisoners were held in wings G , H , I and K of a separate prison , linked to the main prison through workshops and a kitchen . The Certified Normal Accommodation Figure for Strangeways , the number of prisoners the prison was designed to hold , was 970 . The population of the prison had increased in the months before the riot , from 1 @,@ 417 in January 1990 to a peak of 1 @,@ 658 on 27 March . On 1 April , the prison contained 1 @,@ 647 prisoners – about 925 convicted adult prisoners , 500 remand prisoners and 210 convicted young offenders . 
 Prisoners felt their complaints about conditions were being ignored . Remand prisoners were only allowed out of their cells for 18 hours per week , and Category A prisoners were locked in their cells for 22 hours a day , and rarely left their cells except for " slopping out " , a one @-@ hour exercise period each day or a weekly shower . In March 1990 , Dominic Noonan was transferred from Strangeways to HM Prison Hull . Noonan was the organiser of the Prisoners ' League Association ( PLA ) , an organisation formed in 1989 which campaigned for prisoners ' rights . Its aims included initiating legal proceedings against prison staff for mistreatment of prisoners , and picketing outside prisons in which prisoners were mistreated . The PLA were active at Strangeways Prison , and Noonan 's transfer demonstrates prison officers were aware of rising tensions inside the prison . On 26 March , Barry Morton was taken to the " punishment block " and strip @-@ searched after being visited by his mother , as prison officers believed she had brought drugs into the prison for him . During a struggle he sustained a black eye and swollen nose , and the following day he was released back into the main prison along with another prisoner , Tony Bush . Later the same day , Bush and Morton climbed onto the roof of the prison and staged a twenty @-@ hour rooftop protest . On 31 March there was a 30 @-@ minute sit @-@ down protest in the chapel after a film was shown , which ended after a prison officer promised to listen to the prisoners ' grievances . The same evening it is reported that a black prisoner was assaulted by prison officers in front of other prisoners , and injected with <unk> – a sedative used to control prisoners , known in prisons as the " liquid cosh " . Prisoners then decided to stage a further protest in the chapel the following day , 1 April . 
 = = The riot = = 
 = = = Disturbance in the chapel = = = 
 Prison officers had advance warning that an incident would occur in the chapel on 1 April , and security was increased . Extra prison officers were used to escort prisoners to the service , and fourteen officers were inside the chapel supervising the service instead of the usual total of eight . An additional seven officers were also stationed in the vestry outside the chapel . The service was attended by 309 prisoners which was about the usual attendance , but all Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners were prevented from attending as a precautionary measure . A senior prison officer believed the prisoners would attempt another sit @-@ down protest with the possibility of hostage @-@ taking , and instructed staff to evacuate the chapel if trouble began . At approximately 11 : 00 am , a visiting Church of England preacher had just delivered the sermon , and the prison chaplain , Reverend Noel Proctor , stood to thank the preacher when prisoner Paul Taylor took the microphone from him and addressed the congregation . Reverend Proctor was recording the service for distribution to a prayer group , and the subsequent events were recorded : 
 Noel Proctor : After that remarkable message that has ... 
 Paul Taylor : I would like to say , right , that this man has just talked about blessing of the heart and a hardened heart can be delivered . No it cannot , not with resentment , anger and bitterness and hatred being instilled in people . 
 [ General noise , over which ] 
 A prisoner : Fuck your system , fuck your rules . 
 [ Applause ] 
 Noel Proctor : Right lads , sit down . 
 [ More noise ] 
 Noel Proctor : Right lads , down . Down . Come on , this is no way to carry on in God 's house . 
 [ More noise ] 
 A prisoner : Fuck your system . 
 [ More noise ] 
 Noel Proctor : Right lads , sit down . This is completely out of order . Sit down . 
 A prisoner : Why is it ? It 's been waiting to happen for ever . It will never change . 
 Noel Proctor : Come on . This is terrible . 
 [ More noise , banging , shouting , cheering ] 
 Noel Proctor : All of you who want to go back to your cells go the back of the church please . 
 A prisoner : What ? You 're a fucking hypocrite , you . 
 Noel Proctor : I 'm trying to help you , to keep you . 
 A prisoner : Leave it , mate . 
 [ More noise until microphone goes dead ] 
 As Reverend Proctor was appealing for calm , a prisoner brandishing two sticks shouted out " You 've heard enough , let 's do it , get the bastards " . Other prisoners responded by donning masks and brandishing weapons , and three prison officers started to leave the chapel as earlier instructed . A set of keys was taken from a prison officer when a number of officers were attacked by prisoners wielding fire extinguishers , table legs and fire buckets . A number of prisoners attempted to leave the chapel via the vestry ; at the same time , the seven prison officers there attempted to gain entry to the chapel . Once they managed to do so , the officers were attacked by prisoners , and a second set of keys was taken from one of them . Some prisoners helped to get injured officers and Reverend Proctor to a place of safety via the vestry , while others barricaded entrances to the chapel or attempted to gain access to the roof . 
 = = = The riot spreads = = = 
 The prison officers guarding the gates outside the chapel abandoned them , and ran towards the Centre . The prison officer in charge of the Centre saw his colleagues running from the direction of the chapel , but due to the presence of scaffolding he was in a poor position to view the upper levels , and mistakenly assumed he saw prisoners running from the chapel . He informed other officers on C1 and D1 of this and , upon hearing that prisoners were in possession of keys , told them and officers on A1 that they should evacuate the prison . Governor Morrison , who was responsible for the main prison , was present and did not intervene with these instructions . Morrison then ordered officers to evacuate the Centre at 11 : 13 am as he mistakenly believed prisoners had entered the Centre . By this time prisoners had gained access to the roofs of E and F wings , and from there gained access to other wings by making holes in unprotected office ceilings . 
 The prisoners found A and B wings unsupervised as the prison officers had already evacuated , and began to free other prisoners who were still locked in their cells . The prison officer in charge of the first landing of C wing was ordered to evacuate , and with the help of three other officers evacuated the 73 Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners being held there , being fearful for the safety of the prisoners who were regarded as sex offenders . Due to rioting prisoners entering the wing , the officers were unable to evacuate a further seven Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners who were being held on the second landing . Rioting prisoners also gained access to E wing , where the Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners had been left locked in their cells after the prison officers evacuated . A number of these Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners were attacked by rioting prisoners . One such prisoner was Derek White , who was being held on remand on charges of indecent assault and buggery . White later died in North Manchester General Hospital on 3 April after being admitted suffering from head wounds , a dislocated shoulder and chest pains . 
 At 11 : 43 am rioting prisoners were seen approaching the remand prison , which was still secure . The prison governor , Brendan O 'Friel , arrived at the prison at 11 : 55 am and gave orders to defend the remand prison . He later recalled that : 
 By 12 o 'clock when I came in it looked as if we 'd lost control of the whole thing . My first decision was to send a Governor 5 back up to the remand prison to see if we could hold it , but it was too late . That decision , had it been taken half an hour earlier , would have meant we could have held the remand prison , meaning we could have kept another 400 locked up . Assuming the doors would have held , that sort of thing . But we had about 200 staff on duty , and we must have lost nine or ten casualties of one sort or another and then you lose staff getting the casualties out . We didn 't have a lot of the staff come pouring in until about 1 o 'clock . I tell you what really bugged us was there an element of April Fool about it . We rang staff up about it , who said " You must be joking , is this an April Fool ? " That 's what happened when they rang up my home , my son thought it was an April Fool . 
 Rioting prisoners gained access to the remand prison at 12 : 20 pm through the kitchens in G wing , and began freeing prisoners who were still locked in their cells using stolen keys or improvised tools such as iron bars and fire extinguishers . At this point the rioting prisoners were in control of all accommodation wings of the prison . A large number of prisoners were on the prison roof , and roof tiles and other missiles were thrown at prison officers on the ground . Rioting inside the prison continued with cells being damaged and fires being started , and at 3 : 40 pm the Public Relations Department of the Home Office issued a statement : 
 At 11 am a disturbance started in the chapel at Strangeways Prison when some 300 prisoners attacked staff . Those prisoners then gained access to the chapel roof and then broke into the living accommodation in the main prison . Other prisoners , including those on remand , joined in the disturbance and staff had to be withdrawn . The perimeter is secure . 
 Between 2 : 00 pm and 5 : 00 pm approximately 800 prisoners had surrendered , and arrangements were made for them to be transferred to other prisons . At 8 : 00 pm Governor O 'Friel agreed that prison officers should enter E wing , and at 8 : 05 pm approximately ten Control & Restraint ( C & R ) units each consisting of twelve prison officers entered the wing . By 8 : 10 pm all four landings of E wing had been secured , and one C & R unit progressed to the Centre where they fought with rioting prisoners . This was reported to Governor O 'Friel , who instructed the officers not to move beyond E wing . Scaffolding poles and other missiles were thrown at the C & R teams from the roof area above the fourth landing in E wing , and when prisoners broke onto the wing the C & R teams withdrew at 0 : 22 am on 2 April , leaving prisoners in control of the wing . Up to 1 @,@ 100 of the 1 @,@ 647 prisoners were involved in the rioting , and by the end of the first day 700 had surrendered and been transferred to other prisons along with 400 prisoners who were not involved in the rioting . Between 200 and 350 prisoners occupied the rooftop of the main prison during the night . 
 = = = Rooftop protest = = = 
 At 7 : 00 am on 2 April , an estimated total of 142 prisoners were still in control of all the accommodation wings of the prison . Some prisoners on the roof gave clenched fist salutes to the crowd watching below . Some prisoners were wearing prison officers ' hats and uniforms , while others were wearing masks improvised from towels and blankets . A banner was unveiled that read " No dead " , in response to claims in the press that between eleven and twenty prisoners had been killed in the rioting . At 10 : 00 am , C & R units entered the remand prison and regained control , with six prisoners surrendering peacefully . A Home Office statement was released at 11 : 45 am stating that no bodies had been found in the remand prison , and 12 prison officers and 37 prisoners had received treatment in hospital to date . Further prisoners surrendered the same day , and by 6 : 00 pm 114 prisoners remained in the prison . On 3 April newspapers published pictures of the prisoners ' " No dead " banner , while still insisting that 20 prisoners had been killed . The prisoners responded with a banner that read " Media contact now " . The Manchester Evening News newspaper was contacted from inside the prison by telephone , and prisoners outlined their demands : 
 Improved visiting facilities , including the right to physical contact with visitors and a children 's play area . 
 Category A prisoners would be allowed to wear their own clothes and be able to receive food parcels . 
 Longer exercise periods . 
 An end to 23 @-@ hour @-@ a @-@ day lock @-@ up . 
 At 11 : 10 am Michael Unger from the Manchester Evening News was allowed into the prison as an " independent observer " . Unger met prisoners who described their grievances to him , which included mental and physical brutality , poor food and conditions , and misuse of drugs in controlling prisoners . While Unger was inside the prison twelve C & R units attempted to regain control of E wing , in what became known as the " battle for E wing " . Prisoners built barricades and threw scaffolding poles at the C & R units , and after approximately thirty minutes the C & R units withdrew without regaining control of the wing . By the end of the third day of the riot prisoners still controlled the upper levels of the prison , but prison officers had regained control of the lower level , and a Home Office statement was issued : 
 During the course of the evening prison staff have had access at ground level to all wings in the main prison . No bodies have been found . Earlier today prison staff gained access to the main prison building in order to remove barricades to allow the surrender of inmates who wished to do so . No inmates were injured during this process . Nine prison staff were taken to outside hospital for treatment . Two remain overnight for observation . Negotiations were carried out by prison staff ... 31 inmates surrendered . All of those who surrendered have been interviewed , medically examined and fed . They will be transferred to other accommodation as soon as practicable . 
 On 4 April , Governor O 'Friel spoke to the press for the first time , describing the riot as " an explosion of evil which was quite terrible to see " . Also that day the Prison Officers Association claimed that Rule 43 ( a ) prisoners were being treated in North Manchester General Hospital for castration wounds , which was repeated by sections of the press despite being categorically denied by the hospital 's public relations officer and consultant @-@ in @-@ charge . 29 prisoners surrendered during the day leaving 26 prisoners inside the prison , 11 of whom had been identified by the Prison Service . Also that day a prison officer died in hospital from pneumonia ; he had not been injured during the riot and suffered from a long @-@ standing medical condition . Two more prisoners surrendered on 5 April , the same day as the Home Office announced a public inquiry into the riot headed by Lord Woolf . By this time plans to retake the entire prison by force had been scrapped due to the likelihood of fatalities among prisoners or prison officers . That evening the police and prison officers introduced new tactics designed to weaken the resolve of the prisoners and to prevent them from sleeping . Loud music was played , lights were shone at the roof , and prison officers banged on their riot shields and shouted at the prisoners , including calling them " beasts " . 
 The rooftop protest was watched by a crowd of onlookers and supporters outside the prison . Various political groups also attended in support of the prisoners , including anarchist group Class War , the Revolutionary Communist Group , and the Prisoners ' League Association . On 6 April Paul Taylor attempted to shout out the prisoners ' demands to the crowd gathered below , but he was drowned out by police sirens . Taylor and other prisoners responded by unfurling a banner which read " We fight and stand firm on behalf of humanity " . On 9 April , The Sun newspaper called for an end to the riot , saying " Jail riot scum must be crushed " , and former prisoner John McVicar called for the retaking of the prison by force at the earliest possible opportunity . By 10 April more prisoners had surrendered , leaving thirteen inside the prison . Three more prisoners surrendered the following day , one of whom , Barry Morton , had taken part in the rooftop protest on 26 March . On 16 April , another three prisoners surrendered when they became ill with food poisoning . 
 Local businesses were calling for an end to the riot due to the disruption caused , including the closure of roads around the prison . A leather @-@ jacket retailer in the vicinity of the prison claimed to have lost £ 20 @,@ 000 in revenue since the riot had begun . Greater Manchester Police asked for £ 2 million to cover the costs of policing the riot , which it described as the " most savage incident of its kind ever experienced within the British prison service " . On 17 April the remaining seven prisoners began negotiations to attempt to bring the rooftop protest to an end . Negotiations took place inside the prison between two Home Office officials and prisoner Alan Lord , who was negotiating on behalf of the remaining prisoners . On 23 April , Lord was captured by a C & R unit while on his way to meet the negotiators . Mark Williams — one of the remaining prisoners — later described his reactions to the negotiations and Lord 's capture : 
 David Bell , the Home Office negotiator , kept contradicting himself , as if in a bid to prolong the negotiations . He would agree to our terms , then he would try and tell us it was out of his hands , and go back on his word . If it was out of the Home Officer 's hands — then whose hands was it in ? I think the final stages were messed around by the Home Office so that our protest could help to divert the public 's attention from the Poll Tax revolt that was going on throughout the country . As Alan Lord was snatched after being asked to negotiate on behalf of us all , this made us all more defiant about ending the protest . 
 Following the capture of Lord , the remaining prisoners agreed that 25 April would be the final day of the protest . Prison officers entered the prison early in the morning and gradually began to occupy the upper landings . At 10 : 20 am one of the remaining prisoners , a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old on remand for joyriding , was captured leaving five prisoners remaining on the roof . When prison officers reached the roof they put up a sign similar to the ones used by prisoners throughout the protest , which read " HMP in charge — no visits " . At 6 : 20 pm the remaining five prisoners were removed from the roof in a " cherry picker " hydraulic platform , giving clenched fist salutes to the press and public as they descended . During the course of the 25 @-@ day riot , the longest in British penal history , 147 prison officers and 47 prisoners had been injured . 
 = = Disturbances at other prisons = = 
 The Strangeways riot caused a number of protests at prisons across England , Scotland and Wales , described as either solidarity actions or copycat riots . Approximately 100 remand prisoners at HM Prison Hull staged a sit @-@ down protest in the exercise yard on 1 April , after hearing about the Strangeways riot on the radio . Disturbances occurred the same day at HM Prison Gartree , HM Prison Kirkham and HM Prison Rochester , although the Gartree protest had started three days earlier over conditions in the prison . There were minor disturbances at HM Prison Lindholme , HM Prison Low Newton and HM Prison Bedford on 2 April , HM Prison Durham , HM Prison Winchester and HM Prison Wandsworth on 4 April , and HM Young Offenders Institute Glen Parva on 6 April . 
 The weekend of 7 April and 8 April saw protests across the prison system . At HM Prison Leeds there was a sit @-@ down protest after the arrival of over 100 prisoners who had been transferred from Strangeways . At HM Prison Dartmoor , between 100 and 120 prisoners wrecked D wing of the prison , and 12 prisoners also protested on the roof of C wing unfurling a banner that read " Strangeways , we are with you " . 32 prisoners from Dartmoor were transferred to HM Prison Bristol , where there was another major protest following their arrival . Up to 400 prisoners took over three wings of the prison , and held control of them for two days . 130 prisoners at HM Prison Cardiff destroyed cells , a twenty @-@ hour rooftop protest took place at HM Prison Stoke Heath , and disturbances occurred at HM Prison Brixton , HM Prison Pentonville , HM Prison Stafford and HM Prison Shepton Mallet . A second protest took place at HM Prison Hull , where 110 prisoners staged a sit @-@ down protest in the exercise yard . 
 Prisoners smashed windows at HM Prison Verne on 9 April , and 40 prisoners held a prison officer hostage for twenty @-@ four hours after taking over a hall at HM Prison Shotts on 10 April . On 12 April , two teenage remand prisoners at HM Prison Swansea barricaded themselves into their cell for seventeen hours , and on 22 April between 80 and 100 remand prisoners staged an eighteen @-@ hour rooftop protest at HM Prison Ashfield in <unk> . 
 = = Media reaction = = 
 On 2 April newspapers reported a weekend of " anti @-@ authority violence " , as in addition to the Strangeways riot the Poll Tax Riot had occurred in London on 31 March . Reports of the violence at Strangeways included kangaroo courts , hangings , <unk> and that between eleven and twenty prisoners had been killed . On 3 April the front page of the Daily Mirror read " Prison Mob ' Hang Cop ' " , and claimed a former policeman imprisoned at Strangeways for rape had been killed by prisoners . The newspaper was forced to publish a retraction admitting that " reliable police sources " had been mistaken , when it transpired that the man was actually alive and imprisoned in HM Prison Leeds . Following the end of the rooftop protest the newspapers condemned the prisoners , with The Daily Telegraph describing the riot as " a degrading public spectacle " , and The Independent describing the rioters as " dangerous and unstable criminals enjoying an orgy of destruction " . The Guardian urged the government to institute reforms , a view which was the prevalent one for a time , stating : 
 Initially , the riot appeared to increase public support for radical reform of the present degrading prison system . Some of that goodwill will have been eroded by the antics of the rioters in the last two weeks , and may be further eroded once details emerge during the forthcoming criminal prosecutions . But this must not deflect Home Office ministers from the road down which they had belatedly begun to travel . A change in prison conditions is crucial if good order is to be restored to the system . 
 In its last act before disbanding in 1991 and being replaced by the Press Complaints Commission , the Press Council produced a comprehensive report into the press coverage during the Strangeways riot . The report stated that " many of the more gruesome events report in the press had not occurred – nobody had been systematically mutilated , there had been no <unk> , no bodies had been chopped up and flushed in the sewers . Though there was inter @-@ prisoner violence in the first hours of the riot , torture on the scale suggested by many of the early reports did not take place . " It further found that press coverage " fell into the serious ethical error of presenting speculation and unconfirmed reports as fact " . 
 = = The Woolf Report = = 
 A five @-@ month public inquiry was held into the disturbances at Strangeways and other prisons , beginning in Manchester on 11 June 1990 and ending in London on 31 October . In addition to the public inquiry , Lord Woolf and Her Majesty 's Chief Inspector of Prisons , Stephen <unk> , also sent letters to every prisoner and prison officer in the country . 1 @,@ 300 prisoners and 430 prison officers responded , with many excerpts from the letters being appended to the finished report . The Woolf Report was published on 25 February 1991 , and blamed the loss of control of the prison on the prison officers abandoning the gates outside the chapel , which " effectively handed the prison to the prisoners " . Woolf described the conditions inside Strangeways in the months leading up to the riot as " intolerable " , and viewed a " combination of errors " by staff and management at the prison and Prison Service as a central contributing factor to the riot . He also blamed the failure of successive governments to " provide the resources to the Prison Service which were needed to enable the Service to provide for an increased prison population in a humane manner " . Woolf recommended major reform of the Prison Service , and made 12 key recommendations with 204 accompanying proposals . The key recommendations were : 
 Closer cooperation between the different parts of the Criminal Justice System . For this purpose a national forum and local committees should be established . 
 More visible leadership of the Prison Service by a Director General who is and is seen to be the operational head and in day to day charge of the Service . To achieve this there should be a published " compact " or " contract " given by Ministers to the Director General of the Prison Service , who should be responsible for the performance of that " contract " and publicly answerable for the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the Prison Service . 
 Increased delegation of responsibility to Governors of establishments . 
 An enhanced role for prison officers . 
 A " compact " or " contract " for each prisoner setting out the prisoner 's expectations and responsibilities in the prison in which he or she is held 
 A national system of Accredited Standards , with which , in time , each prison establishment would be required to comply . 
 A new Prison Rule that no establishment should hold more prisoners that is provided for it its certified normal level of accommodation , with provisions for Parliament to be informed if exceptionally there is to be a material departure from that rule . 
 A public commitment from Ministers setting a timetable to provide access to sanitation for all inmates at the earliest practical date , not later than February 1996 . 
 Better prospects for prisoners to maintain their links with families and the community through more visits and home leaves and through being located in community prisons as near to their homes as possible . 
 A division of prison establishments into small and more manageable and secure units . 
 A separate statement of purpose , separate conditions and generally a lower security categorisation for remand prisoners . 
 Improved standards of justice within prisons involving the giving of reasons to a prisoner for any decision which materially and adversely affects him ; a grievance procedure and disciplinary proceedings which ensure that the Governor deals with most matters under his present powers ; relieving Boards of Visitors of their <unk> role ; and providing for final access to an independent Complaints <unk> . 
 The Guardian newspaper described the report as a blueprint for the restoration of " decency and justice into jails where conditions had become intolerable " . Home Secretary Kenneth Baker welcomed the Woolf Report and pledged to end " slopping out " by 1994 , and also accepted Woolf 's recommendations for more visits , home leave and telephone calls . In contrast to his proposed reforms , Baker also proposed the introduction of a new offence of " prison mutiny " carrying a maximum sentence of ten years imprisonment , stating " The events of last April marked a watershed in the history of prison service . We cannot , and will not , tolerate the savagery and vandalism in our prisons that we saw then " . 
 = = Prosecutions = = 
 The first prosecutions in relation to the riot began at Manchester Crown Court on 14 January 1992 . The trial was conducted amid tight security , including armed police patrolling the area around the court , body searches for spectators and a specially constructed dock with sides made from bulletproof glass . Nine men went on trial charged with riot under Section 1 of the Public Order Act 1986 , with six of them , including Paul Taylor and Alan Lord , also being charged with the murder of Derek White . 
 On the first day one prisoner pleaded guilty to charges of riot and conspiracy to riot , and was also acquitted of the murder charge . The other defendants were also acquitted of murder due to the unreliability of eyewitness testimony and the possibility that White had died from a pre @-@ existing thrombotic condition . On 16 April , four defendants including Paul Taylor were convicted of rioting , and the remaining four including Alan Lord were acquitted . 
 Taylor received a ten @-@ year sentence , the maximum sentence the judge had the power to impose . The sentences received by the other defendants ranged from four years to nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years imprisonment . By the end of the trial the total cost of the Strangeways riot , including refurbishing the prison and the costs of the police inquiry and court case , had reached £ 112 million . 
 The second trial began at the same court on 5 October 1992 , and dealt with charges relating to the " battle for E wing " on 3 April 1990 . There were fourteen defendants , including Alan Lord and another man who was acquitted in the first trial , both of whom were added to the list of defendants after their acquittals . Two defendants pleaded guilty to violent disorder and received four- and five @-@ year sentences , which due to the two years they had spent on remand awaiting trial resulted in them being freed . 
 The remaining twelve defendants pleaded not guilty to conspiracy to commit grievous bodily harm with intent and conspiracy to riot . On 7 December 1992 David Bowen and Mark Azzopardi escaped from the prison van transferring them from HM Prison Hull to the court . Azzopardi was recaptured , before escaping from the court on 17 February 1993 along with five of the other defendants . 
 At the conclusion of the trial two defendants were acquitted and the remainder found guilty of conspiracy to commit grievous bodily harm with intent , the lesser charge of conspiracy to riot automatically being dropped when guilty verdicts were announced on the first charge . When passing sentence , the judge remarked " You had your period of arrogance and violence in front of the world , but now the price must be paid and paid by you " . The defendants received sentences ranging from four years to ten years imprisonment , although only five defendants were in court to hear the verdict as six defendants were still on the run after escaping and another was being treated at Ashworth Secure Hospital . 
 Following the second trial , a further 26 defendants were still due to be tried on charges relating to the riot . The Crown Prosecution Service accepted plea bargains where defendants pleaded guilty to violent disorder in exchange for the dropping of other charges , or in some cases all charges were dropped completely . On 20 September 1993 the last remaining defendant to maintain a plea of not guilty went on trial , and he was convicted of conspiracy to commit grievous bodily harm and sentenced to thirty months imprisonment . 
 On 18 March 1994 , six prisoners appeared in court on charges of escaping from custody during the second riot trial . Five of them pleaded guilty to escaping from custody on one occasion , and Mark Azzopardi pleaded guilty to escaping on two occasions . Each was sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment for escaping from Manchester Crown Court , and Azzopardi received an additional two @-@ year sentence for escaping from the van transporting him from HM Prison Hull to the court . In July 1994 , David Bowen was convicted of attempting to pervert the course of justice by attempting to influence the jury in the first riot trial , and was sentenced to three years imprisonment . Paul Taylor , who had already pleaded guilty to the same charge , also received a three @-@ year sentence . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Strangeways was rebuilt and refurbished at a cost of £ 90 million , and was officially re @-@ opened as HM Prison Manchester on 27 May 1994 . The press were invited to view the new prison and talk to the prisoners by new governor Derek Lewis . A prisoner told the visiting journalists : 
 The better conditions in here are not down to the prison department . But for the riot , we would still be in the same old jail banged up all day and slopping out ... The rioters brought this about . These conditions ... should not have cost the lives of a prisoner , a prison officer and two huge court trials . They should have done it years ago but it took a riot to get them to do it . 
 " <unk> out " was abolished in England and Wales by 1996 , and was scheduled to be abolished in Scotland by 1999 . Due to budget restraints the abolishment was delayed , and by 2004 prisoners in five of Scotland 's sixteen prisons still had to " slop out " . " <unk> out " ended at HM Young Offenders Institution <unk> in 2007 , leaving HM Prison Peterhead as the last prison where inmates did not have access to proper sanitation , as 300 prisoners were forced to use chemical toilets due to the difficulty of installing modern plumbing in the prison 's granite structure . Peterhead prison closed in December 2013 . 
 In 2015 , the Daily Telegraph reported that a prisoner serving a 27 @-@ year sentence was conducting a lone protest on the roof against conditions and was being cheered by other prisoners . The newspaper also referenced in its own report an interview with former lord chief justice Lord Woolf from earlier in the year where he described prisoners being kept in intolerable conditions @-@ as bad as at the time of the riots . Woolf recommended prisons were kept out of politics . 
 = Nuno Mendes ( footballer ) = 
 Nuno Alexandre Pereira Mendes ( born 7 April 1978 ) is a retired Portuguese footballer who could play in defence and midfield . 
 He began his career with Vitória Guimarães and made his first team debut during the 1996 – 97 Primeira Liga season . Mendes spent three seasons in Liga de Honra , playing for Aves , <unk> and Chaves respectively before moving to France to join Division 1 club Strasbourg in 2000 . He returned to Portugal a year later to play for União Leiria , managed by José Mourinho , before spending a brief period with Braga in 2002 . Mendes spent 18 months with Moreirense and then dropped down a division to play for Santa Clara in 2004 . 
 A year later , Mendes played in England for Championship club Plymouth Argyle before returning to France with Créteil of Ligue 2 . Having spent a brief spell with Penafiel in 2007 , he returned to Aves , where he played for two seasons in Liga de Honra . He dropped down to the Portuguese third division in 2009 to play for Moreirense before spending a season with Trofense . Mendes retired in 2011 after a year with third division side Gondomar . He represented Portugal at under @-@ 21 level . 
 = = Club career = = 
 Mendes was born in Guimarães . He joined his home town club , Vitória Guimarães , at an early age and progressed through their youth system . He made his first team debut in a 4 – 1 win against Chaves on 23 February 1997 . He made 5 more appearances that season , including a 1 – 0 defeat to Marítimo on 2 May 1997 , which was his last for Vitória . Mendes joined Liga de Honra side Aves on loan for the 1997 – 98 season . He scored four goals in 27 league appearances for the club as they finished 15th in the table . The following season , he joined <unk> on loan . They finished 5th in Liga de Honra and Mendes was a first team regular . He made 28 league appearances and scored two goals . Mendes had his contract with Vitória Guimarães terminated in June 1999 , allowing him to sign a two @-@ year deal with Chaves . 
 He made 27 league appearances in his only season with the club , scoring twice , as they finished 12th in Liga de Honra . He moved to France in June 2000 to play for Division 1 club Strasbourg . Having signed a four @-@ year contract , he made his debut in a 1 – 1 draw at Lille on 29 November 2000 . He found first team opportunities limited during the 2000 – 01 season , making six more league appearances as the club were relegated to Division 2 . However , the season did end well for Mendes as he won his first trophy as a professional , the Coupe de France . He made two appearances in the competition , but did not play in the final where Strasbourg defeated Amiens on penalties . 
 Mendes returned to Portugal ahead of the 2001 – 02 season , joining Primeira Liga club União Leiria on a season @-@ long loan . Reflecting on his time in France , he said " I never hid my desire to return to Portugal , but now I can not say anything more . " He made his debut on 11 August 2001 in a 0 – 0 draw at Braga . Mendes played regularly under the management of José Mourinho prior to his departure to Porto , but fell out of favour under his replacement , Vítor Pontes . He made 16 league appearances for Leiria , helping the club finish 7th in the Primeira Liga , before returning to Strasbourg . Upon his departure , Mendes was critical of the club 's president João Bartolomeu , who he believed created instability at the club . " The Union of Leiria is a complicated club at senior management level , especially the president , who sees things where they do not exist and it creates instability in the squad , " said Mendes who " leaves great friends in Leiria " . 
 In May 2002 , he signed a two @-@ year contract with Braga . He made his debut in a 3 – 2 defeat at Belenenses on 5 October 2002 . In a season disrupted by injuries , Mendes only played in one more match for Braga , against his old club Vitória Guimarães . He had his contract cancelled in January 2003 , which allowed him to join Moreirense . He made his debut on 3 February 2003 in a 1 – 1 draw at Benfica . He made two more appearances that season as the club finished 12th in the table . Having fractured his foot in July 2003 , he was used sparingly during the 2003 – 04 season by manager Manuel Machado . He made four league appearances in an injury @-@ plagued season , as the club finished 9th in the Primeira Liga . Mendes dropped down a division in June 2004 after signing a one @-@ year contract with Santa Clara . " This project is attractive , " he said . " The coach , Jose Morais , spoke to me and showed willingness in me to go to the Azores and that 's important . I know that Santa Clara is going through some difficulties , but the Department intends to make a financial recovery in time and maybe next season bet on rising . " 
 He made his debut on 29 August 2004 in a 3 – 1 defeat against <unk> and was sent off for two bookable offences . The club finished 15th in Liga de Honra in the 2004 – 05 season , with Mendes making 17 league appearances . He scored his first goal for the club in his final game , a 4 – 0 win against Naval on 22 May 2005 . After his contract with Santa Clara expired , he joined English Championship club Plymouth Argyle on their pre @-@ season tour of Sweden in July 2005 . Having appeared in friendlies against <unk> and Umeå , he signed a permanent contract with the club . " I am delighted to have got him , " said manager Bobby Williamson of his new signing . " It 's a great opportunity that I could not miss , " Mendes said in an interview with Portuguese newspaper Record . " It is valid for two seasons , with a few perks that are unheard of in Portugal . Essentially , the level of premiums for targets , as is normal in English football . " 
 Mendes made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat at Crystal Palace on 20 August 2005 . He made two more appearances , including one in a 2 – 1 League Cup win against Peterborough United , before losing his place in the squad when Bobby Williamson was replaced by Tony Pulis as manager . He had a trial with Major League Soccer club New York <unk> in January 2006 before his contract with Plymouth Argyle was cancelled by mutual consent . In June 2006 , he returned to France where he signed a two @-@ year contract with Créteil of Ligue 2 . He made his debut on 28 July 2006 in a 0 – 0 draw with Guingamp . Mendes made six more appearances for the club , before being released from his contract in December 2006 . A month later , he returned to Portugal where he signed a short @-@ term contract with Liga de Honra club Penafiel . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat at Rio Ave on 4 February 2007 , and made 5 more appearances during the 2006 – 07 season as Penafiel finished 8th in the table . Having reached the end of his contract with the club , Mendes returned to Aves ahead of the new season . 
 He made his league debut on 18 August 2007 in a 2 – 1 defeat at home to <unk> . Mendes scored his first goal in his second stint for Aves on 17 February 2008 in a 1 – 1 draw with Trofense , and he scored again one week later in a 2 – 1 defeat at Varzim . He finished the 2007 – 08 season with 23 league appearances and two goals , helping the club finish 8th in the Liga de Honra table . He made four more league appearances the following season , before being released from his contract in January 2009 due to a lack of first team opportunities . Mendes dropped down to the third division of Portuguese football later that month , for the first time in his career , to return to Moreirense . He made his debut on 25 January 2009 in a 1 – 0 win at Chaves , and scored his first goal a week later in a 2 – 2 draw with <unk> . Mendes scored two goals in a 3 – 0 win against <unk> on 8 February 2009 and was sent off later in the game . He scored four goals in 12 appearances for the club , but Moreirense were unable to gain promotion back to Liga de Honra , finishing 2nd , three points behind Chaves . 
 In August 2009 , Mendes joined Liga de Honra club Trofense on a one @-@ year contract . He made his league debut on 19 September 2009 in a 3 – 0 defeat at <unk> . He made eight more league appearances , before being released from his contract in January 2010 . He then returned to the Segunda Divisão with Gondomar and he made his debut on 31 January 2010 in a 2 – 0 win against Vieira . His first goal for the club came one week later in a 4 – 4 draw with <unk> . Mendes scored his second goal in a 2 – 1 win against <unk> . He made 12 league appearances in the 2009 – 10 season , scoring twice , as they finished 4th in the table . Having lost his place in the team during the 2010 – 11 season – making one league appearance – Mendes left Gondomar at the end of the campaign and subsequently retired from playing . 
 = = International career = = 
 Mendes represented the Portuguese national team at every youth level , from under @-@ 16 to under @-@ 21 . He earned four caps at under @-@ 21 level . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Coupe de France : 2000 – 01 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Sources : 
 = Evolve ( video game ) = 
 Evolve is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Turtle Rock Studios , published by 2K Games and distributed by Take @-@ Two Interactive . Announced in January 2014 and originally set to be released in late 2014 , the game was delayed and released worldwide for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One in February 2015 . 
 Evolve uses an asymmetrical structure where five players , four playing as hunters and one as the monster , battle against each other in an industrialized alien planet called Shear . The hunters ' gameplay is based on the first @-@ person shooter design , while the monsters are controlled from a third @-@ person perspective . The hunters ' goal is to eliminate the monster , while the monster 's goal is to consume wildlife and evolve to make themselves stronger . The game can be played alone or with multiple players . 
 Evolve was Turtle Rock Studios ' first major project after the company split from Valve Corporation in 2011 . The concept for Evolve existed prior to the development of their previous game , Left 4 Dead . Inspired by hunting games such as Cabela 's Big Game Hunter and Deer Hunter , the idea is to have prey that can strike back at the hunters . The monster design was originally intended to be esoteric , but was later toned down . The game is powered by Crytek 's CryEngine , as they believed that the engine is capable of creating the dark and dense forests featured in the game . Turtle Rock Studios found difficulty when seeking publishers that could provide funding and marketing for the game . THQ was originally set to serve as the game 's publisher , but the rights to the franchise and publishing duties were transferred to Take @-@ Two Interactive after THQ filed for bankruptcy in late 2012 . 
 Prior to release , Evolve received a largely positive reception , and won the Best of Show Awards at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 and Gamescom 2014 . The game was tested by the general public multiple times . Upon release , the game received positive reviews from critics , with praise mostly directed to the game 's atmosphere , asymmetrical structure , controls and designs . However , it received criticism for its progression system and light narrative , as well as the large amount of downloadable content prepared . Evolve is a commercial success , with Take @-@ Two 's CEO saying that the property would be a permanent franchise for them . In July 2016 , it was announced that Evolve would be transitioning to become free @-@ to @-@ play , due to the mixed post @-@ release reception and the DLC controversy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game is set in a fictional future where humans have successfully discovered ways to survive outside Earth and have begun colonizing other planets . Humans arrive at Shear , a distant planet located in the " Far Arm " of space , and begin creating colonies and industrial factories . 
 As the colonization progresses , humans begin to meet resistance from alien life @-@ forms , known as Monsters , that have the ability to evolve by consuming local wildlife . As the Monsters destroy the colonies on Shear , a former " planet tamer " named William Cabot is brought out of retirement to deal with the threat and to evacuate the remaining colonists from Shear . Cabot assembles a team of Hunters to eliminate the Monsters and protect their communities . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Evolve is an action video game with a focus on both co @-@ operative , and competitive , multiplayer gameplay . The game adapts a ' <unk> ' asymmetrical structure where four players take control of the Hunters , while the fifth player controls the Monster . The Hunters ' main objective is to track and hunt the Monster in a limited amount of time , while the Monster 's goal is to evolve and make themselves more powerful . 
 In the beginning of a match , a 30 @-@ second headstart is given to the Monster so that they can have enough time to escape before the Hunters parachute from a plane to where the Monster started . Each map features an open world environment for players to explore and play within . To help the Hunters navigate the environments quickly , they are equipped with jetpacks , allowing them to jump over obstacles and cliffs . The jetpack can also be used to dodge attacks performed by the monster , though it consumes a Hunter 's energy . The team can track the monster , as well as place waypoints on an interactive map . The color of these waypoints are different based on what players have marked . The waypoint mark turns yellow for environment , orange for wildlife or red for the Monster . 
 The Monster needs to grow stronger in order to fight the Hunters by hunting and killing other local wildlife in order to gain experience points . When it gains enough experience , the Monster can evolve . Through evolution , the Monster 's health bar is extended and refilled , and more abilities are available to the Monster , which makes it easier to kill the Hunters . However , the Monster is vulnerable during its evolution , and if caught by the hunters , the process is disrupted . The Monster can also enter a " stealth mode " , allowing it to avoid detection by wildlife and Hunters . 
 Evolve features five different modes : Hunt , Nest , Rescue , Defend and Arena , which have different objectives for both the Hunters and the Monster . Evolve provides two different structures to these game modes : Quick Play , which starts a single playthrough match ; and Evacuation , which serves as a five @-@ match , multiplayer story mode . In Evacuation , each match gives the winning side an advantage in the next map , such as having a toxic gas the Monster is immune to , or autonomous gun turrets to assist the Hunters . The Evacuation mode ends with a ' Defend ' match . Evolve also features an Observer Mode , allowing players to watch a match without playing in the match . The spectator can jump between cameras and view the match from both the Hunters ' and the Monster 's perspectives . 
 Normally , five players play in a standard round of Evolve , with four Hunters fighting one Monster . Playing with less than five players , including single player , is possible in all modes due to computer @-@ controlled bots . These bots can control up to four of the characters , allowing between one and four human players in any game mode . Players can also switch to play as another class instantly in a single @-@ player match . 
 = = = Hunters = = = 
 Evolve features a total of 20 different human characters split into four classes , each class containing 5 characters . Each class has different skills and abilities , and players are required to co @-@ operate with each other in a match . Players unlock new characters as they progress through the game , e.g. the fourth Assault character will be unlocked if the player has upgraded the previous three Assault characters . The Hunters class features first @-@ person gameplay . The ammunition of their weapons is automatically refilled when not in use , and iron sights are used in- game . Evolve does not allow multiple players to play as the same class in a match . Gameplay variations are also present within the characters in the same class . 
 Assault : The Assault @-@ class characters serve as the main " damage dealers " to the Monster . They are equipped with heavy weapons , including an electronic assault rifle and a lightning gun . Assault @-@ class characters also have shields for their own protection and land mines . The shield provides temporary invulnerability to damage . Starting from stage 2 , the invulnerability ability was changed to Defense Matrix , a new ability that reduces damages when being attacked by enemies . 
 Trapper : The Trapper @-@ class characters can use their gear to track the Monster 's movements . As the Monster occasionally scatters local wildlife , such as birds , the trapper can use these ' signs ' to find the location of the monster . Trappers also have other abilities and tools that can slow the movements of the Monster . Following the release of the Stage 2 alpha , all hunters gained the ability to use the mobile arena and the trappers gained the plant scanner ability , similar to the monster 's smell . 
 Support : The Support @-@ class characters provide backup to the other characters . They are equipped with a damage dealing weapon , such as a laser cutter , or a shield that can be used to protect other Hunters . They can also make use of the " cloak " ability , which can make them and their fellow Hunters invisible to the Monster 's view for a short period of time . In Stage 2 , they gains the ability to charge the shields of their companions hunters . 
 Medic : The Medic @-@ class characters ' main technique is replenishing the health of team members . Medics are also equipped with a sniper rifle which can show the vulnerable points of the Monster for other Hunters to attack . Some Medics also have the abilities to revive teammates that are incapacitated or killed by the Monster . According to Evolve 's concept artist , those playing as Medics should stay back and avoid direct combat with the Monster , and only use their abilities when necessary . 
 Starting from the release of Stage 2 , changes were made to the hunter classes . Every class now possesses the ability to deploy a force field , an ability once exclusive to the Trapper class . It can be used to limit the Monster 's movement to a small area . The ability 's cooldown time decreases when the hunters deal enough damages to the monster . Starting from Stage 2 , the health of all hunters regenerate if they manage to avoid damage , and they no longer have to rely on the Medic class . 
 = = = Monsters = = = 
 There are a total of five Monsters featured in Evolve . Similar to the Hunters , players need to inflict a certain amount of damage before unlocking a new Monster . The five different Monster @-@ types also have different abilities , both offensive and defensive . Players control the Monster from a third @-@ person perspective , and it features gameplay similar to an action game , unlike the Hunters . More abilities are given to a Monster after its evolution . Gameplay mechanics do not change much after the release of Stage 2 , but monsters are made more powerful . They are given more health , stamina , armor , and skill points to unlock all abilities . <unk> time abilities also shortened and recharge rate becomes significantly faster . 
 Goliath : The Goliath is the starter Monster , available to all players . It has the strongest armor and health among the monsters . Goliath can charge and throw large rocks at Hunters , which can temporarily stun them , as well as perform attacks , such as breathing fire and " Leap Smash " . In order to navigate the environment , the Goliath can leap over obstacles . 
 Kraken : The Kraken is the second monster players unlock . The Kraken is electricity @-@ based , and can unleash attacks such as " Lightning Strike " , " Vortex " and " Electrical Blast " . The Kraken can also set up traps such as mines in a map to hurt the Hunters . The Kraken can temporarily ascend into the air to both escape from the hunters and move past some obstacles . 
 Wraith : The Wraith is the third unlockable monster . The Wraith can warp towards a Hunter and unleash a blast , dealing damage to the Hunters . They can also launch a small arena within a map which grants them bonus armor and strength . The Wraith also has the ability to teleport between places and kidnap a Hunter whilst in a group . 
 Behemoth : The Behemoth is a DLC character . The Behemoth can unleash abilities such as " Lava Bomb " and " Fissure " , which can stun Hunters . The Behemoth can also create " Rock Wall " , which can isolate a Hunter from their companions . 
 Gorgon : The Gorgon is also a DLC character . The Gorgon has abilities such as " <unk> " , the ability to launch spider webs to move around the map , " Acid Spit " , and " Web Snare " which can slow down Hunters . The Gorgon also has two abilities that use a ' second Monster ' called " Mimic " , which allows the player to control a clone @-@ version of Gorgon that explodes to deal damage to Hunters ; and " Spider Trap " , which sends a smaller version of itself to trap Hunters . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Evolve was developed by Turtle Rock Studios . Evolve 's creative director , Phil Robb , and lead designer , Chris Ashton , are the co @-@ founders of Turtle Rock Studios alongside Michael Booth . The team had a heritage of developing competitive multiplayer games , such as Valve Corporation 's Counter @-@ Strike series and the Left 4 Dead series . According to Robb , the team wanted to build a co @-@ operative , multiplayer game because it gave the team a chance to play with their family and friends together , instead of against each other , and found it offered a more enjoyable experience than competitive multiplayer games . The concept for Evolve was completed in 2005 , before the development of the first Left 4 Dead game . However , the Evolve project was put on hold , as Turtle Rock thought that the technology at that time was not advanced enough to handle the game 's design . 
 Turtle Rock Studios merged into Valve in early 2008 but split away later the same year . When the company reestablished , it had only 13 staff members . As a new company , Turtle Rock Studios hoped to make use of the popularity of the Left 4 Dead franchise to create something ambitious and massive before people forgot about the company . When eighth generation video game consoles were released , the team realized they could create almost anything they wanted . They reviewed some of their previous projects and eventually chose Evolve , which seemed to be the most " straightforward " concept . The team also considered the new project as their " proving ground " , a project that could show their ability to build a large @-@ scale game beyond providing assistance to Valve . The development of Evolve officially began in early 2011 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Evolve was inspired by hunting games Cabela 's Big Game Hunter and Deer Hunter . Members of Turtle Rock Studios , including Robb and Ashton , thought that the gameplay of these hunting games , such as animal @-@ tracking , was seldom incorporated in an action game . As a result , they came up with the original concept of Evolve in which , if players failed at hunting the animals , they could be attacked by their targets . Instead of typical big game animals such as elephants and lions , the team imagined it to be a " King Kong " , which changed to an alien monster . The team picked a sci @-@ fi setting , allowing them to add creative and unrealistic things into the game . The team also took the concept of boss battles , and expanded upon it by using the concept as a key idea when developing Evolve . The team envisioned Evolve as a video game version of Predator . The goal of Evolve was to create an experience that was new to video game players . 
 While Evolve carried some game mechanics from Left 4 Dead , while others were discarded . The team originally thought that it could be added to the artificial intelligence system of Evolve 's wildlife , but was later scrapped . They thought that the core experience offered by Evolve should be tracking and hunting the monster , instead of getting attacked by wildlife constantly . The team also thought that it would become an irritation if they added too many complex mechanics for the wildlife . The developer also intentionally chose not to make Evolve action @-@ packed all the time , and introduced segments that would require players to slow down and track the Monster . Robb explained that the design team wanted to create a contrast , so that players could appreciate the action and chaotic moments after experiencing the less exciting segments . 
 When the design team was deciding on the number of Hunters in a match , they chose four as they believed it was the optimal number in a team , as players would not lose track of the stats and health of other players . It also allowed the players to work collaboratively with each other , so that no character would get left behind , or neglected , by the team . From the Monster 's perspective , the design team thought that having four Hunters engaging in combat with the Monster would provide a challenge for the Monster , as they could find difficulties in keeping track of the Hunters , and this would make a match feel more balanced . The Hunter team was divided into several different classes because it " makes senses " according to Turtle Rock . In order to showcase the features and abilities of different classes , each class has different variations , in both appearances and costume colors . It was designed to make characters more recognizable and memorable . Another reason was that the design team wanted the Monster to adapt and use different strategies when dealing with different Hunters . Turtle Rock considered this a way to effectively extend Evolve 's replayability and would add more variety to the gameplay . There were originally four Hunter characters in Evolve , but after the design team experimented with the free @-@ to @-@ play model , the list of characters was expanded to 16 . 
 The titular " Evolve " game mechanic was inspired by the " bomb planting " mode from the Counter @-@ Strike series . The Monsters started out as a relatively weak creature that could be defeated easily , but becomes stronger and gains more skills as it evolves . Early playtesters complained about the game mechanic , as they thought that this would bring an unfair disadvantage to the Hunters , since they do not " evolve " like the Monster . However , the design team still chose to maintain the game mechanic , as they thought that it would create an engaging experience . Ashton added that such game mechanics can create a " turning the tables " feeling for the Hunters , and that he thought that the sudden change in strategy – from offensive to defensive – could help deliver a dynamic experience to the players . The Monster was originally intended to play from a first @-@ person perspective but was later shifted to a third @-@ person perspective during development because the first @-@ person control system was considered to be clumsy and confusing , and that the first person perspective took control away from players . The design team considered designing third @-@ person gameplay a challenge , as they had no prior experience in creating such games . On the other hand , the design team implemented the first @-@ person gameplay for the Hunters when Evolve 's development started . The design team thought that the first @-@ person perspective would provide a sense of tension as players would not be able to see what was behind them . 
 Evolve 's environments are based on Earth 's as the design team wanted to create a world that felt believable for players and had regions that made geological sense , after an early concept design was found to be too extreme . As a result , the design team drew inspiration from real @-@ world landscapes . The design team wanted Evolve to be set in lush forests , so that Hunters and Monsters could hide from each other . The design team tried using the Source game engine to create a forest landscape but they ultimately failed . The design team then researched Crytek 's CryEngine , which powers games like Far Cry and Crysis . As the design team felt that Far Cry and Crysis set new standards for in @-@ game environments , they decided to utilize CryEngine for Evolve . Evolve 's maps were designed to be dark and mysterious , so that the various characters can hide from each other , as well as presenting a sense of surprise when players are ambushed . 
 As Evolve is multiplayer @-@ focused , the design team put less time and focus into developing Evolve 's narrative and campaign . Conversations between characters were reduced during the multiplayer mode as the design team thought that it would negatively impact on the conversations between players . However , the story and narrative became more significant in the single @-@ player mode . Evolve does not adapt traditional storytelling methods , nor utilise a campaign mode , instead , players learn about the Hunters ' backstory and the fictional world of Shear by slowly progressing through Evolve . Playing as different characters would also lead to different conversations and dialogues between characters . 
 Evolve features an Cthulhu @-@ inspired artstyle . As a result , much of the wildlife were intentionally designed to feature tentacles . Robb had previously drawn a lot of esoteric monster designs but the publisher , THQ at the time , thought that while the designs looked unique , they would not benefit the game . The team then began developing " marketing monsters " with a more stereotypical design . The original Goliath was based on a lobster , but changed to " a hybrid between King Kong and Godzilla " , according to Evolve 's producer , Robb . Anthropological design features were later added to Goliath 's design to make the players feel more connected to the Monsters , especially when they are killed in the game . For the second monster , Kraken , the team wanted to create an electricity @-@ based creature and looked at marine creatures , such as eels , for inspiration . The third monster , Wraith , was inspired by sirens . The team noted that the key feature of this monster was its abduction ability , which the design team felt would capture the tense and exciting moments of classic monster movies . The team had designed more than three monsters , but many of them were dropped due to technical issues with Evolve 's artificial intelligence system , abilities that were deemed to be too powerful , and animation problems . 
 Evolve 's soundtrack was composed by Jason Graves and Lustmord . Graves composed the Monsters ' soundtracks , while Lustmord composed the Hunters ' soundtracks . According to Graves , much of the music was inspired by the Aliens vs. Predator series . Graves stated that he intentionally chose not to use an orchestra @-@ based style for the music , instead , Graves used synthesizers to create sounds that he described as " odd " . According to Graves , Evolve 's soundtrack has " evolved " as the game development progressed , and that it had shifted to become more electronic and synth @-@ based . The Hunters ' soundtracks are more futuristic and synth @-@ sounding , while the Monsters ' soundtracks are more drum @-@ intense and distorting . 
 = = = Publishing = = = 
 Evolve adapts an asymmetrical multiplayer structure , a new concept in the video game industry during its development . It was so new that the developer itself worried and wondered why no one else was working on such project . The design team was also uncertain about whether the <unk> structure would work or not . According to Turtle Rock , when the publishers heard that the original creators of Left 4 Dead were making a new game , they were interested . However , the design team encountered difficulties when they were pitching the game , and used two months to prepare for the pitching process . According to Robb , publishers were conservative and unsupportive about the idea and " [ attempted ] to poke holes " in their pitch . Even though the representatives from these publishers were excited about their pitch after they knew that it would be an extension to the Tank mode in Left 4 Dead , they questioned the ability of Turtle Rock making a triple @-@ A video game , and were uncertain whether it was a project they should invest in . 
 After multiple failures , the Turtle Rock team looked for a business partner , a company that supported the idea and was in need of a co @-@ operative shooter to fit into their games lineup . They eventually partnered with THQ for Evolve , which would serve as the game 's publisher and help with funding . According to Robb , they had to show the game on their iPad , as they forgot to bring the battery for their laptop . THQ 's then president , Danny Bilson and later , Jason Rubin were also excited about the idea . However , at that time , THQ had already entered financial difficulties , suffering from a severe decline in profits . Turtle Rock also knew that THQ had internal problems , but Turtle Rock decided not to part with THQ . 
 THQ 's financial situation continued to worsen and they declared bankruptcy on December 19 , 2012 . Evolve was listed alongside other unannounced titles from Relic Entertainment , Vigil Games , and THQ Studios Montreal in court documents filed by THQ . With THQ unable to continue its publishing and funding roles , an auction was held for other publishers to acquire these titles . Publishers interested in the game visited Turtle Rock Studio to see their " secret project " . The team was frustrated , as they felt that the situation was " out of their control " . Rubin later contacted Ashton and Robb , and suggested that they should bid the game themselves . They bid $ 250 @,@ 000 for their own project , which Ashton described as " what [ they ] had in the bank " . However , they were outbid by Take @-@ Two Interactive , which paid $ 11 million to acquire the game and to secure the rights to the entire franchise , and its publishing label . 2K Games then served as the game 's publisher . Despite being outbid , the Turtle Rock team was still " super excited " to collaborate with 2K . On January 8 , 2015 , Turtle Rock and 2K announced that Evolve had been declared gold , indicating it was being prepared for duplication and release . 
 = = Release = = 
 When Evolve was leaked in THQ 's court document , it was expected that the game would be released on their 2015 fiscal year . The partnership between the two companies was revealed on May 26 , 2011 , and the game was re @-@ revealed by gaming magazine Game Informer on January 7 , 2014 . It was announced that the game would be released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One globally on October 21 , 2014 . However , 2K later decided to extend Evolve 's development time frame , so as to allow Turtle Rock to further polish the game , as well as to " fully realize the vision for Evolve " . As a result , Evolve was delayed to February 10 , 2015 . 
 Prior to release , the game had been playtested multiple times by the general public . An alpha version of Evolve , called the ' Big Alpha ' was released for Xbox One on October 31 , 2014 , The alpha version of Evolve was originally set to be released for the PlayStation 4 a day later on October 31 , 2014 , but was delayed to November 3 , 2014 due to technical issues related to PS4 's firmware update . As compensation , the duration of the demo was extended by a day , and ended on November 4 , 2014 for all platforms . Players can play as the four classes of Hunters as well as the Goliath and Kraken in the alpha version . Turtle Rock expected 100 @,@ 000 people to participate in the alpha . The team hoped that through the alpha testing , they could test the functionality of the game 's servers , and make adjustments to the game 's balance . Open beta trials of Evolve on Xbox One were held January 14 – 19 , 2015 . A limited test for the PlayStation 4 and PC was held January 16 – 19 , 2015 . Players could play as the first eight Hunters as well as the Goliath and Kraken in the beta . The Evacuation mode was also added to the beta on January 17 , 2015 . 
 In addition to the game 's standard edition , players can purchase the game 's Season Pass , Deluxe Edition and PC Monster Race Edition . The Season Pass features four additional Hunters and a set of " magma " Monster skins . The Deluxe Edition features all the content of the Season Pass , as well as a new Monster called Behemoth . The PC Monster Race Edition , which is an exclusive for PC players , features the content of the Deluxe Edition , as well as the fifth Monster and two additional Hunters . After Evolve 's release , a new season pass , called Evolve Hunting Pass 2 was released on June 23 , 2015 . It features new skins , Hunters and a new Monster . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 On January 21 , 2015 , a mobile game titled Evolve : Hunter 's Quest appeared briefly on the iOS App Store and was later removed . The game was released by 2K on January 29 , 2015 for iOS , Android , Windows Phone and Fire OS devices . The game is a free @-@ to @-@ play tile @-@ matching video game , as well as a companion app to Evolve . In Evolve : Hunter 's Quest , players match three tokens of the same colour in order to unleash attacks on enemies , fill up energy bars to activate special Hunter abilities and earn mastery points to level up . Mastery points earned in @-@ app can then be applied to characters in the main Evolve game on any platform . Players who download the app can also unlock unique game art and watch replays of online matches from a top @-@ down view . 
 Evolve was launched with several merchandise items . Handled by Merchandise Monkey , the Evolve 's merchandise collection includes T @-@ shirts and different figurines . Funko also made several toys for Evolve , including 6 inches ( 15 cm ) tall figurines of Markov , Val , Hank , Maggie and Goliath , each part of the first characters available to a player . A Goliath statue , standing at 29 inches ( 74 cm ) tall , was also available for purchase . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 In an interview with Official Xbox Magazine , Ashton claimed that Evolve would have the " best support for downloadable content ever " . However , many of the downloadable content packages are not covered by Evolve 's Season Pass On November 21 , 2014 Turtle Rock Studios co @-@ founder Phil Robb confirmed with IGN that all DLC maps will be free of charge . Robb stated the reason for this is " to allow people who don 't have the DLC , to still play against those who do , the only difference is that they can 't play as those hunters or monsters " . Despite Turtle Rock claiming that all DLC maps would be free to all players , the high number of paid DLCs has attracted criticism from fans who feel that it constitutes a large amount of content being deliberately withheld to be sold . Some players who purchased the game wrote negative reviews for the game on Steam , complaining about the excessive amount of DLC planned . Turtle Rock Studios countered this by claiming that as much content as possible was packaged with the main game , with DLC only including content created after the completion of Evolve 's development . At release , Evolve launched with 44 different paid @-@ DLC skin packs . Free updates were added to the game . The Observer mode was added on March 31 , 2015 , and a less strategic mode , the Arena mode , was introduced on May 26 , 2015 . 
 Robb thought that the game 's format has the potential to become an eSports game . 2K expressed similar enthusiasm , and added that they would allocate resources into developing eSports @-@ centric features to Evolve if fans of the game expressed demands for it . Turtle Rock and 2K collaborated with Electronic Sports League and Sony Pictures Entertainment to host a special tournament , in which players have to battle Chappie , the titular robot from the film Chappie , in February 2015 . A Pro @-@ Am Tournament of Evolve took place on March 6 , 2015 during PAX East . During the tournament , they revealed that the eSport future of Evolve is determined . On June 15 , 2015 , another tournament was hosted by the Electronic Sports League and 2K . 
 On July 6 , 2016 Turtle Rock announced that the game was transitioning to became a free @-@ to @-@ play game under the title Evolve : Stage 2 due to the game downloadable content controversy and mixed critical reception . The new version introduces new changes , including longer respawn time , non @-@ ranked queue for casual players , and changes to hunters ' abilities . Turtle Rock also promised that patches would be released more frequently , and that most items featured in the game would be unlocked through simply playing the game . The alpha version of Stage 2 would begin on July 7 , 2016 for PC , and will be followed by a beta in August in the same year . Players who purchased the game will be given the Founders status , which gives them exclusive cosmetic items . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Evolve received a largely positive reception from critics upon its initial announcement . It was nominated for six different awards in the Game Critics Awards , namely Best of Show , Best Original Game , Best Console Game , Best PC Game , Best Action Game and Best Online Multiplayer . It won four of them , and lost the Best Original Game Awards to No Man 's Sky and Best PC Game to Tom Clancy 's Rainbow Six : Siege . Evolve was also named the Best Game , Best Console Game Microsoft Xbox , Best PC Game and Best Online Multiplayer Game at Gamescom 2014 . Publisher 2K Games stated that these awards indicated that Evolve could become a defining title for both the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . However , the DLC controversy caused backslash from customers , and the game was criticized for serving as a framework for the release of DLC . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Evolve received mostly positive reviews . Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PlayStation 4 version 76 / 100 based on 46 reviews , the Microsoft Windows version 77 / 100 based on 38 reviews , and the Xbox One version 74 / 100 based on 31 reviews . The game received backslash from users on Steam , due to the excessive amount of DLC sold on day one and the game for being overpriced . 
 The asymmetrical structure of the game mostly received praise from critics . Vince Ingenito , from IGN , thought that the system was smart and has successfully delivered a unique multiplayer experience for players . He added that the system is tactically deep , and that the " evolution " mechanic saved it from being gimmicky . This was contradicted by Steven Strom of Ars Technica , who stated that the game overall was just a " great gimmick and little else : something we 'll play for a month or two , and not much longer " . , Evan Lahti , from PC Gamer , also commended the structure , and considered it the most compressed multiplayer experience since 2014 's Titanfall . He added that such structure is something that the genre needs . Anthony <unk> , from Game Revolution , praised the asymmetrical idea . He added that the distant gameplay elements between Monsters and Hunters had successfully introduced Evolve to a broad audience . However , he noted that such a structure may become repetitive and boring for players after months of playthrough . GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd also appreciated the structure , which he thought made every battle feel " vicious and intense " . However , Jeff Marchiafava , from Game Informer , thought that the structure felt limited , and that Evolve , even with all the modes , had failed to offer enough variety and challenges to players . Nic Rowan , from Destructoid , thought that Evolve had presented some of the best moments he had had in a multiplayer game , but he felt that these moments are too far between . 
 The Monster 's gameplay was praised by Ingenito , as he thought it tasked players to use skills and patience while playing , and that Evolve has provided satisfying rewards for the player that successfully outsmarts the Hunters , a sentiment which was echoed by Strom . Lathi commended the Wraith , which he thought encouraged hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics . However , Rowan thought that the Monster gameplay can get old very fast . Furthermore , he noted that several Monsters felt overpowered , which made Evolve feel unbalanced . The controls of the game received praise . Marchiafava thought that it was smartly designed , and applauded it for its accessible nature . Lathi wrote a similar statement , but thought that the gameplay would be " difficult to master " . David Meikleham from GamesRadar praised Evolve 's shooting mechanic , but complained that the action presented on @-@ screen can become too chaotic for players to handle . Strom felt that the game @-@ modes were unbalanced in terms of fun , and that certain game @-@ modes prioritized fun for one team at the penalty of the other , and criticized the fact that outside of private lobbies with friends , you cannot choose any game @-@ mode other than Hunt . 
 The process of hunting the Monster was praised . Ingenito thought that the hunting process was as tense as the actual confrontation and combat between the Hunters and the Monster . The four classes was also applauded by him , as he considered that the distant class abilities have successfully made players co @-@ operate with each other in order to achieve success , as well as making the decision of choosing the correct character important and tactical . This was also contradicted by Strom , who felt that the hunter gameplay up until finding the monster was " hollow " , and generally just consisted of going around in circles . Marchiafava thought that Evolve had successfully delivered a compelling experience while playing with other players . He was also surprised by the game 's balance between the Monster and the Hunters . Meikleham thought that playing the game with other players can be an exhilarating experience , but only when players communicate with each other using microphones . Rowan thought that Evolve could only deliver an enjoyable experience when all players play cooperatively , and the overall experience would crumble if one of these players failed to do so . Lathi liked Evolve 's resources management , singling out the need for the Hunters to manage and conserve the energy for their jetpacks . 
 The Hunter characters featured in the game received praise . Ingenito thought that the Hunters in the game were memorable due to their pre @-@ game dialog , and thought that the dialogue was well @-@ written . He called this the " true beauty " of Evolve . Rowan echoed a similar statement , calling the banter " charming " . Marchiafava thought that the progression system has made the banter between characters repetitive , because players need to play the game continuously to unlock characters . Marchiafava compared the narrative unfavorably to that of Left 4 Dead , and thought that it was not emergent enough . 
 Evolve 's map @-@ design received mixed reviews . Ingenito thought that Shear was a " beautifully realized " planet , while Marchiafava thought that all the maps were both detailed and varied . VanOrd thought that Turtle Rock had successfully captured an unsettling atmosphere , and applauded the verticality of the maps . Lathi agreed that the maps were well @-@ designed . However , he criticized them for being " homogeneous " , as all the maps felt too similar to each other , and none offered a particularly unique experience that required players to change their tactics . He added that the lack of variety had significantly lowered Evolve 's replayability . Meikleham echoed a similar statement , adding that the maps are " bland " , and that they did not look different from each other . 
 The progression system received criticism . Ingenito thought that it was an unnecessary addition to the game . He added that the upgrade system hides a lot of content from players unless they play the game frequently . Lathi however thought that after every character is unlocked , he felt less motivated to continue to play the game . <unk> thought that the system does not offer enough content and described it as " thin " . This was echoed by Strom , who felt that unlocking the characters was a " grind " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Evolve debuted in No. 1 in the UK software @-@ sales chart ; the first title 2K Games had published to take the No. 1 spot since March 2013 . Evolve was the second best selling game in the United States in February according to the NPD Group , only behind the handheld game The Legend of Zelda : Majora 's Mask 3D . However , the average player count on Steam declined significantly since the game 's launch . The game 's player count increased 15 @,@ 930 % and was listed as one of Steam 's most @-@ played games after its transition to a free @-@ to @-@ play model . More than a million new players played the game after the transition . 
 Financial analyst Doug Creutz , of the Cowen Group , estimated only 300 @,@ 000 physical copies were sold in Evolve 's launch month , and by its current sales rate , a well @-@ below average figure for the triple @-@ A gaming industry . Creutz stated that Evolve may be " too niche to reach a wide audience " , adding that the negative reception to its DLC plan has hindered its success considerably . Despite such estimations , Karl Slatoff , President of Take @-@ Two Interactive , stated that Evolve has achieved an “ incredibly successful " launch and that the company was very satisfied with the sales of the game . As of May 2015 , 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the game had been shipped . Take @-@ Two CEO Strauss Zelnick considered the property one of their " permanent " franchises , joining Grand Theft Auto , BioShock and Red Dead . 
 = 16 Cygni = 
 16 Cygni or 16 Cyg is the Flamsteed designation of a triple star system approximately 69 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Cygnus . It consists of two Sun @-@ like yellow dwarf stars , 16 Cygni A and 16 Cygni B , together with a red dwarf , 16 Cygni C. In 1996 an extrasolar planet was discovered in an eccentric orbit around 16 Cygni B. 
 = = Distance = = 
 The parallax of the two brightest stars were measured as part of the Hipparcos astrometry mission . This yielded a parallax of 47 @.@ 44 milliarcseconds for 16 Cygni A and 47 @.@ 14 milliarcseconds for 16 Cygni B. Since the two components are associated , it is reasonable to assume they lie at the same distance , so the different parallaxes are a result of experimental error ( indeed , when the associated parallax errors are taken into account , the ranges of the parallaxes overlap ) . Using the parallax of the A component , the distance is 21 @.@ 1 parsecs . The parallax of the B component corresponds to a distance of 21 @.@ 2 parsecs . 
 = = Stellar components = = 
 16 Cygni is a hierarchal triple system . Stars A and C form a close binary with a projected separation of 73 AU . The orbital elements of the A – C binary are currently unknown . At a distance of 860 AU from A is a third component designated 16 Cygni B. The orbit of B relative to the A – C pair was determined in 1999 and not updated since ( as of June 2007 ) : plausible orbits range in period from 18 @,@ 200 to 1 @.@ 3 million years , with a semimajor axis ranging from 877 to 15 @,@ 180 AU . In addition B orbits between 100 and 160 degrees inclination , that is against the A – C pole such that 90 degrees would be <unk> . 
 Both 16 Cygni A and 16 Cygni B are yellow dwarf stars like the Sun . According to data from the Geneva – Copenhagen survey , both stars have masses similar to the Sun . Age estimates for the two stars vary slightly , but 16 Cygni is likely to be much older than the Solar System , at around 10 @,@ 000 million years old . 16 Cygni C is much fainter than either of these stars , and may be a red dwarf . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 In 1996 an extrasolar planet in an eccentric orbit was announced around the star 16 Cygni B. The planet 's orbit takes 798 @.@ 5 days to complete , with a semimajor axis of 1 @.@ 68 AU . 
 Like the majority of extrasolar planets detectable from Earth , 16 Cygni Bb was deduced from the radial velocity of its parent star . At the time that only gave a lower limit on the mass : in this case , about 1 @.@ 68 times that of Jupiter . In 2012 , two astronomers , E. <unk> and <unk> <unk> , showed that the stable orbit would demand about 2 @.@ 38 Jupiter masses , such that its orbit was inclined at either 45 ° or 135 ° . 
 For the 16 Cyg B system , only particles inside approximately 0 @.@ 3 AU remained stable within a million years of formation , leaving open the possibility of short @-@ period planets . For them , observation rules out any such planet of over a Neptune mass . 
 There was a METI message sent to the 16 Cygni system . It was transmitted from Eurasia 's largest radar — the 70 @-@ meter ( 230 @-@ foot ) Eupatoria Planetary Radar . The message was named Cosmic Call 1 ; it was sent on May 24 , 1999 , and it will reach 16 Cygni in November 2069 . 
 The 16 Cygni system is within the field of view of the Kepler space telescope . 
 = German battleship Scharnhorst = 
 Scharnhorst was a German capital ship , alternatively described as a battleship and battlecruiser , of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine . She was the lead ship of her class , which included one other ship , Gneisenau . The ship was built at the Kriegsmarinewerft dockyard in Wilhelmshaven ; she was laid down on 15 June 1935 and launched a year and four months later on 3 October 1936 . Completed in January 1939 , the ship was armed with a main battery of nine 28 cm ( 11 in ) C / 34 guns in three triple turrets . Plans to replace these weapons with six 38 cm ( 15 in ) SK C / 34 guns in twin turrets were never carried out . 
 Scharnhorst and Gneisenau operated together for much of the early portion of World War II , including sorties into the Atlantic to raid British merchant shipping . During her first operation , Scharnhorst sank the auxiliary cruiser HMS Rawalpindi in a short engagement . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau participated in Operation Weserübung , the German invasion of Norway . During operations off Norway , the two ships engaged the battlecruiser HMS Renown and sank the aircraft carrier HMS Glorious as well as her escort destroyers Acasta and Ardent . In that engagement Scharnhorst achieved one of the longest @-@ range naval gunfire hits in history . 
 In early 1942 , after repeated British bombing raids , the two ships made a daylight dash up the English Channel from occupied France to Germany . In early 1943 , Scharnhorst joined the Bismarck @-@ class battleship Tirpitz in Norway to interdict Allied convoys to the Soviet Union . Scharnhorst and several destroyers sortied from Norway to attack a convoy ; the Germans were instead intercepted by British naval patrols . During the Battle of the North Cape , the Royal Navy battleship HMS Duke of York and her escorts sank Scharnhorst . Only 36 men were pulled from the icy seas , out of a crew of 1 @,@ 968 . 
 = = Construction and characteristics = = 
 Scharnhorst was ordered as Ersatz Elsass as a replacement for the old pre @-@ dreadnought Elsass , under the contract name " D. " The Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven was awarded the contract , where the keel was laid on 16 July 1935 . The ship was launched on 3 October 1936 , witnessed by Adolf Hitler , Minister of War Generalfeldmarschall Werner von Blomberg , and the widow of Kapitän zur See Schultz , the commander of the armored cruiser Scharnhorst , which had been sunk at the Battle of the Falkland Islands during World War I. Fitting @-@ out work followed her launch , and was completed by January 1939 . Scharnhorst was commissioned into the fleet on 9 January for sea trials , which revealed a dangerous tendency to ship considerable amounts of water in heavy seas . This caused flooding in the bow and damaged electrical systems in the forward gun turret . As a result , she went back to the dockyard for extensive modification of the bow . The original straight stem was replaced with a raised " Atlantic bow . " A raked funnel cap was also installed during the reconstruction , along with an enlarged aircraft hangar ; the main mast was also moved further aft . The modifications were completed by November 1939 , by which time the ship was finally fully operational . 
 Scharnhorst displaced 32 @,@ 100 long tons ( 32 @,@ 600 t ) as built and 38 @,@ 100 long tons ( 38 @,@ 700 t ) fully loaded , with a length of 234 @.@ 9 m ( 771 ft ) , a beam of 30 m ( 98 ft ) and a maximum draft of 9 @.@ 9 m ( 32 ft ) . She was powered by three Brown , Boveri & Cie geared steam turbines , which developed a total of 159 @,@ 551 shp ; 118 @,@ 977 kW and yielded a maximum speed of 31 @.@ 5 knots ( 58 @.@ 3 km / h ; 36 @.@ 2 mph ) on speed trials . Her standard crew numbered 56 officers and 1 @,@ 613 enlisted men , augmented during the war to 60 officers and 1 @,@ 780 men . While serving as a squadron flagship , Scharnhorst carried an additional ten officers and 61 enlisted men . 
 She was armed with nine 28 cm ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) L / 54 @.@ 5 guns arranged in three triple gun turrets : two turrets forward , one superfiring — Anton and Bruno — and one aft — Caesar . The design also enabled the ship to be up @-@ gunned with six 15 inch guns which never took place . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 55 guns , fourteen 10 @.@ 5 cm L / 65 and sixteen 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) L / 83 , and initially ten 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns . The number of 2 cm guns was eventually increased to thirty @-@ eight . Six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) above @-@ water torpedo tubes , taken from the light cruisers Nürnberg and Leipzig , were installed in 1942 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 At her commissioning , Scharnhorst was commanded by Kapitän zur See ( KzS ) Otto Ciliax . His tenure as the ship 's commander was brief ; in September 1939 , an illness forced him to go on sick leave , and he was replaced by KzS Kurt @-@ Caesar Hoffmann . Hoffmann served as the ship 's captain until 1942 . On 1 April 1942 , Hoffmann , who had been promoted to Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) and awarded the Knight 's Cross , transferred command of the ship to KzS Friedrich <unk> . In October 1943 , shortly before Scharnhorst 's last mission , <unk> was replaced by KzS Fritz <unk> , who was killed during the ship 's final battle . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Scharnhorst 's first operation began on 21 November 1939 ; the ship , in company with her sister Gneisenau , the light cruiser Köln , and nine destroyers , was to patrol the area between Iceland and the Faroe Islands . The intent of the operation was to draw out British units and ease the pressure on the heavy cruiser ( " pocket battleship " ) Admiral Graf Spee , which was being pursued in the South Atlantic . Two days later , the German flotilla intercepted the British armed merchant cruiser Rawalpindi . At 16 : 07 , lookouts aboard Scharnhorst spotted the vessel , and less than an hour later Scharnhorst had closed the range . At 17 : 03 , Scharnhorst opened fire , and three minutes later a salvo of her 28 cm guns hit Rawalpindi 's bridge , killing the captain and the majority of the officers . During the brief engagement , Rawalpindi managed to score a hit on Scharnhorst , which caused minor splinter damage . 
 By 17 : 16 , Rawalpindi was burning badly and in the process of sinking . Admiral Wilhelm Marschall , aboard Gneisenau , ordered Scharnhorst to pick up survivors . These rescue operations were interrupted by the appearance of the cruiser Newcastle . The German force quickly fled north before using inclement weather to make the dash south through the North Sea . Four allied capital ships , the British Hood , Nelson , Rodney , and the French Dunkerque followed in pursuit . The Germans reached Wilhelmshaven on 27 November , and on the trip both battleships incurred significant damage from heavy seas and winds . Scharnhorst was repaired in Wilhelmshaven , and while in dock , her boilers were overhauled . 
 = = = Operation Weserübung = = = 
 Following the completion of repairs , Scharnhorst went into the Baltic Sea for gunnery training . Heavy ice in the Baltic kept the ship there until February 1940 when she could return to Wilhelmshaven , arriving on 5 February . She was then assigned to the forces participating in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Denmark and Norway . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were the covering force for the assaults on Narvik and Trondheim ; the two ships left Wilhelmshaven on the morning of 7 April . They were joined by the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . Later that day , at around 14 : 30 , the three ships came under attack by a force of British bombers , which failed to make any hits . Heavy winds caused significant structural damage that evening , and flooding contaminated a portion of Scharnhorst 's fuel stores . 
 At 09 : 15 the following morning , Admiral Hipper was detached to reinforce the destroyers at Narvik , which had reported engaging British forces . Early on 9 April , the two ships encountered the British battlecruiser HMS Renown . Gneisenau 's Seetakt radar picked up a radar contact at 04 : 30 , which prompted the crews of both vessels to go to combat stations . Half an hour later , Scharnhorst 's navigator spotted gun flashes from Renown firing at Gneisenau ; the Germans returned fire three minutes later . Gneisenau was hit twice in the opening portion of the engagement , and one shell disabled her rear gun turret . Scharnhorst 's radar malfunctioned , which prevented her from being able to effectively engage Renown during the battle . At 05 : 18 , the British battlecruiser shifted fire to Scharnhorst , which maneuvered to avoid the falling shells . By 07 : 15 , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau had used their superior speed to escape from the pursuing Renown . Heavy seas and the high speed with which the pair of battleships escaped caused them to ship large amounts of water forward . Scharnhorst 's forward turret was put out of action by severe flooding . Mechanical problems with her starboard turbines developed after running at full speed , which forced the ships to reduce speed to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . 
 Scharnhorst and Gneisenau had reached a point north @-@ west of Lofoten , Norway , by 12 : 00 on 9 April . The two ships then turned west for 24 hours while temporary repairs were effected . After a day of steaming west , the ships turned south and rendezvoused with Admiral Hipper on 12 April . An RAF patrol aircraft spotted the three ships that day , which prompted an air attack . The German warships were protected by poor visibility , however , and the three ships safely reached port later that day . Scharnhorst returned to Germany , and was repaired at the Deutsche Werke in Kiel . During the repair process , the aircraft catapult that had been installed on the rear gun turret was removed . 
 The two ships left Wilhelmshaven on 4 June to return to Norway . They were joined by Admiral Hipper and four destroyers . The purpose of the sortie was to interrupt Allied efforts to resupply the Norwegians and to relieve the pressure on German troops fighting in Norway . On 7 June , the squadron rendezvoused with the tanker <unk> to refuel Admiral Hipper and the four destroyers . The next day , a British corvette was discovered and sunk , along with the oil tanker Oil Pioneer . The Germans then launched their Arado 196 float planes to search for more Allied vessels . Admiral Hipper and the destroyers were sent to destroy Orama , a 19 @,@ 500 long tons ( 19 @,@ 800 t ) passenger ship , while Atlantis , a hospital ship , was allowed to proceed unmolested . Admiral Marschall detached Admiral Hipper and the four destroyers to refuel in Trondheim , while he would steam to the Harstad area . 
 At 17 : 45 , the German battleships spotted the British aircraft carrier Glorious and two escorting destroyers , Ardent and Acasta , at a range of some 50 @,@ 000 m ( 55 @,@ 000 yd ) . Scharnhorst was closer and therefore fired first . Six minutes after opening fire , Scharnhorst scored a hit at a range of 24 @,@ 100 m ( 26 @,@ 400 yd ) . The shell struck the carrier 's upper hangar and started a large fire . Less than ten minutes later , a shell from Gneisenau struck the bridge and killed Glorious 's captain . The two destroyers attempted to cover Glorious with smoke screens , but the German battleships could track the carrier with their radar . By 18 : 26 the range had fallen to 25 @,@ 600 m ( 28 @,@ 000 yd ) , and Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were firing full salvos at the carrier . After approximately an hour of shooting , the German battleships sent Glorious to the bottom . They also sank the two destroyers . Before sinking one of them , Acasta , managed to hit Scharnhorst with a torpedo at 18 : 39 . Acasta also hit Scharnhorst 's forward superfiring turret with her 4 @.@ 7 " QF guns , which did negligible damage . The torpedo hit caused serious damage ; it tore a hole 14 by 6 m ( 15 @.@ 3 by 6 @.@ 6 yd ) and allowed 2 @,@ 500 t ( 2 @,@ 500 long tons ; 2 @,@ 800 short tons ) of water into the ship . The rear turret was disabled and 48 men were killed . The flooding caused a 5 degree list , increased the stern draft by almost a meter , and forced Scharnhorst to reduce speed to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The ship 's machinery was also significantly damaged by the flooding , and the starboard propeller shaft was destroyed . 
 The damage was severe enough to force Scharnhorst to put into Trondheim for temporary repairs . She reached port on the afternoon of 9 June , where the repair ship <unk> was waiting . The following day a reconnaissance plane from RAF Coastal Command spotted the ship , and a raid by twelve Hudson bombers took place on 11 June . The Hudsons dropped thirty @-@ six 227 lb ( 103 kg ) armor @-@ piercing bombs , which all missed . The Royal Navy joined in the attacks on the ship by sending the battleship Rodney and the aircraft carrier Ark Royal . On 13 June , Ark Royal launched fifteen Skua dive bombers ; German fighters intercepted the attackers and shot eight of them down . The other seven made it past the air defenses and attacked Scharnhorst , but only scored one hit , and the bomb failed to detonate . Preliminary repairs were completed by 20 June , which permitted the ship to return to Germany . While Scharnhorst was en route under heavy escort on 21 June , the British launched two air attacks , six Swordfish torpedo bombers in the first and nine Beaufort bombers in the second . Both were driven off by anti @-@ aircraft fire and fighters . The Germans intercepted British radio traffic that indicated the Royal Navy was at sea , which prompted Scharnhorst to make for Stavanger . British warships were within 35 nmi ( 65 km ; 40 mi ) of Scharnhorst 's position when she turned to Stavanger . The next day , Scharnhorst left Stavanger for Kiel , where repairs were carried out , lasting some six months . 
 = = = Operation Berlin = = = 
 Following the completion of repairs , Scharnhorst underwent trials in the Baltic before returning to Kiel in December 1940 . There she joined Gneisenau , in preparation for Operation Berlin , a planned raid into the Atlantic Ocean designed to wreak havoc on the Allied shipping lanes . Severe storms caused damage to Gneisenau but Scharnhorst was undamaged . The two ships were forced to put into port during the storm : Scharnhorst went to Gotenhafen while Gneisenau went to Kiel for repairs . Repairs were quickly completed , and on 22 January 1941 , the two ships , under the command of Admiral Günther Lütjens , left port for the North Atlantic . They were detected in the Skagerrak and the heavy units of the British Home Fleet deployed to cover the passage between Iceland and the Faroes . The Germans ' radar detected the British at long range , which allowed Lütjens to avoid the British patrols , with the aid of a squall . By 3 February , the two battleships had evaded the last British cruiser patrol , and had broken into the open Atlantic . 
 On 6 February , the two ships refueled from the tanker Schlettstadt south of Cape Farewell . Shortly after 08 : 30 on 8 February , lookouts spotted convoy HX @-@ 106 , escorted by the battleship Ramillies . Lütjens ' orders prohibited him from engaging Allied capital ships , and so the attack was called off . Scharnhorst 's commander , KzS Hoffmann , however , closed to 23 @,@ 000 m ( 25 @,@ 000 yd ) in an attempt to lure Ramillies away from the convoy so that Gneisenau could attack the convoy . Lütjens ordered Hoffmann to rejoin the flagship immediately . The two battleships steamed off to the northwest to search for more shipping . On 22 February , the pair spotted an empty convoy sailing west , which dispersed at the appearance of the battleships . Scharnhorst managed to sink only one ship during the encounter , the 6000 ton tanker Lustrous . 
 Lütjens then decided to move to a new area , as the surviving members of the dispersed convoy had sent distress signals . He chose the Cape Town @-@ Gibraltar convoy route , and positioned himself to the northwest of Cape Verde . The two ships encountered another convoy , escorted by the battleship Malaya , on 8 March . Lütjens again forbade an attack , but he shadowed the convoy and directed U @-@ boats to attack . A pair of U @-@ boats sank a total of <unk> tons of shipping on the night of 8 – 9 March . Malaya turned on the two battleships and closed to 24 @,@ 000 m ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) , well within the range of the Germans ' guns , but Lütjens refused to be drawn into an engagement . He instead turned toward the mid @-@ Atlantic , where Scharnhorst sank the Greek cargo ship Marathon . The two ships then refueled from the tankers Uckermark and Ermland on 12 March . 
 On 15 March , the two battleships , with the two tankers in company , encountered a dispersed convoy in the mid @-@ Atlantic . Scharnhorst sank two ships . Several days later , the main body of the convoy was located , and Scharnhorst sank another seven ships totaling <unk> tons . One of the surviving ships radioed the location of the German battleships , which summoned the powerful British battleships Rodney and King George V. Scharnhorst and Gneisenau used their high speed to escape in a squall , and the intervention by the British battleships convinced Lütjens that the chances of further success were small . He therefore decided to head for Brest in occupied France , which the ships reached on 22 March . Throughout the operation , Scharnhorst had difficulties with the superheater tubes in her boilers . Work lasted until July , which caused the ship to be unavailable during Operation Rheinübung , the sortie by the new battleship Bismarck in May 1941 . 
 = = = Air raid on 24 July 1941 = = = 
 After repairs were completed in July , Scharnhorst went to La Pallice for trials on the 21st , where she easily steamed at 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . On 24 July , RAF B @-@ 17s and B @-@ 24s attacked the ship while she was anchored there . The bombers scored five hits in an almost straight line on the starboard side , parallel to the centerline . Three of the bombs were 454 kg ( 1 @,@ 001 lb ) armor @-@ piercing bombs , and the other two were 227 kg ( 500 lb ) high @-@ explosive bombs . One of the 227 kg bombs hit the deck just forward of the starboard 15 cm twin turret next to the conning tower . It passed through the upper and middle decks before exploding on the main armored deck , which contained the blast . The joints with the torpedo bulkhead were weakened enough to cause leaking . The second 227 kg bomb fell forward of the rear main battery turret and penetrated the first two decks . It also exploded on the armored deck and tore a small hole in it . The explosion caused splinter damage and disabled the ammunition hoists for the 37 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 Two of the 454 kg bombs hit amidships between the 15 cm and 10 @.@ 5 cm gun turrets ; both failed to explode and penetrated the ship completely . The first went through each deck and exited the ship through the double bottom , while the other was deflected by the torpedo bulkhead and penetrated the hull beneath the side belt armor . The third 454 kg bomb hit abaft of the rear 28 cm turret , about 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) from the side of the ship . It too failed to detonate , and passed through the side of the hull , which was not protected by the main armor belt . These three hits caused significant flooding and caused an 8 degree list to starboard . The forward and rear gun turrets were temporarily disabled , along with half of her anti @-@ aircraft battery . Two men were killed and fifteen were injured in the attack . Damage control teams managed to correct the list with counter @-@ flooding , and although draft increased by 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , Scharnhorst was able to leave for Brest at 19 : 30 . On the morning of 25 July , one of the escorting destroyers shot down a British patrol plane . The ship reached Brest later that day and went into dry dock for repairs . While the damage was being repaired , a new radar system was installed aft , the power output for the forward radar was increased to 100 kW , and the 53 @.@ 3 cm torpedo tubes were installed . 
 = = = Operation Cerberus = = = 
 On 12 January 1942 , the German Naval Command , in a conference with Hitler , made the decision to return Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen to Germany . The intention was to deploy the vessels to Norway to interdict Allied convoys to the Soviet Union . The so @-@ called " Channel Dash " , codenamed Operation Cerberus , would avoid the increasingly effective Allied radar and patrol aircraft in the Atlantic . Vice Admiral Otto Ciliax , Scharnhorst 's first commander , was given command of the operation . In early February , minesweepers swept a route through the English Channel undetected by the British . 
 At 23 : 00 on 11 February , Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Prinz Eugen left Brest . They entered the Channel an hour later ; the three ships sped at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , hugging the French coast along the voyage . The British failed to detect their departure , as the submarine that had been tasked with observing the port had withdrawn to recharge its batteries . By 06 : 30 , they had passed Cherbourg , at which point they were joined by a flotilla of torpedo boats . The torpedo boats were led by Kapitän Erich Bey , aboard the destroyer Z29 . General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighter Force ) Adolf Galland directed Luftwaffe fighter and bomber forces ( Operation Donnerkeil ) during Cerberus . The fighters flew at masthead @-@ height to avoid detection by the British radar network . Liaison officers were present on all three ships . German aircraft arrived later to jam British radar with chaff . By 13 : 00 , the ships had cleared the Strait of Dover Half an hour later , a flight of six Swordfish torpedo bombers , with Spitfire escort , attacked the Germans . The British failed to penetrate the Luftwaffe fighter shield , and all six Swordfish were destroyed . 
 Scharnhorst did not make the voyage unscathed , however ; at 15 : 31 she struck an air @-@ dropped magnetic mine in the mouth of the Scheldt , abreast of the forward superfiring turret . The blast damaged the ship 's circuit breakers and knocked out her electrical system for 20 minutes . The explosive shock caused serious damage ; turret Bruno was jammed , as were the twin and single 15 cm mounts on the port side . The blast also damaged the fuel oil pumps and the bearings in the turbo @-@ generators , which brought the ship to a halt . The power outage disabled the emergency shut @-@ off switches to the boilers and turbines , which could not be turned off until power was restored . The explosion tore a large gash in the side of the hull and allowed 1 @,@ 220 t ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ; 1 @,@ 340 short tons ) of water into the ship , flooding 30 watertight spaces within five main watertight compartments . Scharnhorst took on a list of one degree and was down by the bows by a meter . 
 While the ship was immobilized , Admiral Ciliax transferred to Z29 . The engine room crews managed to restart the first turbine at 15 : 49 , nearly twenty minutes after the mine explosion . The second and third turbines were restarted at 15 : 55 and 16 : 01 , respectively , which permitted a speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . At around the time the last turbine was restarted , a single bomber dropped several bombs approximately 90 m ( 98 yd ) off Scharnhorst 's port side , which caused no damage . Once the ship was back under way , twelve Beauforts launched a 10 @-@ minute attack that was beaten off by anti @-@ aircraft fire and the escorting Luftwaffe fighters . The British carried out a series of attacks that were all unsuccessful ; Scharnhorst 's anti @-@ aircraft guns were red @-@ hot by the end of the action , and one 20 mm gun had burst from the strain . 
 The ship struck another mine off Terschelling on the starboard side at 22 : 34 . The mine briefly knocked out the power system and temporarily disabled the rudders . Two of the three turbines were jammed , and the third had to be turned off . Another 300 t ( 300 long tons ; 330 short tons ) tons of water flooded ten watertight spaces in four main compartments . Only the centerline shaft was operational , which permitted a speed of only 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Partial power was eventually restored to the starboard turbine , which allowed speed to be increased to 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The shock damaged the rotating parts of all of the ship 's gun turrets , and three of the 15 cm turrets were seriously jammed . By 08 : 00 , Scharnhorst had reached the Jade Bight but ice prevented the ship from entering Wilhelmshaven . While waiting outside the port , Admiral Ciliax returned to the ship . The ice had been cleared by noon , permitting Scharnhorst 's entrance to Wilhelmshaven . Two days later , Scharnhorst went to Kiel for permanent repairs . Work was conducted in a floating dry dock and lasted until July 1942 . Afterward , another round of trials were conducted in the Baltic , which revealed the necessity of replacing several of the boiler tubes . 
 = = = Deployment to Norway = = = 
 In early August 1942 , Scharnhorst conducted exercises in cooperation with several U @-@ boats . During the maneuvers , she collided with the German submarine U @-@ 523 , which caused damage that necessitated dry @-@ docking for repairs . Work was completed by September , and the ship conducted further training in the Baltic . Scharnhorst steamed to Gotenhafen in late October for a new rudder , the design of which was based on the lessons learned from the torpedoing of Prinz Eugen and Lützow earlier in the year . Boiler and turbine troubles kept the ship in Germany for the remainder of 1942 . By December , only two of the three shafts were operational and a complete overhaul of the propulsion system was required . In early January 1943 , the ship was back in service , and after trials , left Germany on 7 January in company with Prinz Eugen and five destroyers . Reports of heavy activity in British airfields near the coast prompted the force to return to port , however . Another attempt to reach Norway was canceled under similar circumstances . On 8 March , however , poor weather grounded the British bombers , and so Scharnhorst and four destroyers were able to make the journey to Norway . A severe storm off Bergen forced the destroyers to seek shelter but Scharnhorst was able to continue on at the reduced speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . At 16 : 00 on 14 March , Scharnhorst dropped anchor in Bogen Bay outside Narvik . There she met Lützow and the battleship Tirpitz . 
 On 22 March , Scharnhorst , Tirpitz , and Lützow steamed to Altafjord for repairs to damage incurred in heavy storms . In early April , Scharnhorst , Tirpitz , and nine destroyers conducted a training mission to Bear Island in the Arctic Ocean . On the 8th , a serious internal explosion occurred in the aft auxiliary machinery space above the armor deck . The explosion killed or injured 34 men and prompted the crew to flood the magazines for turret Caesar as a precaution against a magazine explosion . A repair ship completed work on the vessel in two weeks . Fuel shortages prevented major operations for the next six months , during which Scharnhorst was able to conduct only short training maneuvers . 
 Scharnhorst , Tirpitz , and nine destroyers embarked from Altafjord on an offensive on 6 September known as Operation Sicily ; the ships were tasked with bombarding the island of Spitzbergen . During the operation , Scharnhorst destroyed a battery of two 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns and shelled fuel tanks , coal mines , harbor facilities , and military installations . Of particular importance was the weather station that was transmitting weather information to the Allies , which was used to schedule convoys to the Soviet Union . The destroyers landed some 1 @,@ 000 troops , which pushed the Norwegian garrison into the mountains , completing the mission without major loss . On 22 September , a pair of British X @-@ craft mini @-@ submarines attacked and seriously damaged Tirpitz , which reduced the Arctic Task Force to Scharnhorst and her five escorting destroyers . 
 On 25 November 1943 Scharnhorst carried out a two @-@ hour full power trial achieving 29 @.@ 6 knots ( 54 @.@ 8 km / h ; 34 @.@ 1 mph ) and it was noted that her draught had increased by over .5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) from her 1940 trials where she had attained 31 @.@ 14 knots ( 57 @.@ 67 km / h ; 35 @.@ 84 mph ) . 
 = = = Battle of the North Cape = = = 
 With the rapidly deteriorating military situation for the German Army on the Eastern Front , it became increasingly important to interrupt the flow of supplies from the Western Allies to the Soviet Union . By December 1943 , the German Army was forced into continuous retreat . The Luftwaffe had been seriously weakened by four long years of war , and increasing Allied anti @-@ submarine capabilities were steadily degrading the effectiveness of the U @-@ boats . The only effective weapon at the disposal of the Germans in Norway was Scharnhorst — Tirpitz was badly damaged , and the four remaining heavy cruisers were committed to the Baltic . During a conference with Hitler on 19 – 20 December , Großadmiral Karl Dönitz decided to employ Scharnhorst against the next Allied convoy that presented itself . Erich Bey , by now promoted to Konteradmiral , was given command of the task force . 
 On 22 December Dönitz ordered Bey to be ready to go to sea on a three @-@ hour notice . Later that day , reconnaissance aircraft located a convoy of some 20 transports escorted by cruisers and destroyers approximately 400 nmi ( 740 km ; 460 mi ) west of Tromsø . The convoy was spotted again two days later , and it was determined that the course was definitively toward the Soviet Union . A U @-@ boat reported the convoy 's location at 09 : 00 on 25 December , and Dönitz ordered Scharnhorst into action . In his instructions to Bey , Dönitz advised him to break off the engagement if presented with superior forces , but to remain aggressive . Bey planned to attack the convoy at 10 : 00 on 26 December if the conditions were favorable for the attack . At this time of year , there was only 45 minutes of full daylight and six hours of twilight , which significantly limited Bey 's operational freedom . The Germans were concerned with developments in Allied radar @-@ directed fire control , which allowed British battleships to fire with great accuracy in the darkness ; German radar capabilities lagged behind those of their opponents . 
 Scharnhorst and her five destroyers left port at around 19 : 00 and were in the open sea four hours later . At 03 : 19 , Bey received instructions from the Fleet Command that Scharnhorst was to conduct the attack alone if heavy seas interfered with the destroyers ' ability to fight . Unbeknown to the Germans , the British were reading the radio transmissions between Scharnhorst and the Fleet Command ; Admirals Robert Burnett and Bruce Fraser were aware of Bey 's plan for the attack on the convoy and could position their forces accordingly . At 07 : 03 , Scharnhorst was some 40 nmi ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) southwest of Bear Island when she made a turn that would put her in position to attack the convoy at 10 : 00 . Admiral Burnett , commanding the three cruisers Norfolk , Belfast , and Sheffield escorting Convoy JW 55B , placed his ships between the convoy and Scharnhorst 's expected direction of attack . Fraser in the powerful battleship Duke of York , along with the cruiser Jamaica and four destroyers , moved to a position southwest of Scharnhorst to block a possible escape attempt . 
 An hour after making the turn , Bey deployed his destroyers in a line screening Scharnhorst , which remained 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) behind . Half an hour later , Scharnhorst 's loudspeakers called the crew to battle stations in preparation for the attack . At 08 : 40 , Belfast picked up Scharnhorst on her radar . The Germans were unaware that they had been detected , and they had turned off their radar to prevent the British from picking up on the signals . At 09 : 21 , Belfast 's lookouts spotted Scharnhorst at a range of 11 @,@ 000 m ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) . The cruiser opened fire three minutes later , followed by Norfolk two minutes after . Scharnhorst fired a salvo from turret Caesar before turning and increasing speed to disengage from the cruisers . The battleship was hit twice by 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 in ) shells ; the first failed to explode and caused negligible damage , but the second struck the forward rangefinders and destroyed the radar antenna . The aft radar , which possessed only a limited forward arc , was the ship 's only remaining radar capability . 
 Scharnhorst turned south and attempted to work around the cruisers , but the superior British radar prevented Bey from successfully carrying out the maneuver . By 12 : 00 , Scharnhorst was to the northeast of the convoy , but Belfast had reestablished radar contact ; it took the cruisers twenty minutes to close the range and begin firing . Scharnhorst detected the cruisers with her aft radar and opened fire with her main battery guns before turning away to disengage a second time . Shortly before 12 : 25 , Scharnhorst hit Norfolk twice with 28 cm shells . The first shell hit the forward superstructure and disabled Norfolk 's gunnery radar . The second 28 cm round struck the ship 's " X " barbette and disabled the turret . Scharnhorst then turned again and increased speed , in the hopes of escaping the cruisers and finding the convoy . Burnett chose to keep his distance and shadow Scharnhorst with radar while Fraser made his way to the scene in Duke of York . Meanwhile , the five German destroyers continued searching for the convoy without success . At 13 : 15 , Bey decided to return to base , and at 13 : 43 , he dismissed the destroyers and instructed them to return to port . 
 At 16 : 17 , Duke of York made radar contact with Scharnhorst ; thirty minutes later , Belfast illuminated the German battleship with star shells . At 16 : 50 , Duke of York opened fire at a range of 11 @,@ 000 m ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) ; Scharnhorst quickly returned the fire . Five minutes after opening fire , one of Duke of York 's 14 in ( 35 @.@ 6 cm ) shells struck Scharnhorst abreast of her forward gun turret . The shell hit jammed the turret 's training gears , putting it out of action . Shell splinters started a fire in the ammunition magazine , which forced the Germans to flood both forward magazines to prevent an explosion . Turret Bruno 's magazine was quickly drained . The ship was now fighting with only two @-@ thirds of her main battery . Shortly thereafter , another 14 in shell struck the ventilation trunk attached to Bruno , which caused the turret to be flooded with noxious propellant gases every time the breeches were opened . A third shell hit the deck next to turret Caesar and caused some flooding ; shell splinters caused significant casualties . At 17 : 30 , shells struck the forward 15 cm gun turrets and destroyed them both . 
 At around 18 : 00 , another 14 in shell struck the ship on the starboard side , passed through the thin upper belt armor , and exploded in the number 1 boiler room . It caused significant damage to the ship 's propulsion system and slowed the ship to 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . Temporary repairs allowed Scharnhorst to return to 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . She managed to add 5 @,@ 000 m ( 5 @,@ 500 yd ) to the distance between her and Duke of York , while straddling the ship with several salvos . Shell splinters rained on Duke of York and disabled the fire @-@ control radar . 
 At 18 : 42 , Duke of York ceased fire , after having fired 52 salvos and scoring at least 13 hits , but Scharnhorst was pulling away . Many of these hits had badly damaged the ship 's secondary armament , which left her open to destroyer attacks , which Fraser ordered . The destroyers Scorpion and HNoMS Stord launched a total of eight torpedoes at 18 : 50 , four of which hit . One torpedo exploded abreast of turret Bruno , which caused it to jam . The second torpedo hit the ship on the port side and caused some minor flooding , and the third struck toward the rear of the ship and damaged the port propeller shaft . The fourth hit the ship in the bow . The torpedoes slowed Scharnhorst to 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , which allowed Duke of York to close to 9 @,@ 100 m ( 10 @,@ 000 yd ) . With only turret Caesar operational , all available men were sent to retrieve ammunition from the forward turrets to keep the last heavy guns supplied . Fraser then ordered Jamaica and Belfast to move into range and finish the crippled ship off with torpedoes . After several more torpedo hits , Scharnhorst settled further into the water and began to list to starboard . At 19 : 45 , the ship went down by the bows , with her propellers still slowly turning . British ships began searching for survivors , but were soon ordered away after just a few were pulled out of the water where voices could still be heard calling for help from the darkness . Of the crew of 1 @,@ 968 officers and enlisted men , only 36 men survived . 
 = = Wreck discovery = = 
 In September 2000 , a joint expedition to find the sunken battleship conducted by the BBC , NRK , and the Royal Norwegian Navy began . The underwater survey vessel Sverdrup II , operated by the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment , was used to scan the sea floor . After locating a large submerged object , the research team then used the Royal Norwegian Navy 's underwater recovery vessel HNoMS Tyr to examine the object visually . The wreck was positively identified by an ROV on 10 September , which located armament consistent with that of Scharnhorst . The ship sank in approximately 290 m ( 950 ft ) of water . The hull lies upside down on the seabed , with debris , including the main mast and rangefinders , scattered around the wreck . Extensive damage from shellfire and torpedoes is evident ; the bow was blown off , presumably from a magazine explosion in the forward turrets , and lies in a tangled mass of steel some distance from the rest of the hull . 
 = Actions along the Matanikau = 
 The Actions along the Matanikau — sometimes referred to as the Second and Third Battles of the Matanikau — were two separate but related engagements , which took place in the months of September and October 1942 , among a series of engagements between the United States and Imperial Japanese naval and ground forces around the Matanikau River on Guadalcanal ( island in the south @-@ western Pacific , northeast of Australia ) during the Guadalcanal Campaign . These particular engagements — the first taking place between 23 and 27 September , and the second between 6 and 9 October — were two of the largest and most significant of the Matanikau actions . 
 The Matanikau River area on Guadalcanal included a peninsula called Point Cruz , the village of Kokumbona , and a series of ridges and ravines stretching inland from the coast . Japanese forces used the area to regroup from attacks against U.S. forces on the island , to launch further attacks on the U.S. defenses that guarded the Allied airfield ( called Henderson Field ) located at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal , as a base to defend against Allied attacks directed at Japanese troop and supply encampments between Point Cruz and Cape Esperance on western Guadalcanal , and as a location for watching and reporting on Allied activity around Henderson Field . 
 In the first action , elements of three U.S. Marine battalions under the command of U.S. Marine Major General Alexander Vandegrift attacked Japanese troop concentrations at several points around the Matanikau River . The Marine attacks were intended to " mop @-@ up " Japanese stragglers retreating towards the Matanikau from the recent Battle of Edson 's Ridge , to disrupt Japanese attempts to use the Matanikau area as a base for attacks on the Marine Lunga defenses , and to destroy any Japanese forces in the area . The Japanese — under the overall command of Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi — repulsed the Marine attacks . During the action , three U.S. Marine companies were surrounded by Japanese forces , took heavy losses , and barely escaped with assistance from a U.S. Navy destroyer and landing craft manned by U.S. Coast Guard personnel . 
 In the second action two weeks later , a larger force of U.S. Marines successfully crossed the Matanikau River , attacked Japanese forces under the command of newly arrived generals Masao Maruyama and Yumio Nasu , and inflicted heavy casualties on a Japanese infantry regiment . The second action forced the Japanese to retreat from their positions east of the Matanikau and hindered Japanese preparations for their planned major offensive on the U.S. Lunga defenses set for later in October 1942 that resulted in the Battle for Henderson Field . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily American ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of neutralizing the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal Campaign . Taking the Japanese by surprise , by nightfall on 8 August the Allied landing forces had secured Tulagi and nearby small islands , as well as an airfield , later called Henderson Field by Allied forces , under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army — a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake — with the task of retaking Guadalcanal from Allied forces . The 17th Army , by this time heavily involved with the Japanese campaign in New Guinea , had only a few units available to send to the southern Solomons area . Of these units , the 35th Infantry Brigade under Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi was at Palau , the 4th ( Aoba ) Infantry Regiment was in the Philippines and the 28th ( Ichiki ) Infantry Regiment was embarked on transport ships near Guam . The different units began to move towards Guadalcanal immediately , but Ichiki 's regiment — being the closest — arrived first . The " First Element " of Ichiki 's unit — consisting of about 917 soldiers — landed from destroyers at Taivu Point , east of the Lunga perimeter , on 19 August , attacked the U.S. Marine defenses , and were almost completely annihilated during the resulting Battle of the Tenaru on 21 August . 
 Between 29 August and 7 September , Japanese destroyers ( called " Tokyo Express " by Allied forces ) , plus a convoy of slow barges , delivered the 6 @,@ 000 men of Kawaguchi 's brigade , including the rest of Ichiki 's regiment ( called the Kuma Battalion ) and much of the Aoba regiment , to Guadalcanal . General Kawaguchi and 5 @,@ 000 of the troops landed 20 mi ( 32 km ) east of the Lunga Perimeter at Taivu Point . The other 1 @,@ 000 troops — under the command of Colonel Akinosuke Oka — landed west of the Lunga Perimeter at Kokumbona . During this time , Vandegrift continued to direct efforts to strengthen and improve the defenses of the Lunga perimeter . Between 21 August and 3 September , he relocated three Marine battalions — including the 1st Raider Battalion , under U.S. Lieutenant Colonel Merritt A. Edson ( Edson 's Raiders ) — from Tulagi and Gavutu to Guadalcanal . 
 Kawaguchi 's Center Body of 3 @,@ 000 troops began their attacks on a ridge south of Henderson Field beginning on 12 September in what was later called the Battle of Edson 's Ridge . After numerous frontal assaults , Kawaguchi 's attack was repulsed with heavy losses for the Japanese , who retreated back into the jungle on 14 September . Oka 's assault in the west and the Kuma Battalion 's assault in the east were also repulsed by the U.S. Marines over the same two days . Kawaguchi 's units were ordered to withdraw west to the Matanikau Valley to join with Oka 's unit on the west side of the Lunga Perimeter . Most of Kawaguchi 's men reached the Matanikau by 20 September . 
 As the Japanese regrouped west of the Matanikau , the U.S. forces concentrated on shoring up and strengthening their Lunga defenses . On 18 September , an Allied naval convoy delivered 4 @,@ 157 men from the 3rd Provisional Marine Brigade ( U.S. 7th Marine Regiment ) to Guadalcanal . These reinforcements allowed Vandegrift — beginning on 19 September — to establish an unbroken line of defense completely around the Lunga perimeter . 
 The Japanese immediately began to prepare for their next attempt to recapture Henderson Field . The 3rd Battalion , 4th ( Aoba ) Infantry Regiment had landed at Kamimbo Bay on the western end of Guadalcanal on 11 September , too late to join Kawaguchi 's attack on the U.S. Marines . By then , though , the battalion had joined Oka 's forces near the Matanikau . Subsequent Tokyo Express runs — beginning on 15 September — brought food and ammunition — as well as 280 men from the 1st Battalion , Aoba Regiment — to Kamimbo on Guadalcanal . 
 U.S. Marine Lieutenant General Vandegrift and his staff were aware that Kawaguchi 's troops had retreated to the area west of the Matanikau and that numerous groups of Japanese stragglers were scattered throughout the area between the Lunga Perimeter and the Matanikau River . Two previous raids by Marines — on 19 and 29 August — had killed some of the Japanese forces camped in that area but had failed to deny the location as an assembly area and defensive position for the Japanese forces threatening the western portion of the Marine defenses . Vandegrift , therefore , decided to conduct another series of small unit operations around the Matanikau Valley . The purpose of these operations was to " mop @-@ up " the scattered groups of Japanese troops east of the Matanikau and to keep the main body of Japanese soldiers off @-@ balance to prevent them from consolidating their positions so close to the main Marine defenses at Lunga Point . The first operation was assigned to the 1st Battalion , 7th Marine Regiment under Lieutenant Colonel Chesty Puller with a start date of 23 September . The operation would be supported by artillery fire from the U.S. 11th Marine Regiment . 
 = = September action = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 The U.S. Marine plan called for Puller 's battalion to march west from the Lunga perimeter , scale a large terrain feature called Mount Austen , cross the Matanikau River , and then reconnoiter the area between the Matanikau and Kokumbona village . At the same time , the 1st Raider Battalion — now under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Samuel B. Griffith — was to cross at the mouth of the Matanikau to explore the area between the river , Kokumbona , and further west towards Tassafaronga . The Marines thought that there were about 400 Japanese in that area . 
 The number of Japanese troops in the Matanikau Valley was actually much higher than the Marine estimate . Believing that the Allies might attempt a major amphibious landing near the Matanikau River , Kawaguchi assigned Oka 's 124th Infantry Regiment — numbering about 1 @,@ 900 men — to defend the Matanikau . Oka deployed his " Maizuru " Battalion around the base of Mount Austen and along the west and east banks of the Matanikau River . The rest of Oka 's force was located west of the Matanikau , but in position to respond quickly to any Allied attacks in that area . Including other Japanese troops located near Kokumbona , total Japanese forces in the general Matanikau area numbered about 4 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 The 930 men of Puller 's battalion marched west from the Lunga perimeter early on the morning of 23 September . Later that morning , Puller 's troops chased away two Japanese patrols that were reconnoitering the Marine Lunga defenses . Puller 's battalion then camped for the night and prepared to climb Mount Austen the next day . 
 At 17 : 00 on 24 September , as Puller 's men hiked up the northeast slope of Mount Austen , they surprised and killed a bivouac of 16 Japanese soldiers . The noise from the skirmish alerted several companies of Oka 's Maizuru Battalion , who were emplaced nearby . The Maizuru troops quickly attacked Puller 's Marines , who took cover and returned fire . Acting on Oka 's orders , the Japanese slowly disengaged while withdrawing towards the Matanikau River , and the engagement was over by nightfall . The Marines counted 30 dead Japanese and had suffered 13 dead and 25 wounded . Puller radioed headquarters and requested help to evacuate the wounded . Vandegrift replied that he would send the 2nd Battalion , 5th Marine Regiment ( 2 / 5 ) as reinforcements the next day . 
 2 / 5 — under Lieutenant Colonel David McDougal — rendezvoused with Puller 's unit early on 25 September . Puller sent his casualties back to the Lunga perimeter with three companies of his battalion and continued on with the mission with his remaining company ( Company C ) , his headquarters staff , and 2 / 5 , and they bivouacked for the night between Mount Austen and the Matanikau River . 
 On the morning of 26 September , Puller and McDougal 's troops reached the Matanikau River and attempted to cross over a bridge previously built by the Japanese that was called the " one @-@ log bridge " . Because of resistance by about 100 Japanese defenders around the bridge , the Marines instead proceeded north along the east bank of the Matanikau to the sand spit on the coast at the mouth of the river . Oka 's troops repulsed a Marine attempt to cross the Matanikau at the sand spit as well as another attempt to cross the one @-@ log bridge later in the afternoon . In the meantime , Griffith 's Raider battalion — along with Merritt A. Edson , commander of the 5th Marine Regiment — joined Puller and McDougal 's troops at the mouth of the Matanikau . 
 Edson brought with him a " hastily devised " plan of attack — primarily written by Lieutenant Colonel Merrill B. Twining , a member of Vandegrift 's division staff — that called for Griffith 's Raiders — along with Puller 's Company C — to cross the one @-@ log bridge and then outflank the Japanese at the river mouth / sand spit from the south . At the same time , McDougal 's battalion was to attack across the sand spit . If the attacks were successful , the rest of Puller 's battalion would land by boat west of Point Cruz to take the Japanese by surprise from the rear . Aircraft from Henderson Field — as well as Marine 75 mm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) and 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) artillery — would provide support for the operation . The Marine offensive would begin the next day , on 27 September . 
 The Marine attack on the morning of 27 September did not make much headway . Griffith 's Raiders were unable to advance at the one @-@ log bridge over the Matanikau , suffering several casualties , including the death of Major Kenneth D. Bailey and the wounding of Griffith . A flanking attempt by the Raiders further upstream also failed . The Japanese , who had reinforced their units at the mouth of the Matanikau during the night with additional companies from the 124th Infantry Regiment , repulsed the attacks by McDougal 's men . 
 As a result of " garbled " messages from Griffith because of a Japanese air raid on Henderson Field that disrupted the Marine communication 's net , Vandegrift and Edson believed that the Raiders had succeeded in crossing the Matanikau . Therefore , Puller 's battalion was ordered to proceed with the planned landing west of Point Cruz . Three companies of Puller 's battalion , under Major Otho Rogers , landed from nine landing craft just west of Point Cruz at 13 : 00 . Rogers ' Marines pushed inland and occupied a ridge , called Hill 84 , about 600 yd ( 550 m ) from the landing area . Oka — recognizing the seriousness of this landing — ordered his forces to close on Rogers ' Marines from both the west and east . 
 Soon after occupying the ridge , Rogers ' men came under heavy fire from two directions from Oka 's forces . Major Rogers was hit by a mortar shell that blew him in half , killing him instantly . Captain Charles Kelley — commander of one of the companies — took command and deployed the Marines in a perimeter defense around the ridge to fight back . The Marines on Hill 84 were without radio communication and thus could not call for help . The Marines improvised by using white undershirts to spell out the word " H @-@ E @-@ L @-@ P " on the ridge . A Cactus Air Force ( the name for the Allied aircraft operating out of Henderson Field ) SBD Dauntless supporting the operation spotted the undershirt message and relayed the message to Edson by radio . 
 Paul Moore , Jr . , a Marine veteran who participated in the battle , described it : 
 Each ... [ platoon ] was to run across the sandspit until they were opposite the bank , wade across the river , and attack the Japanese battalion , which was dug in with automatic weapons and hand grenades and mortars in the bank .... Well , one platoon went over and got annihilated . Another platoon went over and got annihilated . Then another ... we all realized it was insane ... But if you 're a Marine , you 're ordered across the goddamn beach and you go . 
 Edson received a message from the Raider Battalion reporting their failure to cross the Matanikau . Edson , speaking to those around him , stated , " I guess we better call them off . They can 't seem to cross the river . " Puller angrily replied , " You 're not going to throw these men away ! " apparently in reference to his men trapped on the west side of the Matanikau , and " stormed " off toward the beach where , with the help of his personal signalman , Puller was able to hail the Navy destroyer USS Monssen that was supporting the operation . Once aboard Monssen , Puller and the destroyer led 10 landing craft towards Point Cruz and established communications with Kelley on the ridge by signal flag . 
 By this time , Oka 's troops had moved into position to completely cut off the Marines on Hill 84 from the coast . Therefore , Monssen — coordinated by Puller — began to blast a path between the ridge and the beach . After about 30 minutes of firing by the destroyer , the way was clear for the Marines to escape to the beach . Despite taking some casualties from their own artillery fire , most of the Marines made it to the beach near Point Cruz by 16 : 30 . Oka 's troops put heavy fire on the Marines at the beach in effort to keep them from successfully evacuating , and the U.S. Coast Guard crews manning the U.S. landing craft responded with their own heavy fire to cover the Marines ' withdrawal . Under fire , the Marines boarded the landing craft and successfully returned to the Lunga perimeter , ending the action . U.S. Coast Guard Signalman First Class Douglas Albert Munro — Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge of the group of Higgins boats — was killed while providing covering fire from his landing craft for the Marines as they evacuated the beach and was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for the action , to date the only Coast Guardsman to receive the decoration . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The results of the action were gratifying to the Japanese , still recovering from their defeat at Edson 's Ridge two weeks prior . Oka 's troops counted 32 bodies of U.S. Marines around Hill 84 , and they captured 15 rifles and several machine guns that the Marines left behind . Major General <unk> Futami — chief of staff for the 17th Army at Rabaul — noted in his diary that this action was " the first good news to come from Guadalcanal . " 
 The action — described as " an embarrassing defeat " for the U.S. Marines — resulted in " finger @-@ pointing " among the Marine commanders as they sought to attribute blame . Puller blamed Griffith and Edson , Griffith blamed Edson , and Twining blamed Puller and Edson . Colonel Gerald Thomas — Vandegrift 's operations officer — blamed Twining . The Marines , however , learned from the experience , and the defeat was the only one of that size suffered by U.S. Marine forces during the Guadalcanal campaign . 
 = = October action = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 The Japanese continued to deliver additional forces to Guadalcanal in preparation for their planned major offensive in late October . Between 1 and 5 October , Tokyo Express runs delivered troops from the 2nd Infantry Division , including their commander , Lieutenant General Masao Maruyama . These troops consisted of units from the 4th , 16th , and 29th Infantry Regiments . In an attempt to exploit the advantage gained in the September Matanikau action , Maruyama deployed the three battalions of the 4th Infantry Regiment with additional supporting units under Major General Yumio Nasu along the west side of the Matanikau River south of Point Cruz with three companies from the 4th Infantry Regiment placed on the east side of the river . Oka 's exhausted troops were withdrawn from the immediate Matanikau area . The Japanese units east of the river were to assist in preparing positions from which heavy artillery could fire into the U.S. Marines ' perimeter around Lunga Point . 
 Aware of the Japanese activity around the Matanikau , the U.S. Marines prepared for another offensive in the area with the objective of driving Japanese forces west and away from the Matanikau valley . Applying lessons learned from the September action , this time the Marines prepared a carefully coordinated plan of action involving five battalions : two from the 5th Marine Regiment , two from the 7th Marine Regiment , and one from the 2nd Marine Regiment augmented with Marine scout and sniper personnel ( called the Whaling Group after its commander Colonel William J. Whaling ) . The 5th Marine 's battalions were to attack across the mouth of the Matanikau while the other three battalions were to cross the Matanikau inland at the " one @-@ log bridge " , turn north , and attempt to trap the Japanese forces between themselves and the coast . This time the Marine division headquarters planned to retain control of the entire operation and carefully arranged detailed support for the operation from artillery and aircraft . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 On the morning of 7 October , the two 5th Marine battalions attacked west from the Lunga perimeter towards the Matanikau . With direct @-@ fire support from 75 mm guns mounted on halftracks , plus additional troops supplied by the 1st Raider Battalion , the Marines forced 200 soldiers from the Japanese 3rd Company , 1st Battalion , 4th Infantry into a small pocket on the east side of the Matanikau about 400 yd ( 370 m ) from the river mouth . The Japanese 2nd Company tried to come to the aid of their comrades in the 3rd Company but were unable to cross the Matanikau and took casualties from Marine gunfire . Meanwhile , the two 7th Marine battalions and the Whaling Group reached positions east of the one @-@ log bridge unopposed and bivouacked for the night . 
 Oblivious of the U.S. Marine offensive , General Nasu sent the 9th Company of the 4th Infantry Regiment 's 3rd Battalion across the Matanikau on the evening of 7 October . The Japanese regiment commander received word of the U.S. Marine operation about 03 : 00 on 8 October and immediately ordered his 1st and 2nd battalions closer to the river to counter the Marine operation . 
 Rain on 8 October slowed the U.S. 7th Marines and the Whaling Group as they attempted to cross the Matanikau . Near evening the U.S. 3rd Battalion 2nd Marines reached the first ridge west of the Matanikau about 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Point Cruz . Opposite their position on the east bank of the river , Company H from the U.S. 2nd Battalion 7th Marines unknowingly advanced into an exposed position between the Japanese 9th Company on the east bank and the rest of the Japanese 3rd Battalion on the west bank and was forced to withdraw . As a result , the Marines halted their attack for the night and prepared to resume it the next day . Unaware that the Marines threatened their positions on the west bank of the Matanikau , the Japanese commanders — including Maruyama and Nasu — ordered their units to hold in place . 
 During the night , the survivors of the Japanese 3rd Company , about 150 men , attempted to break out of their pocket and cross the sandbar at the mouth of the Matanikau . The 3rd Company soldiers overran two platoons from the 1st Raiders , who were not expecting an attack from that direction , and the resulting hand @-@ to @-@ hand melee left 12 Marines and 59 Japanese dead . The remaining 3rd Company survivors were able to cross the river and reach friendly lines . According to Frank J. Guidone , a Marine participant in the engagement , " The fight was hours of hell . There was yelling , screams of the wounded and dying ; rifle firing and machine guns with tracers piercing the night – ( a ) combination of fog , smoke , and the natural darkness . Truly an arena of death . " 
 On the morning of 9 October , the U.S. Marines renewed their offensive west of the Matanikau . The Whaling Group and the 2nd Battalion 7th Marines — commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Herman H. Hanneken — reached the shoreline around Point Cruz and trapped large numbers of Japanese troops between themselves and the Matanikau River , where the Japanese took heavy losses from U.S. artillery and aircraft bombardment . Further west , Puller 's 1st Battalion , 7th Marines trapped the Japanese 2nd Battalion , 4th Infantry in a wooded ravine . After calling for massed artillery fire into the ravine , Puller added the fire of his battalion 's mortars to create , in Puller 's words , a " machine for extermination " . The trapped Japanese troops attempted several times to escape by climbing the opposite side of the ravine , only to be cut down in large numbers by massed Marine rifle and machine gun fire . Having received intelligence information that the Japanese were planning a large surprise offensive somewhere on Guadalcanal , Vandegrift ordered all the Marine units west of the Matanikau to disengage and return to the east side of the river , which was accomplished by the evening of 9 October . 
 = = = Aftermath and significance = = = 
 The Marine offensive inflicted heavy casualties on the Japanese 4th Infantry Regiment , killing around 700 Japanese troops . During this operation , 65 Marines were killed . 
 The same night that the U.S. Marine Matanikau operation ended on 9 October , Lieutenant General Harukichi Hyakutake — the Japanese 17th Army commander — landed on Guadalcanal to personally lead the Japanese forces in their planned large offensive scheduled for later in October . Hyakutake was immediately briefed on the loss of the Japanese positions on the east bank of the Matanikau and the annihilation of one of the 4th Infantry Regiment 's battalions . Hyakutake communicated the news directly to the Army 's General Staff in Tokyo where Lieutenant General <unk> Tanabe of the Operations Division noted in his diary that the loss of the Matanikau position was a " very bad omen " for the planned October offensive . 
 The Japanese determined that the reestablishment of their forces on the east bank of the Matanikau would be prohibitive in terms of the number of troops required to accomplish it . Therefore , the Japanese devised a plan of attack for their scheduled offensive that sent many of their troops on a long and arduous journey to attack the U.S. Lunga perimeter from inland . The march — which began on 16 October — exhausted the Japanese troops involved to such an extent that it was later considered as one of the major factors in the decisive Japanese defeat in the subsequent Battle for Henderson Field from 23 – 26 October 1942 . Thus , the failure of the Japanese to gain and hold a strong position on the Matanikau proved to have lasting strategic consequences in the battle for Guadalcanal , significantly contributing to the ultimate Allied victory in the campaign . 
 = Romania in the Early Middle Ages = 
 The Early Middle Ages in Romania started with the withdrawal of the Roman troops and administration from Dacia province in the <unk> . In the next millennium a series of peoples , most of whom only controlled two or three of the nearly ten historical regions that now form Romania , arrived . During this period , society and culture underwent fundamental changes . Town life came to an end in Dacia with the Roman withdrawal , and in Scythia Minor – the other Roman province in the territory of present @-@ day Romania – 400 years later . Fine vessels made on fast potter 's wheels disappeared and hand @-@ made pottery became dominant from the 450s . Burial rites changed more than once from cremation to inhumation and vice versa until inhumation became dominant by the end of the 10th century . 
 The East Germanic Goths and Gepids , who lived in sedentary communities , were the first new arrivals . The Goths dominated Moldavia and Wallachia from the <unk> , and parts of Transylvania from the 330s . Their power collapsed under attacks by the nomadic Huns in 376 . The Huns controlled Eastern and Central Europe from around 400 , but their empire disintegrated in 454 . Thereafter the regions west of the Carpathian Mountains – Banat , Crişana , and Transylvania – and Oltenia were dominated by the Gepids . Within a century , the lands east of the mountains became important centers of the Antes and Sclavenes . <unk> and place names of Slavic origin also prove the one @-@ time presence of Early Slavs in the regions west of the Carpathians . 
 The nomadic Avars subjugated the Gepids in 568 and dominated the Carpathian Basin up until around 800 . The Bulgars also established a powerful empire in the 670s which included Dobruja and other territories along the Lower Danube . Bulgaria officially adopted the Eastern Orthodox variant of Christianity in 864 . An armed conflict between Bulgaria and the nomadic Hungarians forced the latter to depart from the Pontic steppes and began the conquest of the Carpathian Basin around 895 . Their invasion gave rise to the earliest reference , recorded some centuries later in the Gesta Hungarorum , to a polity ruled by a Romanian duke named Gelou . The same source also makes mention of the presence of the Székelys in Crişana around 895 . The first contemporaneous references to Romanians – who used to be known as Vlachs – in the regions now forming Romania were recorded in the 12th and 13th centuries . References to Vlachs inhabiting the lands to the south of the Lower Danube abound in the same period . 
 Banat , Crişana and Transylvania were integrated into the Kingdom of Hungary in the 11th century . These regions were subject to plundering raids by the nomadic Pechenegs and Cumans , who dominated the lowlands east of the mountains . Hungarian monarchs promoted the immigration of Western European colonists to Transylvania from the 1150s . The colonists ' descendants , who were known as Transylvanian Saxons from the early 13th century , received collective privileges in 1224 . Because of the settlement of the Saxons in their former territories , the Székelys were moved to the easternmost zones of the kingdom . The emergence of the Mongol Empire in the Eurasian Steppes in the first decades of the 13th century had lasting effects on the history of the region . The Mongols subjugated the Cumans in the 1230s and destroyed many settlements throughout the Kingdom of Hungary in 1241 and 1242 , bringing the Early Middle Ages to an end . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Roman provinces and native tribes = = = 
 Contacts between the Roman Empire – which developed into the largest empire in the history of Europe – and the natives of the regions now forming Romania commenced in the 2nd century BC . These regions were inhabited by Dacians , Bastarnae and other peoples whose incursions posed a threat to the empire . The Romans initially attempted to secure their frontiers by various means , including the creation of buffer zones . Finally , they decided that the annexation of the lands of these fierce " barbarians " is the best measure . The territory of the Getae between the river Danube and the Black Sea ( modern Dobruja ) was the first region to be incorporated into the empire . It was attached to the Roman province of Moesia in 46 AD . 
 The Lower Danube marked the boundary between the empire and " Barbaricum " until Emperor Trajan decided to expand the frontiers over territories controlled by the Dacian Kingdom . He achieved his goal through two military campaigns , the second of which ended with the annihilation of the Dacian state and the establishment of the province of Dacia in 106 . It included Oltenia and large portions of Banat , Transylvania , and Wallachia . Many colonists " from all over the Roman world " arrived and settled in the new province in the following decades . 
 Dacia was situated over the empire 's natural borders . It was surrounded by native tribes inhabiting the regions of <unk> , Maramureș , Moldavia which are now integral part of Romania , but the Romans never annexed them . Dacia province was plundered by neighboring tribes , including the <unk> , Sarmatians , from the <unk> , and by the Goths from the 250s . As the frontiers were to be shortened for defensive purposes , the withdrawal of the Roman legions from Dacia began in the 260s . The province officially ceased to exist under Emperor Aurelian ( 270 – 275 ) who " withdrew the Romans from the cities and countryside of Dacia " . Garrisons stationed in Drobeta and Sucidava remained on the northern bank of the river . 
 = = = Origin of the Romanians = = = 
 Romanians speak a language originating from the dialects of the Roman provinces north of the " Jireček Line " . This line divided , in Roman times , the predominantly Greek @-@ speaking southern provinces from those where Latin was the principal language of communication . The emergence of Proto @-@ Romanian from Vulgar Latin is first demonstrated by the words " <unk> , <unk> , frater " ( " turn around , turn around , brother " ) recorded in connection with an Eastern Roman military action in 587 or 588 . The soldier shouting them " in his native tongue " spoke an Eastern Romance dialect of the Balkan Mountains . 
 Grigore <unk> writes that the Romanian vocabulary suggests that the Romanians ' ancestors were " reduced to a pastoral life in the mountains and to agricultural pursuits in the foothills of their pasture lands " following the collapse of the Roman rule . A great number of Romanian words of uncertain origin are related to animal husbandry : baci ( " chief shepherd " ) , <unk> ( " dung " ) , and <unk> ( " cheese " ) , for instance , belong to this group . Many words related to a more settled form of animal husbandry were borrowed from Slavic , including <unk> ( " poultry house " ) , <unk> ( " stable " ) , and <unk> ( " fenced pasture " ) . Romanian has preserved Latin terms for agriculture and the Latin names of certain crops , but a significant part of its agricultural lexis originates from a Slavic @-@ speaking population . The first group includes a ara ( " to plough " ) , a <unk> ( " to sow " ) , a <unk> ( " to harvest " ) , a <unk> ( " to reap " ) , <unk> ( " wheat " ) , in ( " flax " ) , and <unk> ( " pitchfork " ) , while a <unk> ( " to cut out " ) , a <unk> ( " to weed " ) , <unk> ( " furrow " ) , <unk> ( " plow line " ) , <unk> ( " scythe " ) , <unk> ( " shovel " ) and many others are Slavic loanwords . 
 The Romanian religious vocabulary is also divided , with a small number of basic terms preserved from Latin and a significant number of borrowings from Old Church Slavonic . Romanian did not preserve Latin words connected to urbanized society . Likewise , the term sat ( " village " ) may have been borrowed from the Albanian language and not directly inherited . The Medieval Romanian word <unk> ( " village community " ) came from Slavic , and the Romanian word for its boundaries ( <unk> ) is of Hungarian origin . 
 The Romanians ' ethnogenesis cannot be understood based exclusively on written sources , because the earliest records on their ancestors were made by 11th @-@ century Byzantine historians . When referring to the Romance @-@ speaking population of Southeastern Europe , early medieval sources used the Vlach exonym or its cognates , which all derived from the Common Slavic term for speakers of the Latin language . The earliest sources write of the Vlachs of the central territories of the Balkan Peninsula . 
 = = Late Roman Age = = 
 = = = Scythia Minor and the limes on the Lower Danube ( c . 270 – c . 700 ) = = = 
 The territory between the Lower Danube and the Black Sea remained a fully integrated part of the Roman Empire , even after the abandonment of Trajan 's Dacia . It was transformed into a separate province under the name of Scythia Minor around 293 . Before 300 , the Romans erected small forts at <unk> and in other places on the northern bank of the Danube in modern @-@ day Banat . In their wider region , Roman coins from the period — mostly of bronze — have been found . 
 The existence of Christian communities in Scythia Minor became evident under Emperor Diocletian ( 284 – 305 ) . He and his co @-@ emperors ordered the persecution of Christians throughout the empire , causing the death of many between 303 and 313 . Under Emperor Constantine the Great ( 306 – 337 ) , a bridge across the Danube was constructed at Sucidava , a new fort ( <unk> Daphne ) was built , and ancient roads were repaired in Oltenia . The Lower Danube again became the empire 's northern boundary in 369 at the latest , when Emperor Valens met Athanaric — the head of the Goths — in a boat in the middle of the river because the latter had taken an oath " never to set foot on Roman soil " . 
 The Huns destroyed Drobeta and Sucidava in the 440s , but the forts were restored under Emperor Justinian I ( 527 – 565 ) . Eastern Roman coins from the first half of the 6th century suggest a significant military presence in Oltenia — a region also characterized by the predominance of pottery with shapes of Roman tradition . Although Eastern Roman emperors made annual payments to the neighboring peoples in an attempt to keep the peace in the Balkans , the Avars regularly invaded Scythia Minor from the 580s . The Romans abandoned Sucidava in 596 or 597 , but <unk> , which was the last town in Scythia Minor to resist the invaders , only fell in 704 . 
 = = = North of the limes ( c . 270 – c . 330 ) = = = 
 Transylvania and northern Banat , which had belonged to Dacia province , had no direct contact with the Roman Empire from the <unk> . There is no evidence that they were invaded in the following decades . Towns , including <unk> and Ulpia <unk> Sarmizegetusa , and the surrounding areas continued to be inhabited but the urban areas diminished . The existence of local Christian communities can be assumed in <unk> , <unk> and other settlements . On the other hand , evidence – mainly pottery with " Chi @-@ rho " ( Χ @-@ <unk> ) signs and other Christian symbols – is " shadowy and poorly understood " , according to archaeologists Haynes and Hanson . 
 <unk> found in late 3rd @-@ century cemeteries at <unk> , Mediaş , and in other Transylvanian settlements had clear analogies in sites east of the Carpathians , suggesting that the <unk> were the first new arrivals in the former province from the neighboring regions . Other <unk> groups , pressured by the Goths , also departed from their homeland and sought refuge in the Roman Empire around 300 . Nevertheless , " <unk> @-@ Dacians " were listed among the peoples " mixed with the Huns " as late as 379 . The Sarmatians of the Banat were allies of the empire , demonstrated by a Roman invasion in 332 against the Goths , their enemies . Sarmatians were admitted into the empire in 379 , but other Sarmatian groups remained in the Tisa plains up until the 460s . 
 = = = Gutthiuda : land of the Goths ( c . 290 – c . 455 ) = = = 
 The Goths started penetrating into territories west of the river Dniester from the <unk> . Two distinct groups separated by the river , the Thervingi and the Greuthungi , quickly emerged among them . The one @-@ time province of Dacia was held by " the Taifali , <unk> , and Thervingi " around 350 . 
 The Goths ' success is marked by the expansion of the multiethnic " Sântana de Mureş @-@ Chernyakhov culture " . Settlements of the culture appeared in Moldavia and Wallachia at the end of the 3rd century , and in Transylvania after 330 . These lands were inhabited by a sedentary population engaged in farming and cattle @-@ breeding . Pottery , comb @-@ making and other handicrafts flourished in the villages . Wheel @-@ made fine pottery is a featuring item of the period , but hand @-@ made cups of the local tradition were also preserved . Plowshares similar to those made in nearby Roman provinces and Scandinavian @-@ style brooches indicate trade contacts with these regions . " Sântana de Mureş @-@ Chernyakhov " villages , sometimes covering an area exceeding 20 hectares ( 49 acres ) , were not fortified and comprised two types of houses : sunken huts with walls made of wattle and daub and surface buildings with plastered timber walls . Sunken huts had for centuries been typical for settlements east of the Carpathians , but now they appeared in distant zones of the Pontic steppes . 
 The multiethnic Gutthiuda was divided into smaller political units or kuni , each headed by tribal chiefs or <unk> . In case of emergency , the tribal chiefs ' council elected a supreme leader who was known as iudex regum ( " judge of kings " ) by St Ambrose . Christian prisoners of war were the first missionaries among the Goths . <unk> , himself a descendant of a Cappadocian captive , was ordained bishop " of the Christians in the land of the Goths " in 341 . Expelled from Gutthiuda during a persecution of Christians , <unk> settled in Moesia in 348 . 
 Gothic dominance collapsed when the Huns arrived and attacked the Thervingi in 376 . Most of the Thervingi sought asylum in the Roman Empire , and were followed by large groups of Greuthungi and Taifali . All the same , significant groups of Goths stayed in the territories north of the Danube . For instance , Athanaric " retired with all his men to <unk> " — probably to the valley of the river Olt — from where they " drove out the Sarmatians " . A hoard of Roman coins issued under Valentinian I and Valens suggests that the gates of the amphitheatre at Ulpia <unk> were blocked around the same time . The Pietroasele Treasure which was hidden around 450 also implies the presence of a Gothic tribal or religious leader in the lands between the Carpathians and the Lower Danube . It contains a torc bearing the inscription <unk> O WI <unk> , which is interpreted by Malcolm Todd as " God who protects the Goths , most holy and inviolate " . 
 = = = Gepidia : land of the Gepids ( c . 290 – c . 630 ) = = = 
 The earliest reference to Gepids – an East Germanic tribe closely related to the Goths – is found in a formal speech of 291 . The anonymous author wrote that the Thervingi joined " battle with the Vandals and Gepids " at that time . The center of an early Gepidia , on the plains northwest of the <unk> Mountains , appears to have been located around <unk> Silvaniei , where early 5th @-@ century precious objects of Roman provenance have been unearthed . 
 The Huns imposed their authority over the Gepids by the <unk> , but the latter remained united under the rule of their king named Ardaric . Although he was one of the favorites of Attila , king of the Huns , he initiated an uprising against the Huns when Attila died in 453 . The Gepids regained their independence and " ruled as victors over the extent of all Dacia " . 
 Three sumptuous tombs found at <unk> evidence the wealth accumulated by Gepid royals through their connections with the Eastern Roman Empire . A golden ring with crosses found in one of the graves implies its owner 's Christian faith . John of <unk> refers to an Arian bishop of the Gepids which suggests that they adopted Christianity through their connection with the Arian Goths . 
 New settlements appearing along the rivers Mureş , Someş , and <unk> reflects a period of tranquility in Gepidia until around 568 . The common people in Biharia , Cenad , <unk> , and other villages lived in sunken huts covered with gabled roofs but with no hearths or ovens . They were primarily farmers , but looms , combs , and other products evidence the existence of local workshops . Trading contacts between Gepidia and faraway regions is evidenced by finds of amber beads and brooches manufactured in the Crimea , Mazovia or Scandinavia . 
 The Avar invasion of 568 ended the independent Gepidia . Written sources evidence the survival of Gepid groups within the Avar Empire . For instance , Eastern Roman troops " encountered three Gepid settlements " on the Tisa plains in 599 or 600 . 
 = = = Hunnic Empire ( c . 400 – c . 460 ) = = = 
 The Huns , a people of uncertain origin , were nomadic and wandered " with the wagons " in the 370s . They were eminent mounted archers who imposed their authority over an increasing number of neighboring peoples . Their first ruler whose seat was located in the Lower Danube region was <unk> , initially an important ally and later an enemy of the Eastern Roman Empire between 401 and 408 . 
 The Eastern Roman government paid an annual tribute to the Huns from the <unk> . Gold flowing from the empire transformed the Hun society . The introduction of a centralized monarchy is evidenced in a report written by Priscus of Panium , an Eastern Roman envoy sent to the ruler of the Huns , Attila , in 448 . At that time , Gothic was widely spoken in the royal court since " the subjects of the Huns " spoke " besides their own barbarous tongues , either Hunnic or Gothic , or — as many as have commercial dealings with the western Romans — Latin " . 
 The Huns imposed their authority on a sedentary population . Priscus of Panium refers to a village where he and his retinue were supplied " with millet instead of corn " and " <unk> ( mead ) instead of wine " . Attila 's sudden death in 453 caused a civil war among his sons . The subject peoples revolted and emerged the victors at the Battle of <unk> in 454 . The remnants of the Huns withdrew to the Pontic steppes . One of their groups was admitted to settle in Scythia Minor in 460 . 
 = = After the first migrations = = 
 = = = Between Huns and Avars ( c . 450 – c . 565 ) = = = 
 The last " Sântana de Mureş @-@ Chernyakhov " objects once widespread in Gutthiuda – such as fine wares and weapons – are dated to the period ending around 430 . According to <unk> H. <unk> , the same period is characterized by " population shifts " which caused the abandonment of many villages and the appearance of new settlements . <unk> , <unk> , and other sites east of the Carpathians demonstrate the simplification of pottery forms and a decline in the use of the fast potter 's wheel from the 450s . Around the same time , semi @-@ sunken huts with stone or clay ovens appeared in Moldavia and Wallachia , forming ephemeral settlements with an area smaller than 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) . The locals practiced an " itinerant form of agriculture " , instead of manuring the soil . Differences in local pottery indicate the coexistence of communities isolated from each other by marshes , forests or hills . For instance , contemporary <unk> produced a significant quantity of wheel @-@ made pottery , <unk> was characterized by crushed @-@ shard tempered vessels , and a sample of the most common " Kolochin " vessels was found in the <unk> Valley . 
 There are few known cemeteries from the second half of the 5th century , pointing to common use of cremation without the use of urns or pits . On the other hand , a huge <unk> necropolis at <unk> @-@ <unk> produced more than 1 @,@ 600 cremation burials , either in wheel @-@ made urns or in pits without urns . Small cemeteries with inhumation graves have been found at <unk> and <unk> . 
 Jordanes , Procopius and other 6th @-@ century authors used the terms " Sclavenes " and " Antes " to refer to the peoples inhabiting the territory north of the Lower Danube . The Antes launched their first campaign over the Lower Danube in 518 . After they concluded a treaty with the Eastern Roman Empire in 545 , the Sclavenes started to plunder the Balkan provinces . Both ethnic groups seized many prisoners of wars during their raids , but they were ready to integrate them " as free men and friends " . 
 The names of early 6th @-@ century leaders of the Sclavenes or Antes are unknown . This supports ancient authors ' claims that both ethnic groups lived " under a democracy " . The same conclusion can be drawn from Procopius 's report of the " phoney <unk> " – a young <unk> serf who " spoke the Latin tongue " – who was dispatched by his fellow tribesmen to negotiate with the Eastern Roman Empire in 545 . 
 The disappearance of bronze and gold coins from sites north of the Lower Danube demonstrates an " economic closure of the frontier " of the Eastern Roman Empire between 545 and 565 . The same period is characterized by a tendency towards cultural unification in Moldavia , Oltenia and Wallachia . Handmade pots with very similar incised designs evidence the " existence of a cross @-@ regional set of symbols shared " by either potters or consumers . Pots , spindle whorls and other objects decorated with crosses or swastikas have been unearthed at <unk> , <unk> , and other sites . The use of handmade clay pans for baking bread was spreading from the regions south and east of the Carpathians towards lands over the Dniester and the Lower Danube . 
 = = = Avar Empire ( c . 565 – c . 800 ) = = = 
 The Avars occupied Gepidia in 567 , less than a decade after their arrival in Europe . They were nomadic pastoralists , who settled in the lowlands . Stirrups found at <unk> German are among the earliest finds in Romania attributed to the Avars . They received agricultural products from farming communities settled in their domains and neighboring peoples subjected to their authority . Emperor Justin II hired , in 578 , the Avars to attack the Sclavenes who resumed their plundering raids against the empire around that time . The names of some of the <unk> leaders were first recorded in the following period . One of them , <unk> , " was called rex in the barbarian tongue " . 
 Graves of males interred together with horses found at <unk> and Band prove the Avars ' settlement in Transylvania in the early 7th century . Their cemeteries are centered around salt mines . Spurs — never found in Avar context but widely used in Western Slav territories — were unearthed in <unk> Mică and <unk> Mare , suggesting the employment of non @-@ Avar horsemen in the 8th century . 
 Large " Late Avar " cemeteries used by several generations between c . 700 and c . 800 imply " an advanced degree of <unk> " of the entire society . The Avar Empire collapsed after the Franks launched three campaigns against the westernmost Avar territories between 791 and 803 . Soon afterwards the Bulgars attacked the Avars from the southeast , and Charlemagne settled Avar groups in Pannonia . 
 = = = Emergence of new powers ( c . 600 – c . 895 ) = = = 
 The Lower Danube region experienced a period of stability after the establishment of the Avar Empire . Archaeological sites in Moldavia , Oltenia and Wallachia became characterized by the growing popularity of hand @-@ made vessels with finger impressions and by a decline in detectable cemeteries . Ananias of Shirak , a 7th @-@ century Armenian geographer described the " large country of Dacia " as inhabited by Slavs who formed " twenty @-@ five tribes " . 
 Villages of sunken huts with stone ovens appeared in Transylvania around 600 . Their network was expanding along the rivers Mureş , Olt and Someş . The so @-@ called " Mediaş group " of cremation or mixed cemeteries emerged in this period near salt mines . The Hungarian and the Romanian vocabulary of salt mining was taken from Slavic , suggesting that Slavs were employed in the mines for centuries . Bistriţa ( " swift " ) , <unk> ( " nice " or " red " ) , Sibiu ( " dogwood " ) , and many other rivers and settlements with names of Slavic origin also evidence the presence of Slavs in Transylvania . 
 The Turkic @-@ speaking Bulgars arrived in the territories west of the river Dniester around 670 . At the Battle of Ongal they defeated the Eastern Roman ( or Byzantine ) Emperor Constantine IV in 680 or 681 and occupied Dobruja . They soon imposed their authority over some of the neighboring tribes . The great variety in burial rites evidences the multi @-@ ethnic character of the Bulgarian Empire . Even the Bulgars were divided in this respect ; some of them practiced inhumation and others cremation . Initially , a sharp distinction existed between the Bulgars and their subjects , but the <unk> of the Bulgars soon began . 
 <unk> writes that the " new cultural synthesis " known as the " Dridu culture " developed in the Lower Danube region around 680 . New settlements and large cemeteries show that the region experienced a steady demographic rise in the 8th century . The large , unfortified " Dridu " settlements were characterized by traditional semi @-@ sunken huts , but a few houses with ground @-@ level floors have also been unearthed in <unk> , <unk> , and other places . 
 " Dridu " communities produced and used gray or yellow fine pottery , but hand @-@ made vessels were still predominant . Fine , gray vessels were also unearthed in the 9th @-@ century " <unk> A " cemeteries in the area of Alba @-@ Iulia , which constitutes a " cultural enclave " in Transylvania . Near these cemeteries , necropolises of graves with west – east orientation form the distinct " Ciumbrud group " . Female dress accessories from " Ciumbrud graves " are strikingly similar to those from Christian cemeteries in Bulgaria and Moravia . From an earlier date are the cremation cemeteries of the " <unk> @-@ <unk> group " in northwestern Transylvania , with their <unk> and 9th @-@ century tumuli , similar to the kurgans of East Slavic territories . 
 Contemporaneous authors rarely dwelled on early medieval Southeastern Europe . For instance , the Royal Frankish Annals makes a passing reference to Abodrites living " in Dacia adjacent to the Danube near the Bulgarian border " on the occasion of their envoys ' arrival in Aachen in 824 . Bulgaria 's territory increased under Krum ( c . 803 – 814 ) , who took Adrianople and forced at least 10 @,@ 000 of the town 's inhabitants to settle north of the Lower Danube in 813 . The ambitions of his son Omurtag ( 814 – 831 ) in the regions of the rivers Dnieper and Tisa are attested by two columns erected in the memory of Bulgar military leaders who drowned in these rivers during military campaigns . Emperor Arnulf sent envoys , in 894 , to the Bulgarians to " ask that they should not sell salt to the Moravians " , suggesting a Bulgarian control over either the Transylvanian salt mines or the roads to Moravia . 
 In the same year , the nomadic Hungarians – who had arrived in the Lower Danube region from the steppes of Eastern Europe in 837 or 838 – became involved in a conflict between Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire on the latter 's behalf . The Bulgarians incited another nomadic tribe , the Pechenegs , to invade the Hungarians from the east , while the Bulgarians also attacked them from the south . The two synchronized attacks forced the Hungarians to cross the Carpathian Mountains in search for a new homeland . 
 About 300 years later , Anonymus , the author of Gesta Hungarorum , wrote a comprehensive list of polities and peoples of the Carpathian Basin at the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries . He wrote about the Hungarian conquest of the territory but did not mention Simeon I of Bulgaria , Svatopluk of Moravia and the conquerors ' opponents known from contemporary sources . Instead , he wrote of a number of personalities unknown by other chroniclers . In Gesta Hungarorum , Menumorut ruled over " the peoples that are called <unk> " in Crişana . Anonymus also wrote of the Székelys ( " previously the peoples of King Attila " ) living in the territory for centuries who joined the invading Hungarians . Banat , according to Anonymus , was ruled by Glad who had come " from the castle of Vidin . " Glad is described to employ " Cumans , Bulgarians and Vlachs " in his army . Anonymous also wrote of Gelou , " a certain Vlach " ruling in Transylvania , a land inhabited by " Vlachs and Slavs " . Gelou 's subjects are portrayed as having " suffered many injuries from the Cumans and Pechenegs " . 
 = = Formation of new states and the last waves of migrations = = 
 = = = First Bulgarian Empire after conversion ( 864 – 1018 ) = = = 
 Boris I , the ruler of Bulgaria , converted to Orthodox Christianity in 864 . He promoted vernacular worship services , thus Old Church Slavonic was declared the language of liturgy in the Bulgarian Orthodox Church in 893 . One of the earliest examples of Cyrillic script — an alphabet strongly associated with Slavonic liturgy — was found in Mircea Vodă in Romania . The Cyrillic inscription from 943 refers to a " župan Dimitrie " . 
 Byzantine troops occupied large portions of Bulgaria , including modern Dobruja , under Emperor John I Tzimiskes ( 969 – 976 ) . After his death an anti @-@ Byzantine uprising led by four brothers broke out . One of the brothers , David , was killed by Vlachs in the present @-@ day border region between Greece and the Republic of Macedonia . In 1018 , the Byzantines conquered the whole territory of the Bulgarian Empire and the Archbishop of Ohrid acquired ecclesiastic jurisdiction in 1020 over the Vlachs living there . 
 = = = Hungarians in the Carpathian Basin ( c . 895 – c . 1000 ) = = = 
 The way taken by the Hungarians across the Carpathian Mountains when they started the conquest of the Carpathian Basin varies from source to source . According to Gesta Hungarorum , the Hungarians descended through the northern passes to the lowlands , bypassing Transylvania , and only began the invasion of the regions east of the Tisa after the conquest of the western regions . Gesta Hungarorum says the Vlach Gelou of Transylvania died fighting the Hungarians , while his subjects chose " for themselves as lord Tétény " , one of the Hungarian leaders . Anonymus also wrote of Menumorut 's defeat , but said he preserved his rule in Crişana until his death by giving his daughter in marriage to Zolta , heir to Árpád , the head of the Hungarians . In a contrasting account , the Illuminated Chronicle writes of Hungarians fleeing through the eastern passes of the Carpathian Mountains to Transylvania where they " remained quietly " and " rested their herds " for a while before moving further west . The so @-@ called " Cluj group " of small inhumation cemeteries — graves with west – east orientation , often containing remains of horses — appeared on both sides of the Apuseni Mountains around 900 . Their military character evidences that the people using them formed a " double defensive line " organized against the Pechenegs . Transylvanian cemeteries of the " Cluj group " cluster around salt mines . 
 Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus identified " the whole settlement " of Hungary with the lands where the rivers <unk> , Mureş , Timiş , Tisa and Toutis – possibly the Bega — ran around 950 . The concentration of objects of Byzantine provenance at the confluence of the Mureş and Tisa shows that this territory was a regional center of power . Accordingly , the seat of Gyula , a Hungarian chieftain baptized in Constantinople around 952 , most probably existed in this region . On the other hand , Hungarian chronicles associate Gyula 's family with Transylvania . Place names from the nomadic stratum of Hungarian toponymy — those corresponding to proper names or Hungarian tribal names , including <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> — also evidence that major Hungarian groups settled in Transylvania from the 950s . An early " Bijelo Brdo " cemetery belonging to a 10th- and 11th @-@ century archaeological culture with finds from all over the Carpathian Basin was found at Deva . 
 = = = <unk> : land of the Pechenegs ( c . 895 – c . 1120 ) = = = 
 The Turkic @-@ speaking Pechenegs took the control of the territories east of the Carpathians from the Hungarians around 895 . Emperor Constantine VII wrote that two Pecheneg " provinces " or " clans " ( " Kato <unk> " and " <unk> " ) were located in Moldavia and Wallachia around 950 . The change of dominion had no major effect on the sedentary " Dridu " villages in the region . The settlements in Moldavia and Wallachia , most of them built on river banks or lake shores , remained unfortified . Sporadic finds of horse brasses and other " nomadic " objects evidence the presence of Pechenegs in " Dridu " communities . <unk> bits with rigid mouthpieces and round stirrups — novelties of the early 10th century — were also unearthed in Moldavia and Wallachia . Cemeteries of the locals show that inhumation replaced cremation by the end of the 10th century . 
 The <unk> 's saga narrates that Pechenegs ( <unk> ) with <unk> " and a good many other nasty people " were involved in the disputes for the throne of Kievan Rus ' in 1019 . An 11th @-@ century runic inscription on a stone from Gotland narrates that a Varangian man was murdered " on a voyage abroad " by <unk> . Both <unk> and <unk> may refer to Vlachs inhabiting the regions east of the Carpathians , although their translation to " black men " cannot be excluded . Graffiti depicting ships and dragons in Scandinavian style were found in the <unk> Cave Complex at <unk> . 
 Large groups of Pechenegs pressured from the east by the Ouzes received asylum in the Byzantine Empire in 1046 and 1047 . All the same , Pecheneg populations remained in the regions north of the Lower Danube even thereafter . Some of them were admitted into the Kingdom of Hungary in the next decades , where they were settled in southern Transylvania and other regions . 
 = = = Byzantine revival and the Second Bulgarian Empire ( 970s – c . 1185 ) = = = 
 Around 971 , Emperor John I Tzimiskes established the theme or " district " of <unk> in the territories occupied between the Balkan Mountains and the Lower Danube . Naval bases were built at <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> lui <unk> on the river . Bulgarians and Vlachs living in the annexed territories often expressed their hostility towards imperial rule . Anna Comnena relates how local Vlachs showed " the way through the passes " of the Balkan Mountains to invading Cumans in 1094 . All the same , Vlachs served in the imperial army , for instance during an imperial campaign against the Kingdom of Hungary in 1166 . New taxes imposed by imperial authorities caused a rebellion of Vlachs and Bulgarians in 1185 , which led to the establishment of the Second Bulgarian Empire . The Vlachs ' eminent status within the new state is evidenced by the writings of Robert of Clari and other western authors , who refer either to the new state or to its mountainous regions as " Vlachia " until the 1250s . 
 = = = Kingdom of Hungary ( c . 1000 – 1241 ) = = = 
 Stephen I , the first crowned king of Hungary whose reign began in 1000 or 1001 , unified the Carpathian Basin . Around 1003 , he launched a campaign against " his maternal uncle , King Gyula " and occupied Transylvania . Stephen I later turned against Ahtum , " who had been baptised in the Orthodox faith in Vidin " , and conquered Banat . Hartvik , Stephen I 's hagiographer , wrote that the monarch " divided his territories in ten bishoprics " . In the territory of modern Romania , three Roman Catholic dioceses were established with their seats in Alba Iulia , <unk> ( from the last decades of the 11th century in Oradea ) , and Cenad . 
 Royal administration in the entire kingdom was based on counties organized around royal fortresses . In modern Romania 's territory , references to an ispán or count of Alba in 1097 , and to a count of Bihor in 1111 evidence the appearance of the county system . The counties in Banat and Crişana remained under direct royal authority , but a great officer of the realm , the voivode , supervised the ispáns of the Transylvanian counties from the end of the 12th century . 
 Eastward expansion of " Bijelo Brdo " villages along the Mureş continued in the 11th century . <unk> and huts with hearths carved into the soil were the characterizing items of the period . Nevertheless , semi @-@ sunken huts with stone ovens from <unk> Gheorghe , <unk> and other villages evidence the survival of the local population . The lands between the Carpathians and the Tisa were plundered by Pechenegs in the 1010s and in 1068 , by Ouzes in 1085 , and by Cumans in 1091 . Cluj , Dăbâca and other royal forts built of earth and timber were strengthened after the 1068 attack . In these forts appeared the so @-@ called " <unk> cemeteries " , dependent upon late 11th @-@ century royal legislation forcing commoners to set up their graveyards around churches . 
 The early presence of Székelys at <unk> in Crişana , and at <unk> , <unk> , and Sebeş in Transylvania is attested by royal charters . Székely groups from <unk> , <unk> , and Sebeş were moved around 1150 into the easternmost regions of Transylvania , when the monarchs granted these territories to new settlers arriving from Western Europe . The Székelys were organized into " seats " instead of counties , and a royal officer , the " Count of the Székelys " became the head of their community from the 1220s . The Székelys provided military services to the monarchs and remained exempt of royal taxes . 
 A great number of Flemish , German , and Walloon " guest settlers " arrived in Transylvania around 1150 . Wheel @-@ made fine vessels with analogies in Thuringia found at Şelimbăr demonstrate the advanced technology they introduced to their new home . An account of royal revenues from the 1190s shows that almost one @-@ tenth of all royal income derived from taxes they paid . In 1224 , King Andrew II granted collective privileges to those inhabiting the region between <unk> and <unk> . The Diploma Andreanum confirmed the custom of freely electing their priests and local leaders ; only the right to appoint the head of their community , the " Count of Sibiu " , was preserved for the monarchs . The Transylvanian Saxons — as they were collectively mentioned from the early 13th century — also received the right to " use the forests of the Romanians and the Pechenegs " along with these peoples . 
 The earliest royal charter referring to Romanians in Transylvania is connected to the foundation of the Cistercian abbey at Cârţa around 1202 , which was granted land , up to that time possessed by Romanians . Another royal charter reveals that Romanians fought in Bulgaria along with Saxons , Székelys and Pechenegs under the leadership of the Count of Sibiu in 1210 . The Orthodox Romanians remained exempt from the tithe payable by all Catholic peasants to the Church . Furthermore , they only paid a special in kind tax , the " fiftieth " on their herds . 
 Colonization continued with the arrival of the Teutonic Knights in Ţara <unk> in 1211 . They were granted the right to freely pass through " the land of the Székelys and the land of the Vlachs " in 1222 . The knights tried to free themselves from the monarch 's authority , thus King Andrew II expelled them from the region in 1225 . Thereafter , the king appointed his heir , Béla , with the title of duke , to administer Transylvania . Duke Béla occupied Oltenia and set up a new province , the Banate of Severin , in the 1230s . 
 = = = Cumania : land of the Cumans ( c . 1060 – 1241 ) = = = 
 The arrival of the Cumans in the Lower Danube region was first recorded in 1055 . A 17th @-@ century version of the Turkic chronicle <unk> relates that <unk> , the ancient Cuman hero , fought against the <unk> ( Romanians ) , along with other nations . Cuman groups assisted the rebelling Bulgarians and Vlachs against the Byzantines between 1186 and 1197 . 
 " Dridu " villages of the lowlands east of the Carpathians were abandoned between 1050 and 1080 , around which time new settlements appeared on higher land on both banks of the Prut . A sharp decrease from 300 to 35 in the number of archaeological sites — settlements , cemeteries and coin <unk> — evidences a population decline which continued well into the 13th century . Byzantine troops marching towards Transylvania through the territory east of the Carpathians encountered " a land entirely bereft of men " in 1166 . 
 A coalition of Rus ' princes and Cuman tribes suffered a sound defeat by the Mongols in the Battle of the Kalka River in 1223 . Shortly thereafter Boricius , a Cuman chieftain , accepted baptism and the supremacy of the king of Hungary . The Roman Catholic Diocese of Cumania was set up in his territories in 1228 . A letter of 1234 written by Pope Gregory IX refers to a " certain people within the Cuman bishopric called <unk> " ( Vlachs ) who even persuaded Catholic Hungarians and Germans to accept the ecclesiastic authority of Orthodox prelates . 
 = = = Mongol invasion ( 1241 – 1242 ) = = = 
 The Mongols , who had decided to invade Europe in 1235 , attacked the Cumans in 1238 . Masses of Cumans sought refuge in Bulgaria and Hungary . The Mongols crossed the Carpathians in March 1241 , and soon afterwards they destroyed " the rich village of the Germans " ( Rodna ) , and took Bistrița , Cluj , and Oradea . Another Mongol army " proceeded by way of the Qara @-@ <unk> " ( " Black Vlachs " ) , and defeated their leader named " <unk> " . They also entered Transylvania , sacked Alba Iulia , Sibiu , the abbeys at Cârţa and <unk> , and Cenad . 
 The Mongol invasion lasted for a year , and the Mongols devastated huge swathes of territory of the kingdom before their unexpected withdrawal in 1242 . Matthew Paris and other contemporaneous scholars considered the Mongol invasion as a " sign of apocalypse " . Whole villages were destroyed , and many were never rebuilt . According to a royal charter of 1246 , Alba Iulia , Harina , Gilău , <unk> , Tășnad and <unk> were almost depopulated . Another charter from 1252 evidences that Zec a village on the Olt was totally deserted . 
 After the devastation of the region , they [ the Mongols ] surrounded the great village with a combined force of some Tatars together with Russians , Cumans and their Hungarian prisoners . They sent first the Hungarian prisoners ahead and when they were all slain , the Russians , the Ishmaelites , and Cumans went into battle . The Tatars , standing behind them all at the back , laughed at their plight and ruin and killed those who retreated from the battle and subjected as many as they could to their devouring swords , so that after fighting for a week , day and night , and filling up the moat , they captured the village . Then they made the soldiers and ladies , of whom there were many , stand in a field on one side and the peasants on the other . Having robbed them of their money , clothing and other goods , they cruelly executed them with axes and swords , leaving only some of the ladies and girls alive , whom they took for their entertainment . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A new period of intensive colonization began in Banat , Transylvania and other regions within the Kingdom of Hungary after the withdrawal of the Mongols . King Béla IV was also considering settling the Knights Hospitallers in the lands between the Carpathians and the Lower Danube . His diploma of 1247 for the Knights evidences the existence of four Romanian polities in the region . They were under the rule of voivodes Litovoi and Seneslau , and of knezes Farcaş and John . 
 Internal conflicts characterized the last decades of the 13th century in the Kingdom of Hungary . For instance , a feud between King Béla and his son , Stephen caused a civil war which lasted from 1261 to 1266 . Taking advantage of the emerging anarchy , Voivode Litovoi attempted to get rid of the Hungarian monarchs ' suzerainty in the 1270s , but he fell in a battle while fighting against royal troops . One of his successors , Basarab I of Wallachia was the first Romanian monarch whose sovereignty was internationally recognized after his victory over King Charles I of Hungary in the Battle of Posada of 1330 . 
 = Tilbury Fort = 
 Tilbury Fort , also known historically as the <unk> Bulwark and the West Tilbury Blockhouse , is an artillery fort on the north bank of the River Thames in England . The earliest version of the fort , comprising a small blockhouse with artillery covering the river , was constructed by King Henry VIII to protect London against attack from France as part of his Device programme . It was reinforced during the 1588 Spanish Armada invasion scare , after which it was reinforced with earthwork bastion , and Parliamentary forces used it to help secure the capital during the English Civil War of the 1640s . Following naval raids during the Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars , the fort was enlarged by Sir Bernard de Gomme from 1670 onwards to form a star @-@ shaped defensive work , with angular bastions , water @-@ filled moats and two lines of guns facing onto the river . 
 In addition to protecting the Thames , in the 18th century Tilbury also began to be used a transit depot and for storing gunpowder . It continued to be essential for the defence of the capital and a new artillery battery was added in the south @-@ east corner during the Napoleonic Wars . The fort became increasingly less significant as a defensive structure , however , as military technology developed in the 19th century . It was redeveloped to hold heavy artillery after 1868 , providing a second @-@ line of defence along the river , but further changes in technology meant that it had become obsolete by the end of the century . Instead Tilbury became a strategic depot , forming a logistical hub for storing and moving troops and materiel throughout the First World War . The fort had only a limited role in the Second World War and was demobilised in 1950 . 
 Tilbury Fort is now operated by the heritage agency English Heritage as a tourist attraction , receiving 16 @,@ 154 visitors in 2014 . Many of the more modern military features were demolished during the 1950s , with further restoration work taking place during the 1970s ahead of the site opening to the public in 1983 . The 17th @-@ century defences are considered by the historian Paul Pattison to be the " best surviving example of their kind in Britain " , and the fort includes the only surviving early 18th century gunpowder magazines in Britain . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 The first permanent fortification at Tilbury in Essex was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Basic defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon , and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 The River Thames was strategically important , as the city of London and the newly constructed royal dockyards of Deptford and Woolwich were vulnerable to seaborne attacks arriving up the estuary , which was a major maritime route , carrying 80 percent of England 's exports . At the mouth of the estuary , the Thames narrowed considerably , forming a natural hub for communications : the " Long Ferry " took passengers into the capital , and the " Cross Ferry " moved traffic across the river . This was also the first point that an invasion force would be able to easily disembark along the Thames , as before this point the mudflats along the sides of the estuary would have made landings difficult . Temporary defences had been constructed at Tilbury as early as the 14th and 15th centuries , although little is known about their design . 
 Under the King 's new programme of work , the Thames was protected with a mutually reinforcing network of blockhouses at Gravesend , Milton , and Higham on the south side of the river , and West and East Tilbury on the opposite bank . West Tilbury Blockhouse , part of the inner line , was initially called the " <unk> Bulwark " , because it was on the site of a hermitage dissolved by the King in 1536 . It was designed by James Nedeham and Christopher Morice , supported by three overseers ; prior to the work , the estimated cost had been given as £ 211 , allowing for stone , timber , 150 @,@ 000 bricks and 200 tonnes ( 200 long tons ; 220 short tons ) of chalk . The D @-@ shaped blockhouse was curved at the front , with two storeys of gun @-@ ports , and probably had additional gun platforms stretching along the river on either side of it ; ancillary buildings were placed at the rear and the whole site was protected by a rampart and a ditch , with extensive marshlands and creeks giving additional protection to the east . It was initially commanded by Captain Francis Grant and his deputy , and garrisoned with a porter , two soldiers and four gunners , equipped with up to five artillery pieces including a demi @-@ cannon and sakers . 
 The invasion threat passed and in 1553 all of the blockhouses were ordered to return their guns ; Milton and Higham were demolished . In the summer of 1588 , however , there was a fresh threat of invasion by the Spanish Armada . An army was mobilised to protect the mouth of the estuary and emergency improvements to the fortifications at Tilbury Blockhouse were made by Rober Dudley , the Earl of Leicester . Queen Elizabeth I visited the fort by barge on 8 August 1588 and rode in procession to the nearby army camp , where she gave a speech to the assembled forces . Fears of invasion continued even after the defeat of the Armada , and over the course of the next year the Italian engineer , <unk> <unk> , reinforced the blockhouse with probably two concentric earthwork ramparts , with ditches and a palisade . A boom was stretched across the river to Gravesend at a cost of £ 305 . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 In the early 1600s , England was at peace with France and Spain and as a result the coastal defences received little attention ; surveys reported multiple problems with Tilbury Fort including flooding caused by the estuary tides , and ferry passengers and animals making their way uninvited into the fort . In 1642 civil war broke out between the supporters of King Charles I and those of Parliament . Tilbury was controlled by Parliament , who placed the Tilbury and Gravesend forts under the command of a military governor , using them to control traffic entering London and to search for spies ; it saw no military action during the war . Tilbury remained in use during the interregnum , having a garrison of three officers and sixty @-@ six men in 1651 . 
 After Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 , he began a wide @-@ ranging programme of work on the coastal defences . The Dutch fleet then attacked up the Thames in June 1667 , but were deterred from going further for fear of the Tilbury and Gravesend fortifications . In reality , the forts were poorly prepared to resist a Dutch attack ; at Tilbury there were only two guns ready for action . The Dutch struck the English fleet at Medway instead , giving enough time for the government to improve the defences along the Thames and mount 80 guns on the forts . In the wake of the conflict , the King instructed his Chief Engineer , a Dutchman called Sir Bernard de Gomme , to develop Tilbury Fort 's defences further . 
 De Gomme prepared several plans for the King in 1665 ; a further iteration of the designs was submitted in 1670 and given royal approval . Work began the same year <unk> took until 1685 to complete the project . The work was carried out by skilled contractors , who were supplemented by large teams of pressed men brought in from across the region ; during 1671 , up to 256 workers were employed on the site . Around 3 @,@ 000 timber piles had to be brought from Norway for the project in 1671 to support the foundations in the marshy ground . The resources needed for the King 's multiple defence projects became stretched , and one of the planned bastions at Tilbury , originally planned to face the river , was cancelled in 1681 , in part to save money . The total cost of the project is unknown , but was significantly more than the original estimate of £ 47 @,@ 000 . 
 The result was a large , five @-@ sided , star @-@ shaped fort with four angular bastions , revetted in brick , with an outer curtain of defences , including two moats and a redoubt ; two new gatehouses defended the entrance from the north . Two gun lines of gun platforms , facing the river , stretched alongside either the side of the fort . The Henrician blockhouse was incorporated into the defences , but the Elizabethan earthworks were destroyed . The interior of the fort was raised up above the level of the marshes to prevent flooding , and barracks and other buildings were constructed inside . The writer John Evelyn praised the new fort as " a Royal work <unk> " . Further work after 1694 replaced the wooden gun platforms alongside the river with more durable stone equivalents . 
 = = = 18th – 19th centuries = = = 
 By the start of the 18th century , Tilbury Fort was one of the most powerful in Britain . The number of artillery guns varied ; in 1715 there were 17 demi @-@ cannon and 26 culverins mounted on the west gun platform , and 31 demi @-@ cannons and one culverin on the east ; the following year there were reported to be 161 guns in total at the fort , although 92 of these were in poor repair and inoperable . 
 In addition to its role in protecting the Thames , the fort had various military uses during the 18th century . From 1716 onwards , the Board of Ordnance began to use it as a gunpowder depot ; there were safety restrictions on moving gunpowder in and out of the London docks , so Tilbury was used instead . Two large magazines were built , able to hold 3 @,@ 600 barrels of powder each , and the old blockhouse and other buildings were converted to act as further magazines . Eventually the fort could hold more than 19 @,@ 000 barrels of gunpowder . It was also used as a transit depot for soldiers and , after the Jacobite rising of 1745 , as a prison to hold 268 Highlander prisoners of war . The Jacobite prisoners were kept in the gunpowder magazines and 45 died from typhus before they were sent on to London for trial . 
 The living conditions at the fort were poor . It was surrounded by marshes , with a poor road network , and the garrison had to survive on collected rainwater . A trader called a sutler built a house inside the southern entrance , growing vegetables within the south @-@ west bastion and enjoying an effective monopoly on selling food to the soldiers . New barracks for the officers and enlisted men were rebuilt in 1772 , but the officers often preferred to live across the river in the more urban setting of Gravesend , near the military headquarters there . A cricket match in 1776 between men from the Kentish and Essex sides of the Thames reportedly ended in bloodshed when guns were seized from the guardroom ; newspapers recounted how an Essex man and a sergeant were shot dead , and a soldier was bayonetted , before both sides fled the scene . It is uncertain how accurate the newspaper account was , although the historians Andrew Saunders and Charles Kightly give it some credence . 
 During the American Revolutionary War there were fears of a French attack on London . In 1780 , the Army carried out a practice attack on the fort with 5 @,@ 000 soldiers , but there were less than 60 guns left at the fort and many of these were in poor condition . Thomas Hyde Page inspected Tilbury in 1788 and reported that the defences facing the Thames were seriously inadequate . As a consequence , a new battery was built in the south @-@ east corner of the defences , armed with 32 @-@ pounders ( 14 @.@ 5 kg ) pointing down @-@ river , and a new battery , New Tavern Fort , was built along the river to the east . Fears continued during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars and smaller batteries were constructed further up the river in 1794 . Tilbury continued to be an essential part of the capital 's defences because of its control of the crossing point on the Thames , and the guns were upgraded with new traversing platforms ; the Gravesend Volunteer Artillery was formed to man the forts on both sides of the river . During the invasion scare of 1803 , the Royal Trinity House Volunteer Artillery manned ten armed hulks placed across the river as a barrier at Tilbury . 
 The size of the garrison varied during the first half of the century , but in 1830 the fort had space for 15 officers and 150 enlisted men . Despite the construction of a new range of facilities in 1809 , the living conditions of the soldiers remained poor , with four men sharing each of the two @-@ bed rooms in the barracks , and no running water on the site . During the 19th century , a pump was installed to bring water up from a well 178 metres ( 584 ft ) below the surface . Nationwide investigations into the standard of Army barracks during 1857 led to investment in better facilities at Tilbury ; piped water was run into the site in 1877 , and improved amenities and sanitation were installed after 1880 . 
 By the 1850s , the advent of steam ships meant that enemy vessels could sail up the Thames far more quickly than before , reducing the time available for forts to intercept them . Rifled guns and turret @-@ mounted weapons and new armour @-@ plating meant that enemy warships could fire on forts such as Tilbury from downstream more easily while being protected from their guns . Fears of an potential invasion by Napoleon III of France led to the establishment Royal Commission on the Defence of the United Kingdom in 1859 . The Commission reported the following year and recommended that new , more powerful forts be built further downstream , with defences such as Tilbury Fort forming a second @-@ line of defence . Work began on strengthening Tilbury in 1868 , under the direction of the then Captain Charles Gordon , focusing on adding heavier gun positions able to fire upstream to support the new forts . The west , north @-@ east and east bastions and the south @-@ east curtain wall were altered to house thirteen rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , protected by brick walls , earthworks and iron shields . Initially 7 @-@ ton , 7 @-@ inch ( 7 @,@ 112 kg , 17 cm ) guns were deployed but these were upgraded to 9 @-@ inch ( ( 22 cm ) weapons by 1888 , supported by a heavier 25 @-@ ton , 11 @-@ inch ( 25 @,@ 401 kg , 27 cm ) gun . The old Tudor block @-@ house was destroyed to make way for the new guns . 
 Naval and defensive technology continued to improve over the next few decades , rendering Tilbury Fort 's bastion design out @-@ <unk> . The government considered the defences further down the Thames to be sufficient and Tilbury was not therefore not improved ; it was largely redundant as a defensive fortification by the end of the century , although still in use as a strategic depot . From 1889 onwards it formed a mobilisation centre to support a mobile strike force in the event of an invasion , part of the wider London Defence Scheme , and large storage buildings were built across the site to store materiel . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 Fresh concerns grew that the Thames might be vulnerable to attack from torpedo boats and armoured cruisers , and in 1903 four quick @-@ firing 12 @-@ pounder , 12 cwt ( 5 @.@ 4 kg , 50 @.@ 8 kg ) guns were positioned on Tilbury 's south @-@ east curtain wall , supplemented in 1904 by two 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) breech loading guns . In 1905 , however , the government decided that the Royal Navy and the forts downstream gave sufficient protection for the capital and removed the artillery , leaving only machine @-@ guns in place . 
 Tilbury continued to function as a mobilisation store and , after the outbreak of the First World War , it was used to house up to 300 transit soldiers and to supply the new army camps established at Purfleet and Belhus Mansion . It was initially manned by the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers until 1916 , and by various reserve units for the rest of the war . The fort itself was used to store munitions while a depot for remounts was built just to the west ; a pontoon bridge was built across the Thames for troop movements , guarded by the fort 's guns . Until 1917 , also used to house the headquarters of several infantry battalions . Electric lighting was installed , and a narrow @-@ gauge railway and a steam crane on the quay were added to help to move material in and out of the fort . After the Zeppelin raids of June 1915 , anti @-@ aircraft guns and searchlights mounted at the fort and they played a role in the shooting down of the German Navy Zeppelin , <unk> , although it is disputed as to which site in the area fired the shell that brought down the airship . 
 During the inter @-@ war years , the government concluded that the fort was no longer militarily useful and there were unsuccessful attempts to sell it off for development . During the Second World War , the fort initially housed an improvised anti @-@ aircraft operations room , controlling the defences of the Thames and Medway ( North ) Gun Zone between 1939 and 1940 . Trenches were dug across the surrounding area to prevent an airborne attack . The enlisted barracks and the facilities block , as well as probably the sutler 's house , were bombed and damaged , being demolished after the war . The fort was transferred out of military use relatively early in the post @-@ war period , and in 1950 the Ministry of Works took over the site . Restoration work took place in the 1970 , including the construction of replica wooden bridges . It was opened to the public in 1982 . 
 In the 21st century , the fort is controlled by English Heritage and operated as a tourist attraction , receiving 16 @,@ 154 visitors in 2014 . The site is protected under UK law as a scheduled ancient monument , with the officers ' barracks a grade II * listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Tilbury Fort remains largely unaltered from its reconstruction in the late 17th century under the direction of Sir Bernard de Gomme , with some 19th century additions . It was designed in a predominantly Dutch style , with a ring of outer and inner defences intended to allow the fort to attack hostile warships , while being protected from attack from the land . The heritage agency Historic England describes it as " England 's most spectacular " example of a late 17th century fort , and the historian Paul Pattison considers the defences the " best surviving example of their kind in Britain " . 
 = = = Outer defences = = = 
 The outer defences comprise outer and inner water @-@ filled moats , fed by the Thames and separated by a ring of defensive ramparts . The inner moat is 50 metres ( 160 ft ) wide but relatively shallow and the banks have been repeatedly strengthened with piles to protect them from erosion . The fort is entered from the north through a triangular defensive work known as a redan , with a redoubt to defend the entrance . A causeway links the redan to the outer defences , which form a complex pattern of ramparts , protecting a covered way stretching around the defensive line . There are bastions on the north @-@ west and north @-@ east corners , and two triangular spurs , originally equipped with cannons , project from the defences on the west and east sides , with assembly points for infantry soldiers on the inside . 
 A replica wooden bridge runs from the outer defences over the water to an island called a ravelin , which is in turn linked to the inner defences by another replica bridge , protected with two drawbridges . The ravelin formed a physical barrier to incoming artillery fire aimed at the entrance to the inner defences and could also have directed fire against enemy forces that breached the outer defensive line . 
 On the south side of the outer defences , facing the river , are the West and East Lines of gun positions . These were built in the 18th century and have been subject to considerable erosion and silting ; 12 of the original 14 gun positions on the West Line remain but only one of the East Line has survived . In between the lines is a quay , designed to allow the delivery of supplies from the Thames , and the remains of the tracks from the narrow gauge railway built during the First World War . A sluice gate in the south @-@ west corner managed the water in the moats , and allowed them to be drained completely should the surfaces begin to freeze over in winter and provide an advantage to any attackers . To the west of the outer defences is the World 's End pub , originally the local ferry house , dating from 1788 . 
 = = = Inner defences = = = 
 The inner defences largely follow a pentagonal design , with four defensive bastions positioned around a central parade ground . From the south , the fort is entered through the Water Gate . This two @-@ storeyed gatehouse dates from the late 17th century with a monumental stone facade featuring carved displays of classical and 17th @-@ century weapons ; when first built , the now @-@ empty niche at the front probably held a statue of King Charles II . The building originally acted a house for the master gunner . Most of the inside of the fort is taken up by the parade ground , an area covering 2 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 ha ) . The central parade ground was raised to its current height in the 17th and 19th centuries using chalk and dirt , and by the early 20th century much of it was occupied by four large warehouses , since destroyed . 
 Moving east from the Water Gate , the south @-@ eastern curtain defences and the south @-@ east bastion were rebuilt at the start of the 20th century to hold emplacements for four quick @-@ firing guns and two 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) guns , with underground tunnels linking to an underground magazine . Four artillery pieces , dating from 1898 to 1942 , are on display . Facing the parade ground are the officers ' quarters , a terrace of houses probably dating in its current form to the late 18th century , with a stables at the northern end , originally used to hold the commandant 's horses . It now holds the Bernard Truss collection of military memorabilia . The north @-@ east bastion was redesigned after 1868 and contains an earth @-@ covered magazine , as well as emplacements for 9 @-@ inch ( 22 cm ) rifled muzzle loading guns . 
 On the north side of the parade are two early 18th century magazines , altered in the 19th century . These were specially designed to avoid the use of iron , which might have generated sparks and set off an explosion , instead being built using wood and copper ; they are the only remaining examples of their type in Britain . The Landport Gate lies behind the magazines , and has a gatehouse , called the Dead House , above the passageway leading into the interior of the fort . Past the north @-@ west bastion , the soldiers ' barracks would have stood opposite those of the officers ' , but was destroyed after the war and only the foundations of the building remain . The south @-@ west magazine also holds a covered magazine , similar to that in the north @-@ east bastion . Just to the west of the Water Gate is the fort 's guardhouse and chapel , dating from the late 17th century and one of the oldest surviving places of worship within a British artillery fortress . 
 = Pyramid of Userkaf = 
 The pyramid complex of Userkaf was built c . <unk> BC for the pharaoh Userkaf ( reign 2494 – <unk> BC ) , founder of the 5th dynasty of Egypt ( c . 2494 – 2345 BC ) . It is located in the pyramid field at Saqqara , on the north @-@ east of the step pyramid of Djoser ( reigned ca . 2670 BC ) . Constructed in dressed stone with a core of rubble , the pyramid is now ruined and resembles a conical hill in the sands of Saqqara . For this reason , it is known locally as El @-@ Haram el @-@ <unk> , the " Heap of Stone " and was recognized as a royal pyramid by western archaeologists in the 19th century . 
 Userkaf 's pyramid is part of a larger mortuary complex comprising a mortuary temple , an offering chapel and a cult pyramid as well as separate pyramid and mortuary temple for Userkaf 's wife , queen Neferhetepes . Userkaf 's mortuary temple and cult pyramid are today completely ruined and difficult to recognize . The pyramid of the queen is no more than a mound of rubble , with its funerary chamber exposed by stone robbers . 
 The complex is markedly different from those built during the 4th Dynasty ( c . 2613 – 2494 BC ) in its size , architecture and location , being at Saqqara rather than <unk> . As such , Userkaf 's pyramid complex could be a manifestation of the profound changes in the ideology of kingship that took place between the 4th and 5th dynasties , changes that may have started during the reign of Userkaf 's likely immediate predecessor , <unk> . Some 1500 years after its construction , the pyramid complex was restored under Ramses II . During the much later Saite period ( 664 – 525 BC ) , it was used as a cemetery . 
 = = Discovery and excavations = = 
 The entrance of the pyramid was discovered in 1831 by the Italian Egyptologist Orazio <unk> but was not entered until 8 years later in 1839 by John Shae Perring who took advantage of an existing tunnel dug into the pyramid by tomb robbers . Perring did not know for sure who the owner of the pyramid was and attributed it to Djedkare Isesi ( reign 2414 – 2375 BC ) , a late 5th dynasty pharaoh . After his investigations Perring buried the robbers tunnel which remains inaccessible to this day . The pyramid of Userkaf entered the official records a few years later in 1842 when Karl Richard Lepsius catalogued it in his list of pyramids under number XXXI . Since Perring had already buried the robbers tunnel by that time , K. R. Lepsius did not investigate the pyramid any further . 
 The pyramid was then neglected until October 1927 when Cecil Mallaby Firth and the architect Jean @-@ Philippe Lauer started excavating there . During the first season of excavation Firth and Lauer cleared the south side of the pyramid area , discovering Userkaf 's mortuary temple and tombs of the much later Saite period . The following year , Firth and Lauer uncovered a limestone relief slab and a colossal red granite head of Userkaf , thus determining that he was the pyramid owner . After Firth 's death in 1931 no excavations took place on site until they were resumed by Lauer in 1948 . Lauer worked there until 1955 , re @-@ clearing and re @-@ planning the mortuary temple and investigating the eastern side of the pyramid . Research on the north and west sides of the mortuary complex was conducted starting in 1976 by Ahmed el @-@ <unk> who excavated and restored the pyramid entrance . The entrance was , however , buried under rubble in an earthquake in 1991 . 
 More recent work on the pyramid was undertaken by <unk> <unk> in 2000 . 
 = = <unk> Complex = = 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 The mortuary complex of Userkaf comprises the same structures as those of Userkaf 's 4th dynasty predecessors : a high wall surrounded the complex with its pyramid and high temple and there was certainly a valley temple located closer to the Nile , yet to be uncovered . The valley temple was connected to the pyramid by a causeway whose exact trajectory is unknown , even though its first few meters are still visible today . 
 The layout of the complex however differs significantly from that of earlier complexes . Indeed , it is organized on a north @-@ south axis rather than an east @-@ west one : the high temple is located south of the main pyramid and its structures are turned away from it . Furthermore , a small offering chapel is adjoining the eastern base of the pyramid , a configuration otherwise unattested since offering chapels usually occupy the inner sanctum of the mortuary temple . Finally , immediately to the south of Userkaf 's funerary enclosure is a second smaller pyramid complex attributed to his wife , queen Neferhetepes . 
 The reason for these changes is unclear and several hypotheses have been proposed to explain them : 
 The first hypothesis is that this is due to a change of ideology . The advent of the 5th dynasty marks the growing importance of the cult of the sun as hinted by the Westcar Papyrus . This is also directly evidenced by the large sun temples built at Abusir throughout the dynasty , a tradition initiated by Userkaf . Finally , the Abusir Papyri demonstrate the strong connection between the cult of the sun and the mortuary cult of the pharaohs of this dynasty : offerings for a deceased ruler were first consecrated in a sun temple before being dispatched to his mortuary temple . Thus , Userkaf located his mortuary temple to the south of the main pyramid so that the sun would shine directly into it all year round . 
 The second hypothesis holds that Userkaf chose to return to 3rd dynasty ( c . 2670 – 2610 BC ) traditions : not only did he choose to construct his mortuary complex on the north @-@ east corner of Djoser 's complex but its layout is similar to that of Djoser . Indeed , both are organized on a north @-@ south axis and both have their entrances located at the south @-@ end of the eastern side . 
 The third hypothesis proposes that Userkaf 's choice is due to practical considerations . Nabil <unk> discovered a large moat completely surrounding Djoser 's enclosure , some places as deep as 25 metres ( 82 ft ) . This moat might be a stone quarry for material used during the construction of Djoser 's step pyramid . If for some reason it was important for Userkaf to locate his mortuary complex on the north @-@ east corner of Djoser 's , i.e. between the enclosure and the moat , then there was not enough space available for the mortuary temple to be located on the east side . Thus the local topography would explain the peculiar layout of Userkaf 's complex . 
 = = = Mortuary temple = = = 
 Userkaf 's mortuary temple layout and architecture is difficult to establish with certainty . Not only was it extensively quarried for stone throughout the millennia , but a large Saite period shaft tomb was also dug in its midst , damaging it . 
 Modern reconstructions of the temple nonetheless show that it shared the same elements as all mortuary temples since the time of <unk> ( reigned ca . <unk> BC ) . However , just as with the complex , the layout of the temple seem to differ significantly from those of Userkaf 's predecessors . The causeway entered the pyramid enclosure at the southern end of the east wall . There the entrance corridor branched south to five magazine rooms as well as a stairway to a roof terrace . To the north a doorway led to a vestibule and then to an entrance hall . That in turn led to an open black @-@ basalt floored courtyard bordered on all sides but the south one by monolithic red granite pillars bearing the titles of the king . A colossal head of Userkaf was found there , the second oldest monumental statue of an Egyptian ruler after the Great Sphinx , now in the Egyptian Museum . The head , which must have belonged to a 5 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 16 ft ) statue , represents Userkaf wearing the <unk> and <unk> . The walls of the courtyard were adorned with fine reliefs of high workmanship depicting scenes of life in a papyrus thicket , a boat with its crew and names of Upper and Lower Egyptian estates connected to the cult of the king . 
 Two doors at the south @-@ east and south @-@ west corners of the courtyard led to a small hypostyle hall with four pairs of red granite pillars . Beyond were storage chambers and the inner sanctum with three ( <unk> ) or five ( Lauer ) statue niches where statues of the king would have been placed , facing the pyramid to the north . Contrary to other mortuary temples , the inner sanctum was thus separated from the pyramid by the courtyard . The only remains of the mortuary temple that are visible today are its basalt paving and the large granite blocks framing the outer door . 
 = = = Offering chapel = = = 
 A small offering chapel is adjoining the eastern side of the main pyramid and is barely visible today . It consisted of a central two pillared room with a large quartzite false door and two narrow chambers on the sides . Like the mortuary temple , the chapel was floored with black basalt . Its walls however were made of Tura limestone and granite and were adorned with fine reliefs of offering scenes . 
 = = = Cult pyramid = = = 
 In the south @-@ west corner of Userkaf 's mortuary complex is a small cult pyramid . This pyramid was destined to receive the Ka of the deceased pharaoh and thus might have housed a statue of Userkaf 's Ka . It stood 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high with a base 21 metres ( 69 ft ) long and its slope is identical to that of the main pyramid at 53 ° . The position of the cult pyramid within the complex is unusual , the cult pyramid being normally located in the south @-@ eastern corner . This difference is certainly linked with the peculiar overall north @-@ south layout of Userkaf 's complex with the south @-@ eastern corner hosting the entrance to the mortuary temple . 
 The core of the pyramid is made of roughly hewn limestone blocks similar to those of the main pyramid . These were disposed in two layers and finally clad with fine Tura limestone which fell victim to stone robbers . Consequently , the poor quality pyramid core was exposed and <unk> rapidly with only the two lowest layers of the pyramid still visible today . 
 The pyramid has a T @-@ shaped substructure with a descending corridor leading to a chamber with a gabled roof . Similarly to the main pyramid , the substructure was constructed in a shallow open pit dug into the ground before the pyramid construction started and is therefore located just below ground @-@ level . 
 = = Main pyramid = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Userkaf 's pyramid is located on the northeast corner of Djoser 's step pyramid complex . The pyramid was originally around 49 metres ( 161 ft ) high and 73 metres ( 240 ft ) large with an inclination of 53 ° identical to that of Khufu 's great pyramid for a total volume of 87 @,@ 906 m3 ( 114 @,@ 977 cu yd ) .The core of the pyramid is built of small roughly @-@ hewn blocks of local limestone disposed in horizontal layers . This meant a considerable saving of labor as compared to the large and more accurately @-@ hewn stone cores of 4th Dynasty pyramids . However , as the outer casing of Userkaf 's pyramid fell victim to stone robbers throughout the millennia , the loosely assembled core material was progressively exposed and fared much worse over time than that of the older pyramids . This explains the current ruined state of the pyramid . 
 The pyramid core was constructed in a step @-@ like structure , a construction technique similar to that of the 4th dynasty although the building material was of a significantly lower quality . The outer casing of the pyramid was made of fine Tura limestone which certainly ensured Userkaf 's construction an appearance similar to that of the glorious 4th Dynasty pyramids . There was however no red granite paneling over the lower part of the pyramid as in the case of the Pyramid of Menkaure . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The pyramid does not have internal chambers , the chambers being located underground . These were constructed in a deep open ditch dug before the pyramid construction started and only later covered by the pyramid . The entrance to the underground chambers is located north of the pyramid from a pavement in the court in front of the pyramid face . This is different from the 4th dynasty pyramids for which the entrance to the internal chambers is located on the pyramid side itself . The entrance was hewn into the bedrock and floored and roofed with large slabs of white limestone , most of which have been removed in modern times . 
 From the entrance a 18 @.@ 5 metres ( 61 ft ) long , southward descending passage leads to a horizontal tunnel some 8 metres ( 26 ft ) below the pyramid base . The first few meters of this tunnel were roofed and floored with red granite . The tunnel was blocked by two large portcullis of red granite , the first one still having traces of the gypsum plaster used to seal the portcullis . 
 Behind the granite barrier the corridor branches eastward to a T @-@ shaped magazine chamber which probably contained Userkaf 's funerary equipment . The presence of such a magazine chamber , located under the base of a pyramid , is unique of all the 5th and 6th dynasty pyramids . 
 At the south end of corridor lies an antechamber , which is located directly under the tip of the pyramid . The antechamber is oriented on the east @-@ west axis and leads west to the king 's burial chamber . The burial chamber has the same height and width as the antechamber , but is longer . At the western end of the burial chamber Perring discovered some fragments of an empty and <unk> black basalt sarcophagus which had been originally placed in a slight depression as well as a canopic chest . The chambers are protected from the pyramid weight by a gabled ceiling made of two large Tura limestone blocks , an architecture common to all pyramids of the 5th and 6th dynasties . The chambers are lined with the same material , while the floor pavement was lost to stone robbers . 
 = = Pyramid complex of Queen Neferhetepes = = 
 It was common for Old Kingdom pharaohs to prepare the burials of their family close to theirs and Userkaf followed this tradition . Thus 10 metres ( 33 ft ) to the south of his funerary enclosure , Userkaf had a small separate pyramid complex built for his queen on an east @-@ west axis . The pyramid is completely ruined and only a small mound of rubble can be seen today . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The pyramid of the queen was first recognized in 1928 by C. M. Firth following his first excavations to the south of Userkaf 's main pyramid . One year later in 1929 , he proposed that the pyramid be assigned to Queen Neferhetepes , Userkaf 's wife and the mother of Sahure . It was not before 1943 that Bernard Grdseloff discovered the tomb of Persen , a priest at the court of Userkaf and Neferhetepes . His tomb is located in the immediate vicinity of Userkaf 's complex and yielded an inscribed stone giving the name and rank of the queen . This stone is now on display at the Egyptian Museum of Berlin . Further evidence confirming the assignment of the pyramid to Neferhetepes was discovered by <unk> <unk> in 1979 when he excavated the ruins of the temple . Consequently , the small pyramid complex has been attributed to her . 
 = = = Pyramid = = = 
 The queen 's pyramid originally stood 16 @.@ 8 metres ( 55 ft ) high with a slope of 52 ° , similar to that of Userkaf 's , with a base 26 @.@ 25 metres ( 86 @.@ 1 ft ) long . The core of the pyramid was built with the same technique as the main pyramid and the cult pyramid , consisting of three horizontal layers of roughly hewn local limestone blocks and gypsum mortar . The core was undoubtedly covered with a fine Tura limestone outer casing , now removed . In fact , the pyramid was so extensively used as a stone quarry in later times that it is now barely distinguishable from the surroundings and its internal chambers are exposed . 
 The entrance to the substructure is located on the pyramid 's northern side and consists of a descending passage leading to a T @-@ shaped chamber . This chamber was located under the tip of the pyramid and is oriented on an east @-@ west axis like the rest of the queen 's pyramid complex . It has a <unk> roof made of large limestone blocks , a construction technique common to all pyramid chambers of the 5th dynasty . The substructure is thus a scaled @-@ down version of Userkaf 's without the magazines . 
 = = = Mortuary Temple = = = 
 The queen 's pyramid complex had its own separate mortuary temple , which was located on the east of the pyramid in contrast to Userkaf 's complex . This difference may be explained by the small dimensions of the temple which allowed it to be oriented to the east in the usual fashion . Access to the temple was located in the south @-@ east corner of the enclosure wall . The entrance led to an open courtyard that stretched from east to west . The ritual cleaning and preparation of the offerings took place here . Because of the extensive degradation suffered by the temple , reconstruction attempts are somewhat speculative . From the ruins , archaeologists propose that the temple comprised an open colonnade , possibly made of granite , a sacrificial chapel adjoining the pyramid side , three statue niches and a few magazine chambers . No traces of a cult pyramid were found onsite . In the halls of the temple were depictions of animal processions and offerings carriers moving towards the Shrine of the Queen . 
 = = Later alterations = = 
 The pyramid of Userkaf was apparently the object of restoration work in antiquity under the impulse of Khaemweset ( 1280 – 1225 BC ) , fourth son of Ramses II . This is attested by inscriptions on stone cladding showing Khaemweset with offering bearers . 
 During the 26th Dynasty ( c . 685 @-@ 525 BC ) Userkaf 's temple had become a burial ground : a large shaft tomb was dug in its midst thus rendering modern reconstruction of its layout difficult . This indicates that by the time of the Saite period , Userkaf 's temple was already in ruins . 
 = Kurt Angle = 
 Kurt Steven Angle ( born December 9 , 1968 ) is an American professional wrestler , actor , former mixed martial artist and retired amateur wrestler . While at Clarion University of Pennsylvania , he won numerous accolades , including being a two @-@ time National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I Heavyweight Wrestling Champion . After graduating college , Angle won a gold medal in freestyle wrestling at the 1995 World Wrestling Championships . He then won a freestyle wrestling gold medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics . Angle is one of only four people to complete an amateur wrestling Grand Slam ( junior nationals , NCAA , World Championships , Olympics ) . In 2006 , he was named by USA Wrestling as the greatest shoot wrestler ever and one of the top 15 college wrestlers of all time . He was inducted into the International Sports Hall of Fame in 2016 for his amateur accomplishments . 
 Angle made his first appearance at a professional wrestling event in 1996 , with his in @-@ ring debut following in 1998 . In 1999 , he signed a multi @-@ year contract with then World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) and participated in his first televised storyline in March . After months of unaired matches , Angle made his official debut the following November and received his first major push in the company in February 2000 , when he held the European Championship and the Intercontinental Championship simultaneously . Four months later , he won the King of the Ring tournament , and not long after , began pursuing the WWF Championship , which he won in October ; this capped off a rookie year which is considered by many to be the greatest in professional wrestling history . Throughout his tenure in the WWF / E , Angle was a six @-@ time world champion ( four @-@ time WWF / E Champion , one @-@ time World Heavyweight Champion , and one @-@ time WCW Champion ) , a one @-@ time United States Champion , one @-@ time Intercontinental Champion , one @-@ time European Champion and one @-@ time WWE Tag Team Champion . He is the tenth Triple Crown Champion and the fifth Grand Slam Champion in WWE history . 
 After leaving WWE , Angle joined Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , where he became a record six @-@ time TNA World Heavyweight Champion , a two @-@ time TNA World Tag Team Champion , and a one @-@ time TNA X Division Champion . He is the second Triple Crown winner in TNA history and the only one to hold all the required titles at once . As a part of TNA , Angle also made appearances for New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) and the Inoki Genome Federation ( IGF ) , where he held the IWGP Heavyweight Championship once . 
 Between WWF / E , TNA , and Japan , Angle has won 13 world championships and 21 total championships . He is the only professional wrestler in history to have won the WWE , World heavyweight , WCW , TNA , and IWGP world championships . Angle is also a two @-@ time King of the Mountain and a one @-@ time King of the Ring , making him the only person to have been both King of the Ring ( WWF ) and King of the Mountain ( TNA ) . In 2010 , Wrestling Observer Newsletter named Angle the Wrestler of the Decade for the 2000s , and in 2013 , he was inducted into the TNA Hall of Fame . He has headlined numerous pay @-@ per @-@ view events for both WWF / E and TNA throughout his career , including the flagship event for both promotions : WrestleMania in WWF / E , and Bound for Glory in TNA . 
 = = Amateur wrestling career = = 
 Angle started amateur wrestling at the age of seven . He attended Mt . Lebanon High School , where he won varsity letters in football and wrestling and was an All @-@ State linebacker . He went undefeated on the freshman wrestling team at Mt . Lebanon High and qualified for the state wrestling tournament his sophomore year . Angle also placed third in the state wrestling tournament as a junior and was the 1987 Pennsylvania State Wrestling Champion as a senior . 
 Upon graduating from high school , Angle attended the Clarion University of Pennsylvania , where he continued to wrestle at an amateur level . He was a two @-@ time National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I champion , national runner @-@ up in 1991 , and a three @-@ time NCAA Division I All @-@ American . In addition , Angle was the 1987 USA Junior Freestyle champion , a two @-@ time USA Senior Freestyle champion , and the 1988 USA International Federation of Associated Wrestling Styles Junior World Freestyle champion . 
 After graduating from college , Angle continued to wrestle . In 1995 , he won a gold medal at the FILA Wrestling World Championships in Atlanta , Georgia . Following this victory , Angle began preparing for the 1996 Summer Olympics under Dave Schultz at the Pennsylvanian <unk> Club , training between eight and ten hours a day . In January 1996 , not long after Angle began training at the club , Schultz was murdered by John <unk> du Pont , the sponsor of Schultz 's team of Olympic <unk> . As a result , Angle quit du Pont 's team , searched for new sponsors , and joined the Dave Schultz Wrestling Club in Schultz 's memory . 
 Angle faced further hardships while taking part in the 1996 Olympic Trials , when he suffered a severe neck injury , fracturing two of his cervical vertebrae , <unk> two discs , and pulling four muscles . Nonetheless , Angle won the trials and then spent the subsequent five months resting and rehabilitating . By the Olympics , Angle was able to compete , albeit with several pain @-@ reducing injections in his neck . In the fall of 1996 , Angle stated that he temporarily became addicted to the analgesic Vicodin after injuring his neck . He won his gold medal in the heavyweight ( 90 – 100 kg ; 198 – 220 lb ) weight class despite his injury , defeating the Iranian Abbas Jadidi by officials ' decision after the competitors wrestled to an eight @-@ minute , one @-@ one draw . The bout saw Jadidi earn a point after two minutes and 46 seconds by turning Angle , and Angle earning a point of his own with a takedown after three minutes and eleven seconds . The officials ' decision was protested by Jadidi . Angle dedicated the victory to Schultz 's honor . 
 Shortly after his victory , Angle turned down a contract with the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . In the same year , he became a marketing representative for <unk> Foods , the manufacturers of <unk> , an ostrich meat based foodstuff . 
 In April 2011 , Angle revealed that he was planning a comeback to amateur wrestling for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . In April 2012 , he announced he was unable to make the trials for the US team due to a knee injury . A parody of these efforts entitled " Olympic Trials With Kurt Angle " appeared on the website Funny or Die . 
 In 2016 , Angle was announced as an inductee into the International Sports Hall of Fame for his amateur wrestling accomplishments . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Extreme Championship Wrestling ( 1996 ) = = = 
 On October 26 , 1996 , Angle was convinced by fellow Pittsburgh native Shane Douglas to attend the taping of an Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) event named High Incident . He gave an in @-@ ring interview and provided guest commentary during a match between Taz and Little Guido , but left the building after Raven " crucified " a bleeding Sandman by attaching him to a cross using barbed wire . Angle , shocked by the controversial imagery and afraid that his career prospects would be damaged if he was associated with the incident , threatened to sue ECW owner Paul Heyman if he was shown on television in the same broadcast as the stunt . 
 = = = National Wrestling Alliance ( 1998 ) = = = 
 Angle competed in a battle royal at the NWA 's 50th Anniversary Show , held on October 24 , 1998 at the Hilton Hotel in Cherry Hill , New Jersey . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = <unk> Champion ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = = 
 In October 1998 , Angle signed an eight @-@ year contract with the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . He was assigned to the Power Pro Wrestling developmental territory in Memphis , Tennessee , where he began training . Angle 's first appearance on WWF television was on the March 7 , 1999 episode of Sunday Night Heat , where he took part in an angle with Tiger Ali Singh . This angle involved Singh paying him money to blow his nose on the American flag . Angle instead blew his nose on Singh 's flag and fought him off . His first WWF match was a dark match victory over Brian Christopher on April 11 , 1999 . In the following months , he wrestled in house shows and other dark matches in preparation for his televised debut . 
 After several weeks of vignettes , Angle made his televised in @-@ ring debut on November 14 , 1999 at the Survivor Series at the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit , Michigan , defeating Shawn Stasiak . In his initial push , he remained undefeated for several weeks , eventually losing to the debuting Tazz by passing out at the Royal Rumble . Angle 's television character was an " American hero " gimmick based on his gold medal win at the 1996 Summer Olympics . In his promos , Angle presented himself as a role model and stressed the need to work hard to realize one 's dreams , stressing the 3 Is , " Intensity , Integrity , and Intelligence " . In his promos and ring entrances , Angle would always wear replicas of his gold medals around his neck . While he stood for many principles that are associated with " good guy " wrestlers , Angle 's character put an arrogant spin on them to act as a villain , talking down to the audience and behaving as if he thought he was better than the fans and fellow wrestlers , usually taunting them with the question of , " Where are your gold medals ? " . Angle won both the European Championship and the Intercontinental Championship in February 2000 , billing himself as the " <unk> Champion " . He dropped both of his titles without ever conceding a fall in a two falls Triple Threat match with Chris Benoit and Chris Jericho at WrestleMania 2000 . The match had been agreed to on Angle 's behalf by his mentor , Bob Backlund . 
 = = = = WWF Champion ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 Throughout mid @-@ 2000 , after aligning himself with Edge & Christian , " Team ECK " ( Edge , Christian , and Kurt ) feuded with Too Cool and Rikishi , with Angle defeating Rikishi in the finals of the King of the Ring tournament . He went on to feud with Triple H after a love triangle between them and Triple H 's wife , Stephanie McMahon , developed . As a change to the intended storyline of Stephanie turning on her husband and going with Angle , he lost to Triple H at Unforgiven . Following his feud with Triple H , Angle received another push and began pursuing the WWF Championship , defeating The Rock at No Mercy , after botched interference on The Rock 's behalf from Rikishi . With his victory over The Rock , Angle became the first wrestler to have won both an Olympic Gold medal and the world championship . Angle retained the WWF Championship for the rest of the year in matches with The Undertaker at Survivor Series and in a six @-@ man Hell in a Cell match at Armageddon . 
 After beating Triple H at the Royal Rumble , Angle eventually lost the title to The Rock at No Way Out , after holding the WWF Championship for four months . He then feuded with Chris Benoit whom he defeated at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven , but lost to him at Backlash in an Ultimate Submission match ; Benoit defeated Angle four falls to three in sudden @-@ death overtime . Continuing the feud , Angle again defeated Benoit in a two out of three falls match at Judgment Day . Benoit pinned Angle after an Angle Slam in a " Pinfalls Only " fall , and then Angle made Benoit submit with the ankle lock in the " Submissions Only " fall . Angle won the third fall , a ladder match , with the help of Edge and Christian . 
 = = = = The Invasion and Grand Slam Champion ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 When World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) and ECW were purchased by WWF , the wrestlers from both promotions joined and formed The Alliance and invaded the WWF in mid @-@ 2001 ( dubbed as " The Invasion " ) . As a result , Angle became a fan favorite and began a storyline where he joined forces with WWF Champion Stone Cold Steve Austin to repel them . At Invasion , Angle and Austin captained a team of five WWF superstars against five handpicked members of the Alliance . As part of the angle , Team WWF lost to Team Alliance when Austin turned on his team to join The Alliance . At the close of the match , Austin nailed Angle with a Stone Cold Stunner , causing him to get pinned by the other team . After winning and losing the WCW Championship , WCW United States Championship , and the WWF Hardcore Championship in matches with Alliance members , Angle was booked to defeat Austin in a SummerSlam rematch for his second WWF Championship at Unforgiven . He dropped the title back to Austin on the October 8 , 2001 , episode of Raw when WWF Commissioner William Regal joined The Alliance and cost Angle the match . As part of the storyline , Angle subsequently turned into a villain again and joined The Alliance himself ; during a WrestleMania X @-@ Seven rematch between Vince McMahon and Shane McMahon , he interfered seemingly to aid Vince , but instead struck the members of team WWF with a steel chair . Angle , however , ultimately returned to the WWF side by enabling The Rock to defeat Austin in a " Winner Takes All " match between the WWF and The Alliance at Survivor Series . He remained a villain by claiming sole responsibility for the destruction of The Alliance . 
 After dropping the WCW United States Championship to Edge , the duo were booked into a lengthy feud . During this feud , Edge helped the fans with the already started " you suck " chants every time Angle entered a WWE ring , usually in tune with Angle 's entrance music . The chants followed Angle throughout the rest of his WWE career . In the course of the feud , the naturally balding Angle lost a " hair versus hair " match to Edge at Judgment Day , and his head was shaved bald . Angle has retained the shaved head since . Following the loss of his hair , Angle 's storyline called for him to wear a wig and insult bald people , leading to a feud with Hollywood Hogan , who stripped Angle of his wig . Angle later scored a submission victory over Hogan at King of the Ring , making him the first wrestler in WWE history to win a submission from Hogan . During 2002 , Angle routinely held open invitation challenges on Smackdown ! . Accepting one of these challenges , John Cena made his WWE televised debut , losing to Angle after a roll @-@ up pin . 
 In October 2002 , Angle became the fifth WWE Grand Slam Championship winner when he won the WWE Tag Team Championship with Chris Benoit at No Mercy . Their team was successful but problematic , as the two bickered constantly , with Benoit often fed up with Angle 's over @-@ the @-@ top antics . After dropping the title to Edge and Rey Mysterio on an episode of SmackDown ! , Angle won his third WWE Championship at Armageddon , defeating Big Show with the help of Brock Lesnar . While still in his third reign , Angle began a new storyline when he gained the services of manager Paul Heyman and " Team Angle " . 
 = = = = Championship reigns and pursuits ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 He then began feuding with Brock Lesnar , who had won the 2003 Royal Rumble match , after he claimed to be the new top superstar on SmackDown ! . Angle lost the WWE Championship in the main event of WrestleMania XIX to Lesnar , due to needing time off to recuperate from injuries . 
 On April 11 , 2003 , Angle underwent neck surgery performed by Dr. Hae @-@ Dong Jho to repair nerve and spinal damage , calcium buildup , bone spurs , and intervertebral disc problems . Rather than have Dr. Jho remove the afflicted discs and fuse his vertebrae together , Angle opted for a less conventional surgery where Jho removed only the spurs and selected portions of the discs . The alternative surgery reduced Angle 's rehabilitation time from one year to three months . He returned as a face character in June . Shortly after returning , Angle defeated Lesnar and Big Show in a Triple Threat match at Vengeance to regain the WWE Championship . During this time , Lesnar seemed to become an ally to Angle . Lesnar , however , secretly worked with Vince McMahon on a plot against Angle , turning on him during a steel cage match between himself and McMahon in which Angle was the special guest referee , and stated that he never tolerated losing the belt to him at Vengeance . After retaining the title in a singles bout at SummerSlam by making Lesnar submit to the ankle lock , he dropped the title to Lesnar in an Iron Man match on an episode of SmackDown ! . Angle then formed a five @-@ man team to rival Lesnar 's team at the Survivor Series , with Angle 's team coming out victorious . 
 Angle then got involved in a feud with Eddie Guerrero . Initially being a firm friend and ally to Eddie during the latter 's feud with his nephew Chavo , Angle turned on him when it was announced that Guerrero , not Angle , was the number one contender for the WWE Championship , thus becoming a villain once again . At No Way Out , Guerrero defeated Lesnar to win the WWE Championship , and Angle won a match to become the new number one contender . After losing to Guerrero at WrestleMania XX , Angle began to once again suffer from legitimate neck problems . As a response , he was made the on @-@ screen General Manager of SmackDown ! , with his absence from the ring attributed to injuries suffered after Big Show chokeslammed him off a ledge . Angle continued his feud with Guerrero throughout 2004 . He cost Guerrero the WWE Championship against John " Bradshaw " Layfield in a Texas Bull Rope match at The Great American Bash by participating in the worked finish ; Angle came down to the ring and showed a replay where JBL 's shoulder hit the corner pad before Guerrero 's hand . Angle was later fired by Vince McMahon as General Manager in July 2004 , after discovering that he was faking his handicapped status . 
 In November 2004 , Angle initiated the Kurt Angle Invitational , a worked weekly segment where " hometown heroes " ( plants ) , challenged him to a match , with Angle promising to give his Olympic gold medal to the first person to last more than three minutes in the ring with him . The Invitational was won by Eugene in July 2005 starting a new angle for both men . As a result , Angle faced Eugene at SummerSlam , defeating him by making him submit to the ankle lock . 
 On the November 4 , 2004 , episode of SmackDown ! , taped in St. Louis , Missouri , during an unscripted segment of Tough Enough , Angle challenged the finalists to a squat thrust competition . Chris Nawrocki won the competition , and the prize Nawrocki won was a match against Angle . Angle quickly took Nawrocki down , breaking his ribs , then made him submit with a neck crank . After Angle defeated Nawrocki , Angle challenged the other finalists . Daniel Puder , an American professional mixed martial artist , accepted Angle 's challenge . Angle and Puder wrestled for position , with Angle taking Puder down , however , in the process , Puder locked Angle in a kimura lock . With Puder on his back and Angle 's arm locked in the kimura , Angle pushed Puder 's shoulders down , pinning him and one of two referees in the ring , Jim <unk> , quickly counted three to end the bout , despite the fact that Puder 's shoulders were not fully down on the mat , bridging up at two . Puder later claimed he would have snapped Angle 's arm on national television if <unk> had not ended the match . Dave Meltzer and Dave Scherer gave these following comments : 
 " It was real . If you don 't follow fighting , Puder had Angle locked in the Kimura , or <unk> as Tazz called it , although Tazz didn 't let on the move was fully executed . Not only was Angle not getting out of the move , but most MMA fighters would have tapped already . Angle couldn 't tap for obvious reasons . The ref counted a three even though Puder 's shoulders weren 't fully down , trying to end the thing , because the reality was Angle would have been in surgery had it gone a few seconds longer or had Puder not given up the hold " . ― Dave Meltzer 
 " As you would expect , Kurt Angle was less than happy backstage at Smackdown after almost being forced to tap out to Tough Enough contestant Daniel Puder . Downright ticked off would probably be the best way to describe his mood . The unscripted nature of the contest was the main reason that Angle was made to look so bad since Puder just reacted to the situation and could have forced Angle to submit had the referees not thought quickly and counted a pin that wasn ’ t there on Puder " . ― Dave Scherer 
 = = = = The Wrestling Machine and departure ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In January 2005 , Angle took part in the Royal Rumble , but was eliminated by Shawn Michaels , who had returned to the ring to eliminate in retaliation . After mocking Michaels by defeating his former tag team partner , Marty Jannetty , and attacking former manager , Sherri Martel , Angle defeated Michaels in an interpromotional match at WrestleMania 21 , which won the Pro Wrestling Illustrated ( PWI ) Match of the Year award . He continued to feud with Michaels upon being drafted from SmackDown ! to Raw in the 2005 WWE draft lottery , losing to Michaels at Vengeance . On the July 25 , 2005 episode of Raw , Eugene took part in the " Kurt Angle Invitational " challenge . Eugene defeated Angle , winning his cherished Olympic gold medal ( per match stipulation ) , and starting a feud between the two . The feud culminated at SummerSlam , where Angle defeated Eugene to regain his medal . Angle later feuded with John Cena for the WWE Championship . He would challenge Cena at Unforgiven , but won by DQ , therefore not winning the title . He would face Shawn Michaels and Cena in a Triple Threat match at Taboo Tuesday but did not win , and would then unsuccessfully challenge Cena at Survivor Series . 
 In early January 2006 , Angle returned to the SmackDown ! brand as a surprise entrant in a twenty @-@ man battle royal for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship . Angle won by last eliminating Mark Henry , turning face in the process for the first time since 2004 . He retained the title against Henry at the Royal Rumble . Shortly after the match , The Undertaker made his return and challenged Angle for the title . At No Way Out , Angle retained the title against Undertaker after a controversial finish where Angle pinned Taker while locked in a triangle choke . As a result , Undertaker challenged Angle to a rematch on the March 3 episode of SmackDown ! , where Angle won by disqualification after Mark Henry interfered and attacked Undertaker . This ensured that Angle would go to WrestleMania 22 as champion . Angle then began a three way feud with 2006 Royal Rumble winner Rey Mysterio and Randy Orton ( who defeated Mysterio at No Way Out to gain entrance to the SmackDown main event at WrestleMania ) . At WrestleMania , Angle indirectly dropped the title to Mysterio in the Triple Threat match after Mysterio pinned Orton . 
 On May 29 , 2006 , Angle was drafted to the newly created ECW brand . It was during this time that he acquired the nickname " The Wrestling Machine " , wearing a mouth guard and quickly squashing opponents . Upon coming to ECW , he issued an open challenge for One Night Stand , which was accepted by Randy Orton . Angle defeated Orton at One Night Stand , later losing to him in a rematch at Vengeance . Angle appeared sporadically on WWE television throughout mid @-@ 2006 . On August 25 , 2006 , Angle was granted an early release from his WWE contract because of health reasons . Angle stated in the Kurt Angle : Champion documentary DVD that he asked for his release from WWE because he could not take time off and was working hurt , severely on some occasions . He also states that when he quit , WWE lost their top talent , as he was at the very top of the payroll . Angle wrestled his last match at an ECW taping on August 8 , against Sabu . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling = = = 
 = = = = Championship reigns ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Angle then went on to sign a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . The new signing was viewed by some as a promotion not having concern for the health of a wrestler . On September 24 , 2006 , during the closing segment of No Surrender , TNA President Dixie Carter announced that TNA Wrestling had signed Angle to a contract , with Jim Cornette introducing video footage of Angle training in a six @-@ sided TNA ring . On the December 28 , 2006 , episode of TNA Impact ! , this was announced as the " Moment of the Year " for TNA . 
 Angle made his TNA debut on October 19 , confronting Samoa Joe after Joe refused to relinquish the NWA World Heavyweight Championship belt that , according to the storyline , he had stolen from Jeff Jarrett . The two men ended up fighting while Jarrett took the title back . Angle was then the special enforcer for the Title vs. Career match between Jarrett and Sting at Bound for Glory , but , as part of the worked finish , he took out referee Rudy Charles and assumed the referee 's role for the rest of the match @-@ up . Angle 's first match in TNA took place on the November 16 airing of Impact ! , where he was booked to defeat Abyss with the ankle lock and be attacked after the match by Samoa Joe . At Genesis , Angle defeated Samoa Joe , ending Joe 's undefeated push . 
 At Final Resolution , Angle was booked to defeat Samoa Joe in a thirty @-@ minute Iron Man match 3 – 2 to earn a shot at the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Against All Odds , which he lost to Christian Cage after interference from Tomko and Scott Steiner . This led to a feud between Angle and Steiner , with Angle pinning Steiner at Destination X. After Angle defeated Steiner , he was picked to lead a team of four other wrestlers against a team of Christian Cage 's choice in a Lethal Lockdown match at April 's Lockdown . Angle chose Samoa Joe , Rhino , Sting , and Jeff Jarrett for Team Angle , while Cage chose A.J. Styles , Scott Steiner , Tomko , and Abyss . The man who gained the winning pinfall would become the number one contender to Christian Cage 's NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Team Angle was victorious after Jeff Jarrett hit Abyss with a <unk> guitar full of thumbtacks and allowed Sting to score the pin . Cage was set to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Sting and Angle in a triple threat match at Sacrifice . The day of the PPV , the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) , the owners of the NWA World Heavyweight and the NWA World Tag Team Championships , stripped Cage of the title and Team 3D of the tag team title . NWA Executive Director Robert K. Trobich stated the reason was that Cage refused to defend the NWA Title at NWA live events . At the PPV event , Cage , still holding the physical NWA Championship belt , defended what was billed as the " World Heavyweight Championship " against Angle and Sting . Angle was the victor of said contest by making Sting submit , who had technically just pinned Cage , and was announced as the new " World Heavyweight Champion " . The Impact ! following the event , Angle came to the ring with a new championship belt , and announced he was the new " TNA World Heavyweight Champion " . Afterward , Cage and Sting came to the ring and the three began to argue over who was the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion . Due to the controversial finish to their match at Sacrifice , the title was declared vacant by Cornette . A tournament was held for the title which culminated in a King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary on June 17 , 2007 . At the event , Angle became the TNA World Heavyweight Champion by defeating Cage , Samoa Joe , A.J. Styles , and Chris Harris . He then attacked Joe after denying a request for a handshake , reigniting their feud . This also turned Angle heel in the process . 
 At Victory Road , newly crowned X Division Champion Samoa Joe teamed with Kurt Angle to face TNA Tag Team Champions Team 3D , with the stipulation that if a wrestler pinned the other opponent , he won his championship . As part of the planned outcome of the match , Joe pinned Brother Ray of Team 3D to win both tag team belts , which he held by himself . On the following episode of Impact ! , Joe – now holding the X Division and Tag Team Championships , challenged Angle – the reigning TNA and ( IGF recognized ) IWGP Heavyweight Champion , to a Winner Take All match at Hard Justice . While illustrating how he would take away everything important in Angle 's life , Joe brought Angle 's wife Karen into the fray , as she demanded a divorce . During the match , however , Karen turned on Joe and aided her husband . As part of his next push , Angle won , gaining all the championships and becoming the second Triple Crown champion in TNA and the first to hold all three titles at the same time . Including the IWGP title , this made Angle a quadruple champion ( and since Joe held the tag team titles by himself , that meant Angle 's victory gave him both tag team championship belts , meaning Angle was now in possession of five championship belts ) . Angle , however , dropped both the X Division and Tag Team Titles to Jay Lethal and Team Pacman , respectively , at No Surrender . At Bound for Glory , Angle lost the TNA World Championship to Sting , but won it back on the October 25 episode of Impact ! . 
 Angle then joined forces with A.J. Styles and Tomko as The Angle Alliance at Turning Point against Samoa Joe , Kevin Nash , and Scott Hall . Styles had planned for Christian 's Coalition and The Angle Alliance to team up together , but Christian Cage demanded to be the leader of The Angle Alliance after Cage denied Angle 's request of being his " lackey " . At Final Resolution , Angle successfully defended the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Cage due to interference from Styles and again at Against All Odds with help from Tomko . At Lockdown , Angle lost the TNA World Heavyweight Championship to Samoa Joe after being pinned . 
 = = = = The Main Event Mafia ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 After suffering a neck injury , Angle was out of action . In the storyline , he returned to Impact ! to ask his estranged wife Karen to reunite with him , but she declined his offer . Later that night , after Styles suffered a beating at the hands of Team 3D , Booker T , and Tomko , Angle added to the mugging by hitting Styles with a steel chair . At <unk> , Angle lost to Styles , being pinned after interference from Karen . At Victory Road , Angle and Team 3D won a six @-@ man tag team Full Metal Mayhem match defeating the team of Christian Cage , Rhino , and Styles . At Hard Justice , Angle once again lost to Styles – this time in a Last Man Standing match . The feud continued on the next episode of Impact ! , with Styles winning Angle 's gold medal in a mock amateur wrestling match . The next week Angle challenged Styles to a ladder match for the Olympic Gold Medal . As they both stood on the top of the ladder , the arena went dark and Jeff Jarrett 's music played . When the lights turned on , Styles had a guitar and performed an Acoustic Equalizer on Angle to win the match . 
 Angle began a feud with Jarrett after No Surrender when Jarrett hit Angle with his guitar , a match that involved him , Christian Cage and Samoa Joe for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On the October 2 episode of Impact , Mick Foley announced that he would be the special enforcer for Angle 's match with Jarrett at Bound for Glory IV . Angle lost to Jarrett in this match , being pinned after taking the mandible claw from Foley and a guitar shot and Stroke from Jarrett . He started attacking other superstars backstage in order to get a rematch against Jarrett . On the first HD Impact ! , Angle , Booker T , Kevin Nash , and Sting started a new stable of legends called The Main Event Mafia . Scott Steiner joined the group the following week . Angle then defeated Abyss at Turning Point in a Falls Count Anywhere match . After weeks of torturing Jeff Jarrett to give him a rematch , Jarrett said that if Angle could defeat Rhino at the second Final Resolution of 2008 , with Mick Foley as the Special Enforcer , he would grant it . Angle defeated Rhino to earn a rematch with Jarrett at Genesis after Al Snow made a surprise appearance and distracted Foley for Angle to cheat . At Sacrifice , Angle lost his leadership of the Mafia to Sting because of their match 's stipulation . On June 21 at Slammiversary , Angle won the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for the fourth time in a King of the Mountain match with help from Samoa Joe . On the following episode of Impact ! , Angle regained leadership of the Main Event Mafia after he and the rest of the Mafia , attacked Sting while introducing Joe as their newest member . At No Surrender Angle lost his championship to A.J. Styles in a five @-@ way match which also included Matt Morgan , Sting , and Hernandez . 
 = = = = Various feuds ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 After defeating Morgan at Bound for Glory , Angle came out on the following episode of Impact ! and put over the younger talent of the company , thus leaving the Main Event Mafia and turning face once again . Afterward , he was assaulted by the debuting Desmond Wolfe , who defeated him via knockout in a street fight the following week . At Turning Point Angle defeated Wolfe in a rematch . The following month at Final Resolution Angle faced Wolfe in a " Three Degrees of Pain " two out of three falls match . Wolfe managed to gain the first fall by pinning Angle following the Tower of London , but Angle forced him to submit with the ankle lock to win the second fall . In the final fall , which could only be won by escaping the Six Sides of Steel , Angle managed to escape first and won the match . On the January 4 , 2010 , live , three @-@ hour , Monday night edition of Impact ! Angle received a shot at A.J. Styles ' World Heavyweight Championship , but was defeated in the main event of the show . Two weeks later at Genesis Angle received one last shot at the World Heavyweight Title , but was once again defeated by Styles , who turned heel with the help of Ric Flair and nailed him with the title belt . As a result , Angle was barred from challenging for the belt as long as Styles is the title holder . Due to the circumstances surrounding the loss , Hulk Hogan gave Angle another shot at Styles and the TNA World Heavyweight Championship on the January 21 episode of Impact ! , but this time he lost the match after referee Earl Hebner , who was later revealed to have been paid off by Flair , called for the bell in an incident similar to the Montreal Screwjob . Angle responded to the incident by spitting in Hogan 's face , threatening to quit TNA and go back to WWE . Angle apologized to Hogan , after being saved by him from Scott Hall and <unk> @-@ Pac . At Against All Odds Angle took part in the 8 Card Stud Tournament to crown a new number one contender , but was defeated in the first round by Mr. Anderson , after Anderson used Angle 's dog tags to bust him open . On the following episode of Impact ! Angle promised to make Anderson suffer for disrespecting the U.S. soldiers , but was in the end once again laid out by him , effectively starting a feud between the two . At Destination X Angle defeated Anderson in a rematch . Angle and Anderson were booked in a rubber match inside a steel cage at Lockdown . On the April 5 episode of Impact ! Anderson defeated Angle in a ladder match to win possession of the key to the cage door . At Lockdown , Angle defeated Anderson in a steel cage match and afterwards announced that he would take some time off from wrestling . 
 Angle returned on the May 20 episode of Impact ! as a face and was ranked number two by the Championship Committee in the inaugural top 10 rankings for a World Heavyweight title shot . Angle , however , decided to take his name out of the running for a title shot and vowed to fight his way through the top 10 and earn his spot at the top of the company . At Slammiversary VIII Angle started his climb back to the top by defeating Kazarian , who was ranked number ten . Angle continued his climb , defeating Desmond Wolfe , who was ranked number nine prior to the match , on the June 24 episode of Impact ! , and D 'Angelo Dinero , ranked number eight , at Victory Road . Prior to his match with Dinero , Angle announced that should he lose on his way to the top of the rankings , he would retire from professional wrestling On the July 22 episode of Impact ! Angle defeated number seven ranked Hernandez and followed that up three weeks later by defeating number six ranked A.J. Styles . On the August 19 episode of Impact ! the TNA World Heavyweight Championship was vacated and instead of continuing his climb , Angle was entered into an eight @-@ man tournament for the title , defeating X Division Champion Douglas Williams in his first round match . At No Surrender Angle first wrestled Jeff Hardy to a twenty @-@ minute time limit draw , after which Eric Bischoff ordered a five @-@ minute extra time . After that and a second five @-@ minute extra time also ended in draws , it was ruled that , due to a cut , Angle wouldn 't be allowed to continue the match , ending the match in a no contest . After wrestling a draw on the September 16 episode of Impact ! , it was announced that both Angle and Hardy would advance to the finals at Bound for Glory , to wrestle Mr. Anderson in a three – way match . 
 = = = = Feud with Jeff Jarrett ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 At Bound for Glory Angle was defeated by Hardy , when he turned heel and pinned Anderson , after an interference from Hulk Hogan and Eric Bischoff , who then went on to form an alliance named Immortal , with Hardy , Abyss and Jeff Jarrett . On the following episode of Impact ! Angle came out to make his retirement speech , after his failed attempt to win the World Heavyweight Championship , but was interrupted by Jarrett , who announced that he had made a deal with Hogan and Bischoff in order to end Angle 's career at Bound for Glory , before attacking him , when he was restrained by TNA 's security officers Gunner and Murphy . The following week Angle returned , trying to get his hands on Bischoff and Ric Flair , before being stopped by TNA 's security officers . Angle returned three weeks later on the November 11 episode of Impact ! , saving Samoa Joe from Jeff Jarrett , Gunner and Murphy . After not appearing again for two weeks , Angle made another return on the December 2 episode of Impact ! , saving Samoa Joe from Jeff Jarrett and Abyss . 
 On the January 6 , 2011 , episode of Impact ! Angle interrupted Jarrett 's $ 100 @,@ 000 Mixed Martial Arts Challenge and signed a contract to face him at Genesis in an MMA exhibition match , since he had promised not to wrestle again . The match was thrown out in the third round after Jarrett blinded Angle . After the match Jarrett bloodied Angle , before announcing that he was ending his mixed martial arts career and promised that his wife , Karen Jarrett ( formerly Karen Angle ) , would join the retirement party . On the January 13 episode of Impact ! Karen made her return and stopped Angle just as he was about to attack Jeff , telling him that she would not allow him to ruin their personal lives and promised to tell all about their divorce the following week . The following week Karen slapped Kurt , providing a distraction which allowed Jeff to beat him down . At the end of the show Crimson saved Angle from a beating at the hands of Immortal and Fortune . The following week Ric Flair reinstated Angle in order to place him and Crimson in a seven – on – two handicap match against Jarrett , James Storm , Robert Roode , Kazarian , Rob Terry , Gunner and Murphy . The match ended with Jarrett pinning Angle for the win . Afterwards , Angle was saved from another beatdown by the returning Scott Steiner . The following week Fortune turned on Immortal and aligned themselves with Angle , Crimson and Steiner . On February 13 at Against All Odds Jarrett defeated Angle in a singles match and as a result Angle was forced to walk Karen down the aisle , when she and Jarrett renewed their wedding vows on the March 3 episode of Impact ! . After the match Angle hinted at a possible retirement by leaving his wrestling boots in the ring . On March 3 Angle proceeded to destroy the wedding set with an axe and forced wedding guest , New York Jet Bart Scott to submit with the ankle lock . On April 17 at Lockdown , Jarrett defeated Angle in an " Ultra Male Rules " Two out of Three Falls steel cage match , with help from Karen . On the May 12 episode of Impact ! , Angle revealed Chyna as his backup in taking care of the <unk> . At Sacrifice , Angle and Chyna defeated the <unk> in a mixed tag team match . Later that same month , Angle signed a new three @-@ year contract with TNA . With Karen out of the picture , Angle defeated Jarrett on June 12 at Slammiversary IX in what was billed as the " final battle " between the two to retain his Olympic gold medal and become the number one contender for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . However , on the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Jarrett challenged Angle to a Parking Lot Brawl and agreed to sign a contract that would force him to move to Mexico without Angle 's children , should he lose the match . Angle ended up winning the fight after choking Jarrett with a shirt , forcing him to say " adiós " . 
 = = = = Regaining championships ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 With his feud with Jarrett behind him , Angle aligned himself with Sting to feud with the rest of Immortal , including the group 's newest member , TNA World Heavyweight Champion Mr. Anderson . On the July 14 episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle helped Sting regain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship from Anderson . On August 7 at Hardcore Justice , Angle defeated Sting , after hitting him with a chair he snatched away from Hulk Hogan , to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for the record @-@ breaking fifth time , thus turning heel . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle explained that he did not agree with Sting , who , using the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , wanted to hand the promotion back to Dixie Carter , as he had found out that she had lied to him about not knowing of the relationship between Karen and Jeff Jarrett . When Sting confronted Angle , he was attacked by Hogan , which led to Angle revealing that Hogan had been the one who had exposed Carter 's lie to him . Angle also revealed that his goal was now to ruin Carter 's youth movement in TNA by eliminating the younger wrestlers one @-@ by @-@ one and started by attacking Bound for Glory Series leader Crimson after the main event , cementing his heel turn . Angle made his first televised title defense on the September 1 episode of Impact Wrestling , defeating Sting in a rematch , following interference from special enforcer Hulk Hogan and the rest of Immortal . The following week , Angle 's title match with Mr. Anderson ended in a disqualification , following interference from Immortal , which led to a three @-@ way match between Angle , Anderson and Sting on September 11 at No Surrender , where Angle managed to retain the title , following interference from Hogan . On October 16 at Bound for Glory , Angle successfully defended the title against Bobby Roode . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle lost the TNA World Heavyweight Championship to Roode 's tag team partner , James Storm . 
 Angle returned on the November 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , attacking James Storm and revealing himself as the man who had attacked and bloodied him also the previous week , costing him his match with Bobby Roode for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On December 11 at Final Resolution , Angle was defeated by Storm in a singles match . On January 8 , 2012 , at Genesis , Angle defeated Storm in a rematch . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Storm defeated Angle in a number one contender 's match . 
 Angle returned on the February 16 episode of Impact Wrestling , costing Jeff Hardy his shot at the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On March 18 at Victory Road , Angle defeated Hardy in a singles match , pinning him while grabbing a hold of the ring ropes . On April 15 at Lockdown , Hardy defeated Angle in a rematch , contested inside a steel cage . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle defeated A.J. Styles , following interference from Styles ' rivals Christopher Daniels and Kazarian . The following week , Angle warned the two Immortal associates never to interfere in one of his matches again . 
 On May 13 at Sacrifice , Angle defeated Styles in a rematch , following another interference from Daniels and Kazarian . After the match , Angle made the save for Styles , chasing Daniels and Kazarian out of the ring , and becoming a face once again . On June 10 at Slammiversary , Angle and Styles defeated Daniels and Kazarian to win the TNA World Tag Team Championship . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle entered the 2012 Bound for Glory Series , taking part in the opening gauntlet match , from which he was eliminated by Daniels . Two weeks later , Angle and Styles lost the TNA World Tag Team Championship back to Daniels and Kazarian . Angle wrestled his final match in the 2012 Bound for Glory Series on the August 30 episode of Impact Wrestling , losing to Jeff Hardy , which caused him to get eliminated from the tournament . 
 On September 9 at No Surrender , Angle and Styles unsuccessfully challenged Daniels and Kazarian for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . Angle and Styles received another title shot against Daniels and Kazarian on October 14 at Bound for Glory , in a three @-@ way match , which was won by Chavo Guerrero , Jr. and Hernandez . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle defeated Daniels and Styles in a three @-@ way match to become one of four wrestlers in consideration for a shot at the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = = = New Main Event Mafia ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 The following week , Angle was chosen as the number one contender for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , but was defeated by Jeff Hardy in his title match . Afterwards , Angle was attacked by Aces & Eights . At Turning Point , Angle defeated Aces & Eights member Devon via submission , despite the rest of Aces & Eights trying to interfere . Angle continued his feud with Aces & Eights on the December 6 episode of Impact Wrestling , defeating DOC via disqualification after the rest of Aces & Eights interfered . Three days later at Final Resolution , Angle teamed with Garett Bischoff , Samoa Joe , and Wes Brisco to defeat Devon , DOC , and two masked members of Aces & Eights in an eight @-@ man tag team match . Angle unsuccessfully challenged Devon for the TNA Television Championship on the edition of December 20 of Impact Wrestling , after interference from Aces & Eights , Garett Bischoff , Samoa Joe , and Wes Brisco . On the January 3 , 2013 , episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle and Samoa Joe defeated Devon and a masked member of Aces & Eights in a steel cage tag team match . Afterwards , the returning Sting saved Angle and Joe from a beatdown from Aces & Eights before revealing the mystery member as the debuting Mike Knox . The following week , Angle was sidelined with a storyline injury after Knox hit him in the neck with a ball @-@ peen hammer . Angle returned to in @-@ ring action on the January 31 Impact Wrestling , defeating Aces & Eights member Mr. Anderson in a steel cage match . Afterwards , Angle 's two allies Garret Bischoff and Wes Brisco revealed themselves as members of Aces & Eights and attacked him . Angle infiltrated the Aces & Eights hideout on the February 28 <unk> managed to unmask their Vice President , but was beat down by the other members before he could reveal his identity to the cameras . Angle revealed the Vice President as D 'Lo Brown on the following episode of Impact . At Lockdown , Angle was defeated by Wes Brisco in a steel cage match , following interference from Brown . Angle was defeated by Jeff Hardy in a four @-@ way number one contenders match for the World Heavyweight Championship , which also included Magnus and Samoa Joe on the March 21 Impact Wrestling . In the following weeks , Angle continued to face Bischoff and Brisco in multiple tag team and handicap matches , that all ended with the two getting the advantage over Angle . Angle then began feuding with A.J. Styles , after Styles refused to answer Angle 's question on whether he is with TNA or the Aces & Eights which led to a brawl between the two on the May 9 episode of Impact Wrestling . On June 2 at Slammiversary XI , Angle was announced as the second inductee into the TNA Hall of Fame . Later that night , Angle defeated Styles in a singles match . On the following Impact Wrestling , Angle got into a verbal confrontation with the debuting Rampage Jackson who claimed he had to beat the best to be the best . The following week , Angle was defeated by Styles in a rematch to earn the final spot in the 2013 Bound for Glory Series . Afterward , Angle was assaulted by Aces & Eights until Jackson came out and made the save . On June 20 Angle attacked TNA World Heavyweight Champion Bully Ray at the end of the Impact episode , and revealed himself as the first member of Sting 's New Main Event Mafia . In the following weeks , Angle and Sting recruited Samoa Joe , Magnus , and Rampage Jackson as members of the New Main Event Mafia . Beginning on August 2 , Angle took a hiatus from TNA after being admitted to rehab for drug and alcohol use . 
 = = = = Director of Wrestling Operations ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 Angle returned on the edition of October 10 of Impact attacking EGO and challenged Bobby Roode to a match at Bound For Glory . The following week , Angle stated his discontentment with Roode mocking his Hall of Fame induction and told Roode he would make him tap out . Roode responded by attacking Angle with help from his faction , EGO , forcing Angle to submit to the crossface hold in a precursory act prior to their match . At the PPV Angle was inducted into the TNA Hall of Fame but he refused to accept the offer as he felt he had let himself , TNA and the fans down and didn 't deserve a Hall of Fame induction ceremony . He also said he would accept the offer when he feels he has earned it and he still has great things to do in TNA . Later in that night , Angle was defeated by Roode , after he landed awkwardly from a running belly @-@ to @-@ belly suplex . On October 31 episode of Impact , Angle lied about gaining medical clearance Angle suffered ( kayfabe ) convulsions during the match against Bobby Roode after a bad landing from the same move again , which resulted in referee Brian Hebner rewarding a knock out / count @-@ out victory to Roode . After the match , he also showed signs of post @-@ concussive amnesia . On November 5 , Angle was reported to had tested negative for concussion , but his recurring knee injuries still required monitoring . 
 The following week , Angle saw the New Main Event Mafia being disbanded , then he was attacked by Roode after he accused him to use his injuries to get out of the match . On November 14 , Angle won a submission match against Austin Aries in the World title tournament , but by using Roode 's finisher : arm trap crossface , with Roode watching on at the ramp . However , Angle lost his next match against Magnus due to an interference from Roode . At Final Resolution , Angle was defeated by Roode in a 2 @-@ out @-@ of 3 falls match , but Angle beat Roode in a Steel Cage match at Genesis to end the feud . 
 On February 6 , 2014 , Angle had a match against Magnus . However , he won by DQ , when EC3 attacked him , performing a leglock , which injured his knee . On February 27 , 2014 , Angle officially accepted his induction into the TNA Hall of Fame , but the ceremony was interrupted by EC3 , Angle attacked Ethan Carter III , on the next week , Angle was attacked by Ethan Carter III and severely damaged his knees , thus losing his chance to fight at Lockdown . Angle made his return on April 17 , and vowing revenge . On April 24 , after Kurt defeated Rockstar Spud in a match , EC3 attacked Angle but Willow made the save . At Sacrifice Willow and Kurt Angle defeated Ethan Carter III and Rockstar Spud . In May , Angle underwent ACL repair surgery and was sidelined . 
 On June 20 , 2014 , Angle was named Executive Director of Wrestling Operations of TNA by TNA 's Board of Directors . He announced a TNA World Heavyweight Championship rematch for the edition of July 3 of Impact Wrestling between Lashley and Eric Young , and reinstate Bobby Roode , who had been indefinitely suspended by MVP . Angle also retired the TNA Television Championship , which had not been seen or defended since Abyss won it at Slammiversary 2013 . On September 18 , 2014 ( aired on October 29 due to tape delay ) , Angle refereed the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between Bobby Roode and Bobby Lashley . 
 Angle 's contract with TNA was due to expire on September 14 , 2014 . Around this time he reached out to Vince McMahon to offer his services for a return to the WWE . Unbeknownst to him Triple H had taken over McMahon 's former duties . Angle offered to return as a part @-@ time wrestler due to concerns of his age and health . Angle was caught off guard when WWE declined his services . It is speculated that WWE only offered a full @-@ time contract which Angle didn 't accept or WWE declined his return due to past relationship issues with him . After he was denied by WWE , he quickly signed a part @-@ time contract with TNA Wrestling . On September 21 , 2014 , Angle 's contract with TNA expired , ending his eight @-@ year tenure with the company . Angle teased a return to WWE , however , he was offered a full @-@ time contract , so Angle decided to stay with TNA . 
 = = = = Final storylines ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 Angle returned to in @-@ ring action on TNA 's debut on Destination America on January 7 , 2015 , when he stopped a brawl , but started a street fight against MVP . On January 31 , 2015 ( aired March 20 ) , Angle defeated Lashley to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for a record sixth time . He lost to Eric Young on May 1 , in a stretcher match with the title not on the line . He successfully retained his title against Lashley once and then again against both Lashley and Eric Young . On May 8 , Angle defeated Young to retain his title with Bully Ray as the special referee . At Destination X , Kurt Angle defeated Rockstar Spud , who gave up the X Division Championship in order to challenge for the title . Later that night , Angle again successfully defended his title , this time against Austin Aries , who cashed in his Feast or Fired contract to allow him a title match . On the June 25 , 2015 taping of Impact Wrestling ( aired July 1 ) , Angle lost the championship to Ethan Carter III . On the July 8 episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle faced Carter in a rematch , in a losing effort . 
 On October 4 , 2015 , at Bound for Glory , Angle defeated Young via ankle lock submission . On November 19 , 2015 , Kurt Angle was announced for TNA 's live debut on Pop . On the November 25 , 2015 , episode of Impact Wrestling , Angle announced that he would remain with TNA until the conclusion of their Maximum Impact Tour of the UK on January 31 , 2016 , after which he would part ways with the company . Angle announced his " Farewell Tour " which took place on TNA 's tour of the UK . Angle 's final match was against Lashley on March 8 , 2016 which ended up in a losing effort . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = 
 On February 18 , 2007 , Angle made his debut in New Japan Pro Wrestling , teaming with former IWGP Heavyweight Champion Yuji Nagata to defeat fellow TNA wrestler Travis Tomko and fellow WWE alumnus Giant Bernard . 
 Angle was booked to face Brock Lesnar in a champion versus champion match for the Inoki Genome Federation on June 29 , 2007 , and defeated him by submission for the IWGP World Heavyweight Championship , and he challenged him to an MMA fight . On December 19 , 2007 , Angle defended the IWGP World Title successfully against Kendo Kashin . 
 On January 4 , 2008 , Angle made his third successful IWGP World Championship defense when he defeated Yuji Nagata at the New Japan Pro Wrestling supershow Wrestle Kingdom II in Tokyo Dome by forcing Nagata to submit to the ankle lock . On February 17 , 2008 , Angle lost the IWGP title to Shinsuke Nakamura in a unification match . He returned in August during the G1 Climax in two special tag matches A.J. Styles as his opponent with Shinsuke Nakamura and Masahiro Chono as Angle 's partners and Hiroshi Tanahashi and Shinjiro Otani as Styles ' partners . Angle 's team won both matches . 
 He returned on January 4 , 2009 , at Wrestle Kingdom III in Tokyo Dome in a special eight man tag match , where he , Kevin Nash , Chono , and Riki Choshu faced <unk> ( Giant Bernard , Karl Anderson , Takashi Iizuka and Tomohiro Ishii ) , with Angle getting the win for his team . Angle then went on to defeat Bernard in a singles match at New Japan 's ISM tour on February 15 . After Hiroshi Tanahashi retained the IWGP Heavyweight Championship against Nakamura in the main event , Angle challenged him for the title , which Tanahashi accepted . Tanahashi defeated Angle on April 5 at New Japan 's Resolution ' 09 to retain the title . 
 = = = Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( 2012 ) = = = 
 Angle made his debut for Mexican promotion Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) on August 5 , 2012 , at Triplemanía XX , where he teamed up with Jeff Jarrett as Team Dorian Roldán in a Hair vs. Hair match , where they faced Team Joaquín Roldán ( Electroshock and L.A. Park ) , with the <unk> ' hairs on the line . Electroshock won the match for his team by pinning Angle , forcing Dorian to have his head shaved bald . However , after the match , Angle , Jarrett and Dorian overpowered the winners and shaved Joaquín bald . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On March 20 , 2016 , Angle competed for <unk> , going against former rival and fellow WWE alumnus Rey Mysterio in a losing effort in a two @-@ falls match during the match Angle played as heel by using dirty tactics . Angle wrestled for Revolution Pro Wrestling on June 12 , where he defeated Zack Sabre Jr . On May 31 it was announced that Angle will face Cody Rhodes in a Northeast Wrestling event , called " Wrestling Under the Stars " , that will be on August 27 at Wappingers Falls , NY . Angle is set to compete for ICW on November 20 at Fear & Loathing IX . 
 = = Olympic Games Matches = = 
 = = Acting career = = 
 Angle has expressed interest on several occasions in pursuing an acting career after retiring from professional wrestling . In 2008 , he made his film debut as a racist prison deputy in the short film Chains . In 2009 , he played serial killer Brad Mayfield in the film End Game . On a third season episode of Pros vs. Joes , he was teamed up with Jimmy Smith and Kendall Gill against the Joes . Angle appeared in the " Car Wreck Vanish " episode of Criss Angel Mindfreak . He played Russian MMA champion Koba ( in a non @-@ speaking role ) in the 2011 film Warrior , and starred as town sheriff Will Logan in the film River of Darkness . On the Right After Wrestling program on Sirius Satellite Radio , Angle revealed he would become a part @-@ time wrestler after his contract expired in 2011 to focus on Angle Foods and his acting career . In the 2013 film Pro Wrestlers vs Zombies , he plays himself as both a human and a zombie . Angle also had a small role in the 2014 cult @-@ film Sharknado 2 : The Second One and in the 2014 romantic @-@ comedy film Not Cool . He appeared in the film The Last Witch Hunter . He also made a cameo appearance in the movie Pain and Gain in which he brawls against Dwayne Johnson 's character in a prison fight . Angle appeared on an episode of Duck Dynasty in February 2016 . 
