 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = = Film = = = = 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 = = Other endeavors = = 
 In 1997 , Angle worked for a year as a sportscaster on Pittsburgh 's local Fox affiliate <unk> @-@ TV . He also did a commercial for Pittsburgh @-@ based pizza chain Pizza Outlet . 
 = = = Mixed martial arts = = = 
 Angle is a longtime fan of MMA , and has occasionally talked about his desire to compete . UFC president Dana White stated that Angle was in talks to appear as a heavyweight contestant on the 10th season of The Ultimate Fighter , but failed the medical requirements . Angle signed with Bellator MMA on October 28 , 2015 . He attended a fan convention on November 6 , the eve of Bellator 145 , then joined the commentary booth the next night , during the Bobby Lashley vs James Thompson match , where he teased possibly fighting for the promotion himself . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Angle was born in Mt . Lebanon , Pennsylvania , the son of Jackie and David Angle . He attended Clarion University of Pennsylvania , graduating with a degree in education in 1993 . Angle is a Christian . 
 Angle has four older brothers ( one of whom , Eric , is also a wrestler ) and a sister , Le 'Anne , who died in 2003 . His father , a crane operator , was killed in a construction accident when Angle was sixteen , and Angle dedicated both his career and his autobiography It 's True , It 's True to him as a result . Angle stated in an interview that , following the death of his father , he regarded his wrestling coach , David Schultz , as a paternal figure . While training Angle , Schultz was murdered in January 1996 by John <unk> du Pont , the sponsor of Schultz 's team of Olympic <unk> . Angle 's mother died in 2015 after a long battle with cancer . 
 He married Karen Smedley on December 19 , 1998 , In September 2008 , it was reported that Karen had filed for divorce from Kurt . They have two children together , a daughter named Kyra Angle ( born December 2 , 2002 ) and son named Kody Angle ( born October 26 , 2006 ) . 
 In 2010 , It was reported that Angle was engaged to actress Giovanna Yannotti . On September 30 , 2010 , Yannotti announced that the couple was expecting their first child . On January 22 , 2011 , Yannotti gave birth to a daughter named Giuliana Marie Angle . Angle and Yannotti were married on July 20 , 2012 . They had their second child together and fourth for Angle , a daughter named Sophia Laine Angle on New Year 's Eve , 2012 . 
 Angle is a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers . 
 In 2008 , Angle was selected to be featured on the cover for metal band Emmure 's second album The Respect Issue where he is depicted on the front and back covers for the record as well as in the inlay . Angle also further promoted the album by wearing an Emmure shirt during fights broadcast on TNA Impact ! . 
 In July 2015 , Angle was expected to make an appearance at London Comic Con in England but his management team tweeted that Angle underwent emergency surgery to remove fluid buildup on his spinal cord after all of his extremities went numb . A week before this emergency , he had surgery to remove a benign tumor from his neck . 
 Angle is a Republican and supported Marco Rubio for President in 2016 . 
 = = = Steroid allegations = = = 
 On March 6 , 2007 , Sports Illustrated reported that Angle 's name was found in the client database of a Florida wellness center suspected of being a front for distributing performance @-@ enhancing drugs . The magazine alleged Angle had received prescriptions for <unk> ( which is not approved for human use by the FDA ) and nandrolone , both anabolic steroids . Angle responded on his official website : " I did not improperly receive prescriptions . It is well documented that in my career I have broken vertebrae in my neck on five occasions and each time the course of treatment was under the care and supervision of my doctors . Any attempt to link me to the athletes in the current news accounts who may have improperly sought performance @-@ enhancing drugs is without foundation . " 
 Approximately two weeks later on March 19 , 2007 , Sports Illustrated posted on its website another article in its continuing series investigating a steroid and HGH ring used by a number of professional athletes in several sports . That article mentioned that 10 other professional wrestlers were implicated to have received performance @-@ enhancing drugs from the same drug ring including four WWE wrestlers and Eddie Guerrero . Kurt never failed a drug test for pain pills . He did , however , fail a steroid test under WWE 's Wellness Policy because his prescription for <unk> @-@ <unk> had expired . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 Angle was arrested at his home by Moon Township , Pennsylvania police on September 28 , 2007 , on a charge of driving under the influence after being reported by a woman who claimed that he almost hit her while leaving a local restaurant . Officials said Angle failed a field sobriety test but refused a blood test . Angle was charged with driving under the influence and careless driving , but he denied the charges . On September 9 , 2008 , Angle was cleared of all charges pertaining to his DUI arrest . 
 On August 15 , 2009 , Pittsburgh @-@ based NBC affiliate WPXI reported that Angle had been arrested . His girlfriend stated that she had filed a protection from abuse ( PFA ) order and that he was stalking her in the Robinson Township area . Angle was charged with " driving while operating privilege is suspended , prohibited acts @-@ possession , harassment and prohibited acts " . <unk> , a human growth hormone , was found in his car ; Angle maintained that he had a prescription for the drug . On September 15 , a District Court Judge dropped the harassment , suspended license , and drug charges against Angle . On November 9 , 2009 , the PFA charges were dropped after he and former girlfriend Trenesha Biggers reached an agreement to avoid contact with each other . 
 On March 25 , 2011 , Angle was arrested in Thompson , North Dakota and charged with " being in control of a motor vehicle while intoxicated " after failing a field sobriety test . Angle later pleaded guilty to the charges and was sentenced on April 20 to one year of unsupervised probation , a chemical dependency evaluation , a $ 250 fine , $ 225 in court fees , and a ten @-@ day suspended sentence . 
 Angle was arrested on September 4 , 2011 , by Virginia State Troopers for allegedly driving under the influence . Angle was placed in Warren County Jail , before posting $ 2 @,@ 000 bail and being released in the early morning . State police revealed that Angle 's initial breath test at the scene , where he was stopped by police showed a blood @-@ alcohol concentration of 0 @.@ 091 percent , which was above the legal limit of 0 @.@ 08 percent . The test was later ruled not admissible and when a second test , taken at the police station , showed a blood @-@ alcohol concentration of 0 @.@ 06 , the DUI charge was dropped . Angle was still charged with reckless driving . On November 8 , 2011 , Angle entered a plea of no contest and was fined $ 1 @,@ 500 . 
 On August 2 , 2013 , Angle was again charged with driving while intoxicated in Decatur , Texas . Later that same day , Angle announced he was immediately entering a rehabilitation center . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Angle Slam / Olympic slam , sometimes from the top rope 
 Ankle lock , sometimes while grapevining the opponent 's leg – 2001 – present ; used as a signature move in 2000 
 Crossface chickenwing – 2000 ; adopted from Bob Backlund 
 Signature moves 
 Bodyscissors 
 Double leg takedown , often transitioned into a pin or a suplex 
 European uppercut 
 Frog splash – TNA 
 Headbutt 
 Moonsault 
 Multiple suplex <unk> / Release belly @-@ to @-@ back 
 Bridging / Release / Rolling German 
 Overhead belly @-@ to @-@ belly , sometimes from the second rope 
 Rear naked choke 
 Triangle choke 
 Managers 
 Bob Backlund 
 Eric Bischoff 
 Paul Heyman 
 Shane McMahon 
 Stephanie McMahon @-@ Helmsley 
 Trish Stratus 
 Team Angle 
 Luther Reigns 
 Mark Jindrak 
 Daivari 
 Tomko 
 Karen Angle 
 Kevin Nash 
 Frank Trigg 
 Nicknames 
 " The Most Celebrated Real Athlete in WWF History " ( WWF ) 
 " The ( Only ) Olympic Gold Medalist ( in Pro Wrestling History ) " ( WWF / E , TNA ) 
 " The American / Olympic Hero " ( WWF / E ) 
 " The Wrestling Machine " ( WWE / TNA ) 
 " The Godfather of The Main Event Mafia " ( TNA ) 
 " The Cyborg " ( TNA ) 
 Entrance themes 
 " Medal " by Jim Johnston ( WWF / E / independent circuit ; November 14 , 1999 – January 2 , 2006 ; March 20 , 2016 – present ) 
 " Medal " ( Remix ) by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; January 29 , 2006 – July 11 , 2006 ) 
 " Medal " ( Revisited ) by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; July 11 , 2006 – August 8 , 2006 ) 
 " My Quest " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; September 24 , 2006 – August 9 , 2007 ) 
 " Gold Medal " performed by Tha Trademarc and composed by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; August 12 , 2007 – January 31 , 2016 ) 
 " Main Event Mafia " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ; used while a part of The Main Event Mafia ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 = = = Amateur wrestling = = = 
 Canadian Cup Championship 
 Winner ( 1990 ) 
 Collegiate / High School 
 Pennsylvania State Wrestling Champion ( 1987 ) 
 Clarion University Freshman of the Year ( 1988 ) 
 International Federation of Associated Wrestling Styles 
 FILA Junior World Freestyle Champion ( 1988 ) 
 FILA World Championships gold medal in freestyle wrestling ( 100 kg ) ( 1995 ) 
 International Sports Hall of Fame 
 Class of 2016 
 National Amateur Wrestling 
 National Amateur Wrestling Hall of Fame ( Class of 2001 ) 
 National Collegiate Athletic Association 
 NCAA Division I All @-@ American ( 1990 – 1992 ) 
 NCAA Division I Champion ( 1990 , 1992 ) 
 Olympic Games 
 Summer Olympics gold medal in freestyle wrestling ( heavyweight ) ( 1996 ) 
 USA Wrestling 
 USA Junior Freestyle Champion ( 1987 ) 
 USA Senior Freestyle Champion ( 1995 , 1996 ) 
 USA Wrestling Hall of Fame ( Class of 2001 ) 
 Greatest Shoot Wrestler of All @-@ Time 
 = = = Professional wrestling = = = 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Future Legend Award ( 2000 ) 
 Inoki Genome Federation 
 IWGP Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 International Wrestling Institute and Museum 
 George Tragos / Lou Thesz Hall of Fame ( 2012 ) 
 Special honoree ( 2015 ) 
 Power Pro Wrestling 
 PPW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Comeback of the Year ( 2003 ) 
 Feud of the Year ( 2000 ) vs. Triple H 
 Feud of the Year ( 2003 ) vs. Brock Lesnar 
 Feud of the Year ( 2007 ) vs. Samoa Joe 
 Match of the Year ( 2003 ) vs. Brock Lesnar in an Iron Man match on SmackDown ! on September 16 
 Match of the Year ( 2005 ) vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania 21 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2000 ) 
 Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year ( 2001 ) 
 Most Popular Wrestler of the Year ( 2003 ) 
 Rookie of the Year ( 2000 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2003 ) 
 Ranked 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2001 
 SoCal Uncensored 
 Match of the Year ( 2000 ) vs. Christopher Daniels , September 13 , 2000 , Ultimate Pro Wrestling 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA World Heavyweight Championship ( 6 times ) 
 TNA X Division Championship ( 1 time ) 
 TNA World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Himself / Sting ( 1 ) 1 and A.J. Styles ( 1 ) 
 King of the Mountain ( 2007 , 2009 ) 
 TNA Hall of Fame ( Class of 2013 ) 
 Second TNA Triple Crown Champion 
 Feud of the Year ( 2006 , 2007 ) with Samoa Joe 
 Match of the Year ( 2007 ) vs. Sting at Bound for Glory , October 14 , 2007 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment 
 WWF / E Championship ( 4 times ) 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WCW Championship ( 1 time ) 2 
 WCW United States Championship ( 1 time ) 2 
 WWF Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF European Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Chris Benoit 
 WWE Tag Team Championship Tournament ( 2002 ) 
 King of the Ring ( 2000 ) 
 Tenth Triple Crown Champion 
 Fifth Grand Slam Champion 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Gimmick ( 2000 ) 
 Best on Interviews ( 2002 ) 
 Best Technical Wrestler ( 2002 ) 
 Feud of the Year ( 2003 ) vs. Brock Lesnar 
 Match of the Year with Chris Benoit vs. Edge and Rey Mysterio , No Mercy 2002 
 Most Improved ( 2000 ) 
 Most Outstanding Wrestler ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 Readers ' Favorite Wrestler ( 2002 , 2003 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2002 ) 
 Wrestler of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 2004 ) 
 1 ^ Angle originally won both tag team championship belts from solo championship holder Samoa Joe . Sting won a four way match to win the other share of the title , and joined Angle in his reign mid @-@ way <unk> ^ Won during the Invasion storyline . 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Todd Manning = 
 Thomas Todd Manning is a fictional character from the American daytime drama One Life to Live ( OLTL ) . Created by writer Michael Malone , the role was originated in 1992 by actor Roger Howarth . Todd was a college student and fraternity brother to Kevin Buchanan , Zach Rosen , and Powell Lord , and became part of a storyline in which Marty Saybrooke is gang raped . The storyline was considered groundbreaking by television critics , and its main players — Howarth , Susan Haskell ( Marty ) , and Hillary B. Smith ( Todd 's lawyer Nora <unk> ) — won Emmys in 1994 , as did Malone and his writing team . Howarth left the role in 2003 ; it was recast with Trevor St. John , physically altered by plastic surgery . In 2011 , Howarth returned to OLTL ; it was disclosed Todd had been taken hostage and St. John 's version of the character was really Todd 's identical twin brother , Victor Lord , Jr . , conditioned to assume Todd 's place . 
 Todd was initially a short @-@ term villain , but his popularity with the audience and critics inspired the writers to forgo killing him or permanently sending him to prison , like most soap operas had done with rapists in the past . While keeping aspects of his personality dark or otherwise violent , they had Todd exhibit a conscience and compassion . They took steps to redeem him and made him an integral part of OLTL 's canvas , despite Howarth 's objections to a redemption storyline . With the use of literary techniques for the redemptive arc , the writers borrowed from nineteenth @-@ century melodrama and Gothic traditions , and literature such as Frankenstein . Todd became the product of an affair between his father , Victor Lord , and his mother , Irene Manning , which provided him a fortune and ties to other major characters , including his sisters , Tina and Victoria Lord . An important aspect of the character became his appearance , most notably the scar on his right cheek , which emerged as synonymous with him and served to remind him of his past misdeeds against Marty . Music and the use of humor were also key to Todd 's development . Although he formed many relationships ( including with his wives , Blair Cramer and Téa Delgado ) , and fathered children , a defining characteristic of his personality was his resistance to close relationships and sexual intimacy . 
 The drive to redeem Todd eventually drew Howarth , who always saw Todd as a villain , to leave the show for a year ; he was uncomfortable with the redemption storyline and with many fans ' positive reactions to Todd . <unk> Todd years later with St. John was generally considered successful by viewers and critics . St. John , instead of imitating Howarth 's portrayal , brought his own spin to the character . After OLTL 's cancellation in 2012 , Howarth brought Todd to General Hospital ( GH ) , but returned , along with St. John as Victor , Jr . , to the online version of OLTL in 2013 , which was cancelled after one year . 
 Todd has been the subject of numerous soap opera articles , feminist studies , and inspired the creation of a doll in his likeness . He has remained a popular and controversial figure since his creation , and is considered one of soap opera 's breakout characters . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = 1992 – 2003 = = = 
 In 1992 , Todd , a defensive back for Llanview University 's football team , has a one @-@ night stand with his tutor , Marty Saybrooke ( Susan Haskell ) , and later blames her when he fails a test that causes him to be suspended from the football team . In 1993 , Todd and his fraternity brothers , Zach Rosen and Powell Lord , rape Marty in Kevin 's dorm room . Todd hires attorney Nora <unk> ( Hillary B. Smith ) , who believes in his innocence until a woman named Carol Swift reveals Todd also raped her ; Nora throws the case . Todd continues to torment Marty , including by attempting to rape her for a second time , but she eventually tricks Todd into confessing , sending him , Zach and Powell to prison where he befriends Rebecca Lewis ( Reiko Aylesworth ) . Todd has Rebecca help him escape prison , but is stabbed when he goes after Nora . In hiding , he is discovered by Marty and her boyfriend , Suede Pruitt . After accidentally killing Suede when they fight , he is shot by officer Bo Buchanan ( Robert S. Woods ) ; Todd falls into the <unk> River , and is presumed dead . 
 Todd survives and hides at Llanfair , where he befriends two children , C. J. and Sarah Roberts . He is arrested when he jealously confronts new couple Rebecca and Powell . His prison van gets into an accident with another vehicle , and he rescues Marty , C. J. and Jessica ( Erin Torpey ) from the car . This results in an early parole for Todd , but he is soon accused of rape by several women . Marty provides him with an alibi for one of the attacks . A deranged Powell is later revealed as the serial rapist . Todd apologizes to Marty for all the pain he caused her , and begins falling in love with Blair Cramer ( <unk> <unk> ) after a one @-@ night stand . In December 1994 , Peter Manning dies and Todd learns he is adopted . <unk> David Vickers ( Tuc Watkins ) discovers Todd 's biological parents , Victor Lord and Irene Manning . With help from Todd 's scheming biological sister , Tina , David claims to be the lost Lord heir , but Todd 's true parentage is ultimately revealed , leaving Todd $ 27 @.@ 8 million richer . He purchases tabloid paper The Intruder from Dorian Lord ( Robin Strasser ) and relaunches it as The Sun , a direct rival to his new @-@ found family 's newspaper The Banner . In 1995 , Blair tricks Todd into marriage by faking a pregnancy . She later learns that she really is pregnant , but , after being mugged , she miscarries . Todd discovers she initially lied about her pregnancy and has the marriage annulled . When Blair becomes pregnant again , they remarry in November 1995 . Todd goes to Ireland to give Marty a flight back to Llanview . Her friend , Patrick Thornhart ( Thorsten Kaye ) , is being hunted by Irish terrorists . Todd poses as Patrick , is shot , and presumed dead . He returns to Llanview in 1996 , to find Blair in bed with Patrick . His sister , Victoria " Viki " Lord ( Erika Slezak ) , introduces him to his daughter , Starr ( Kristen Alderson ) . Todd eventually resumes his life with Blair . They have many difficulties in their marriage , and Starr being diagnosed with aplastic anemia strains the marriage further . 
 Blair is pregnant with Patrick 's baby , who has been identified as a donor match for Starr . She gives birth to his stillborn son in 1997 . Todd blames Patrick for the miscarriage and frames him for the murder of Guy Armitage . Blair learns that Todd caused the explosion that killed Guy , and divorces him in June . When Blair falls into a coma , Todd pays lawyer Téa Delgado ( Florencia Lozano ) five million dollars to marry him so he can keep custody of Starr . When Blair awakens , he allows her visitation . In 1998 , while Todd and Téa grow closer , Todd is again accused of rape ; Blair and Sam Rappaport ( Kale Browne ) , a lawyer and father @-@ figure to Todd , help prove his innocence . Back in town upon Todd 's request , he also intends to help Todd save his tempestuous marriage to Téa . In the interim , Todd and Blair grow closer , and Blair and Téa vie for Todd 's affections . As Todd and Téa fall in love , Blair moves on with Sam . When Todd is about to be arrested for the murder of Georgie Phillips , he takes the other fourteen suspects hostage at the Buchanan family cabin with fake dynamite strapped to his chest . Rachel Gannon admits to the murder , but Todd is arrested for the hostage incident . He fakes dissociative identity disorder ( split personalities ) to avoid conviction . Téa divorces him as part of his defense strategy , but they remarry in November . During the reception , a tape on which Todd confesses to faking his split personalities is accidentally played at Starr 's request . Téa refuses his offer of another five million to stay married to him . He leaves town in December , and Tea has the marriage annulled in 1999 . 
 In 2000 , Todd keeps tabs on Téa , who starts dating Rachel 's uncle , R. J. ( Timothy Stickney ) . He tries to kill R. J. , and reveals himself to Téa , convincing her to leave town with him . When Téa dumps him , he returns months later without her . Todd and Blair grow close again . By framing Skye Chandler ( Robin Christopher ) , he helps her cover up her rage @-@ shooting of Max Holden ( James <unk> ) . They decide to remarry , but the night before the wedding , a vengeful Max drugs Blair and leads Todd to believe they had sex . A furious Todd exposes Blair as Max 's shooter . After burying Max alive to discover the truth , and soon afterward releasing him , he helps Blair stay out of jail by claiming she suffered a psychotic break . She is committed against her will . Months later , she goes to Mexico , knowing that she is pregnant with Todd 's child . Todd follows , where he delivers their son . Believing the child is Max 's , he gives the baby to David Vickers , and leads Blair to believe the baby died . During her grief , she and Todd reconcile , and she finally tells Todd that the " stillborn " child was really his . Todd locates the infant and claims the boy was abandoned . In December 2001 , he convinces Blair to remarry him . They name their son John " Jack " Cramer Manning , and Todd makes it appear they have adopted him . 
 Jack develops aplastic anemia like Starr , which ultimately leads Sam to deduce that they are biological siblings , and to inform Blair that Jack is her biological son . She angrily confronts Todd . When he admits that he gave Jack away and forced her to grieve for a child that was never dead , she bans him from her life , which results in him being severely emotionally unstable . Blair leaves town with the children soon afterward , but Todd follows her to Hawaii , where his plans to kidnap the children with help from Ross Rayburn ( Shawn Christian ) are foiled by Téa . Todd and Téa make love when they get stranded together on an island with Ross . Todd escapes to return to Blair , and protects her when the Mafia comes after her because of her exposé on them in The Sun . As Todd and Blair are about to remarry , Sam discloses that Todd , in an effort to win Blair 's affections , staged a hit on their nanny , who had been presumed dead as a result of the Mafia 's retaliation . Todd had used the nanny 's " death " as an excuse for Blair to stay with him , later staging a hit on Blair 's life , with him as the rescuer . The wedding is called off , and Blair distances herself from Todd . Soon afterward , Mitch Laurence ( Roscoe Born ) kidnaps Starr . Blair exchanges her own life for her daughter 's . Todd rescues Blair by kidnapping his niece , Natalie ( Melissa Archer ) , and exchanging her life for Blair 's . Mitch , working for the presumed dead Victor Lord , intends to steal a descendant 's heart so he can live . Natalie is rescued , and Todd comes face to face with a frail Victor before he finally dies from heart failure . Mitch kidnaps Todd and locks him in Victor 's crypt in order to frame him for Sam Rappaport 's murder . Todd disappears from the crypt , and Blair eventually has him declared dead . 
 = = = 2011 – 2013 = = = 
 Todd 's identical twin brother , Victor Lord , Jr . ( Trevor St. John ) , whom he had never known , is physically altered and brainwashed to believe that he is Todd . From May 2003 to August 2011 , he assumes Todd 's identity . The truth is revealed by a presumed dead Irene Manning , who admits that she switched the brothers and imprisoned Todd . Todd struggles with losing eight years of his life , and blames Victor for stealing his children , including the daughter he had with Téa , Danielle ( Dani ) . He plans to kill Victor and is the top suspect when Victor is gunned down . He claims his innocence and convinces Starr to help him escape jail to keep Irene from killing the family for Victor 's fortune . Although Irene wounds him , Todd kills her . Téa 's brother , Tomás ( Ted King ) , takes credit for allowing a wounded Todd to escape . Todd begins having vivid memories of killing Victor . Before Tomás is sentenced , Todd confesses to Irene 's murder ; Téa gets the charges reduced to self @-@ defense . Todd locates the gun used to kill Victor and uses it to frame Tomás as revenge for initially bringing him to Irene . Todd and a rogue CIA agent force Tomás into a false confession . Todd faces difficulty bonding with Jack , who only accepts Victor as his father , but he continues to bond with Starr and assists her with various issues . He also helps Cole Thornhart fake his death so he can live with Starr and their daughter , Hope , in California . Todd is later arrested for Victor 's murder . 
 In 2012 , Todd jumps bail and arrives in Port Charles upon learning that Starr has been involved in a car accident that resulted in the deaths of Cole and Hope . Todd thinks local mobster Sonny <unk> ( Maurice Benard ) is responsible for the deaths and seeks revenge . The charges against him for Victor 's murder are dropped , due to a claim of posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) following his years in captivity , but Starr faces attempted murder charges for trying to kill Sonny . A pregnant Téa , who has been sought out by Blair to represent Starr , gets the charges dropped . In June , Todd is with Téa during an intense rainstorm when she goes into labor and gives birth to an unresponsive baby boy . Sam Morgan ( Kelly Monaco ) is also giving birth to a baby boy in a motel room . After Todd , searching for help , comes upon Heather Webber ( Robin Mattson ) in a shack , and she tells Todd that Téa 's baby has died , he comes across Sam 's son . An elated Téa sees the child and believes he is hers . Todd allows Téa to believe the child is hers , after Heather talks him out of telling Téa the truth . Todd forms a close relationship with Carly <unk> ( Laura Wright ) , Sonny 's former wife , in the wake of yet another rejection from Blair , who is set to marry Tomás . Todd 's role in the baby switch is eventually revealed . To make amends for almost killing her son , Steven , Heather lies to the judge and prosecutors about Todd 's role in switching the babies . He is then released . 
 In 2013 , Todd returns to Llanview to check on Dani , who had previously phoned him several times . He witnesses Dani collapse from a drug overdose due to her abuse of oxycodone . While she is recovering at the hospital , an alive Victor arrives . A surprised Téa , Dani , and Jack welcome Victor back , while Todd tries to bond with his children . Todd remains concerned about Jack and Dani , attempting to buy their affections with money and deciding the best way to win them over is to call a truce with Victor . He also tries to win back Blair 's affections . He eventually admits he only pretended to get along with Victor to lure him into a false sense of security . Victor admits that he poisoned Todd 's scotch with arsenic and then tried to strangle him . Jack takes Todd to the hospital , where he recovers but is frustrated when his family continues to defend Victor . Victor realizes he must leave town and says goodbye to his family . Todd shows Blair a threatening note he received with the names of all his loved ones on it . The mysterious Tattoo Organization that held Victor demands that Todd find and kill Victor . Todd , Blair and Téa devise a scheme to fool this organization into believing Victor is dead . Feeling secure that their scheme has worked , they plan for a future . Todd receives another note by the Tattoo Organization , this time telling him that he failed them and that Victor has been recaptured . Todd is told that he must leave Llanview and go to the address given on the note . Todd and Blair are devastated . Todd says goodbye to Viki and his children , but does not tell them the real reason he is leaving is to protect their family . Before Todd leaves , he and Blair make love one last time , and it is revealed that they have married again . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Todd was originally intended to be a short @-@ lived role , but Howarth 's portrayal of the character inspired notable fan reaction , which prompted the creators to layer Todd 's personality and showcase him regularly within the series . Michael Malone , Todd 's creator , said fleshing out the character reminded him of what he loved about soap operas , adding , " The story @-@ telling is a genuine collaboration , not just among writers but by the actors . " Malone felt he could not take full credit for the development of Todd from Marty Saybrooke 's gang rapist to what he later became , and also noted Howarth 's impact : 
 In the creation of Todd Manning , no one played a larger role than the remarkably talented Josh Griffith , first associate head writer , then co @-@ head writer , during my stay at One Life . Josh loved , lived and breathed Todd and fought passionately for his position on the show . Second , Todd never would have evolved from " first frat boy " to the major cast member he became without the powerful talent of Roger Howarth . Because of Roger 's ability to convey the complexity of Todd ( the hurt as well as anger , the insecurity as well as bluster , the brains , yearning , <unk> , sexiness , tenderness , nastiness ) we were able to explore both the deeply dark side of this character ( the effort to destroy Marty to cover the rape , the attempted revenge on his lawyer Nora , the attack on Luna ) and at the same time slowly uncover his growing struggle ( usually a failed struggle ) towards some kind of redemption . Romantic leads have often begun their careers playing villains ( Valentino , Clark Gable , Humphrey Bogart among them ) . These characters appeal because they make women feel both the thrill of the " bad " and the lure of the hidden " good " : they can lead the man to change through love . " I 'll save him ! " Fans loved Todd from the beginning because he always had that appeal . 
 Malone originally scripted Todd as a serial rapist . As part of the 1993 rape storyline , it was disclosed that Todd raped a woman named Carol Swift , a year or two before raping Marty , and that there were hints he raped other young women before Carol . Howarth considered Todd 's rationale for raping Marty to be complex . " Todd was in love with Marty , " he said . When Marty rejects Todd 's romantic advances after their one @-@ night stand , it is because he was cold to her that same night after they had sex . Marty 's rejection upsets Todd and it <unk> . When he fails an exam after she tutors him , he blames her for the failure and begins attributing her as the reason for his problems . Howarth called Todd " privileged and very rich " . Because Todd was used to getting what he wanted , he did not know how to cope with Marty rejecting him . 
 Although Todd is the product of an affair between Victor Lord and Irene Manning , Malone gave him the last name " Manning " without knowing the name of Victor 's mistress , an oversight that allowed the writers to later reveal him as Tina and Victoria Lord 's brother . He is at first presented as 18 years old , but over the years , his age has been changed based upon the occasional rapid aging of his children . Malone stated that making Todd heir to the Lord fortune gave the writers " huge story " that helped Howarth 's character evolve from a short @-@ term role to a major cast member , which Malone attributed to Howarth 's " powerful talent " . Peter Manning , who Todd thought was his father , had died ; Todd receives letters written by his adoptive mother disclosing that he is the Lord heir , and worth almost $ 30 million . Developing Todd not only as Victoria 's unwanted sibling , whom she was horrified to discover was her blood , but as " her professional rival " who used " a splashy tabloid newspaper to wipe out her venerable " newspaper The Banner appealed to Malone . 
 Executive producer Susan <unk> Horgan , when speaking of Todd 's psychological motivations , reported that Peter Manning degraded him verbally and abused his mother , whom Todd loved but who abandoned and disappointed him , leaving Todd with wounds that influenced his later behavior . Author Gerry Waggett stated that Peter Manning had physically abused Todd his entire life . 
 = = = Signature scar , hair and facial cues = = = 
 In late 1993 , in order to make Todd look more menacing , he was given a scar to his right cheek by Marty 's friend , Luna Moody , when she hit him in his face with a crowbar while preventing his second attempted rape of Marty . The camera would often close in and emphasize Todd 's scar , which later became synonymous with the character . 
 To casting director Howard Meltzer , " Todd wears the scar like a badge . It 's a warning to others : Don 't mess with me . " Meltzer felt Howarth underplayed Todd ; Todd did not have to rant to incite fear . Meltzer added : " He gets a lot more from the raising of an eyebrow than raising the volume of his voice . Most of Todd 's performance is reacting to the environment around him , and thanks to Howarth 's expressiveness , viewers can see the wheels turning . " The scar also served to remind Todd of his past villainy against Marty . It was applied by glue , with a little makeup to make it look more authentic , and usually took ten minutes to apply . 
 Todd 's long hair was also integral to the character . It was described by Soap Opera Magazine as " enigmatic , with an air of innate authority " . The hair was said to demonstrate Todd 's lack of pretense and to convey an " I don 't care " attitude . Todd 's " overhanging brow " seemed threatening , but instead concealed the " intense , vulnerable eyes underneath " , features that contrasted well with the character 's " pouty , sensual mouth " . The features , which conferred " a charming , boyish quality " , could sometimes convey that Todd was less dangerous than he actually was . Photographer Robert Milazzo believed Howarth 's hair softened Todd 's character . " You don 't expect that intensity because of it , " he said , and felt that it made Todd more intriguing . Milazzo also stated that the combination of Todd 's soft hair and intensity made Todd " a very complex character to look at " . 
 <unk> by an interviewer about Todd 's appeal , Howarth said he found it disturbing that people could romantically desire a character that is unhealthy . " I don 't get it , " he said . " I don 't want to insult anybody , but I don 't know why he 's attractive . " When the interviewer concluded Howarth 's good looks may have contributed to the character 's magnetism , Howarth said , " I know what the convention of a good @-@ looking person is , and I know that for some reason skinny white guys are big now . I guess you could blame it on that . " 
 In November 2008 , during St. John 's portrayal of the character , Todd is given a new scar by John McBain during a physical altercation in which John beats Todd with a gun . The scar symbolized Todd 's " second rape of Marty " , and was considered " a poetic nod " to Todd 's history . The scar was significantly smaller than the original but placed in the same spot ; it was gone by January 2009 . St. John stated , " I know . It 's too bad . I honestly have no idea why they wouldn 't keep that reminder on Todd 's face . It might be an economical thing . You know it costs to apply that kind of makeup each day . " 
 The most important aspect of Todd 's appearance for St. John was his character 's hair . His preference was that Todd 's hair was a little shorter ; he told Soap Opera Weekly ( SOW ) that he thought that Todd 's hair was too " shaggy " , which was not his personal style , and that he hoped the writers and producers would let him trim off a bit . When he first got the role , St. John 's hair resembled Howarth 's shorter shoulder @-@ length haircut , which was initially worn from 2000 to 2003 , and St. John was told by the writers and producers not to change his hair until further notice . St. John " made the creative choice [ to let himself ] go because [ Todd 's ] not really right in the old noggin ' " , and gained weight for the role . 
 = = = " Todd 's theme " and related music = = = 
 One Life to Live 's producers stated that most of the show 's music was custom written , suitable for the situation and what the characters in the scene might actually play . For Todd , his volatile nature was represented with powerfully dark theme music , which producers and fans called the " Todd theme " . The music consisted of ominous low chords and signaled that Todd was about to commit a vicious , dangerous , or threatening act . The theme was especially evident in Howarth 's portrayal , but it continued during St. John 's early portrayal as well . 
 Composer David Nichtern , who created Todd 's theme music , said he loved the character and enjoyed implementing the different versions of the Todd theme . While describing the music that marked Todd 's prominent 1996 " return from the dead " ( his return to town after being presumed dead ) , Nichtern addressed the broader aspect of his composition for the character : " All of Todd 's music has had a certain ' vibe ' to it , especially since the character is so well @-@ drawn , " he stated . " It also has seemed particularly well @-@ suited to my guitar style , so I 've enjoyed ' becoming ' Todd musically . The key is always to represent his dark side , but with the possibility of redemption and power behind the whole thing . " Nichtern added , " That 's what makes him such an interesting character . Todd 's cues are always custom @-@ made so to speak , so there is energy and attention going toward getting the exact flavor of what the current story @-@ line is saying about his journey . " 
 Three primary musical themes were played throughout Todd 's evolution . The original Todd theme , from 1993 to 1996 , encompassed Todd 's rape of Marty and his early misdeeds . The second theme was heard throughout 1998 and 2000 , and the third theme was first heard in 2001 . The Todd and Marty rape scene was aided primarily by rock songs . Heard at a low volume in the background , hard rock songs assist moments building up to the rape ; they intensify the otherwise implicitly tense , aggressive atmosphere , and set a chilling tone for viewers . When Todd is certain that he will rape Marty , the volume of a song in the background ( " Head Like a Hole " ) is increased , which emphasizes the lyrics : " I 'd rather die / Than give you control . " This use of background music allowed Todd 's motivation for the rape to significantly register with viewers . 
 There have been additional musical themes for Todd ; for example , the menacing chords , which played as he stalked and terrorized Nora in 1993 for mishandling his trial and sending him to prison . During his romance with Rebecca in 1994 , an all @-@ encompassing romantic theme with tragic nuances , which was at times intermixed with his ominous music , were heard . His rescue of Marty and two children from a car crash , and the Todd and Téa romance , also have their own musical themes . For the mid @-@ 1994 plot point where Todd rescues Marty and the children , the music was changed to reflect his decision to be a better person . It becomes his dominant theme , and is assisted by a tuneful , forward @-@ moving melody . This music is primarily a part of Todd 's 1994 redemption storyline and the storyline when he is the Lord heir in 1995 . According to Nichtern , the music for Todd and <unk> , which he composed with his friend keyboardist Kevin Bents , was " as close as we get to Todd ' romantic ' music " , with " the possibility of a little sensuality and romance " . 
 For the " Todd returns from the dead " 1996 storyline , demented @-@ sounding , on @-@ edge music signifies that Todd 's psyche has worsened . This theme accompanied Todd 's emotional breakdown and revenge scheme after discovering his wife , Blair , having sex with Patrick . 
 = = Personality = = 
 At the time of Todd 's introduction to OLTL , he was a competitive athlete . His fraternity was the most important part of his life ; Howarth stated that Todd was " under intense pressure from the male figures in his life " . He felt that the key to understanding Todd was his concern about his status and how others perceived him . He thought that Todd mistreated people because it made him feel better about himself and that he did not want to appear vulnerable , so his defense mechanisms " spun out of control " . Howarth , during an April 1994 Soap Opera Update interview , said that the only thing that he admired about Todd was his clothing style . His interviewer called Todd 's early fashion sense " grunge , Salvation Army like ' rags ' , " and Howarth described Todd 's later wardrobe as " all Ralph Lauren " and " [ d ] <unk> R.L. 80 dollar pants and a 400 @-@ and @-@ something @-@ dollar jacket " . St. John , as Todd 's second portrayer , described the character as " kind of both good and bad . He 's got his good side with his kids , and yet he is conniving and vicious and all those negative things " . 
 The show 's writers presented Todd 's personality as a combination of dark humor , uncouth behavior , and the essence of a tortured soul ; he often delivers one @-@ liners that range from humorous to sadistic . Soap opera columnist Jenn Bishop stated that Todd 's personality is " violent , gentle , caring , apathetic , smart , obsessive , crazy , irrational , devilish , heroic , angst @-@ filled , comical , etc . " and that " [ he ] loves , but he feels he 's unworthy of true love because of the things he 's done . He doesn 't love himself and projects a facade of a confident , arrogant playboy , but underneath it all , he 's someone who seeks an unattainable love " . Columnist Jill Berry , who saw Todd as self @-@ centered in the extreme , said that although Todd desperately wants to be loved , he is unable to give or receive it , and when he is loved , he will destroy it . She did acknowledge Todd 's capability of loving his children , which he expressed by doing " crazy and illegal things to prove it " , but felt that much of the difficulty he experiences is brought on by himself and that he is incapable of learning from his mistakes even when they hurt the people he loves . She said Todd is in need of " intensive therapy " , which will never work because he refuses to change . For example , as portrayed by St. John in 2006 , he fights for the custody of his son , Sam , but he is motivated by anger that he has been lied to and revenge more than by a desire to recover his child . 
 For several years on the series , a defining characteristic of Todd 's personality was his resistance to close relationships and sexual intimacy , which were due to his mistreatment by others , especially his adoptive father , who may have raped him when he was fourteen . It was also due to his horrific past misdeeds , including his rape of Marty and dysfunctional aspects of his relationship with Blair . Surviving a near @-@ death experience and being presumed dead in 1995 and , upon his return in 1996 , finding Blair having sex with Patrick made Todd bitter ; seeing Blair with another man sexually , soon after his presumed death , caused him to shut down emotionally . The writers made Todd 's fear of intimacy into a prominent obstacle for his relationship with his second wife , Téa . When she at one point attempts to seduce Todd by stripping down naked in front of him and pleading with him to make love to her , he rejects her , explaining that he no longer trusts himself to be intimate in that way ; he subsequently throws her out , practically naked , into the middle of a snowstorm . 
 Bishop stated , " Though viewers were given an explanation for his repulsive actions ( lots and lots of childhood trauma ) , his crime was never excused or glossed over . Todd began to care for people – Rebecca , then Blair and later Téa – something missing in his earlier sociopathic characteristics . " Soap opera commentator <unk> Barnett stated that Todd 's dark edges had been softened over a period of many years by Blair , Viki , and Starr . Todd 's deep love for his sister , Viki , was partly demonstrated by him supporting her during her battle with cancer , her difficulties with her daughter and his niece , Jessica , and by defending Viki to her enemies . Berry enjoyed the vulnerability Viki brought out of Todd , and felt that his self @-@ hatred demonstrated itself in many ways , including when he refused to name his son , Jack , after himself because his name carried too much baggage . In the 1998 storyline where he fakes dissociative identity disorder ( split personalities ) to avoid a prison sentence for hostage and threat charges , the revelation that he was faking devastates Viki , who had actually suffered from the disorder ; it also brings out remorse in Todd , and causes him to reflect on his mistakes . 
 For the audience to better understand Todd , the writers made it so that his difficulties are manifested in his nightmares , which give him insomnia and are designed as a look into his soul and personality ; at multiple points within the series , Téa attempts to help him by encouraging him to open up to her about them , which he eventually does . His opinions on his enemies are conveyed clearly ; he remains one step ahead of them , and consistently out @-@ smarts police , family , and others he targets , sometimes using weapons . 
 = = Casting and portrayals = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Following Howarth 's 1992 casting as Todd Manning , he occasionally vacated the role . His 2003 departure was his longest absence from OLTL ; he did not return to the series until 2011 . Todd was recast in 2003 with St. John , and Howarth joined As the World Turns as Paul Ryan until it was cancelled in 2010 . Malone stated that because of Todd 's appeal , which he credited to Howarth , " The network was therefore happy to have him return to Llanview whenever Roger would come back , and happy to have him move into story in major ways . " In April 2011 , after several months of speculation , OLTL confirmed Howarth 's return , although it was unclear if he would portray Todd Manning . He stated , " I am looking forward to returning to One Life to Live " . Valentini said , " We are thrilled to have Roger return to One Life to Live " . It was eventually revealed that St. John 's version of the character was really Victor Lord , Jr . , Todd 's twin brother , conditioned to believe that he was Todd and assume Todd 's identity , while the real Todd ( Howarth ) was held hostage for eight years . 
 OLTL was cancelled in early 2012 ; Howarth brought Todd to General Hospital ( GH ) , along with his co @-@ stars Kristen Alderson as Starr and Michael Easton as John McBain . All three actors were forced to briefly leave GH when Prospect Park , the company that bought the rights to OLTL and aired an online version of the show in 2013 , sued ABC for breach of contract . Prospect Park argued that ABC sabotaged its efforts by killing off two characters , Starr 's boyfriend Cole and her young daughter Hope . Both St. John and Howarth appeared on the online version as Victor and Todd , but the suit prevented ABC from continuing to feature Howarth , Alderson , and Easton as their original characters on GH ; ABC 's solution was to create new characters for the actors . The online version of OLTL was cancelled after one season . 
 = = = Howarth = = = 
 Malone credited Howarth 's versatility with the reason he was cast as Todd , as well as why he became an important part of the show 's cast , and one of the contributing factors for the character 's subsequent complexity . During a February 1993 interview with Soap Opera Digest ( SOD ) , Howarth stated he was surprised he won the part . " I really don 't know how I made it , " he said . He met a One Life to Live casting director two years previously , while performing in a New York play , but , when the role of Todd opened up , he " auditioned just like everybody else " . He " made it to callbacks , and [ he ] got the part " . Howarth said , " I was hired ... to plant drugs in Jason Webb 's jacket . All I knew was that my first name was Todd . I don 't know what happened next . They called me in again and suddenly I had a last name ' Manning . ' Then I get called to read another day . " 
 Howarth stated , " I was happy to get the part of Todd , but it was the furthest thing from the fabric of my personality . " In an interview later that year , with Soap Opera Weekly , he grimaced when reminded of what he had said , and commented , " What a totally self @-@ involved , pretentious thing to say . " He clarified his previous statement , saying that although he seemed to be consistently cast as a " bad guy " and as a " Greek frat brother @-@ type " , both his upbringing and experiences in college were different than those of Todd and his other roles . For example , Howarth was not in a fraternity in college , and , unlike Todd and his previous soap opera roles , Kent in Loving and Jory on Guiding Light , status was unimportant to him . 
 Although Howarth was familiar with campus fraternity life while attending George Washington University , he did not base Todd or his other roles on anyone he knew . When asked about his roles , he was unable to explain why he was consistently cast as a bad guy , but said that he enjoyed it . He stated , " I would never want to come in now and play a nice guy for three months . That would be dreadfully boring . This suits me fine . It 's just as easy to pretend I 'm a bad guy as it is to pretend I 'm a good guy " . For Howarth , playing a rapist was like playing any other role because " I know it 's all make @-@ believe " . Howarth was perplexed by the need for writers to redeem villains . " Todd 's a pretty interesting character just the way he is , " he said in late 1994 . " There 's no need to fix it if it 's not broken . I don 't know where the whole notion of redeeming characters comes from . People used to say to me , ' I hope you get redeemed so you can stay on the show . ' Well , Todd hasn 't been redeemed , and he 's still on the show . " Howarth continued , " I don 't love the character I play . If I met Todd on the street , I wouldn 't say ' Hi ' to him , but I do love playing this character . " 
 Howarth said of starring on a soap opera , " Every actor at one time passes through daytime . I wouldn 't have said yes to the offer if I didn 't want to stay a while on daytime . " He added , " I don 't crave fame . It 's kind of goofy . I didn 't want to be a public figure . I wanted to be an actor , not a movie star . But I love rock ' n ' roll @-@ there , I 'd rather be a rock star . That would be cool . " He said that " like all soap actors , " he sticks with the script the majority of the time , " but every now and then he goes off the page , " commenting , " You get to direct yourself . You come up with a little bit . It 's improvisational . Maybe you 're doing it just for your castmates , but the audience catches on . " 
 In 1997 and 1998 , Todd was given comedic partners similar to the set @-@ up in comedy teams , in which the " funny guy " usually has a " straight man " who either sets up the joke or simply does not understand it . Todd 's first partner was Charlie Briggs , portrayed by actor Robert J. Hogan . Hogan was first seen as Briggs in 1995 , working for the rival publication The Banner before Todd " [ steals ] him away " to work at his newspaper . Hogan said , " Briggs had been on the show for 17 years , but they never showed him . " Scenes between Todd and Briggs typically involved Todd issuing " some bizarre order " to Briggs , or Todd asking Briggs a " way @-@ out question " that was often " way out of line " . During these scenes , Briggs would often respond with a stupefied look on his face . Though Briggs appeared lost at some of Todd 's comments , Todd was sometimes unable to realize that the joke was about him . Hogan felt Briggs was " more than a match " for Todd . " You look at a kid yelling at you , " he said , " and you can 't take him seriously . " 
 Another of Todd 's comedic pairings is his friendship with a parrot he names Moose . Todd is closer to Moose than he is to most humans . He tells the bird his private thoughts and secrets , which causes conflict and antagonism between Moose and his wife at the time , Téa . Florencia Lozano , Téa 's portrayer , stated , " My character ... has a very adversarial relationship with the bird ... It 's sort of jealous of me , I 'm jealous of the bird . We 're both trying to get close to Todd . " The bird was portrayed by two South American blue and gold macaws named Flash and Lucky , and an Animal Planet documentary stated that they had developed an " impressive résumé " by the time they appeared on OLTL . They were trained by Ed Richman , who had worked with the birds for fifteen years in TV shows such as Magnum , P.I. and Jake and the Fatman . Richman stated that Howarth caught on " real quick " regarding his interaction with Flash and Lucky and said that he was the best actor he had worked with in the industry . The parrots were used for different purposes : for intimidating scenes where it looked like Moose " was going to kill somebody " , Richman used Flash , and Lucky was used for the " loving , very caring , physically close " portrayal of Moose . Like other actors , the parrots were able to connect , in character , with their fellow castmembers and achieve comedic timing with them . Voice actor Ron Gallop was hired to deliver Moose 's lines , which were crafted to help demonstrate Todd 's train of thought , signified Todd 's and Moose 's close bond , and consisted of funny or insulting remarks aimed at anyone causing problems for Todd . 
 = = = St. John = = = 
 Howarth 's departure from the series motivated OLTL 's writers and producers to do what many considered impossible : recast Todd . During Michael Malone 's second stint as head writer of OLTL , he had to decide if Todd would remain . Malone said that he and the other creators could not allow Todd to permanently leave the show 's canvas , so they chose to recast the role . They offered the role to Easton , who had portrayed the vampire Caleb Morley on the soap opera Port Charles , but he turned it down because he did not want to be affiliated with a role played by another established actor . Malone said that St. John 's audition was " extraordinary " , and that although a committee was involved in the recast , everyone agreed " he was Todd " . Malone felt that they made a risky decision , but St. John made it work and that he had made the character his own . Initially , St. John , in his first role in daytime television , was introduced as Walker Laurence , younger brother of Mitch Laurence . 
 Author Gerry Waggett stated that Walker was " reinvented as Todd with plastic surgery " after the show 's viewers accepted St. John as a part of the cast . The soap opera press and fans speculated for several months that Todd had been recast with St. John . The soap website Soap <unk> stated that despite executive producer Frank Valentini neither confirming nor denying it , St. John 's character exhibited " Todd @-@ like " behavior . TV Guide confirmed the speculation and reported that St. John , when asked about it , stated , " That would be fascinating , though I don 't see how it would work , " and added , " Todd [ had ] a different voice and height , but this is a soap world and anything can happen . " 
 St. John 's version of Todd had undergone plastic surgery after being severely beaten during a murder attempt on his life ordered by Mitch Laurence . While recovering in the hospital , Todd conducts research and learns Mitch has a brother named Walker ( also portrayed by St. John ) , who goes by the name Flynn Laurence . Todd pays Flynn for information on Mitch , and has extensive plastic surgery in order to physically resemble Flynn and get revenge on ( as well as protect his family from ) Mitch . The writers revealed Walker 's true identify slowly , allowing Walker to develop as a new character before hinting that he could be Todd . 
 St. John was unaware that Malone and the producers of OLTL were considering him as Todd , but had no strategy in his performance once he won the role . When speaking of the recast , he stated , " It 's nice , because I had instant concrete relationships . " He liked that he could consult old scripts and his fellow castmembers to gain information about his character , resources he did not have when playing Walker . He was able to use these resources to figure out his relationship to other characters , which helped him analyze how to play a scene . St. John stated that as an actor , he let the audience interpret the character , and believed in exploring and portraying the moment as it was written in the script . He said , " Todd is already written on the page , so it 's my job to bring him to life in that moment . " 
 St. John was instructed by the show 's directors to watch about fifteen episodes of Howarth 's performances of Todd because they wanted him to portray Todd like Howarth did . St. John reported that he watched two episodes , but never tried to mimic Howarth 's style because he felt that it was limiting , uncreative , and destructive . He said , " I needed to get a sense of who Todd was first , and that has to happen organically . " He did not care if Marlon Brando portrayed the role before him . St. John said that even actors who portray Hamlet do it differently , and added , " I don 't care what the other guy did . That 's his time . " He felt that it was up to him to decide how to perform Todd , saying , " I know that sounds very arrogant and overconfident , but it would be no fun to try to mimic somebody . " 
 Unlike how most actors are trained , St. John believed that it was not up to the performer to interpret the character , but that a character existed regardless of how an actor played him , which he realized was " an unusual way to approach acting " . He also thought that playing Todd was fun and " never boring to watch " because Todd , although popular with the audience , is an unlikable character . St. John told Branco that when people asked him if Todd was capable of harming his loved ones , like his long @-@ time love Blair or daughter Starr , St. John would say that Todd was capable of anything , even being sexually attracted to Starr or one of her friends , because to state otherwise meant that he was " limiting the character " . He added , " Todd is a marvelous character to play because he could commit genocide , or find a cure for AIDS . He 's full of possibilities — good and bad ... See , as an actor that always gives you conflict to play — and that subtext enriches a performance . " 
 = = Early writing and literary analysis = = 
 = = = Archetypes and rape = = = 
 Howarth said , " I think when it comes to creating a character for a soap opera they have to go with an archetype , one that 's recognizable . " Writer Jennifer Hayward felt the same , stating that like 19th century melodrama and serials , soap operas draw on powerful archetypes . Writer Dianne L. Brooks states that the storyline conforms to many of the same conventions of how rape has been presented in soap operas . According to Hayward , the OLTL writers " had a terrific time camping up Todd as the embodiment of evil " . She said that the writers who created Todd 's first major storyline , the gang rape of Marty Saybrooke and its aftermath , treated rape like most soaps had done in the past , by using archetypes such as the fight between good and evil and the contrast between the weak and strong . Author Gerry Waggett said , " The close @-@ ups of the rapists ' faces during the assault , distorted to capture Marty 's scared and drunken perspective , rank among the show 's most graphic images . " An attempt was made to dramatize the rape and present it differently than the typical voyeuristic perspective , and the scenes were designed to disturb the audience . Waggett added : " Marty 's subsequent quest to bring her rapists to justice dominated the show " throughout the summer of 1993 . 
 Up to this point , soap operas used rape and its related archetypes to , like their nineteenth @-@ century melodrama counterparts , " critique power relationships , especially the oppression of the poor by the rich and of women by men " . Hayward believes that the storyline was initially flawed because two of the rapists , Todd and Zach , were demonized , which oversimplified rape and " failed to capture the complex power relations underlying ... violence towards women " . The perpetrators were " simply evil or out control " , so they and their mindsets they represented could be rejected . The three characters represented three archetypes of the rapist : " the evil instigator " ( Todd ) ; " the good resister " ( Powell ) , and " the mediator between these polarized figures " ( Zach ) , but also represented a departure from how rape was treated in soaps . Brooks called the rapists " a complicated alternative to the standard soap opera rapist " , because they had a different relationship with their victim than in previous rape narratives and because they were multiple . Todd , whom Brooks called the " evil ' other ' " , was the leader and most villainous of the group and had a previous physical relationship with Marty . Hayward said , " What becomes especially clear is that for these characters the act of rape is not about sex , about women , or even about Marty . It is about what takes place ... between men . " 
 Like serials throughout history , soap operas use the unstable identity as a literary device , which is evidenced by the genre 's use of mistaken identities , evil twins , and characters that suffer from multiple personality disorder and whom come back from the dead . Identity is used in the rape storyline as well . Before the rape , Todd was crude yet still human , but afterwards , he became a dehumanized embodiment of rage , demonstrated by Todd 's bizarre and dangerous behavior after his conviction . Powell Lord , whose name is full of the same kind of symbolism Dickens used when choosing his characters ' names and who initially urges his friends to let Marty go yet ultimately gives into peer pressure , is a " relative ' good ' " character as compared to Todd 's " ' absolute evil ' identity " . In Hayward 's opinion , " The show also departs from the rape paradigm not only by insisting on the essential ' goodness ' of Powell Lord ... but even more startlingly by redeeming the evil Todd " . Initially , " the increasingly guilt @-@ ridden " Powell is the only rapist who has a conscience . He attempts to convince Todd and Zach to confess their crime , and comes close to confessing to his lawyer . Hayward calls Powell , like Todd , " redeemed " , but unlike Todd , was so guilt @-@ ridden that he attempted suicide , was forgiven by Marty , and received a much lighter jail sentence than Zach or Todd . 
 = = = Redeeming Todd = = = 
 Initially , Todd , as described by Hayward , was written as " unequivocally bad : sullen , remorseless , charmless " . As Todd 's popularity grew with the audience , mostly due to Howarth 's abilities to portray Todd as more than a one @-@ dimensional rapist , Malone and executive producer Susan <unk> Horgan chose the controversial option of redeeming Todd rather than killing him off or permanently sending him to prison , which is what soap operas had usually done with irredeemable rapists in the past . The writers began to redeem Todd , or change him so that he could be incorporated into the show , in the spring of 1994 , a year after the rape . Hayward states that it required " a whole arsenal of symbolic weaponry , " something that had never happened in soap operas before . Malone was intrigued by crafting the story in this way , and saw it as the spiritual journey of a man who wanted forgiveness for his past misdeeds . 
 Malone stated that Todd believes that he does not deserve forgiveness , which contributes to him embracing his worst qualities , something Malone felt worked better due to Howarth 's acting choices , which prevented Todd from acquiring redemption easily . Malone felt the most important part of Todd 's redemption was to have him re @-@ confront Marty in order to better deal with the fact he initiated her rape . As well as having Todd risk his freedom from prison and save Marty from a car crash , he donates his own blood to Marty to ensure she survives . A year later , Todd risks his life to save Patrick , Marty 's lover , from death ; this act leads to Todd 's presumed death . Despite having the character yearn to be thought of as a decent human being , the writers felt his good deeds should never make him feel any less horrible for having raped Marty . Initially , Howarth disagreed , and did not consider the storylines to be redemptive . " [ Todd 's ] not being redeemed at all , " he said . " Todd , as I see it , is looking for a way to overcome this rage so he can live in society again . From now on , his menace will be on the surface , not exploding . It 's more interesting if his violence is on the surface and that he play against it . That 's where the subtlety is . " 
 Hayward stated that the writers turned Todd from a realistic soap opera character into " the villain appropriated from nineteenth @-@ century melodrama " and Gothic fiction traditions . After Todd is sent to prison for Marty 's rape , he vows he will escape , and does so by drugging himself and forcing himself to wake up from a coma , which allows him to escape from a speeding ambulance . He returns to Llanview to stalk and terrorize Nora , the lawyer who threw his court case , who had gone temporarily blind . He tries to rape Marty for the third time , later inadvertently kills Marty 's boyfriend Suede during a scuffle , kidnaps the evangelist Rebecca Lewis , and is shot by the police , but survives . The writers also began to deepen his character by emphasizing his tenderness towards Rebecca and showing flashbacks of the abuse he experienced from his adoptive father , which Hayward states does not " <unk> the problem but simply removes the cause of violence one step " . Laurie Stone of the Village Voice commented that Howarth 's performance steered Todd away from cartoon villainy , " heightening the character 's wildness as a dodge from sentimentality and high @-@ mindedness " . Instead of killing Todd off as other soap operas had done to other unrepentant rapists , OLTL chose , as Stone put it , " to renovate the genre : maintaining Todd as a rapist , while enlarging his human dimension " . 
 Stone addressed how the writers kept Todd on the OLTL canvas , stating , " Characters as dangerous as Todd go up in flames on soaps . You can see little coffins on their eyelids , leaving only one question : how will the fiend get whacked ? " Stone said that " Todd was this close to being <unk> , but Howarth made that choice laughable . <unk> through fictional Llanview , he injected ambiguity into the <unk> dialogue , his sneers averting cynicism to reveal depression and humor " and " transformed Todd into a soul @-@ wrenched Lucifer , his rage ripped from abuse and bathed in vengeful glee , his sexiness rising off his instinct for survival and his outlaw impulse to disrupt . " She added , " Even the ragged scar he acquired on one cheek only heightened his animal appeal . No soap would jettison such gold and electricity — a figure simultaneously furious , ironic , melancholy , and horny . " 
 The writers used strong imagery to redeem Todd . Malone , who had been a novelist and was known for his " Dickensian " plots on OLTL , was influenced by nineteenth @-@ century literature . Malone told Stone that he compared Rebecca 's decision to marry Powell instead of Todd to Cathy 's decision to marry Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights . According to Stone , Todd is a classical character − " a soap character of unprecedented psychological complexity , a being whose feelings are intrinsically mixed and mostly unresolvable " . 
 In Hayward 's view , Malone and his team of writers used four techniques drawn from the conventions of Victorian sentimental fiction to redeem Todd : his unhappy childhood with an aloof but caring mother and abusive father ; sending Todd to church to confess his past sins and present impulses ; his love for Rebecca , " an innocent and highly religious virgin " ; and his friendship with two children , C.J. and Sarah Roberts . Hayward calls Rebecca , with her " open @-@ mouthed passivity " and " pre @-@ Raphaelite curls " , " almost a caricature of <unk> 's more sentimental and less felicitous heroines " . She believes that many of Todd 's scenes with Rebecca are heavily iconic , with symbolic representations of the Virgin Mary and Freudian images of Todd 's own feminization . 
 Hayward compares Todd to Mary Shelley 's monster ( Frankenstein 's monster ) , especially his friendship with C.J. and Sarah . Shelley 's monster watches two children playing , and saves a young girl from drowning . Similarly , Todd rescues C.J. and Sarah 's cousin , Jessica , from being manhandled by an older boy ; this leads to him meeting C.J. and Sarah . Like Shelley 's monster , Todd observes the family 's happy moments from afar , and wishes to be part of their lives . He uses his time alone to make toys for the children . Once they accidentally discover him , he manipulates them into keeping his whereabouts a secret by telling them he is " a genie on the run from an evil master " . Hayward said , " The stories he tells them function as clear metaphors for his feelings about his father . " Stone added that Todd 's counseling sessions in prison were the writers ' attempts to redeem Todd , and both she and Hayward include one of the final techniques the writers used : Todd 's rescue of Marty , Jessica and C.J. soon after a car crash . Hayward calls the writers ' attempts to use powerful narrative and visual techniques to redeem Todd " dubious at best " . 
 Writer Mary D. Dutta believed that OLTL , in order to " assuage the moral qualms associated with a sympathetic rapist " , added " mitigating reasons for Todd 's sexual abuse of Marty " ; namely , that he was raped at the age of fourteen by his adoptive father , Peter Manning , though whether or not he was raped is disputed . Dutta feels that the gang rape storyline invokes many of the rape myths that have appeared in literature since the 18th century , which includes " only bad girls get raped , " " women ask for it , " and " women ' cry rape ' only when they 've been jilted or have something to cover up " . Dutta also includes the myth of the " reformed rake " , or " the rapist redeemed by the woman who loves him , not uncommonly the same woman he raped " , which " deny or reduce perceived injury , or ... blame the victims for their own victimization " . Dutta states , " Todd 's redemption begins with his rescue of Marty and two children from a car wreck and ends with the discovery that he is the rightful heir to a huge fortune . " 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 = = = General popularity = = = 
 Todd 's impact is varied . The rape storyline inspired feminist studies , and , in 1994 , OLTL was awarded several Daytime Emmys in writing and acting for all the principles involved . Michael Malone and Josh Griffith 's team won an Emmy for writing , Susan Haskell won an Emmy for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , and Hillary B. Smith was awarded the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series . Howarth won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actor in a Drama Series . In 1995 , Howarth was nominated for an Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Soap Opera Digest ( SOD ) named him Outstanding Leading Actor . SOD also named him Outstanding Villain in 1998 . While Howarth has been called a " fan favorite , and one of the best actors in soaps " , Todd has been called " one of the greatest characters of all @-@ time " and Howarth 's portrayal of him has been called " iconic " . The Hollywood Reporter stated that even though Todd was a convicted rapist , he was the most popular character and Howarth was the most popular actor on OLTL . According to Waggett , the rape storyline propelled Todd " onto the list of OLTL 's most despicable <unk> " . He said that due to the storyline and to Howarth 's talent , Todd " bec [ a ] me the show 's next centerpiece villain and eventually the show 's male lead " . Howarth appeared on several interview shows following his Emmy win in 1994 , including the Phil Donahue Show in May , with six other male soap stars , and later that month , on Live ! with Regis and Kathie Lee . Host Regis Philbin commented on the fact that Howarth was receiving more fan mail than any other American soap opera star , and called him " a terrible villain , who 's become a heartthrob to thousands of wildly adoring fans " . 
 At the height of the character 's popularity , which was called " Todd @-@ mania " and " the Todd Manning phenomenon " , Howarth was disturbed that so many women were attracted to Todd and that the show 's writers had begun to redeem the character . In a September 1995 interview with The Hollywood Reporter , the publication stated that Howarth was troubled that " his villainous character became such a fan favorite " . In October 1995 , Howarth told SOD , " People have come up to me and said , ' My 7 @-@ year @-@ old loves you . ' What do I say to that ? I 'm not going to tell them , ' Don 't let your 7 @-@ year @-@ old watch TV . ' But I have to say , it 's disturbing . " He gave credit to the show 's writers for Todd 's popularity , saying that the rapists ' trial was well constructed and added , " I think , right now , we 're just riding the wave of something that started last summer . Beyond that , I don 't really know why people like Todd " . 
 Todd 's rampant popularity intruded on Howarth 's life . " It 's really starting to frustrate me because I can 't just go to work anymore , " he said . He stopped doing press interviews after fans screamed " Rape me , Todd " at fan events . Howarth 's coming @-@ and @-@ goings from time to time throughout the years , including his return in 2010 , even though the role of Todd had been re @-@ cast with St. John , were greeted with anticipation , excitement , and speculation from the fans . At one point in 2000 , Howarth returned for a week , accompanied by significant fanfare , in order to assist with the departure of Florencia Lozano ( <unk> ) . During the ten years he was on the show , rumors of his departures were reported sometimes weekly by the soap opera press . 
 Soap Opera Magazine attributed the success of Todd to Howarth 's face and skill as an actor . In February 1998 , the magazine stated , " Although the scar that traverses his face while he plays Llanview 's dark prince isn 't real , the menacing intensity Roger Howarth can so effortlessly convey with his eyes and furrowed brow are frighteningly authentic . " Soap Opera Weekly called his presence " hypnotic " and stated that his eyes relayed his focus . The magazine added that Howarth " has given Todd such a deliciously frightening edge we hope he wreaks more havoc in Llanview " . Marla Hart of the Chicago Tribune stated , " ... it has been an unexpected pleasure to watch actor Roger Howarth as a lost soul in search of spiritual redemption " . Hart speculated that the darkness Howarth brought to the role made him interesting to watch and was responsible for his Emmy win in 1995 . 
 St. John and the writers received praise for the recast , and for successfully re @-@ integrating Todd into the show 's canvas . Soap Opera Weekly stated , " They said it couldn 't be done . One Life to Live 's Todd ( previously played by Roger Howarth ) could not be recast . But with an appealing actor and the right pacing , One Life to Live may just have done it " . The magazine stated that the writers revealed Todd 's identity slowly , letting Walker develop as a character before dropping hints that he might be Todd . By the time he disclosed who he really was to his daughter Starr , the audience had already suspected the truth . Soap Opera Weekly called the reveal scene between St. John and Alderson , who played Starr , " one of those great ( and , these days , rare ) must @-@ see moments " . Soap Opera Digest said that despite the recast , a difficult situation in and of itself , " St. John aptly distinguished between Walker , who 's really Todd , as well as Flynn , who pretended to be Walker " . The magazine stated that St. John revealed glimmers of Todd to the audience : " We could see Todd when Walker lowered his eyes while holding back from telling his sister , Viki ; with fiancee Blair , Walker 's gaze was always shifting , making sure nothing could clue her in to his secret " . The article also credited St. John with maintaining " the [ uniquely scheming ] relationship of Todd and Starr " and for keeping their scenes touching and delightful . 
 On May 29 , 2006 , in what the soap opera section of SheKnows described as " one of the most memorable moments " for OLTL , and " breathtaking , nerve @-@ racking , heart wrenching " , St. John portrayed Todd being executed for a crime he did not commit . At the last moment , after the lethal injection has been administered , John McBain rushes in declaring Todd 's innocence , with proof : the woman Todd is accused of killing ( Margaret Cochran ) is at his side , clearly still alive , and Todd is revived . During the execution episode , a montage a little over four minutes in length was shown while a song played in the background . The song was called " Forsaken " ( or " Todd 's Song " ) and written by Michal <unk> especially for the show . The montage included reaction shots of those witnessing the execution , shots of Starr crying in the presence of a lynch mob outside the prison , and flashbacks of Todd 's children and of Blair during both St. John and Howarth 's tenures as Todd , with Howarth 's face unseen . The scenes were called " unbearable " by viewers , and their responses were varied . Much of the audience was infuriated by Blair 's unwillingness to believe that Todd was innocent . Many viewers thought that Todd 's death was permanent ; Soap Opera Digest speculated that this was due to limited Internet access or to a lack of interest in spoilers . 
 Although fans and St. John 's co @-@ workers felt that he deserved an Emmy nomination for his death row performances , he did not receive one , but OLTL received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series by submitting the episode . One soap opera website criticized St. John 's Emmy snub , stating that it was incongruous that the show 's Best Show nomination was due in large part to St. John 's performance . Soap opera commentators Nelson Branco and Michael Fairman called St. John 's execution performances the best on any daytime drama in the early 2000s . <unk> and other composers for the show were nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Music Direction and Composition for a Drama Series . 
 = = = Controversy and fan debate = = = 
 = = = = Rape and redemption = = = = 
 Although the gang rape storyline was well @-@ received , it was also criticized . Jennifer Hayward , in her literary analysis of the rape and its similarity to nineteenth century melodrama , stated that this storyline not only polarized " the gap between rapists and the raped but also the figure of the rapist himself " , and that insisting on " the ' essential ' goodness " of Powell Lord implied that peer pressure " could be an adequate ( or even physiologically possible ) excuse for rape " . Scholar Mary Buhl Dutta , arguing that the storyline perpetuated rape myths , commented on how the series especially used Marty , who fulfilled the stereotype of " the bad girl " who was the rape victim . Dutta stated that " Marty had once ' cried rape ' " when the Rev. Andrew Carpenter " rebuffed her romantic overtures , falsely accusing him of sexually abusing a boy he was counseling " . After she was actually raped , she falsely yet unintentionally accuses Kevin Buchanan , who was innocent . Marty , according to Dutta , " is a ' bad girl ' because she had a one @-@ night stand with Todd before the rape , bolstering his later claim she ' asked for it ' in their second sexual encounter " . 
 Critics have wondered why Todd is popular . Soap opera journalist Marlena De Lacroix , who acknowledged that she neither liked or understood Todd , expressed her inability to understand his popularity among so many fans , even during his several hiatuses from the show . She asked , " Why has the show devoted years of storyline time to him and all but made a hero out of a criminal ? " Hayward , who said that her own response to Todd 's redemption was ambivalent , called the writers ' attempt to redeem Todd controversial and stated that the role of Rebecca , the woman the writers paired Todd with during the redemption process , " seems to encourage both female and male fantasies about the power of a ' good woman ' to save a man from his own violent impulses " . In his book Behold the Man , <unk> Dotson suggested that viewers accepted Todd 's redemption because he was physically attractive . Dotson stated , " Were Todd an ugly man , he would have never been forgiven , and female fans would not crowd the studio 's backdoor shouting his name . " 
 Soap opera commentator Jenn Bishop said she found it difficult to explain Todd 's popularity , and that if she is perplexed about her feelings regarding him , it is understandable that others would be as well . " If I were to give a surface level assessment of Todd , I 'd say he 's an abhorrent character with little to no redeeming qualities , " she said . " His actions , which span from the immoral to criminal , can be downright heinous . I wouldn 't want to know Todd , let alone be around him in real life . Nor would I want any woman to have any sort of relationship with him . " Instead of seeing Todd as an antihero , she saw him as more of " an anti @-@ anti @-@ hero " and stated that what added to his appeal was that his rape storyline was authentic . " While Todd is not the first ( or the last ) soap character to have committed this crime , the realness of this particular storyline didn 't leave a lot of room for rewrites , " Bishop commented . " For example , Luke 's rape of Laura on General Hospital was rewritten and for years was referred to as a ' seduction . ' There was no ' grey area ' . This [ Todd 's rape of Marty ] could not be dismissed as simply the behavior of a romantic rogue . " To Bishop , the end result of this aspect , and that the writers had Todd generally pay for his crimes , " was the development of a dynamic , unpredictable , multi @-@ faceted character with many traits that conflict with one another " and " [ a ] ll this makes for one messed up guy , intriguing to the viewers and one I can 't help but like " . 
 Hayward categorized the writing team involved in Todd 's redemption as " an usually high number of male writers " , and as an unusual situation because , historically , most soap opera writers have been women . In a June 1994 interview with TV Guide , in an article about the trend during the early 1990s of redeemed rapists on soap operas , head writer Malone commented that " [ t ] he bond between the woman and the violator is a great historical tradition in fiction and films , " and said that Rudolph Valentino , Humphrey Bogart , Kirk Douglas , and Clark Gable " all began as totally irredeemable villains . " Although he did not think that most women want to be raped or are drawn to violence , he said that viewers " are responding to the intensity of passion and an actor who lets you inside the torment . Some [ women ] believe they can be swept up in that passion and still turn it good . They think , ' With me , he 'd be different ' " . The author of the article , Michael Logan , supported Malone 's statements , and commented , " Let 's call a spade a spade . There is a large contingent of American female soap viewers who find something very attractive about rapists " . Hayward reported that many female viewers were furious that Logan had described them this way , and stated that their attraction to Todd was due to the skill of the actor portraying him . 
 Howarth said he had no desire to portray a redeemed Todd , and that the show would be better off finding " a Todd who won 't object to the material . " He subsequently left the series for a year . In the October 24 , 1995 Soap Opera Digest issue , he stated : 
 In the beginning , the character of Todd was successful . I 'll always be proud of this story , because it was the result of a real team effort . It was one of those spectacular times when the writer , producer , director , grips , engineers and actors were all on the same wavelength . Everybody was working toward a common goal . My task , at the time , was to show the humanity of someone who was basically inhuman . Todd wasn 't one @-@ dimensional , but he was definitely a serious psychopath . Todd was a serial rapist . He raped Carol Swift . Then , he raped Marty Saybrooke , and that rape was brutal , intense , violent and realistic . There were innuendos he had raped other women before . He stalked Nora , he stalked and tried to rape Luna . [ Then @-@ Executive Producer ] Linda Gottlieb told me with reasonable certainty that [ One Life to Live ] would not try to redeem Todd . So , I didn 't think the character would change . Then about a year ago , it became clear to me they were taking the character on a different path — they were redeeming him . In my mind , I 'd been hired to play Todd Manning , a very realistic , serious psychopath . But now , the powers @-@ that @-@ be wanted me to play Todd Lord . And the story of Todd Lord is not realistic — it 's a fairy tale . I thought , " It would be best for the show if I were to leave . " That 's when I tendered my resignation . 
 Howarth also stated that Todd and Marty suddenly bonding , even if reluctantly , did not make sense and that he could not , in good conscience , support Todd 's redemption by continuing to play him as Todd Lord , who had become a likable character . Since the rape was , as he called it , " so in @-@ depth and so brutal " , he viewed Todd and Marty doing something like having drinks with each other bizarre . Entertainment Weekly reported that One Life to Live agreed to let Howarth go on the condition he would not appear on another soap opera for twelve months . Indy Week said , " Todd was partially redeemed into a self @-@ destructive antihero who remained popular until the show 's end , but his portrayer and many critics were wary of having him becoming a romantic lead . " 
 = = = = Merchandising = = = = 
 In 2002 , as part of ABC 's push to sell merchandise from its soap operas , the network began selling a doll in Todd 's likeness on its website , but were thwarted by a backlash . Modeled after cartoon versions of the Manning family that Starr would sometimes imagine , the doll sold for $ 19 @.@ 95 . According to the description on the site , it was " an all @-@ cloth doll with brown felt hair and blue eyes . He is 20 inches standing . He wears a blue shirt and black pants " . The doll 's face also included Todd 's scar . Even though several years had passed since the gang rape and Todd had " since settled down " , and had become a more sympathetic character , rape advocate groups thought that selling the doll glorified sexual assault ; so ABC removed the doll from its online store . Pictures of the doll were pulled from the Internet and the doll was blocked from being available at eBay or any other online store . 
 The controversy began when the industry newsletter " The Jack Myers Report " harshly criticized ABC for selling the doll , and other news outlets reported the snafu . Bob Tedeschi of The New York Times stated , " In the charge toward e @-@ commerce revenues , ABC learned a useful lesson last week : Don 't try to sell cuddly rag dolls depicting homicidal rapists " . Angela Shapiro , president of ABC , said , " I was insensitive and take total responsibility for it . I should have been sensitive to the history of the character and I wasn 't " . Another ABC executive stated , " We didn 't exercise proper sensitivity to the history of the character of Todd . We have re @-@ evaluated and decided not to sell the doll " . A doll of Todd 's daughter , Starr , remained in ABC stores . Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times commented , " I suppose ABC didn 't have much of a choice but to pull the <unk> I have to wonder about the people who voiced those protests . " He added , " It was a stupid <unk> <unk> based on a SOAP <unk> <unk> . If you 're offended by that , how do you get through the day without succumbing to fits of hysterical outrage every five minutes ? " 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 When Todd was recast with St. John after Howarth 's departure , many fans felt that like the roles of Luke Spencer ( Anthony Geary ) on General Hospital and Erica Kane ( Susan Lucci ) on All My Children , Todd should be portrayed only by the actor who had originated the role . As Soap Opera Digest put it , " Few recasts caused more uproar " . Soap Opera Digest also stated that while there were fans who " will only consider Howarth to be their beloved Todd " , St. John won over many fans by putting a lighter spin on the character . Soap Opera Weekly stated that they were " on board with St. John " . Soap Opera Digest agreed , commenting that St. John made the transition believable while adding new facets to the character . The magazine also stated that Todd 's new appearance aided in his continuing redemption . Soap opera columnist Jill Berry expressed her approval for the recast , stating , " Trevor 's Todd continues to impress me . He has given some sweetness to Todd that I find totally appealing " . 
 In late 2006 , St. John and Howarth simultaneously began contract negotiations with their respective shows , which caused rumors that St. John was departing from OLTL , leaving room for Howarth , who was with the soap opera As the World Turns at the time , to return as Todd . TV Guide sought to clear up the matter and questioned executive producer Frank Valentini , who stated that although he was not able to comment on contracts , the producers were " doing our best to make sure that we do right by the audience " . In 2007 , TV Guide received official confirmation Howarth would not be returning to the series . The magazine conducted a poll on its website , TV Guide.com , and found that 82 percent of the show 's viewers wanted to see Howarth return . Daniel R. Coleridge of TV Guide.com disagreed with the results , stating , " Perhaps I 'm in the minority , but I absolutely adore Trevor St. John " , whose portrayal of Todd he found " very cocky , arrogant and humorous in a sexy way " . 
 In 2009 , following the announcement that As the World Turns would be cancelled in 2010 , rumors that Howarth would return to OLTL regained momentum . The rumors were further fueled by an August 2010 episode of OLTL , in which Howarth 's picture was shown and a delirious Téa stated that the current Todd ( St. John ) was not Todd Manning . This resulted in what Dan Kroll of the website Soap Opera <unk> described as fans " <unk> [ ing ] to their computers to figure out the meaning of the scene " . Kroll speculated that the scene was " crafted merely to get fans talking , or was it a hint to viewers something big was coming down the pike ? " Soap Opera Network , citing unnamed sources and pointing to the 2010 episode , reported on their website that they had " learned exclusively Howarth [ would ] indeed be returning " to the series in the near future . Soap Opera Digest columnist Carolyn <unk> dismissed the report , stating on her Facebook page , " Seriously , stop with the Howarth misinformation here please . He is not coming back to OLTL . Case closed . " Some fans were convinced that St. John 's character was an impostor , while others were not ; although Howarth eventually returned as Todd in 2011 , his return was initially accompanied with fan debate regarding what role he would play , Todd Manning or a new character . 
 = = = = Violence towards teenagers = = = = 
 According to Nelson Branco of TV Guide , OLTL aired " some of the most explosive and ugliest scenes ever broadcast on daytime " television in March 2008 when Todd beat up teenager Cole Thornhart ( his daughter 's boyfriend and Marty 's son ) , and slapped Starr and Cole 's friends <unk> Rivera and Langston Wilde . Todd barges in on Starr and Cole in bed together for the first time , jumping to the conclusion that Cole had raped her , " and [ beats ] the son of his rape victim relentlessly " . At least one soap opera blogger was outraged , and wanted Todd to be punished . 
 In Branco 's opinion , head writer Ron Carlivati wanted to use the storyline to return Todd to his dark roots by showing him as a monster again , stating , " Carlivati chose to do something unique , bold and risky with one of his marquee characters " , demonstrating Todd 's damaged personality and calling into question his mental stability . Carlivati said that Todd was convinced that Starr 's alleged rape was karmic payback , even when Starr insisted that she had not been raped . Branco postulated that Todd 's conclusion and strong reaction to seeing the two in bed together was Todd 's inability to separate sex from violence , stating , " Todd , in that instance , became unhinged , paranoid , and out @-@ of @-@ control " . Todd was in denial , and even almost hit Starr twice when she challenged his beliefs . The scenes were praised as " riveting " . Soap columnist Marlena De Lacroix , a self @-@ described " Todd hater " who felt that the character was psychotic , expressed hope that they were " the beginning of a storyline that will delve into Todd 's mind and enlighten viewers as to the complexities of a character who is mentally ill " . De Lacroix worried that although the storyline had the potential to be memorable , it could be another way to build sympathy for Todd . 
 = = = = <unk> Marty = = = = 
 Deciding to revisit the rape storyline in 2007 , Carlivati wrote a story in which Marty is thrown from a van during a car crash later that year . The van explodes , and she is presumed dead . In June 2008 , Todd discovers her alive , and finds that she is afflicted with amnesia and has been crippled since the crash . He starts to nurse her back to health , lying to her about her identity and her importance to the people she loves . ABC promoted the storyline by airing ads that called it , " The story you thought you 'd never see " . Carlivati defended the storyline by assuring the audience , who was concerned about and resisted the storyline , that it would not have been written if Marty had not lost her memories . He stated that he was aware of how serious it was pairing the characters romantically , but did not feel like they were damaging Marty 's character . Carlivati was committed to having the storyline progress slowly , and to using the actors ' and characters ' chemistry . Eventually , Todd and Marty have sex ; Todd insists that he has always been in love with Marty and plots to steal his daughter 's baby ( who is also Marty 's grandchild ) , run off with Marty and the baby , and raise the baby with her . 
 According to Branco , the show 's past writing teams had proposed creating a Marty and Todd love story , but it never happened , mostly because Haskell and Howarth had refused to participate . In Branco 's opinion , the push toward the storyline was the reason Howarth eventually left OLTL for As the World Turns . By contrast , at a fan gathering in 2008 , St. John joked about Todd and Marty bonding during the Carlivati storyline , stating , " I 'm all for gang rape . " He later issued an apology for the comment : " I should know better than to ever try and make a joke about such a serious subject . I intended no <unk> [ s ] <unk> and apologize to anyone I offended . " 
 De Lacroix found Carlivati 's storyline " disgusting " , stating that it was exploitative , misogynistic , insulting to the audience , and " the most phony , stupidly contrived story I have ever seen " . She also felt that it was a severe <unk> to the original storyline . Fans who were opposed to the controversial storyline called it " the re @-@ rape " , and ABC aired public service announcements ( PSAs ) during the Todd and Marty sex scene for their viewers . Berry supported ABC 's use of the PSAs , but felt that they were used to justify the storyline and stated that it would have been better to not have presented it in the first place . Lynn Parrish , a spokesperson for Rape , Abuse & Incest National Network ( RAINN ) , which was not consulted by the show 's writers , spoke out against the " re @-@ rape " storyline . She told Branco , " There is nothing romantic about rape " , and that " whoever writes a romance between a rapist and its victim under any circumstances clearly doesn 't understand rape nor violence — and probably shouldn 't be writing about it " . 
 Branco called the original rape storyline " the gold standard of rape stories , " and stated that Carlivati had changed it into a soap opera cliché . Carlivati 's addition to the characters ' histories left him feeling betrayed , hurt , depressed , angry , insulted , and disgusted , and he said that he had wasted almost 20 years investing in and believing in the original rape storyline . At the " re @-@ rape " storyline 's conclusion , Branco stated that the payoff was worth the tense moments . " However obscene or depraved the riskiest storyline in recent memory was , " he said , " the fallout has been shockingly riveting — thanks to the fact that head writer Ron Carlivati is playing all the psychological beats of Todd 's self @-@ serving and criminal actions . " Branco also gave credit to St. John . " Nominated for a 2009 Soap Opera Spirit Award as outstanding lead actor , St. John inarguably faced the most challenging assignment of any actor in 2008 — in any genre , " said Branco . " And yet , somehow , St. John made it work . In a lesser actor 's hands , the storyline most certainly would have resulted in career suicide for all involved . " 
 = Typhoon Judy ( 1989 ) = 
 Typhoon Judy of July 1989 was a strong tropical cyclone that caused extensive damage and loss of life in Japan , South Korea and the eastern Soviet Union . Originating from a monsoon trough on July 21 , Judy began as a tropical depression west of the Northern Mariana Islands . Tracking west @-@ northwest , the system gradually intensified into a tropical storm and was given the name Judy on July 23 . By this time , the storm had turned due north . Two days later , Judy attained typhoon status as it began a gradual turn to the west @-@ northwest . Late on July 25 , the storm peaked with winds of 165 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Striking Kyushu on July 27 , interaction with the island 's mountainous terrain caused Judy to quickly weaken as it neared South Korea . The weakened storm struck the country west of Pusan the following day before losing its identity near the border with North Korea . The remnants of Judy were last noted over the Sea of Japan . 
 In Japan , damaging winds from the typhoon left approximately 4 million people without power . Significant flooding in the country resulted in 11 deaths and $ 28 @.@ 9 million in damage . In South Korea , heavy rains from the storm exacerbated ongoing floods , leading to at least 20 fatalities . Flooding from the remnants of Judy affected the Soviet Far East , temporarily severing the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway and killing 15 people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In mid @-@ July , a monsoon trough located west of the Northern Mariana Islands produced two tropical disturbances . The first of these tracked due west and later became Tropical Storm Irving . The second of these disturbances remained poorly organized and development into a tropical cyclone was expected to be slow . By July 21 , an area of low pressure formed within the system and convection associated with it increased . Situated underneath an anticyclone , upper @-@ level outflow also improved . Following further organization of the system , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued their first advisory on Tropical Depression 11W on July 21 ; at this time , the depression was located about 555 km ( 345 mi ) west of Guam . Further aided by a tropical upper tropospheric trough to the northwest , the depression intensified into a tropical storm on July 23 and was assigned the name Judy by the JTWC . 
 On July 23 , a subtropical ridge to the northeast of Judy caused the system to turn northward . This turn was not well anticipated by tropical cyclone forecast models . By July 25 , satellite imagery indicated that Judy had intensified into a typhoon . Within hours of reaching this strength , the a weather buoy near the storm recorded a barometric pressure of 974 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 76 inHg ) and winds of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Strengthening continued throughout the day and Judy soon attained its peak intensity as a Category 2 equivalent typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , with maximum sustained winds estimated at 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Around this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency assessed the typhoon to have attained ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) and a pressure of 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . 
 On July 26 , the typhoon turned towards the northwest and weakened somewhat . Late the next day , Judy struck the southern coast of Kyushu before moving over the Korea Strait . Interaction with the mountainous terrain of the island caused the storm to degenerate . Less than a day after moving over Kyushu , the system weakened to a tropical storm and soon made landfall in South Korea , roughly 205 km ( 125 mi ) west of Pusan . Once onshore , rapid weakening took place with Judy being downgraded to a tropical depression within 12 hours . The remnants of Judy were last noted on July 29 over the Sea of Japan . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On July 26 , the Japan Meteorological Agency began warning residents of the typhoon 's imminent arrival , stating that Judy would approach western parts of the country in two days . The following day , heavy rain and strong wind warnings were issued for much of Kyushu . Heavy rains from the storm affected much of southern Japan . Across Kyushu , rainfall rates exceeded 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) per hour at times and many areas measured total rainfall over 500 mm ( 20 in ) . Significant flooding and landslides from the storm destroyed 25 homes and damaged many more . In <unk> , Miyazaki , roughly 1 @,@ 800 people evacuated as a river rose and threatened to flood parts of the city . Damaging winds from the storm , measured up to 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) in Kagoshima , left roughly 4 million households without power . Train service throughout Kyushu was significantly disrupted , with 110 @,@ 000 passengers stranded . Damage throughout the island was placed at $ 3 @.@ 8 million . Agricultural losses from the storm reached 3 @.@ 5 billion yen ( $ 25 @.@ 1 million ) . In all , Typhoon Judy killed 11 people in Japan , destroyed 76 homes and damaged 10 @,@ 664 others . 
 On July 28 , typhoon and heavy rain warnings were issued for all of South Korea . Numerous people in low @-@ lying areas were evacuated . Thousands of vessels were also called to port to ride out the storm . Winds up to 125 km / h ( 78 mph ) battered coastal areas of South Korea , uprooting many trees and leaving thousands without power . In <unk> , hundreds of windows were blown out by the winds . Heavy rains , amounting to at least 335 mm ( 13 @.@ 2 in ) along the Yeongsan River , from the storm exacerbated ongoing floods in the country . In Pusan , 15 people were killed by the storm , 9 by landslides and 6 by structural collapse or flooding . Approximately 2 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed in the city . In some areas , flood waters were " knee @-@ deep . " Throughout the country , 20 people were confirmed to have been killed by the storm ; however , media reports indicated that 24 people perished . According to Korean officials , roughly 47 @,@ 000 people were left homeless and losses reached 1 @.@ 2 billion won ( $ 1 @.@ 8 million USD ) . In the wake of Typhoon Judy , the South Korean Red Cross set up soup kitchens . 
 The remnants of Judy produced heavy rains in the Soviet Far East in early August , resulting in significant flooding . In Primorsky Krai , at least 15 people were killed by the floods which virtually cut off part of the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway and washed out 267 bridges . A total of 109 settlements were also inundated . Approximately 120 @,@ 000 hectares ( 300 @,@ 000 acres ) of land was underwater at the height of the floods . In addition to the loss of human life , 75 @,@ 000 cattle drowned . 
 = Vizianagaram fort = 
 Vizianagaram fort is an early 18th century fort in the city of Vizianagaram in northeastern Andhra Pradesh , South India . It was built by Vijaya Rama Raju , the Raja of Vizianagaram in 1713 . The formal ceremony , while laying the foundation for the fort , was very auspicious as it represented five signs of victory . The square @-@ shaped fort has two main gates , of which the main entry gate ( the " Nagar khana " ) has elaborate architectural features . There are many temples and palaces within the fort and a victory tower . 
 = = Location = = 
 The fort is situated in Vizianagaram ( Telugu language meaning : " the city of victory " ) about 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) away from the Bay of Bengal . It is 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) to the northwest of Visakhapatnam . 
 = = History = = 
 The Vizianagaram fort was built in 1713 at a location where five <unk> ( Telugu language meaning : " signs of victory " ) were supposed to be present . It is named after its founder Vijaya Rama Raju , also known as Ananda Raju I ( 1671 – 1717 ) , the Raja of <unk> site for the fort was suggested to the Rajas by a Muslim saint , <unk> Valli , who was doing penance in that forest . The auspicious date chosen for the foundation laying ceremony corresponded , according to the Hindu calendar , to the year known as Vijaya on the tenth day of the Vijaya <unk> when the <unk> Festival is generally held in the country . It was also a Tuesday , which means <unk> ( " victory day " ) in Telugu . 
 = = Features = = 
 The fort , built of stone , is in the shape of a square of side 240 metres ( 790 ft ) , and rises to a height of 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . The width of the wall at the top varies from 8 to 16 metres ( 26 to 52 ft ) . The four corners of the fort have fortifications in the form of bastions made of stones with a slope on its inner face covered with earth fill and strengthened with stone slabs . There are two gates of entry into the fort . The fort entry from the east is the main gate called the " Nagar khana " , which has elegant architectural designs . Prior to the construction of the Nagar khana , a victory arch stood at the entrance . The west @-@ facing gate is smaller but with similar architectural features as the main gate . A moat surrounded the fort . 
 Apart from the two main gates , there are several temples and monuments located within the fort . Two important temples are the Hanuman temple , and the Lakshmi temple known as the “ Kota <unk> ” , which is the guardian deity of the fort . Rajas offered prayers at Lakshmi temple before proceeding on any war campaign . Important monuments are palaces such as the Moti Mahal , Oudh Khana , Alakananda Palace , Korukonda Palace , and , just outside , the victory tower called the " Ghanta Stambham " ( Clock Tower ) . Two other important historical monuments outside the fort , but within the city limits , are the <unk> temple and the Perla Home . 
 = = = Gates = = = 
 The two main gates of the fort are architecturally elegant , built in Rajasthani style of architecture . The east main gate is called the " Nagar khana " as it has a drum tower at the top which was used to beat drums to inform the people of royal orders and arrival of royal guests . 
 The west gate is the rear entrance to the Vizianagaram fort . This gateway is also built in Rajasthani style with a pavilion on top . The gate provides access to the royal tombs , and is a traditional gateway to take out dead bodies for cremation . In place of a moat , which existed in the past , there is now a well turned park extending to the west gate . 
 = = = Moti Mahal = = = 
 The Moti Mahal is the royal court or the Durbar hall which was built by <unk> Raju @-@ III in 1869 . At the entry to this hall there are two marble statues . This is a monument that represent the past glory , donated to the Maharajah <unk> Narayan Society of Arts and Science ( <unk> Trust ) by its founder Dr. <unk> Raju , the Raja Saheb of Vizianagaram , is now functioning as a college for women on its first floor . It also houses a museum which has artifacts of the past kings who ruled from the fort . 
 = = = Oudh Khana = = = 
 The Oudh Khana is the opulent royal palace of the Rajas of Vizianagaram . A unique part of this palace is an exclusive bath room of the Rajas , which is an octagonal stone structure that adjoins the Phool Bagh Palace . The structure is 50 feet ( 15 m ) in height built with stones and has a spiral stairway which leads to the water tank at the top that is fed by pumping water from a nearby well . 
 = = = Alakananda Palace = = = 
 The Alaknanda Palace was built as a royal guest house . It was constructed in a plush style for the royal guests . It is set within a well laid out garden with walkways . Within the grounds of this palace an air strip has been built in recent years for use of the royalty . This palace , however , now houses the 5th Battalion of the Andhra Pradesh Armed Reserve Police . 
 = = = Korukonda Palace = = = 
 Nearer to the Alakananda Palace is the Korukonda Palace . The land around this palace , about 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) large , is used as a playground and also has well @-@ tended gardens . Educational institutions have been established in this land and there a school to train youth who wish to join the defense forces . 
 = = = <unk> Stambham = = = 
 <unk> Stambham is the Clock Tower patterned on the lines of the Big Ben in London . The rajas of Vizianagaram , who used to frequent London during the British Raj , built it . It is located just outside the limits of the fort within the heart of the city . The octagonal tower , built of sandstone in 1885 , reaches a height of 68 feet ( 21 m ) . It was painted white at the top in the past but is now painted cream and red . 
 = = = Other structures = = = 
 Outside the limits of the fort there is an ancient temple dedicated to goddess <unk> <unk> which is held in great reverence by the people of the town . It is believed that this deity is the reincarnated form of a daughter of the royal family . The image of the Goddess worshipped in this temple was found on Vijayadashami day in 1752 . This day is marked by an annual celebration on 21st and 22nd October as a " jatra " or " religious fair " . The temple has a Shiva linga in two colours , which is said to exemplify the union of Shiva and Parvati . 
 Perla Home , also known as the " Perla Vari " , constructed in 1895 , is said to be one of the most well @-@ maintained monuments in the city . The first building to get electricity connection in the region , it had a bedroom fitted with bedsteads made of silver . A library , which was part of this building , is still functional . The elegant European furniture and the chandeliers of past glory are on display with other artifacts . 
 = Miniopterus griveaudi = 
 Miniopterus griveaudi is a bat in the genus Miniopterus found on Grande Comore and Anjouan in the Comoros and in northern and western Madagascar . First described in 1959 from Grande Comore as a subspecies of the mainland African M. minor , it was later placed with the Malagasy M. manavi . However , morphological and molecular studies published in 2008 and 2009 indicated that M. manavi as then defined contained five distinct , unrelated species , and M. griveaudi was redefined as a species occurring on both Madagascar and the Comoros . 
 With a forearm length of 35 to 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) , M. griveaudi is a small Miniopterus . It is usually dark brown , but sometimes reddish . The tragus ( a projection inside the ear ) is narrow and ends in a rounded tip . The uropatagium ( tail membrane ) appears virtually naked . In the skull , the palate is concave and the rostrum ( front part ) is rounded . The species occurs up to 480 m ( 1 @,@ 570 ft ) above sea level on Madagascar , often in karstic areas . In the Comoros , it reaches 890 m ( 2 @,@ 920 ft ) and roosts in lava tubes as well as shallower caves . Females collected on Grande Comore in November were pregnant , but data on reproduction is limited and suggests individual and inter @-@ island variation . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1959 , David Harrison described a small Miniopterus from the island of Grande Comore as a subspecies , Miniopterus minor griveaudi , of the mainland African species M. minor . The name griveaudi honors Paul <unk> , who collected the specimens on which Harrison based his description . This classification remained for the next few decades ; in 1992 , for example , Javier Juste and Carlos Ibáñez recognized five subspecies , including griveaudi , within M. minor , ranging from São Tomé to Madagascar . In their 1995 review of Madagascar bats , Randolph Peterson and colleagues recognized the small Malagasy Miniopterus as a separate species , Miniopterus manavi , with griveaudi as a subspecies . 
 In 2007 , Juste and colleagues re @-@ examined the relationships of the M. minor group using DNA sequences from the mitochondrial cytochrome b ( cyt b ) gene . They found that griveaudi from Grande Comoro , manavi from Madagascar , and M. minor newtoni ( currently Miniopterus newtoni ) from São Tomé were not closely related ; however , the representatives of " manavi " used in their study were misidentified specimens of M. majori . 
 In another molecular study , published in 2008 and using both cyt b and mitochondrial D @-@ loop sequences , Nicole <unk> and colleagues found that examined specimens of " Miniopterus manavi " actually grouped in two , distantly related clades — one including specimens from Madagascar , Anjouan , and Grande Comore , and the other occurring on Madagascar and Anjouan only . 
 The next year , Steven Goodman and colleagues further explored the relationships of the bats known as " Miniopterus manavi " using cyt b sequences and morphological comparisons . They found five species within " M. manavi " , which are not each other 's closest relatives , forming an example of convergent evolution . Up to four species of the group may occur in a single locality . Miniopterus griveaudi , now recognized as a full species , was found to occur on Grande Comore , Anjouan , and northern and western Madagascar , and M. manavi was restricted to the eastern margin of Madagascar 's Central Highlands . Three other species were newly described : Miniopterus aelleni on Anjouan and in northern and western Madagascar ; Miniopterus brachytragos in northern and western Madagascar only ; and Miniopterus mahafaliensis in southwestern Madagascar . <unk> b sequences suggest that M. griveaudi occupies an isolated position among African and Malagasy Miniopterus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Miniopterus griveaudi is a small , dark brown Miniopterus species . M. aelleni is similar in color , but M. manavi is darker and M. brachytragos and M. mahafaliensis are lighter . The upperparts are occasionally reddish brown ; this color variant occurs more often in the Comoro populations than on Madagascar . In the Comoros , individual colonies or groups sometimes consist exclusively of one color variant , but there is no apparent genetic differentiation between the two forms . The head is usually somewhat lighter than the body and the hairs of the underparts have buffish tips . The tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the outer ear ) is straight and narrow and ends in a rounded tip . Other species have differently shaped tragi . The wing membrane is also brown , but the uropatagium ( tail membrane ) is lighter . The wing membrane and uropatagium are attached to the upper leg at the same level , near the ankle . The uropatagium is sparsely covered with thin hairs that are virtually invisible to the naked eye . In contrast , M. manavi , M. mahafaliensis , and M. brachytragos have densely covered uropatagia and that of M. aelleni is sparsely , but visibly haired . There are some differences in measurements among the island populations ; animals from Grande Comore are generally smallest , those from Anjouan are intermediate , and those from Madagascar are largest . 
 The animal has a karyotype of 46 chromosomes , with a total of 50 major arms on the autosomes ( non @-@ sex chromosomes ) . The X chromosome is submetacentric ( with one arm slightly longer than the other ) and the Y chromosome is small and acrocentric ( with one very short and one long arm ) . The karyotype is conserved among species of Miniopterus ; the number of chromosomes and arms is identical in M. griveaudi , the Malagasy M. aelleni and M. <unk> , and even the Asian M. fuliginosus . 
 In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is rounded . The central groove in the nasal depression ( the lowered area at the nose ) is relatively broad in comparison to M. manavi . The frontal bones ( part of the skull roof ) bear a well @-@ developed sagittal crest ( a crest that provides support for muscles of the head ) . Further back on the braincase , the lambdoid crest ( another such crest ) is also prominent . The middle part of the palate is concave , as in M. brachytragos and M. mahafaliensis , but unlike in M. aelleni and M. manavi , which have a flat palate . At the palate 's back margin is a long , robust posterior palatal spine . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 On Madagascar , the distribution of M. griveaudi extends along the western lowlands north to Ankarana in the far north of the island , and on eastern Madagascar south to the vicinity of Daraina . It is found up to 480 m ( 1 @,@ 570 ft ) above sea level and often occurs in karstic areas . Its range extensively overlaps that of M. aelleni , which is regularly found in the same forests and caves . Although some ecological and behavioral data has been published on " Miniopterus manavi " , the recognition of several cryptic species within this group , which may occur in the same places , renders the association of these data with any of the species now recognized uncertain ; however , species of Miniopterus generally feed on insects . Miniopterus griveaudi was assessed as " Data Deficient " on the IUCN Red List in 2008 , but the account predates the recognition of the species on Anjouan and Madagascar . 
 Miniopterus griveaudi is known from 15 to 670 m ( 49 to 2 @,@ 198 ft ) altitude on Grande Comore and 5 to 890 m ( 16 to 2 @,@ 920 ft ) on Anjouan . In the Comoros , it roosts in caves , both lava tubes and shallower structures ; it was found to share one cave on Grande Comore with another bat , <unk> <unk> . Individuals of M. griveaudi have been found to leave a Grande Comore cave at sunset . Flying M. griveaudi have mostly been recorded in forests , but this may reflect a lack of survey effort in open areas . In caves , individuals either group in large groups of more than 50 bats without reproductive activity or in smaller groups of at most five reproductively active bats . Limited data on reproduction show some notable variation between individuals and islands . In two caves surveyed on Grande Comore in November 2006 , all females were pregnant with single embryos with crown @-@ rump lengths of 14 to 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 to 0 @.@ 75 in ) , but none of the males were reproductively active . In another cave , none of the bats examined at the same time — all males — were reproductively active . None of the bats captured in one of the caves in April 2007 showed signs of reproductive activity . On Anjouan , no bats were reproductively active in two caves surveyed in late November 2006 . 
 Although specimens of M. griveaudi differ by only 0 @.@ 6 % in their cyt b sequences , analysis of D @-@ loop data does show some differentiation between the island populations . These data suggest that the species originated on Madagascar , where a large , stable population persists , and independently colonized Grande Comore and Anjouan ; subsequently , the Grande Comore and Anjouan populations came into contact , resulting in inter @-@ island gene flow . 
 = Mantled howler = 
 The mantled howler ( Alouatta palliata ) , or golden @-@ mantled howling monkey , is a species of howler monkey , a type of New World monkey , from Central and South America . It is one of the monkey species most often seen and heard in the wild in Central America . It takes its " mantled " name from the long guard hairs on its sides . 
 The mantled howler is one of the largest Central American monkeys , and males can weigh up to 9 @.@ 8 kg ( 22 lb ) . It is the only Central American monkey that eats large quantities of leaves ; it has several adaptations to this folivorous diet . Since leaves are difficult to digest and provide less energy than most foods , the mantled howler spends the majority of each day resting and sleeping . The male mantled howler has an enlarged hyoid bone , a hollow bone near the vocal cords , which amplifies the calls made by the male , and is the reason for the name " howler " . Howling allows the monkeys to locate each other without expending energy on moving or risking physical confrontation . 
 The mantled howler lives in groups that can have over 40 members , although groups are usually smaller . Most mantled howlers of both sexes are evicted from the group they were born in upon reaching sexual maturity , resulting in most adult group members being unrelated . The most dominant male , the alpha male , gets preference for food and resting places , and mates with most of the receptive females . The mantled howler is important to the rainforest ecology as a seed disperser and <unk> . Although it is affected by deforestation , it is able to adapt better than other species , due to its ability to feed on abundant leaves and its ability to live in a limited amount of space . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mantled howler belongs to the New World monkey family Atelidae , the family that contains the howler monkeys , spider monkeys , woolly monkeys and muriquis . It is a member of the subfamily <unk> and genus Alouatta , the subfamily and genus containing all the howler monkeys . The species name is A. palliata ; a pallium was a cloak or mantle worn by ancient Greeks and Romans . This refers to the long guard hairs , known as a " mantle " , on its sides . 
 Three subspecies are recognized : 
 Ecuadorian mantled howler , Alouatta palliata aequatorialis , in Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Panama and Peru ; 
 Golden @-@ mantled howler , Alouatta palliata palliata , in Costa Rica , Guatemala , Honduras and Nicaragua ; 
 Mexican howler , Alouatta palliata mexicana , in Mexico and Guatemala . 
 Two additional subspecies of the mantled howler are sometimes recognised , but these are more generally recognised as subspecies of the Coiba Island howler , <unk> <unk> . However , mitochondrial DNA testing of their status has been inconclusive : 
 <unk> howler , Alouatta palliata <unk> , in Panama ; 
 Alouatta palliata <unk> , in Panama . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The mantled howler 's appearance is similar to other howler monkeys of the genus Alouatta except for coloration . The mantled howler is primarily black except for a fringe of yellow or golden brown guard hairs on the flanks of the body earning the common name " mantled " howler monkey . When the males reach maturity , the scrotum turns white . Females are between 481 and 632 mm ( 18 @.@ 9 and 24 @.@ 9 in ) in body length , excluding tail , and males are between 508 and 675 mm ( 20 @.@ 0 and 26 @.@ 6 in ) . The prehensile tail is between 545 and 655 mm ( 21 @.@ 5 and 25 @.@ 8 in ) long . Adult females generally weigh between 3 @.@ 1 and 7 @.@ 6 kg ( 6 @.@ 8 and 16 @.@ 8 lb ) , while males typically weigh between 4 @.@ 5 and 9 @.@ 8 kg ( 9 @.@ 9 and 21 @.@ 6 lb ) . Average body weights can vary significantly between monkey populations in different locations . The brain of an adult mantled howler is about 55 @.@ 1 g ( 1 @.@ 94 oz ) , which is smaller than that of several smaller monkey species , such as the white @-@ headed capuchin . 
 The mantled howler shares several adaptations with other species of howler monkey that allow it to pursue a folivorous diet , that is , a diet with a large component of leaves . Its molars have high shearing crests , to help it eat the leaves , and males have an enlarged hyoid bone near the vocal cords . This hyoid bone amplifies the male mantled howler 's calls , allowing it to locate other males without expending much energy . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The mantled howler lives in groups . Group size usually ranges from 10 to 20 members , generally 1 to 3 adult males and 5 to 10 adult females , but some groups have over 40 members . Males outrank females , and younger animals of each gender generally have a higher rank than older animals . Higher @-@ ranking animals get preference for food and resting sites , and the alpha male gets primary mating rights . Animals in the group are generally not related to each other because most members of both sexes leave the group before sexual maturity . 
 Grooming activity in the mantled howler is infrequent and has been shown to reflect social hierarchy , with dominant individuals grooming subordinates . Most grooming activities are short and are typically females grooming infants or adult males . Aggressive interactions between group members is not often observed either . However , studies have shown that aggressive interactions among group members do occur , and are probably not often observed because these interactions tend to be quick and silent . 
 Mantled howler groups that have been studied have occupied home ranges of between 10 and 60 hectares ( 25 and 148 acres ) . Groups do not defend exclusive territories , but rather several groups have overlapping home ranges . However , if two groups meet each group will aggressively attempt to evict the other . On average , groups travel up to about 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) each day . 
 The mantled howler has little interaction with other sympatric monkey species but interactions with the white @-@ headed capuchin sometimes occur . These are most often aggressive , and the smaller capuchins are more often the aggressors . However , affiliative associations between the capuchins and howlers do sometimes occur , mostly involving juveniles playing together , and at times the capuchins and howlers may feed in the same tree , apparently ignoring each other . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The mantled howler is the most folivorous species of Central American monkey . Leaves make up between almost 50 % and 75 % of the mantled howler 's diet . The mantled howler is selective about the trees it eats from , and it prefers young leaves to mature leaves . This selectivity is likely to reduce the levels of toxins ingested , since certain leaves of various species contain toxins . Young leaves generally have less toxins as well as more nutrients than more mature leaves , and are also usually easier to digest . Mantled howler monkeys possess large salivary glands that help break down the leaf tannins by binding the polymers before the food bolus reaches the gut . Although leaves are abundant , they are a low energy food source . The fact that the mantled howler relies so heavily on a low energy food source drives much of its behaviour – for example , howling to locate other groups and spending a large portion of the day resting . 
 Although leaves tend to make up the majority of the mantled howler 's diet , fruit can also make up a large portion of the diet . When available , the proportion of fruit in the diet can be as much as 50 % , and can sometimes exceed the proportion of leaves . The leaves and fruit from Ficus trees tend to be the preferred source of the mantled howler . Flowers can also make up a significant portion of the diet and are eaten in particularly significant quantities during the dry season . The mantled howler tends to get the water it needs from its food , drinking from tree holes during the wet season , and by drinking water trapped in bromeliads . 
 Like other species of howler monkeys , almost all mantled howlers have full three color vision . This is different from other types of New World monkeys , in which most individuals have two color vision . The three color vision exhibited by the mantled howler is believed to be related to its dietary preferences , allowing it to distinguish young leaves , which tend to be more reddish , from more mature leaves . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 The mantled howler is diurnal and arboreal . Movement within the rainforest canopy and floor includes quadrupedalism ( walking and running on supports ) , bridging ( crossing gaps by stretching ) , and climbing . It will also sometimes leap to get to another limb . 
 However , the mantled howler is a relatively inactive monkey . It sleeps or rests the entire night and about three quarters of the day . Most of the active period is spent feeding , with only about 4 % of the day spent on social interaction . This lethargy is an adaptation to its low energy diet . It uses its prehensile tail to grasp a branch when sleeping , resting or when feeding . It can support its entire body weight with the tail , but more often holds on by the tail and both feet . A study has shown that the mantled howler reuses travel routes to known feeding and resting sites , and appears to remember and use particular landmarks to help pick direct routes to its destination . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 The mantled howler gets the name " howler " from the calls made by the males , particularly at dawn and dusk , but also in response to disturbances . These calls are very loud and can be heard for several kilometers . The calls consist of grunts and repeated roars that can last for four to five seconds each . The volume is produced by the hyoid bone — a hollow bone near the vocal cords — amplifying the sound made by the vocal cords . Male mantled howlers have hyoid bones that are 25 times larger than similarly sized spider monkeys , and this allows the bone to act like the body of a drum in amplifying the calls . Females also call but their calls are higher in pitch and not as loud as the males ' . The ability to produce these loud roars is likely an energy saving device , consistent with the mantled howler 's low energy diet . The roars allow the monkey to locate each other without moving around or risking physical confrontations . The mantled howler uses a wide range of other sounds , including barks , grunts , woofs , cackles and screeches . It uses clucking sounds to maintain auditory contact with other members of its group . 
 The mantled howler also uses non @-@ vocal communication , such as " urine rubbing " when in a <unk> social situation . This consists of rubbing the hands , feet , tail and / or chest with urine . It marks its scent by rubbing its throat on branches . Lip smacking and tongue movements are signals used by females to indicate an invitation to mate . Genital displays are used to indicate emotional states , and group members shake branches , which is apparently a playful activity . 
 The mantled howler is usually indifferent to the presence of humans . However , when it is disturbed by people , it often express its irritation by urinating or defecating on them . It can accurately hit its observers despite being high in the trees . 
 = = = Tool use = = = 
 The mantled howler has not been observed using tools , and prior to 1997 no howler monkey was known to use tools . However , in 1997 a Venezuelan red howler ( Alouatta <unk> ) was reported to use a stick as a club to hit a Linnaeus 's two @-@ toed sloth , ( <unk> didactylus ) , that was resting in its tree . This suggests that other howlers , such as the mantled howler , may also use tools in ways that have not yet been observed . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 The mantled howler uses a polygamous mating system in which one male mates with multiple females . Usually , the alpha male <unk> the breeding opportunities , but if the alpha male is distracted , a lower @-@ ranking male can get an opportunity to mate . And in some groups , lower @-@ ranking males do get regular mating opportunities and do sire offspring . Alpha males generally maintain their status for about 2 ½ to 3 years , during which time they may father 18 or so infants . Females become sexually mature at 36 months , males at 42 months . Females reaching sexual maturity are typically 42 months old by their first birth . They undergo a regular estrus cycle , with an average duration of 16 @.@ 3 days , and display sexual skin changes , particularly swelling and color change ( from white to light pink ) of the labia minora . The copulatory sequence begins when a receptive female approaches a male and engages in rhythmic tongue flicking . The male responds with the same tongue movements before the female turns while elevating her rump , which allows for mating to begin . Females apparently also use chemical signals , since males smell the females ' genitals and taste their urine . The gestational period is 186 days ; births can occur at any time of year . The infant 's fur is silver at birth , but turns pale or gold after a few days . After that , the fur starts to darken , and the infant takes on the adult coloration at about 3 months old . 
 The infant is carried under its mother , clinging to its mother 's chest , for the first 2 or 3 weeks of its life . After that , it is carried on its mother 's back . At about 3 months the mother will usually start to push the infant off , but will still carry the infant some of the time until it is 4 or 5 months old . After the young can move on its own , the mother will carry it across difficult gaps in the trees . Juveniles play among themselves much of the time . Infants are weaned at 1 ½ years old at which point maternal care ends . Adult females typically give birth every 19 to 23 months , assuming the prior infant survived to weaning . 
 The mantled howler differs from other howler monkey species in that the males ' testes do not descend until they reach sexual maturity . Upon reaching sexual maturity , the young monkeys are usually evicted from their natal group , although the offspring of a high @-@ ranking female may get to stay in its natal group . However , many infants do not reach sexual maturity ; high @-@ ranking adults sometimes harass or kill the offspring of lower @-@ ranking monkeys to eliminate competition to their own offspring for an opportunity to remain with the group upon reaching maturity . Natal emigration is performed by both sexes , with 79 % of all males and 96 % of the females leaving their original social group . When a male from outside the group <unk> the previous alpha male , he normally kills any infants so that the mothers come into estrus quickly and are able to mate with him . Predators , such as cats , weasels , snakes and eagles , also kill infants . As a result , only about 30 % of mantled howler infants live more than one year . The highest reproductive success occurs in the middle @-@ ranking females , with the alpha position lower possibly because of competitive pressures , and infant mortality appears to be lower when the timing of births in a group of females is clustered . If it survives infancy , the mantled howler 's lifespan is typically 25 years . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The mantled howler is native to Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama and Peru . Within Honduras , Nicaragua , Costa Rica and Panama , the mantled howler is found in locations throughout the countries . In Colombia and Ecuador , it is found in a narrow corridor bordered by the Pacific Ocean to the west and the Andes Mountains to the east and also in Colombia in a small area near the Caribbean Sea close to the Panama border . In Guatemala , the mantled howler is found through the central part of the country , and into southeastern Mexico south of the Yucatán Peninsula . The mantled howler is among the most commonly seen and heard primates in many Central American national parks , including Manuel Antonio , Corcovado , Monteverde and <unk> . The mantled howler lives in several different types of forest , including secondary forest and semi @-@ deciduous forest but is found in higher densities in older areas of forest and in areas containing evergreen forest . The mantled howler is sympatric with another howler monkey species , the Guatemalan black howler , A. <unk> , over a small part of its range , in Guatemala and Mexico near the Yucatan Peninsula . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The mantled howler is regarded as " least concern " from a conservation standpoint by the IUCN . Nonetheless , its numbers may be adversely affected by rainforest fragmentation which has caused forced relocation of groups to less habitable regions . 
 In 2011 , the primatologist Joaquim <unk> <unk> studied in Los <unk> Biosphere Reserve in Veracruz , Mexico , the impact due the fragmentation of populations and identified an increase in stress , especially among females , when a male from outside the group approached the area , because they felt that their offspring are being threatened . In addition , food limitation in areas of reduced surface area was forcing individuals to adapt their diet to increased food deprivation . <unk> highlighted that “ although this situation revealed up to what point individuals have the capacity for adaption , in some cases , undernourishment can lead to health problems that would make the population <unk> ” . Results can be compared to humans who “ do not always eat everything which they should , for example in underdeveloped countries that have problems with malnutrition , rickets , a range of illnesses , but this does not put an end to the population , but rather provokes them to change their characteristics ” . 
 However , the mantled howler can adapt to forest fragmentation better than other species due to its low energy lifestyle , small home ranges and ability to exploit widely available food sources . The mantled howler is important to its ecosystems for a number of reasons , but especially in its capacity as a seed disperser and <unk> , since passing through the monkey 's digestive tract appears to aid the germination of certain seeds . Dung beetles , which are also seed dispersers as well as nutrient recyclers , also appear to be dependent on the presence of the mantled howler . The mantled howler is protected from international trade under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ( CITES ) . 
 = Cirrus cloud = 
 Cirrus ( cloud classification symbol : Ci ) is a genus of atmospheric cloud generally characterized by thin , wispy strands , giving the type its name from the Latin word cirrus , meaning a ringlet or curling lock of hair . The strands of cloud sometimes appear in tufts of a distinctive form referred to by the common name of " mares ' tails " . 
 On planet Earth , cirrus generally appears white or light gray in color . It forms when water vapor undergoes deposition at altitudes above 5 @,@ 500 m ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) in temperate regions and above 6 @,@ 400 m ( 21 @,@ 000 ft ) in tropical regions . It also forms from the outflow of tropical cyclones or the anvils of cumulonimbus cloud . Since cirrus clouds arrive in advance of the frontal system or tropical cyclone , it indicates that weather conditions may soon deteriorate . While it indicates the arrival of precipitation ( rain ) , cirrus clouds only produce fall streaks ( falling ice crystals that evaporate before landing on the ground ) . 
 Jet stream @-@ powered cirrus can grow long enough to stretch across continents while remaining only a few kilometers deep . When visible light interacts with the ice crystals in cirrus cloud , it produces optical phenomena such as sun dogs and haloes . Cirrus is known to raise the temperature of the air beneath the main cloud layer by an average of 10 ° C ( 18 ° F ) . When the individual filaments become so extensive that they are virtually indistinguishable from one another , they form a sheet of high cloud called cirrostratus . Convection at high altitudes can produce another high @-@ based genus called cirrocumulus , a pattern of small cloud tufts that contain droplets of supercooled water . 
 Cirrus clouds form on other planets , including Mars , Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and possibly Neptune . They have even been seen on Titan , one of Saturn 's moons . Some of these extraterrestrial cirrus clouds are composed of ammonia or methane ice rather than water ice . The term cirrus is also used for certain interstellar clouds composed of sub @-@ micrometer @-@ sized dust grains . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cirrus cloud ranges in thickness from 100 m ( 330 ft ) to 8 @,@ 000 m ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) , with an average thickness of 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . There are , on average , 30 ice crystals per liter ( 96 ice crystals per gallon ) , but this ranges from one ice crystal per 10 @,@ 000 liters ( 3 @.@ 7 ice crystals per 10 @,@ 000 gallons ) to 10 @,@ 000 ice crystals per liter ( 37 @,@ 000 ice crystals per gallon ) , a difference of eight orders of magnitude . The length of each of these ice crystals is usually 0 @.@ 25 millimeters long , but they range from as short as 0 @.@ 01 millimeters or as long as several millimeters . The ice crystals in contrails are much smaller than those in naturally @-@ occurring cirrus cloud , as they are around 0 @.@ 001 millimeters to 0 @.@ 1 millimeters in length . Cirrus can vary in temperature from − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) to − 30 ° C ( − 22 ° F ) . 
 The ice crystals in cirrus clouds have different shapes in addition to different sizes . Some shapes include solid columns , hollow columns , plates , rosettes , and conglomerations of the various other types . The shape of the ice crystals is determined by the air temperature , atmospheric pressure , and ice supersaturation . Cirrus in temperate regions typically have the shapes segregated by type : the columns and plates tend to be at the top of the cloud , whereas the rosettes and conglomerations tend to be near the base . In the northern Arctic region , cirrus tend to be composed of only the columns , plates , and conglomerations , and these crystals tend to be at least four times larger than the minimum size . In Antarctica , cirrus are usually composed of only the columns , and these columns are much longer than normal . 
 Scientists have studied the characteristics of cirrus using several different methods . One , Light Detection and Ranging ( LiDAR ) , gives highly accurate information on the cloud 's altitude , length , and width . Balloon @-@ carried <unk> give information on the humidity of the cirrus cloud but are not accurate enough to measure the depth of the cloud . Radar units give information on the altitudes and thicknesses of cirrus clouds . Another data source is satellite measurements from the Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment ( SAGE ) program . These satellites measure where infrared radiation is absorbed in the atmosphere , and if it is absorbed at cirrus altitudes , then it is assumed that there are cirrus clouds in that location . The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration 's ( NASA ) <unk> resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer ( MODIS ) also gives information on the cirrus cloud cover by measuring reflected infrared radiation of various specific frequencies during the day . During the night , it determines cirrus cover by detecting the Earth 's infrared emissions . The cloud reflects this radiation back to the ground , thus enabling satellites to see the " shadow " it casts into space . Visual observations from aircraft or the ground provide additional information about cirrus clouds . 
 Based upon data taken from the United States using these methods , cirrus cloud cover was found to vary diurnally and seasonally . The researchers found that in the summer , at noon , the cover is the lowest , with an average of 23 % of the United States ' land area covered by cirrus . Around midnight , the cloud cover increases to around 28 % . In winter , the cirrus cloud cover did not vary appreciably from day to night . These percentages include clear days and nights , as well as days and nights with other cloud types , as lack of cirrus cloud cover . When these clouds are present , the typical coverage ranges from 30 % to 50 % . Based on satellite data , cirrus covers an average of 20 % to 25 % of the Earth 's surface . In the tropical regions , this cloud covers around 70 % of the region 's surface area . 
 Cirrus clouds often produce hair @-@ like filaments — similar to the virga produced in liquid – water clouds — called fall streaks , and they are made of heavier ice crystals that fall from the cloud . The sizes and shapes of fall streaks are determined by the wind shear . 
 Cirrus comes in four distinct species ; Cirrus castellanus , fibratus , <unk> , and <unk> ; which are each divided into four varieties : intortus , <unk> , radiatus , and <unk> . Cirrus castellanus is a species that has cumuliform tops caused by high @-@ altitude convection rising up from the main cloud body . Cirrus fibratus looks striated and is the most common cirrus species . Cirrus <unk> clouds are hooked and are the form that is usually called mare 's tails . Of the varieties , Cirrus intortus has an extremely contorted shape , and cirrus radiatus has large , radial bands of cirrus clouds that stretch across the sky . Kelvin – Helmholtz waves are a form of cirrus intortus that has been twisted into loops by vertical wind shear . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Cirrus clouds are formed when water vapor undergoes deposition at high altitudes where the atmospheric pressure ranges from 600 mbar at 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level to 200 mbar at 12 @,@ 000 m ( 39 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level . These conditions commonly occur at the leading edge of a warm front . Because humidity is low at such high altitudes , this genus @-@ type tends to be very thin . 
 = = = Cyclones = = = 
 Cirrus forms from tropical cyclones , and is commonly seen fanning out from the eyewalls of hurricanes . A large shield of cirrus and cirrostratus typically accompanies the high altitude outflow of hurricanes or typhoons , and these can make the underlying rain bands — and sometimes even the eye — difficult to detect in satellite photographs . 
 = = = Thunderstorms = = = 
 Thunderstorms can form dense cirrus at their tops . As the cumulonimbus cloud in a thunderstorm grows vertically , the liquid water droplets freeze when the air temperature reaches the freezing point . The anvil cloud takes its shape because the temperature inversion at the tropopause prevents the warm , moist air forming the thunderstorm from rising any higher , thus creating the flat top . In the tropics , these thunderstorms occasionally produce copious amounts of cirrus from their anvils . High @-@ altitude winds commonly push this dense mat out into an anvil shape that stretches downwind as much as several kilometers . 
 Individual cirrus cloud formations can be the remnants of anvil clouds formed by thunderstorms . In the dissipating stage of a cumulonimbus cloud , when the normal column rising up to the anvil has evaporated or dissipated , the mat of cirrus in the anvil is all that is left . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> are a manmade type of cirrus cloud formed when water vapor from the exhaust of a jet engine condenses on particles , which come from either the surrounding air or the exhaust itself , and freezes , leaving behind a visible trail . The exhaust can also trigger the formation of cirrus by providing ice nuclei when there is an insufficient naturally @-@ occurring supply in the atmosphere . One of the environmental impacts of aviation is that persistent contrails can form into large mats of cirrus , and increased air traffic has been implicated as one possible cause of the increasing frequency and amount of cirrus in Earth 's atmosphere . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds appear as thin and fibrous looking . Noticeably , they are the most common type of cirrus cloud . They might indicate windy weather , since they are mostly formed by wind shear on higher altitudes . 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds appear as thin and fibrous like , except that they always have a hook or curl on the tip . 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds are the highest clouds of the main cloud genera . They may form in the higher tropopause or even at the lower stratosphere . They are dense and opaque , not allowing the light of the sun or moon to pass through . They are more common on the anvils of cumulonimbus clouds . 
 Cirrus <unk> is derived from Latin , which means " lock of wool " or cirrus with ragged bases . They are not to be confused with cirrocumulus floccus since they are larger than cirrocumulus and mostly are isolated . A precipitation @-@ based supplementary feature virga is mostly visible , which makes it easier to distinguish the difference between cirrocumulus floccus and cirrus floccus . 
 Cirrus <unk> is derived from Latin , which means " castle " or round turrets . They indicate that atmospheric instability is occurring on the higher altitudes of the troposphere . They appear as tall clouds that originate from a flat base . 
 = = = Opacity @-@ based Varieties = = = 
 Cirrus clouds have no opacity @-@ based varieties , due to them being translucent , and only one species is opaque , which is cirrus <unk> . 
 = = = Pattern @-@ based Varieties = = = 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds is derived from Latin which means " twisted " , or " wound " . These clouds appear twisted , or simply , <unk> . 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds , resembling the appearance of bones as hinted by the word " <unk> " . They look more like fish bones , with fibrous lines that originate from one which resembles the appearance of fish bones . 
 Cirrus <unk> clouds appear as parallel lines that seem to originate from one point and can stretch for hundreds of miles , and they move parallel to the wind shear . 
 = = Use in forecasting = = 
 Random , isolated cirrus do not have any particular significance . A large number of cirrus clouds can be a sign of an approaching frontal system or upper air disturbance . This signals a change in weather in the near future , which usually becomes <unk> . If the cloud is a cirrus castellanus , there might be instability at the high altitude level . When the clouds deepen and spread , especially when they are of the cirrus radiatus variety or cirrus fibratus species , this usually indicates an approaching weather front . If it is a warm front , the cirrus clouds spread out into cirrostratus , which then thicken and lower into altocumulus and altostratus . The next set of clouds are the rain @-@ bearing nimbostratus clouds . When cirrus clouds precede a cold front , squall line or multicellular thunderstorm , it is because they are blown off the anvil , and the next to arrive are the cumulonimbus clouds . Kelvin @-@ Helmholtz waves indicate extreme wind shear at high levels . 
 Within the tropics , 36 hours prior to the center passage of a tropical cyclone , a veil of white cirrus clouds approaches from the direction of the cyclone . In the mid to late 19th century , forecasters used these cirrus veils to predict the arrival of hurricanes . In the early 1870s the president of Belén College in Havana , Cuba , Father Benito Viñes , developed the first hurricane forecasting system , and he mainly used the motion of these clouds in formulating his predictions . He would observe the clouds hourly from 4 : 00 am to 10 : 00 pm . After accumulating enough information , Viñes began accurately predicting the paths of hurricanes , and he eventually summarized his observations in his book , <unk> <unk> a los <unk> de las Antilles . 
 = = Effects on climate = = 
 Cirrus clouds cover up to 25 % of the Earth and have a net heating effect . When they are thin and translucent , the clouds efficiently absorb outgoing infrared radiation while only marginally reflecting the incoming sunlight . When cirrus clouds are 100 m ( 330 ft ) thick , they reflect only around 9 % of the incoming sunlight , but they prevent almost 50 % of the outgoing infrared radiation from escaping , thus raising the temperature of the atmosphere beneath the clouds by an average of 10 ° C ( 18 ° F ) — a process known as the greenhouse effect . Averaged worldwide , cloud formation results in a temperature loss of 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) at the earth 's surface , mainly the result of stratocumulus clouds . 
 As a result of their warming effects when relatively thin , cirrus clouds have been implicated as a potential partial cause of global warming . Scientists have speculated that global warming could cause high thin cloud cover to increase , thereby increasing temperatures and humidity . This , in turn , would increase the cirrus cloud cover , effectively creating a positive feedback circuit . A prediction of this hypothesis is that the cirrus would move higher as the temperatures rose , increasing the volume of air underneath the clouds and the amount of infrared radiation reflected back down to earth . In addition , the hypothesis suggests that the increase in temperature would tend to increase the size of the ice crystals in the cirrus cloud , possibly causing the reflection of solar radiation and the reflection of the Earth 's infrared radiation to balance out . 
 A similar hypothesis put forth by Richard Lindzen is the iris hypothesis in which an increase in tropical sea surface temperatures results in less cirrus clouds and thus more infrared radiation emitted to space . 
 = = Optical phenomena = = 
 Cirrus clouds , like cirrostratus clouds , can produce several optical effects , such as halos around the sun and moon . Halos are caused by interaction of the light with hexagonal ice crystals present in the clouds , which , depending on their shape and orientation , can result in a wide variety of white and colored rings , arcs and spots in the sky . Common halo varieties are the 22 ° halo , sun dogs , the circumzenithal arc and the <unk> arc . Halos produced by cirrus clouds tend to be more pronounced and colorful than those caused by cirrostratus . 
 More rarely , cirrus clouds are capable of producing glories , more commonly associated with liquid water @-@ based clouds such as stratus . A glory is a set of concentric , faintly @-@ colored glowing rings that appear around the shadow of the observer , and are best observed from a high viewpoint or from a plane . Cirrus clouds only form glories when the constituent ice crystals are <unk> , and researchers suggest that the ice crystals must be between 0 @.@ 009 millimeters and 0 @.@ 015 millimeters in length . 
 = = Relation to other clouds = = 
 Cirrus clouds are one of three different genera of high @-@ étage ( high @-@ level ) clouds . High @-@ étage clouds form at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 500 ft ) and above in temperate regions . The other two genera , cirrocumulus and cirrostratus , are also high clouds . 
 In the intermediate range , from 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 500 ft ) to 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) in temperate regions , are the mid @-@ étage clouds . They comprise two or three genera depending on the system of height classification being used : altostratus , altocumulus , and , according to WMO classification , nimbostratus . These clouds are formed from ice crystals , supercooled water droplets , or liquid water droplets . 
 Low @-@ étage clouds form at less than 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 500 ft ) . The two genera that are strictly low @-@ étage are stratus , and stratocumulus . These clouds are composed of water droplets , except during winter when they are formed of supercooled <unk> or ice crystals if the temperature at cloud level is below freezing . Two additional genera usually form in the low altitude range , but may be based at higher levels under conditions of very low humidity . They comprise the genera cumulus , and cumulonimbus , which along with nimbostratus , are often classified separately as clouds of vertical development , especially when their tops are high enough to be composed of super @-@ cooled water droplets or ice crystals . 
 The altitudes of high @-@ étage clouds like cirrus vary considerably with latitude . In the polar regions , they are at their lowest , with a minimum altitude of only 3 @,@ 000 m ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) to a maximum of 7 @,@ 600 m ( 25 @,@ 000 ft ) . In tropical regions , they are at their highest , ranging in altitude from about 6 @,@ 100 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) to around 18 @,@ 000 m ( 60 @,@ 000 ft ) . In temperate regions , they range in altitude from 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 500 ft ) to 14 @,@ 000 m ( 45 @,@ 000 ft ) — a variation in contrast to low @-@ étage clouds , which do not appreciably change altitude with latitude . 
 = = = Summary of high cloud genera = = = 
 There are three main genera in the family of high clouds : cirrus , cirrocumulus , and cirrostratus . Cirrostratus clouds commonly produce halos because they are composed almost entirely of ice crystals . Cirrocumulus and cirrostratus are sometimes informally referred to as " cirriform clouds " because of their frequent association with cirrus . They are given the prefix " <unk> " , but this refers more to their altitude range than their physical structure . Cirrocumulus in its pure form is actually a high cumuliform genus , and cirrostratus is stratiform , like altostratus and lower based sheet clouds . 
 = = = = Cirrocumulus = = = = 
 Cirrocumulus clouds form in sheets or patches and do not cast shadows . They commonly appear in regular , rippling patterns or in rows of clouds with clear areas between . Cirrocumulus are , like other members of the cumuliform category , formed via convective processes . Significant growth of these patches indicates high @-@ altitude instability and can signal the approach of poorer weather . The ice crystals in the bottoms of cirrocumulus clouds tend to be in the form of hexagonal cylinders . They are not solid , but instead tend to have stepped funnels coming in from the ends . Towards the top of the cloud , these crystals have a tendency to clump together . These clouds do not last long , and they tend to change into cirrus because as the water vapor continues to deposit on the ice crystals , they eventually begin to fall , destroying the upward convection . The cloud then dissipates into cirrus . Cirrocumulus clouds come in four species : stratiformis , lenticularis , castellanus , and floccus . They are iridescent when the constituent supercooled water droplets are all about the same size . 
 = = = = Cirrostratus = = = = 
 Cirrostratus clouds can appear as a milky sheen in the sky or as a striated sheet . They are sometimes similar to altostratus and are distinguishable from the latter because the sun or moon is always clearly visible through transparent cirrostratus , in contrast to altostratus which tends to be opaque or translucent . Cirrostratus come in two species , fibratus and <unk> . The ice crystals in these clouds vary depending upon the height in the cloud . Towards the bottom , at temperatures of around − 35 ° C ( − 31 ° F ) to − 45 ° C ( − 49 ° F ) , the crystals tend to be long , solid , hexagonal columns . Towards the top of the cloud , at temperatures of around − 47 ° C ( − 53 ° F ) to − 52 ° C ( − 62 ° F ) , the predominant crystal types are thick , hexagonal plates and short , solid , hexagonal columns . These clouds commonly produce halos , and sometimes the halo is the only indication that such clouds are present . They are formed by warm , moist air being lifted slowly to a very high altitude . When a warm front approaches , cirrostratus clouds become thicker and descend forming altostratus clouds , and rain usually begins 12 to 24 hours later . 
 = = Extraterrestrial = = 
 Cirrus clouds have been observed on several other planets . On 18 September 2008 , the Martian Lander Phoenix took a time @-@ lapse photograph of a group of cirrus clouds moving across the Martian sky using LiDAR . Near the end of its mission , the Phoenix Lander detected more thin clouds close to the north pole of Mars . Over the course of several days , they thickened , lowered , and eventually began snowing . The total precipitation was only a few thousandths of a millimeter . James Whiteway from York University concluded that " precipitation is a component of the [ Martian ] hydrologic cycle . " These clouds formed during the Martian night in two layers , one around 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) above ground and the other at surface level . They lasted through early morning before being burned away by the sun . The crystals in these clouds were formed at a temperature of − 65 ° C ( − 85 ° F ) , and they were shaped roughly like <unk> 0 @.@ 127 millimeters long and 0 @.@ 042 millimeters wide . 
 On Jupiter , cirrus clouds are composed of ammonia . When Jupiter 's South Equatorial Belt disappeared , one hypothesis put forward by Glenn Orten was that a large quantity of ammonia cirrus clouds had formed above it , hiding it from view . NASA 's Cassini probe detected these clouds on Saturn and thin water @-@ ice cirrus on Saturn 's moon Titan . Cirrus clouds composed of methane ice exist on Uranus . On Neptune , thin wispy clouds which could possibly be cirrus have been detected over the Great Dark Spot . As on Uranus , these are probably methane crystals . 
 Interstellar cirrus clouds are composed of tiny dust grains smaller than a micrometer and are therefore not true clouds of this genus which are composed of ice crystals or other frozen liquids . They range from a few light years to dozens of light years across . While they are not technically cirrus clouds , the dust clouds are referred to as " cirrus " because of their similarity to the clouds on Earth . They also emit infrared radiation , similar to the way cirrus clouds on Earth reflect heat being radiated out into space . 
 = Lee McEvilly = 
 Lee Richard McEvilly ( born 15 April 1982 ) is a journeyman footballer who currently plays as a striker for Northern Premier League Premier Division side Droylsden . Although born in England , he won one cap for the Northern Ireland national team in 2002 and also played for Northern Ireland at under @-@ 21 and under @-@ 23 levels . 
 McEvilly started his career with non @-@ League side Burscough , rising through their youth ranks to the senior side , where he made 49 league appearances , scoring 28 goals . In December 2001 , Third Division club Rochdale signed him for £ 20 @,@ 000 . From 2004 to 2009 he had spells in the Conference National and League Two with Accrington Stanley , Cambridge United and Wrexham . Since 2009 , McEvilly has struggled with injuries and has had brief spells at numerous non @-@ league clubs in England and Wales , as well as a brief period at League of Ireland side Sligo Rovers in 2010 , which was also cut short due to injury . He is currently playing with Barrow for the third time , with whom he won the FA Trophy in 2010 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 McEvilly started his career at Burscough rising through the youth ranks , making his senior debut against Southport in the Liverpool Senior Cup final in August 1999 . He went on to play 49 Northern Premier League games for Burscough , scoring 28 goals over two seasons . Rochdale manager John Hollins signed McEvilly in December 2001 , for the Third Division club for a fee believed to be around £ 15 @,@ 000 plus a sell @-@ on clause . He made his debut for Rochdale in the Third Division against Kidderminster Harriers on 26 December in the 4 – 1 away defeat , replacing Clive Platt as a substitute in the 69th minute . McEvilly scored his first Football League goal , and his first for Rochdale against York City in their 5 – 4 home win on 5 February 2002 . During McEvilly 's first season with Rochdale , 2001 – 02 , they reached the playoffs finishing fifth place . Rochdale were defeated by Rushden & Diamonds in the playoff semi @-@ finals 4 – 3 on aggregate over two legs . During the first leg away at Nene Park , McEvilly scored in the 2 – 2 draw . He made a total of 18 appearances in the Third Division , scoring four goals . The following season , 2002 – 03 , McEvilly played 37 games in the Third Division scoring 15 goals . 
 He started the 2003 – 04 season at Rochdale , making 16 appearances and scoring five goals in League Two . Rochdale 's new manager Steve Parkin criticised McEvilly 's fitness level to play and had described him as " too heavy " , and that he needed " to get his physique down to an acceptable weight where he can get around the pitch " . Conference National club Accrington Stanley signed McEvilly on a one @-@ month loan in January 2004 , making his debut in their 3 – 0 home win against Tamworth on 20 January . Despite playing out of position in wide right , McEvilly commented ; " I was playing out of position but it was okay " . He went on to describe the drop in level he said ; " I have never played in the Conference but , from what I have seen , it is no different to Division Three . " After a month at Accrington and making three appearances scoring one goal , his loan was extended in February for a further month , with manager John Coleman praising him as " a great acquisition to the squad " . McEvilly went on to make a further three appearances , scoring once more before returning to Rochdale . On his return to Rochdale , he scored a further one goal in 14 appearances . At the end of the season , McEvilly was released by Rochdale on 10 May , signing a dater for Accrington Stanley on a permanent basis after a previous loan spell . On 13 November 2004 , McEvilly scored a hat @-@ trick in Accrington 's 5 – 0 home victory over Northwich Victoria . During the 2004 – 05 season he made 39 appearances in the Conference National , scoring 15 goals . 
 = = = Wrexham = = = 
 Accrington Stanley accepted an undisclosed bid from Wrexham in July 2005 , which included a sell @-@ on clause and a bonus if he returned to play international football . He scored on his debut in a friendly against UEFA Champions League winners Liverpool in the 4 – 3 defeat after he came on as a substitute . McEvilly suffered a stress fracture in a metatarsus bone on his right foot in the 1 – 1 home draw with Notts County on 11 December , although he declared himself fit to play their following game against Carlisle United , he was substituted after 45 minutes after receiving a mouth injury which had required temporary dental surgery the same evening . His foot injury was later operated on and he received further dental treatment . His return to the Wrexham team following his injury was on 9 April 2006 , in their 2 – 1 home defeat to Shrewsbury Town when he came on as a substitute replacing Matt Crowell in the 45th minute . He made a further three appearances scoring one goal , before breaking the same bone again in mid @-@ April sidelining him until the end of the season . During the 2005 – 06 season , McEvilly made a total of 23 appearances for Wrexham , scoring seven goals in League Two . 
 In June 2006 , McEvilly was set to join for Bradford City on a free transfer after agreeing a contract with the club . Despite McEvilly passing a medical , the move fell through as he was unwilling to train with Bradford during their pre @-@ season without guarantee of a contract . Bradford City manager Colin Todd explained ; " We were concerned about an old injury to his foot which has resulted in it being pinned and we are not prepared to take a risk with him " . McEvilly opted to sign a new two @-@ year contract with Wrexham . During pre @-@ season with Wrexham , McEvilly broke his other foot , having previously broke the same bone twice in four @-@ months during the previous season . His first appearance of the 2006 – 07 season , was on 25 November at home against Lincoln City in the 2 – 1 win in League Two , when he came on as a substitute for Kevin Smith in the 80th minute . McEvilly went on to make 28 appearances in League Two , scoring eight goals and a further two appearances in the FA Cup , scoring once against Championship side Derby County in their 3 – 1 defeat at Pride Park on 6 January . His contract was cancelled by mutual consent at the end of the season . Wrexham manager Brian Carey said that they are " well covered in terms of strikers " and " he is some way down the pecking order " . 
 = = = Return to Stanley = = = 
 Accrington Stanley re @-@ signed McEvilly on a one @-@ year contract following his departure from Wrexham . On his return to Accrington he commented ; " I am back here because I feel I have unfinished business . I played well for a year here and I want to do the same again " . He had played 10 games in League Two and one game in the League Cup failing to score , and picking up a red card for violent conduct after a stamp on Peterborough United winger Jamie Day in their 2 – 0 home loss on 1 September . However , McEvilly struggled to hold down a regular place in the Accrington side and was loaned out to former club , Rochdale in November 2007 . On his return to Spotland Stadium , he scored the only goal of Rochdale 's 1 – 0 win over Mansfield Town on 24 November , with a shot from the edge of the penalty area . McEvilly made a total of seven appearances for Rochdale scoring three goals , before returning in January 2008 . He made one more appearance for Accrington , coming on as a substitute in the 73rd minute for Paul Mullin in the 2 – 0 defeat to Stockport County on 12 January , before joining Cambridge United on loan on 18 January . McEvilly made 14 appearances and scored three goals for Cambridge , helping them finish second place in the 2007 – 08 Conference National , securing a place in the playoffs . In Cambridge 's playoff semi @-@ final first leg , they drew 2 – 2 with Burton Albion away at the Pirelli Stadium with McEvilly scoring both Cambridge 's goals . Cambridge were 2 – 0 down and McEvilly came on as a substitute for Mark Beesley in the 74th minute . Paul Hurst was deemed to have handled in the penalty area , and four minutes later McEvilly converted the penalty four minutes after coming off the bench . He scored his second goal from a direct free kick . In the following leg , McEvilly started the game and had a shot within the opening 30 seconds which Rob <unk> managed to score from the rebound , before being replaced by Leo Fortune @-@ West in the 77th minute . McEvilly played in the final , in which Exeter City defeated Cambridge 1 – 0 at Wembley Stadium . 
 = = = Cambridge United = = = 
 McEvilly signed a permanent two @-@ year deal with Cambridge the following 2008 – 09 season , after being released on a free transfer from Accrington Stanley . On 10 October , he was sent off in the 87th minute of Cambridge 's 1 – 0 win over Weymouth , for violent conduct after the referee deemed a tackle to be dangerous . He went on to make 18 appearances for Cambridge scoring eight goals in the Conference National , before returning to the Football League to rejoin Rochdale , initially on loan in November , with the possibility of a permanent transfer in January . McEvilly stated he was glad to be back " home " at Rochdale . 
 = = = Return to Rochdale = = = 
 He made five appearances , scoring twice on loan at Rochdale before signing permanently on an 18 @-@ month contract on 1 January 2009 . McEvilly made 10 more appearances , starting just once and scoring three goals , before joining Barrow on loan in March , citing his friendship with joint @-@ manager David Bayliss as a key reason for his move . He scored seven his debut on 21 March at home against Lewes , which finished as a 2 – 0 victory . In Barrow 's next match on 29 March , he was sent off against Weymouth for the second time that season after he received two yellow cards in the 3 – 0 away win , picking up the first for kicking the ball away in the first half and then a second in the 69th minute for a foul on Gavin Hoyte , resulting his dismissal . He made six appearances in the Conference National for Barrow , scoring once . On 2 May , McEvilly made one last appearance for Rochdale in their 1 – 0 home defeat to Gillingham , replacing Adam Rundle as a substitute in the 75th minute . Rochdale terminated his contract by mutual consent at the end of the season . 
 = = = Non @-@ league career = = = 
 At the start of the 2009 – 10 season , McEvilly signed for Grays Athletic along with eight other players , turning down offers from Northern Premier League Premier Division club Marine and Maltese Premier League club Hibernians . McEvilly picked up a long @-@ term shin injury delaying his debut for Grays , and he was eventually released by the club in November without making a single appearance . In January 2010 , Marine announced that McEvilly had signed for the club . Marine chairman Paul Leary described McEvilly as a " massive signing " for the club . He played six matches during his spell in Crosby , scoring twice , before leaving to rejoin Barrow on a short @-@ term contract until the end of the 2009 – 10 campaign . In the 2010 FA Trophy Final against Stevenage Borough , he replaced Gregg Blundell in the 72nd minute before scoring with his first touch to level the match at 1 – 1 . Barrow went on to win the game 2 – 1 after extra time , but it proved to be the end of McEvilly 's spell at Holker Street as he was released at the end of the season . 
 After leaving Barrow , McEvilly began training with Sligo Rovers of the League of Ireland Premier Division in June 2010 . He made only one league appearance for the side , coming on as a substitute in the 2 – 1 defeat to Shamrock Rovers on 2 July 2010 . In November 2010 , he returned to his first senior club Burscough , signing a permanent contract with the Northern Premier League outfit . He made his debut on 11 December 2010 as a second @-@ half substitute in the 3 – 2 loss against Bradford Park Avenue . Three weeks later , he got on the scoresheet for the first time during his second spell at the club , scoring both Burscough goals in the 4 – 2 defeat to Kendal Town . McEvilly went on to stay at Victoria Park for three months before transferring to Conference North side Droylsden along with goalkeeper Sean Lake in March 2011 . 
 McEvilly signed for Garry Flitcroft 's Chorley at the start of the 2011 – 12 season . He scored his first goal in a 6 – 0 home victory over Frickley Athletic and went on to play 12 league games for the club , scoring four times . However , on 13 October , McEvilly was released after failing to hold down a first team spot . He subsequently joined Colwyn Bay on 27 October 2011 . He signed for AFC Fylde in February 2012 to work with Dave Challinor again , but was released at the end of the campaign . In August 2012 , McEvilly signed for Warrington Town , the fourteenth different club of his career . After being released by Warrington in December 2012 he spent time training with Barrow and officially joined the club on non @-@ contract terms on 31 January 2013 — the start of his third spell with the Cumbrian outfit . 
 = = International career = = 
 Sammy McIlroy called McEvilly up to the Northern Ireland squad to face Spain in an international friendly on 17 April 2002 at Windsor Park , Belfast . He earned his first cap , replacing Warren Feeney as a substitute in the 63rd minute in the 5 – 0 defeat to Spain . He went on to play for Northern Ireland under @-@ 21 , gaining nine caps scoring three goals between September 2002 and October 2003 . On 27 April 2004 , McEvilly played for Northern Ireland under @-@ 23 team in the 0 – 0 home draw against Serbia & Montenegro . McEvilly was called up to the Northern Ireland national squad again in May 2006 , to face United States but he failed to make an appearance . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Rochdale assistant manager David Hamilton described McEvilly saying ; " He 's strong , powerful , can shoot with both feet and can score goals . He has good all @-@ round ability and is tremendously tenacious " . His aggressive and robust playing style earned him the nickname " Evil " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Prior to playing professional football for Rochdale , McEvilly worked at McDonald 's fast food restaurant . He was born in Liverpool , Merseyside , and is an Everton supporter . 
 = Remember not , Lord , our offences = 
 Remember not , Lord , our offences , <unk> , is a five @-@ part choral anthem by the English baroque composer Henry Purcell ( 1659 – 95 ) . The anthem is a setting of a passage from the litany compiled by Thomas Cranmer , Archbishop of Canterbury , and later included in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer . It was composed circa 1679 – 82 at the beginning of Purcell 's tenure as Organist and Master of the Choristers for Westminster Abbey . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Remember not , Lord , our offences is an anthem for an a cappella choir consisting of five voice parts : two soprano parts , alto , tenor and bass ( SSATB ) . Purcell originally composed the 44 @-@ measure work in the key of A minor . Some arrangements of the anthem include a continuo instrumental accompaniment . Musicologist and historian Franklin B. Zimmerman ( born 1923 ) designated the anthem as " <unk> " in his catalogue of Purcell 's works . The duration of performances and recordings of this work is approximately 3 minutes . 
 The lyrics of Purcell 's anthem are drawn from a passage in the beginning of the Exhortation and Litany compiled in 1544 by Thomas Cranmer ( 1489 – 1556 ) , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Cranmer established the liturgical structures for the Church of England after the Reformation and prepared the church 's first official authorised vernacular service . He derived the text of the litany from two medieval Sarum rite <unk> and a German Litany by Martin Luther . Cranmer added the litany to the 1549 edition of the Book of Common Prayer and it has been included in subsequent editions . Purcell set an excerpt from the litany : 
 Scholars date the composition of Remember not , Lord , our offences to the period generally between 1679 and 1682 . Cummings states that Purcell included it in a collection of anthems compiled in 1683 . During this time , Purcell had been appointed Organist and Master of the Choristers of Westminster Abbey in 1679 with the resignation of John Blow . He dedicated the next few years entirely to the composition of sacred music . In July 1682 , following the death of Edward Lowe , Purcell was appointed organist of the Chapel Royal — an office which he held simultaneously with his position at Westminster Abbey . In his personal life , Purcell had married Frances Peters ( or Pieters ) who bore him a son that died shortly after birth . 
 During the 1680s and tenure at Westminster Abbey and the Chapel Royal , Purcell compiled earlier and contemporary sacred music ( including several of his own compositions ) into one collection for the use of the choirs of both churches . Two extant manuscripts compiled by Purcell are currently held in the collections of the University of Cambridge 's Fitzwilliam Museum . Both manuscripts include Remember not , Lord , our offences . 
 The choral anthems , including Remember not , Lord , our offences , that Purcell composed after his appointment to Westminster and before his appointment at the Chapel Royal are described as his " last concentrated involvement with the verse anthem without strings . " After 1681 , Purcell began including string accompaniments to his choral anthems — a shift that musicologist Martin Adams attributes to having more resources available to him with his appointment to the Chapel Royal . Adams states that the anthems of this period included revisions of earlier works , including his well @-@ known setting of the Anglican funeral sentences , and that these works are " distinguished by complex contrapuntal textures , a concentration on a limited quantity of motivic material , and the somber expression of penitential texts . " Purcell 's anthems reflect the influence of compositional techniques developed by earlier composers William Byrd and Orlando Gibbons . These anthems are closely related to those composed by Purcell 's friend and teacher , John Blow , " with their basso <unk> continuo and severe counterpoint , they are true stile antico . " 
 = Burns , Baby Burns = 
 " Burns , Baby Burns " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 17 , 1996 . Mr. Burns ' long lost son Larry returns and although they at first get along well , Mr. Burns begins to see that his son has turned out to be an oaf . It was directed by Jim Reardon and was the first episode written by Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham . It guest starred Rodney Dangerfield as Larry Burns . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns and Smithers take a train back to Springfield after attending the annual Harvard @-@ Yale football game . The train makes a brief stop because of a discarded couch on the tracks and a man named Larry comes up to the train and tries to hawk cheesy merchandise . He suddenly sees Mr. Burns , gasps and takes out an old picture of a man who looks similar and compares the two . Suddenly the train pulls away , leaving Larry behind . Meanwhile , the Simpson family are on their way home from visiting a cider mill and see Larry hitchhiking . After much discussion , the family picks up the hitchhiker . Larry asks the Simpson family about Mr. Burns and they agree to take Larry to his house . In Springfield , Larry visits Mr. Burns 's estate and reveals that he is Burns 's son . 
 Mr. Burns is at first shocked , but after acknowledging the resemblance admits that Larry was the product of a one @-@ night stand with the daughter of a former flame at a college reunion . At first , Mr. Burns is overjoyed to have a son and tries to shape Larry after himself . Burns takes Larry to fancy parties for the rich and tries to have him enrolled in Yale , but Larry keeps acting like an oaf and proves to be an embarrassment . Larry is put to work in Sector 7G at Springfield Nuclear Power Plant alongside Homer and the two become fast friends . Larry invites Homer to dinner , and at dinner , Mr. Burns becomes frustrated due to Larry 's <unk> and tells him that he wishes he had no son . Homer tries to convince Larry to fake a kidnapping so that Burns will admit that he loves his son , and although Larry at first opposes the idea , he eventually agrees to do it . After going through with the plan , Larry moves into the Simpsons ' basement . Homer calls Mr. Burns and says that he can have Larry back if he admits that he loves him . Marge eventually discovers the plan and convinces Homer and Larry to abandon their plot , but as they leave the house they are spotted by a news helicopter and are chased by reporters and police . 
 The two are chased into a cinema where they climb out onto the marquee and have a brief standoff with the police . Homer gives a heartfelt speech to justify Larry 's actions and Mr. Burns forgives them for the hoax , but explains he cannot be the family whom Larry needs . Larry says that is okay and announces that he has a wife and children back home who are probably worrying about him as he had only gone out a week ago for coffee . Burns and Larry say their goodbyes , with Burns musing on the fact there is another kidney out there for him . Larry announces that they should have a party and the episode ends with the people of Springfield dancing outside the movie theater , with music and drinks coming out from nowhere , all to the sound of Journey 's " Any Way You Want It " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham wrote the episode and it was his first The Simpsons writing credit , although he had served as a consultant on the show for several months . Maxtone @-@ Graham had previously worked with showrunners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein on a game show and the two had wanted to hire him as a writer on The Simpsons . The episode started out as a story about Mr. Burns and Grampa both being stationed in Paris during World War II and falling in love with the same woman , who had a love child . Maxtone @-@ Graham had wanted this episode to be about Burns having a child , which is where it went . The other episode idea eventually became " Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in " The Curse of the Flying Hellfish " " , which aired in the previous season . The episode opens with the family visiting Mt . Swartzwelder Historic Cider Mill because the writers had wanted to do something involving autumn and a cider mill seemed like a good setting for that . 
 Rodney Dangerfield guest stars in this episode and was a huge favorite of many of the Simpsons writers . Many of the jokes in the episode were specifically written to be " Dangerfield jokes , " which were much tougher to write than the staff had originally thought . Dangerfield made a few key changes to his script during the recording of his part ; Josh Weinstein kept the annotated script and pen and considers them among his three most prized Simpsons possessions . Designing Larry Burns was a challenge because the director had wanted him to look like Dangerfield but still have Burns 's characteristics such as the pointed nose . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 After discovering that Larry Burns is also working in Sector 7G , Homer frantically cleans up and puts away an almost entirely assembled jigsaw puzzle which has an image of Snoopy the dog lying on his doghouse . The puzzle is missing a piece over where Snoopy 's nose should be , which was intentionally drawn that way to avoid copyright laws . The character from Yale that Mr. Burns briefly talks to is based on the fictional character Dink Stover from the book Dink Stover at Yale by Owen Johnson . The episode contains several references to the film Caddyshack , such as the scene where Larry tries to fit in with Mr. Burns 's associates and the ending street party which also parodies the way that several films , including Caddyshack , end with a party and feature the song " Any Way You Want It " by Journey . The episode ends at a movie theater , which is a reference to several famous criminals who were involved with theatres , such as John Dillinger , Lee Harvey Oswald and John Wilkes Booth . The play in Mr. Burns ' play room is Death of a Salesman as shown by the famous quote " You can 't eat the orange and throw the peel away - a man is not a piece of fruit . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Burns , Baby Burns " finished 64th in ratings for the week of November 11 – 17 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the fourth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Melrose Place , and Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " A fun episode , with Rodney Dangerfield putting a lot of pathos into Larry – and Homer 's impassioned speech atop the cinema at the climax is one of his funniest moments . " 
 = Animal ( Miike Snow song ) = 
 " Animal " is a song performed by Swedish indie pop band Miike Snow . It was released as the first single from the band 's 2009 self @-@ titled debut album on 17 February 2009 through Columbia and Downtown Records . Written by the band alongside Henrik Jonback , " Animal " is a pop song with instrumentation provided by horns and staccato synthesizers . Lead singer Andrew Wyatt has explained that it has an ambiguous meaning ; its lyrics can be interpreted as dealing with matters such as addiction , basic instincts or dissatisfaction when one 's needs are not met by society . 
 Applauding its catchiness and pop sound , critics were positive towards " Animal " . Following its release in the United Kingdom , the single managed to peak at number 98 on the UK Singles Chart , but failed to chart elsewhere . Two music videos were made to promote the release of " Animal " ; the first was directed by Sebastian <unk> and depicts the band wearing different animal masks , and the second video , directed by Anthony Dickenson , features a mixture of projections , animation and performance footage . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Animal " was written by Miike Snow 's three members , Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg and Andrew Wyatt , in collaboration with Henrik Jonback . In an interview with Dustin <unk> of Out , Wyatt explained that the song has an ambiguous meaning , " It can deal with addiction . It can deal with just the basic instincts – some of them are wonderful and some of them are very dangerous . " In a separate interview with Joe Zadeh for Clash , Wyatt deemed it a " very simple song " and elaborated on its subject matter , " Directing your attention to man 's underlying nature and how sometimes things in society just don 't work out to meet your needs . And a lot of people end up feeling very dissatisfied . And the way people feel the need to fit into certain circumstances without even thinking about what they want . " " Animal " was recorded at Robotberget , the band 's own studio in Stockholm , Sweden . The band produced the track and then mixed it with Anders Hvenare . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Animal " is a pop song with horn and staccato synthesizer instrumentation . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is written in the time signature of common time with a moderate beat rate of 118 beats per minute . It is written in the key of E major and Wyatt 's vocal range spans the notes of B3 to C ♯ 6 . It has an E – F ♯ m7 – C ♯ m chord progression and a verse @-@ chorus structure . Sam Richards of NME and Ben Hogwood of musicOMH compared the sound and rhythm of the song to works by English band The Police , while Paul Lester of The Guardian likened lead singer Wyatt 's vocals to those of The Police lead singer Sting . Jason Lymangrover of AllMusic compared the hook to works by American band Vampire Weekend , and said that " dubby synths circulate around flighty vocals with heavy sentiments " . Wyatt sings lyrics such as " But I 'm still trying to make my mind up , am I free or am I tied up ? " with " unassuming <unk> " , and the chorus contains the line " I change shapes just to hide in this place , but I 'm still , I 'm still an animal " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Downtown Records first released " Animal " as the band 's debut single on 17 February 2009 via digital download in the United States . The record label then sent it for alternative airplay in the country on 12 April 2009 . In the United Kingdom , Columbia Records first released the single as a 12 " remix vinyl on 27 July 2009 . The label later digitally released it on 7 August 2009 , and as a CD single on 10 August 2009 . The CD and digital releases in the UK include the song " Billie Holiday " , written by Karlsson , Winnberg and Wyatt , as a B @-@ side . A digital extended play ( EP ) with remixes by <unk> , Fake Blood , Fred Falke , Punks Jump Up and Style of Eye was released in European countries on 7 August 2009 . Two remixes by Peter Bjorn and John and Mark Ronson were digitally released in the US on 8 December 2009 . Ronson 's remix also appears on the UK iTunes Store release of the band 's next single , " Black & Blue " ( 2009 ) . " Animal " was a minor chart success ; it charted at number 98 in the issue dated 22 August 2009 of the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Animal " received a positive response from music critics . Natalie Kaye of Contactmusic.com described it as a " solid pop song " , before adding that the " infectious " chorus is " irrefutably something you 'll end up whistling in the shower " . Similarly , Ian Wade of BBC Music commented that it " takes approximately one play for its catchiness to cluster bomb your memory bank " , and John Bergstrom of PopMatters called it " sharp , catchy pure pop " with a chorus that " charm [ s ] [ its ] way into your brain " . Rudy Klapper of Sputnikmusic commended lead singer Wyatt 's " chameleonic " vocals , calling them " a highlight from the beginning " . Klapper concluded , " [ ' Animal ' ] <unk> [ es ] along a deceptively catchy progression to a jangly chorus that hits immediate pop pay dirt . " Neil Ashman of Drowned in Sound commented that it " boasts a number of indelible hooks worked around its staccato synth blasts " . 
 Jordan <unk> of Now described " Animal " as " catchy and creative " and said that the horns and the " playful vocal hook " will appeal to listeners who enjoyed Britney Spears ' " Toxic " ( 2003 ) , a production of Miike Snow members Karlsson and Winnberg . Sam Richards of NME viewed " Animal " as an " impressive piece of sleight of hand " and compared its sound to that of The Police , " while remaining bearable " . Ben Hogwood of musicOMH said that it sounds like a " lost Police song given a new , vividly coloured change of clothes " . He felt that the lyrical vignettes and hooks seem " awkward " during the first listen , and " gloriously different the next " . Hogwood furthermore said that this applied for the album as a whole . Marc Hogan of Pitchfork Media called it a " kiddie @-@ pop lilt " . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Two music videos were released to promote " Animal " . The first video , directed by Sebastian <unk> , was released in July 2009 . It opens with the band performing on a street at night , holding umbrellas . The band then appears wearing different surgical masks with animal prints throughout the video . Near the end , they are seen performing in a grass field . Anthony Dickenson directed the single 's second music video , released in August 2009 . Dickenson created projections and sculptures , utilizing both animation and performance footage . The video features projections of a forest which turns into a city as the video progresses . It interspersed with shots of the band performing in a dark room . The video ends with the band 's jackalope logo being projected onto the cityscape . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Punks Jump Up Remix is used as the opening credits theme for the Channel 4 sitcom Friday Night Dinner . 
 An A capella version of the song was featured in the episodic expansion pack Grand Theft Auto : The Ballad of Gay Tony , on the radio station Electro @-@ Choc . 
 The song was featured in the videogame Saints Row : The Third , on the radio station 89 @.@ 0 Generation X. 
 The song is played during the last segment of the episode ' Turn This Car Around " of Cougar Town . 
 The song is played during end of the episode ' The Lost Boy " of Gossip Girl . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg , Andrew Wyatt , Henrik Jonback 
 Production – Miike Snow 
 Mixing – Anders Hvenare , Miike Snow 
 Mastering – Ted Jensen 
 Credits are adapted from the Miike Snow liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hydrophiinae = 
 The Hydrophiinae , also known as coral reef snakes or sea snakes , are a subfamily of venomous elapid snakes that inhabit marine environments for most or all of their lives . Most are extensively adapted to a fully aquatic life and are unable to move on land , except for the genus Laticauda , which has limited land movement . They are found in warm coastal waters from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific and are closely related to venomous terrestrial snakes in Australia . 
 All have paddle @-@ like tails and many have laterally compressed bodies that give them an eel @-@ like appearance . Unlike fish , they do not have gills and must surface regularly to breathe . They are among the most completely aquatic of all air @-@ breathing vertebrates . Among this group are species with some of the most potent venoms of all snakes . Some have gentle dispositions and bite only when provoked , but others are much more aggressive . Currently , 17 genera are described as sea snakes , comprising 62 species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The majority of adult Hydrophiinae species grow to between 120 and 150 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in length , with the largest , Hydrophis spiralis , reaching a maximum of 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Their eyes are relatively small with a round pupil and most have nostrils located dorsally . The skulls do not differ significantly from those of terrestrial elapids , although the dentition is relatively primitive with short fangs and ( with the exception of <unk> ) as many as 18 smaller teeth behind them on the maxilla . 
 Most Hydrophiinae are completely aquatic and have adapted to their environments in many ways , the most characteristic of which is a paddle @-@ like tail that has improved their swimming ability . To a varying degree , the bodies of many species are laterally compressed , especially in the pelagic species . This has often caused the ventral scales to become reduced in size , even difficult to distinguish from the adjoining scales . Their lack of ventral scales means they have become virtually helpless on land , but as they live out their entire lifecycles at sea , they have no need to leave the water . 
 The only genus that has retained the enlarged ventral scales is the sea kraits , Laticauda , with only five species . These snakes are considered to be more primitive , as they still spend much of their time on land , where their ventral scales afford them the necessary grip . Laticauda species are also the only sea snakes with internasal scales , i.e. , their nostrils are not located dorsally . 
 Since it is easier for a snake 's tongue to fulfill its olfactory function under water , its action is short compared to that of terrestrial snake species . Only the forked tips protrude from the mouth through a divided notch in the middle of the rostral scale . The nostrils have valves consisting of a specialized spongy tissue to exclude water , and the windpipe can be drawn up to where the short nasal passage opens into the roof of the mouth . This is an important adaptation for an animal that must surface to breathe , but may have its head partially submerged when doing so . The lung has become very large and extends almost the entire length of the body , although the rear portion is thought to have developed to aid buoyancy rather than to exchange gases . The extended lung possibly also serves to store air for dives . 
 Most species of the Hydrophiinae are able to respire through the top of their skin . This is unusual for reptiles , because their skin is thick and scaly , but experiments with the black @-@ and @-@ yellow sea snake , Pelamis <unk> ( a pelagic species ) , have shown this species can satisfy about 25 % of its oxygen requirements in this manner , which allows for prolonged dives . 
 Like other land animals that have adapted to life in a marine environment , sea snakes ingest considerably more salt than their terrestrial relatives through their diets , and when seawater is inadvertently swallowed . This meant they had to evolve a more effective means of regulating the salt concentration of their blood . In sea snakes , the posterior sublingual glands , located under and around the tongue sheath , evolved to allow them to expel salt with their tongue action . 
 Scalation among sea snakes is highly variable . As opposed to terrestrial snake species that have imbricate scales to protect against abrasion , the scales of most pelagic sea snakes do not overlap . Reef @-@ dwelling species , such as Aipysurus , do have imbricate scales to protect against the sharp coral . The scales themselves may be smooth , keeled , spiny , or granular , the latter often looking like warts . Pelamis has body scales that are " peg @-@ like " , while those on its tail are juxtaposed hexagonal plates . 
 = = Sensory abilities = = 
 Vision , chemoreception ( tongue @-@ flicking ) and hearing are important senses for terrestrial snakes but these stimuli become distorted in water . The poor visibility , chemical dilution and limitation of ground @-@ borne vibrations underwater suggest that sea snakes and sea kraits may have unique sensory abilities to compensate for the relative lack of other sensory cues . 
 Very little is known about sea snake vision . A study of retinal photoreceptors of spine @-@ bellied , Lapemis curtus , and horned , <unk> <unk> , sea snakes found three classes of visual pigments all from cone cells . Despite the absence of rod cells in sea snake eyes , <unk> et al. found genes from rod @-@ cells ( <unk> ) were still being expressed suggesting that in sea snakes some cones may be transmuted rods . However , behavioural observations indicate that vision has a limited role for catching prey and mate selection , but sound ( i.e. vibration ) and chemoreception may be important . One study identified small sensory organs on the head of Lapemis curtus similar to the mechanoreceptors in alligators and aquatic snake <unk> that are used to sense the movement of fish prey . Westhoff et al. recorded auditory brain responses to vibration underwater in Lapemis curtus , which are sensitive enough to detect movement in prey but were not as sensitive as fish lateral line systems . Similarly , vision appears to be of limited importance for finding mates . Shine experimented with applying skin secretions ( pheromones ) to snake @-@ like objects to see if male turtle @-@ headed sea snakes , <unk> annulatus , are attracted to female pheromones . Shine found that although vision may be useful over short distances ( < 1 m ) , pheromones are more important once the male comes in physical contact with an object . 
 The olive sea snake , Aipysurus laevis , has been found to have photoreceptors in the skin of its tail , allowing it to detect light and presumably ensuring it is completely hidden , including its tail , inside coral holes during the day . While other species have not been tested , Aipysurus laevis possibly is not unique among sea snakes in this respect . 
 Other unique senses , such as electro @-@ magnetic reception and pressure detection , have been proposed for sea snakes , but scientific studies have yet to be performed to test these senses . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Hydrophiinae are mostly confined to the warm tropical waters of the Indian Ocean and the western Pacific Ocean , with a few species found well out into Oceania . The geographic range of one species , Pelamis platurus , is wider than that of any other reptile species , except for a few species of sea turtles . It extends from the east coast of Africa , from Djibouti in the north to Cape Town in the south , across the Indian Ocean , the Pacific , south as far as the northern coast of New Zealand , all the way to the western coast of the Americas , where it occurs from northern Peru in the south ( including the Galápagos Islands ) to the Gulf of California in the north . Isolated specimens have been found as far north as San Clemente in the United States . 
 Sea snakes do not occur in the Atlantic Ocean . It is thought that Pelamis would be found there were it not for the cold currents off Namibia and western South Africa that keep it from crossing into the eastern South Atlantic , or south of 5 ° latitude along the South American west coast . Sea snakes do not occur in the Red Sea , believed to be due to its increased salinity , so no danger exists of them crossing through the Suez Canal . A lack of salinity is also thought to be the reason why Pelamis has not crossed into the Caribbean via the Panama Canal . 
 Despite their marine adaptations , most sea snakes prefer shallow waters near land , around islands , and especially somewhat sheltered waters , as well as near estuaries . They may swim up rivers and have been reported as far as 160 km ( 99 mi ) from the sea . Others , such as P. platurus , are pelagic and are found in drift lines , slicks of floating debris brought together by surface currents . Some sea snakes inhabit mangrove swamps and similar <unk> habitats , and two landlocked freshwater forms are found : Hydrophis <unk> occurs in Lake Taal in the Philippines , and Laticauda <unk> in Lake Te <unk> on Rennell Island in the Solomon Islands . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Sea snakes are generally reluctant to bite , and are usually considered to be mild @-@ tempered , although variation is seen among species and individuals . Some species , such as P. platurus , which feed by simply gulping down their prey , are more likely to bite when provoked because they seem to use their venom more for defense . Others , such as Laticauda , use their venom for prey immobilization ; these snakes are often handled without concern by local fishermen , who unravel and toss them back into the water <unk> when the snakes become entangled in fishing nets . Species reported as much more aggressive include Aipysurus laevis , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Hydrophis ornatus . 
 On land , their movements become very erratic . They crawl awkwardly in these situations and can become quite aggressive , striking wildly at anything that moves , although they are unable to coil and strike in the manner of terrestrial snakes . 
 Sea snakes appear to be active both day and night . In the morning , and sometimes late in the afternoon , they can be seen at the surface basking in the sunlight , and they dive when disturbed . They have been reported swimming at depths over 90 m ( 300 ft ) , and can remain submerged for as long as a few hours , possibly depending on temperature and degree of activity . 
 Sea snakes have been sighted in huge numbers . For example , in 1932 , a steamer in the Strait of Malacca , off the coast of Malaysia , reported sighting " millions " of <unk> <unk> , a relative of Pelamis ; these reportedly formed a line of snakes 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide and 100 km ( 62 mi ) long . The cause of this phenomenon is unknown , although it likely has to do with reproduction . They can sometimes be seen swimming in schools of several dozen , and many dead specimens have been found on beaches after typhoons . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 They feed on small fish and occasionally young octopodes . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Except for a single genus , all Hydrophiinae species are ovoviviparous ; the young are born alive in the water where they live their entire lives . In some species , the young are quite large : up to half as long as the mother . The one exception is the genus Laticauda , which is oviparous ; its five species all lay their eggs on land . 
 = = Venom = = 
 Like their relatives in the Elapidae family , the majority of the Hydrophiinae species are highly venomous ; however , when bites occur , venom injection is rare , so envenomation symptoms usually seem nonexistent or trivial . For example , P. platurus has a venom more potent than any terrestrial snake species in Costa Rica based on LD50 , but despite its abundance in the waters off its western coast , few human fatalities have been reported . Nevertheless , all sea snakes should be handled with great caution . 
 Bites in which envenomation does occur are usually painless and may not even be noticed when contact is made . Teeth may remain in the wound . Usually , little or no swelling occurs , and rarely are any nearby lymph nodes affected . The most important symptoms are rhabdomyolysis ( rapid breakdown of skeletal muscle tissue ) and paralysis . Early symptoms include headache , a thick @-@ feeling tongue , thirst , sweating , and vomiting . Symptoms that can occur 30 minutes to several hours after the bite include generalized aching , stiffness , and tenderness of muscles all over the body . Passive stretching of the muscles is also painful , and <unk> , which is similar to tetanus , is common . This is followed later on by symptoms typical of other elapid envenomations : a progressive flaccid paralysis , starting with ptosis and paralysis of voluntary muscles . Paralysis of muscles involved in swallowing and respiration can be fatal . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Sea snakes were at first regarded as a unified and separate family , the <unk> , that later came to comprise two subfamilies : the Hydrophiinae , or true / aquatic sea snakes ( now 16 genera with 57 species ) , and the more primitive <unk> , or sea kraits ( one genus , Laticauda , with five species ) . Eventually , as it became clear just how closely related the sea snakes are to the elapids , the taxonomic situation became less well @-@ defined . Some taxonomists responded by moving the sea snakes to the Elapidae , thereby creating the subfamilies <unk> , Hydrophiinae , and <unk> , although the latter may be omitted if Laticauda is included in the Hydrophiinae . No one has yet been able to convincingly work out the phylogenetic relationships between the various elapid subgroups , and the situation is still unclear . Therefore , others opted to either continue to work with the older traditional arrangements , if only for practical reasons , or to lump all of the genera together in the Elapidae , with no taxonomic subdivisions , to reflect the work that remains to be done . 
 * ) Not including the nominate subspecies 
 = = = Molecular studies = = = 
 Molecular data studies suggest all three monotypic semiaquatic genera ( <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) are early diverging lineages . The Aipysurus group is monophyletic : the egg @-@ eating specialists form separate , early @-@ diverging lineages . The <unk> last shared a common ancestor about 6 million years ago ago with the majority of extant lineages diversified over the last 3 @.@ 5 million years ago . The Hydrophis group shared a last common ancestor about 1 @.@ 5 @-@ 3 million years ago . 
 = = Captivity = = 
 At best , Hydrophiinae make difficult captives . Ditmars ( 1933 ) described them as nervous and delicate captives that usually refuse to eat , preferring only to hide in the darkest corner of the tank . Over 50 years later , Mehrtens ( 1987 ) wrote , although they were rarely displayed in Western zoological parks , some species were regularly on display in Japanese aquariums . Available food supply limits the number of species that can be kept in captivity , since some have diets that are too specialized . Also , some species appear intolerant of handling , or even being removed from the water . Regarding their requirements in captivity , the Laticauda species need to be able to exit the water somewhere at about 29 ° C , along with a submerged shelter . Species that have done relatively well in captivity include the ringed sea snake , Hydrophis <unk> , which feeds on fish and eels in particular . Pelamis platurus has done especially well in captivity , accepting small fish , including goldfish . However , care has to be taken to house them in round or oval tanks , or in rectangular tanks with corners that are well @-@ rounded , to prevent the snakes from damaging their snouts by swimming into the sides . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Most sea snakes are not on the CITES protection lists , however , one species , Laticauda <unk> , is classified as vulnerable , another , Aipysurus fuscus , classified as endangered , and two , Aipysurus <unk> and Aipysurus <unk> , are classified as critically endangered according to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . 
 = Moe Berg = 
 Morris " Moe " Berg ( March 2 , 1902 – May 29 , 1972 ) , was an American catcher and coach in Major League Baseball who later served as a spy for the Office of Strategic Services during World War II . Although he played 15 seasons in the major leagues , almost entirely for four American League teams , Berg was never more than an average player , usually used as a backup catcher , and was better known for being " the brainiest guy in baseball " than for anything he accomplished in the game . Casey Stengel once described Berg as " the strangest man ever to play baseball " . 
 A graduate of Princeton University and Columbia Law School , Berg spoke several languages and regularly read 10 newspapers a day . His reputation was fueled by his successful appearances as a contestant on the radio quiz show Information , Please in which he answered questions about the derivation of words and names from Greek and Latin , historical events in Europe and the Far East , and ongoing international conferences . 
 As a spy working for the government of the United States , Berg traveled to Yugoslavia to gather intelligence on resistance groups the U.S. government was considering supporting . He was then sent on a mission to Italy , where he interviewed various physicists concerning the German nuclear program . After the war , Berg was occasionally employed by the OSS 's successor , the Central Intelligence Agency , but , by the mid @-@ 1950s , was unemployed . He spent the last two decades of his life without work , living with various siblings . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moe Berg was Jewish , and was the third and last child of Bernard Berg , a pharmacist , and Rose <unk> , a homemaker , both Jewish , who lived in the Harlem section of New York City , New York , a few blocks from the Polo Grounds . When Berg was three and a half , he begged his mother to let him start school . In 1906 , Bernard Berg bought a pharmacy in West Newark . In 1910 the Berg family moved again , to the Roseville section of Newark . Roseville offered Bernard Berg everything he wanted in a neighborhood — good schools , middle @-@ class residents , and very few Jews . 
 Berg began playing baseball at the age of seven for the Roseville Methodist Episcopal Church baseball team under the less ethnic pseudonym Runt Wolfe . In 1918 , at the age of 16 , Berg graduated from Barringer High School . During his senior season , the Newark Star @-@ Eagle selected a nine @-@ man " dream team " for 1918 from the city 's best prep and public high school baseball players , and Berg was named the team 's third baseman . Barringer was the first in a series of institutions Berg joined in his life where his religion made him unusual . Most of the other students were East Side Italian Catholics or Protestants from Forest Hill , but there were not many Jews , just as Bernard wanted it . 
 After graduating from Barringer , Berg enrolled in New York University . He spent two semesters there and played baseball and basketball . In 1919 he transferred to Princeton University , and never again mentioned that he attended NYU for a year , presenting himself exclusively as a Princeton man . Berg received a B.A. , magna cum laude in modern languages . He had studied seven languages : Latin , Greek , French , Spanish , Italian , German and Sanskrit , studying with the philologist Harold H. Bender . His Jewish heritage and modest finances combined to keep him on the fringes of Princeton society , where he never quite fit in . 
 During his freshman year , Berg played first base on an undefeated team . Beginning in his sophomore year , he was the starting shortstop . He was not a great hitter and was a slow baserunner , but he had a strong , accurate throwing arm and sound baseball instincts . In his senior season , he was captain of the team and had a .337 batting average , batting <unk> against Princeton 's arch @-@ rivals , Harvard and Yale . Berg and Crossan Cooper , Princeton 's second baseman , communicated plays in Latin when there was a man on second base . 
 On June 26 , 1923 , Yale defeated Princeton 5 – 1 at Yankee Stadium to win the Big Three title . Berg had an outstanding day , getting two hits in four at bats ( 2 – 4 ) with a single and a double , and making several marvelous plays at shortstop . Both the New York Giants and the Brooklyn Robins ( i.e. , Dodgers ) desired " Jewish blood " on their teams , to appeal to the large Jewish community in New York , and expressed interest in Berg . The Giants were especially interested , but they already had two future Hall of Famers at shortstop , Dave " Beauty " Bancroft and Travis Jackson . The Robins were a mediocre team , where Berg would have a better chance to play . On June 27 , 1923 , Berg signed his first big league contract for $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 69 @,@ 000 today ) with the Robins . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1923 – 1925 ) = = = 
 Berg 's first game with the Robins came on June 27 , 1923 against the Philadelphia Phillies at the Baker Bowl . Berg came in at the start of the seventh inning , replacing Ivy Olson at shortstop , when the Robins were winning 13 – 4 . Berg handled five chances without an error and caught a line drive to start a game @-@ ending double play . He got a hit in two at bats , singling up the middle against Clarence Mitchell , and scoring a run . For the season , Berg batted .187 and made 21 errors in 47 games , his only National League experience . 
 After the season ended , Berg took his first trip abroad , sailing from New York to Paris . He settled in the Latin Quarter in an apartment that overlooked the Sorbonne , where he enrolled in 32 different classes . In Paris he developed a habit he kept for the rest of his life : reading several newspapers daily . Until Berg finished reading a paper , he considered it " alive " and refused to let anyone else touch it . When he was finished with it , he would consider the paper " dead " and anybody could read it . In January 1924 , instead of heading back to New York and getting himself into shape for the upcoming baseball season , Berg toured Italy and Switzerland . 
 During spring training at the Robins facility in Clearwater , Florida , manager Wilbert Robinson could see that Berg 's hitting had not improved , and optioned him to the Minneapolis Millers of the American Association . Berg did not take the demotion well and threatened to quit baseball , but by mid @-@ April he reported to the Millers . Berg did very well once he became the Millers ' regular third baseman , hitting close to .330 , but in July his average plummeted and he was back on the bench . On August 19 , 1924 Berg was loaned to the Toledo Mud Hens , a poor team ravaged by injuries . Berg was immediately inserted into the lineup at shortstop when Rabbit <unk> refused to pay a $ 10 ( $ 140 today ) fine for poor play and was suspended . Major league scout Mike González sent a telegram to the Dodgers evaluating Berg with the curt , but now famous , line , " Good field , no hit . " Berg finished the season with a .264 average . 
 By April 1925 , he was starting to show promise as a hitter with the Reading Keystones of the International League . Because of his .311 batting average and 124 runs batted in , the Chicago White Sox exercised their option they had with Reading , paying $ 6 @,@ 000 ( $ 81 @,@ 000 today ) for him , and moved Berg up to the big leagues the following year . 
 = = = Career as a catcher ( 1926 – 1934 ) = = = 
 The 1926 season began with Berg informing the White Sox that he would skip spring training and the first two months of the season to complete his first year of law school at Columbia University , and Berg did not join the White Sox until May 28 . Bill <unk> was signed by the White Sox to take Berg 's place at shortstop , and was having a very good year , batting over .300 . Berg played in only 41 games , batting .221 . 
 Berg returned to Columbia after the season to continue working on his law degree . Despite White Sox owner Charles Comiskey offering him more money to come to spring training , Berg declined , and informed the White Sox that he would be reporting late for the 1927 season . Noel Dowling , a professor to whom Berg explained his situation , told Berg to take extra classes in the fall , and said that he would arrange with the dean a leave of absence from law school the following year , 1928 . 
 Because he reported late , Berg spent the first three months of the season on the bench . In August , a series of injuries to catchers Ray Schalk , Harry McCurdy and Buck Crouse left the White Sox in need of somebody to play the position . Schalk , the White Sox player / manager , selected Berg , who did a fine job filling in . Schalk arranged for former Philadelphia Phillies catcher Frank <unk> to meet the team at their next game , against the New York Yankees . <unk> was so fat that pitcher Ted Lyons refused to pitch to him . When Schalk asked him whom he wanted to catch , Lyons selected Berg . 
 In Berg 's debut as a starting catcher , he had to worry not only about catching Lyons ' knuckleball , but also about facing the Yankees ' Murderers ' Row lineup , which included Babe Ruth , Lou Gehrig and Earle Combs . Lyons beat the Yankees 6 – 3 , holding Ruth hitless . Berg made the defensive play of the game when he caught a poor throw from the outfield , spun and tagged out Joe Dugan at the plate . He caught eight more times during the final month and a half of the season . 
 To prepare for the 1928 season , Berg went up to a lumber camp in New York 's Adirondack Mountains three weeks before reporting to the White Sox spring training facility in Shreveport , Louisiana . The hard labor did wonders for him , as he reported to spring training on March 2 , 1928 in excellent shape . By the end of the season , Berg had established himself as the starting catcher . 
 At law school , Berg failed Evidence and did not graduate with the class of 1929 , but he did pass the New York State bar exam . He repeated the evidence course the following year , and on February 26 , 1930 received his LL.B. On April 6 , during an exhibition game against the Little Rock Travelers , his spikes caught in the soil as he tried to change directions and he tore a knee ligament . 
 He was back in the starting lineup on May 23 , 1930 , but his knee would not allow him to play every day . He played in only 20 games the whole season and finished with a .115 batting average . During the winter , he took a job with the respected Wall Street law firm Satterlee and Canfield ( now Satterlee , Stephens , Burke & Burke ) . The Cleveland Indians picked him up on April 2 , 1931 when Chicago put him on waivers , but he played in only 10 games with 13 at @-@ bats and only 1 hit for the entire season . 
 The Indians gave him his unconditional release in January 1932 , but with catchers hard to come by , Clark Griffith , owner of the Washington Senators , invited him to spring training in Biloxi , Mississippi . He made the team , playing in 75 games while not committing an error . When starting catcher Roy Spencer went down with an injury , Berg stepped in , throwing out 35 baserunners while batting .236 . 
 = = = First trip to Japan = = = 
 Retired ballplayer Herb Hunter arranged for three players , Berg , Lefty O 'Doul and Ted Lyons , to go to Japan to teach baseball seminars at Japanese universities during the winter of 1932 . On October 22 , 1932 , the group of three players began their circuit of Meiji , Waseda , Rikkyo , <unk> ( Tokyo Imperial ) , Hosei , and Keio universities , the members of the Tokyo <unk> Baseball League . When the other Americans returned to the United States after their coaching assignments were over , Berg stayed behind to explore Japan . He went on to tour Manchuria , Shanghai , Peking , Indochina , Siam , India , Egypt and Berlin . 
 Despite his desire to go back to Japan , Berg reported to the Senators training camp on February 26 , 1933 in Biloxi . He played in just 40 games during the season , and batted only .185 . The Senators won the pennant , but lost to the Giants in the World Series . Cliff Bolton , the Senators ' starting catcher in 1933 , demanded more money in 1934 . When the Senators refused to pay him more , he sat out and Berg got the starting job . On April 22 , Berg made an error , his first fielding mistake since 1932 — an American League record of 117 consecutive errorless games . On July 25 , the Senators gave Berg his unconditional release . He soon returned to the big leagues , however , after Cleveland Indians catcher Glenn Myatt broke his ankle on August 1 . Indians manager Walter Johnson , who had managed Berg in 1932 , offered Berg the reserve catching job . Berg played sporadically until Frankie <unk> , Cleveland 's starting catcher , injured himself , and Berg became the starting catcher . 
 = = = Second trip to Japan = = = 
 Herb Hunter arranged for a group of All @-@ Stars , including Babe Ruth , Lou Gehrig , Earl Averill , Charlie Gehringer , Jimmie Foxx and Lefty Gomez , to tour Japan playing exhibitions against a Japanese all @-@ star team . Despite the fact that Berg was a mediocre , third @-@ string catcher , he was invited at the last minute to make the trip . Among the items Berg took with him to Japan were a 16 @-@ mm Bell & Howell movie camera and a letter from <unk> , a New York City newsreel production company with which Berg had contracted to film the sights of his trip . When the team arrived in Japan , he gave a welcome speech in Japanese and also addressed the legislature . 
 On November 29 , 1934 , while the rest of the team was playing in <unk> , Berg went to Saint Luke 's Hospital in <unk> , ostensibly to visit the daughter of American ambassador Joseph Grew . Instead , Berg sneaked onto the roof of the hospital , one of the tallest buildings in Tokyo , and filmed the city and harbor with his movie camera . He never did see the ambassador 's daughter . Back at home , the Indians gave him his unconditional release . Berg continued on to the Philippines , Korea and Moscow . 
 = = = Late career and coaching ( 1935 – 1941 ) = = = 
 After his return to America , Berg was picked up by the Boston Red Sox . In his five seasons with the Red Sox , Berg averaged fewer than 30 games a season . On February 21 , 1939 , Berg made his first of three appearances on the radio quiz show , Information , Please . Berg put on a dazzling performance . Of his appearance , baseball commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis told him , " Berg , in just thirty minutes you did more for baseball than I 've done the entire time I 've been commissioner " . On his third appearance , Clifton Fadiman , the moderator , started asking Berg too many personal questions . Berg did not answer any more questions and never appeared on the show again . Regular show guest and sportswriter John Kieran later said that " Moe was the most scholarly professional athlete ( I ) ever knew . " After his playing career ended , Berg was a Red Sox coach in 1940 and 1941 . 
 = = Post @-@ baseball career = = 
 = = = Spying for the U.S. Government = = = 
 With the attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese on December 7 , 1941 , the United States was thrust into World War II . To do his part for the war effort , Berg accepted a position with Nelson Rockefeller 's Office of the Coordinator of Inter @-@ American Affairs on January 5 , 1942 . Nine days later , his father , Bernard , died . During the summer of 1942 , Berg screened the footage he shot of Tokyo Bay for intelligence officers of the United States military . The film may have helped Lieutenant Colonel Jimmy Doolittle plan his famous Doolittle Raid . 
 From August 1942 to February 1943 , Berg was on assignment in the Caribbean and South America . His job was to monitor the health and physical fitness of the American troops stationed there . Berg , along with several other <unk> agents , left in June 1943 because they thought South America posed little threat to the United States , and they wanted to be someplace where their talents would be put to better use . 
 On August 2 , 1943 , Berg accepted a position with the Office of Strategic Services Special Operations Branch ( SO ) for a salary of $ 3 @,@ 800 ( $ 52 @,@ 000 today ) a year . He was a paramilitary operations officer in the part of the OSS that is now called the CIA Special Activities Division . In September , he was assigned to the OSS Secret Intelligence branch ( SI ) and given a spot on the OSS SI Balkans desk . In this role , he parachuted into occupied Yugoslavia to evaluate the various resistance groups operating against the Nazis to determine which was the strongest . He talked to both Draža Mihailović and Tito and reviewed their forces , deciding that Tito had the stronger and better supported group . His evaluations were used to help determine the amount of support and aid to give each group . In late 1943 , Berg was assigned to Project Larson , an OSS operation set up by OSS Chief of Special Projects John Shaheen . The stated purpose of the project was to kidnap Italian rocket and missile specialists out of Italy and bring them to the U.S. However , there was another project hidden within Larson , called Project <unk> , with the goal of interviewing Italian physicists to see what they knew about Werner Heisenberg and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker . It was similar in scope and mission to the Alsos project . 
 From May to mid @-@ December 1944 , Berg hopped around Europe interviewing physicists and trying to convince several to leave Europe and work in America . At the beginning of December , news about Heisenberg giving a lecture in Zürich reached the OSS . Berg was assigned to attend the lecture and determine " if anything Heisenberg said convinced him the Germans were close to a bomb . " If Berg came to the conclusion that the Germans were close , he had orders to shoot Heisenberg ; Berg determined that the Germans were not close . During his time in Switzerland , Berg became close friends with physicist Paul Scherrer . Berg returned to the United States on April 25 , 1945 , and resigned from the Strategic Services Unit , the successor to the OSS , in August . He was awarded the Medal of Freedom on October 10 , but he rejected the award on December 2 . His sister accepted it on his behalf after his death . 
 = = = After World War II = = = 
 In 1946 , former Chicago White Sox teammate Ted Lyons was the new manager of the White Sox , and offered Berg a coaching position . Berg declined . Boston Red Sox owner Thomas Yawkey , who was much closer to Berg when he played for Red Sox , matched Lyons ' offer , but Berg still turned them down . Berg did not apply for a teaching position , or join a law firm . 
 In 1951 , Berg begged the CIA to send him to Israel . " A Jew must do this " , he wrote in his notebook . The CIA rejected Berg 's request . Still , in 1952 Berg was hired by the CIA to use his old contacts from World War II to gather information about the Soviet atomic science . For the $ 10 @,@ 000 plus expenses that Berg received , the CIA received nothing in return . The CIA officer who spoke with Berg when he returned from Europe said that he was " flaky " . Berg continued to serve his assignment for the CIA until 1954 , when his contract expired . The CIA chose not to renew it . Berg tried again to serve the CIA and the CIA again declined . 
 For the next 20 years , Berg had no real job , living off friends and relatives who put up with him because of his charisma . When they would ask what he did for a living , he would reply by putting his finger to his lips , giving them the impression that he was still a spy . A lifelong bachelor , he lived with his brother Samuel for 17 years . According to Samuel , he became moody and <unk> after the war and did not seem to care for much in life besides his books . His brother finally grew fed up with the arrangement and asked Moe to leave and even had eviction papers drawn up . After being evicted from his brother 's home , Berg moved in with his sister Ethel in Belleville , New Jersey , where he remained for the rest of his life . 
 He received a handful of votes in Baseball Hall of Fame voting ( four in 1958 , and five in 1960 ) . When he was criticized for " wasting " his intellectual talent on the sport he loved , Berg replied , " I 'd rather be a ballplayer than a justice on the U.S. Supreme Court " . 
 Berg received many requests to write his memoirs , but turned them down ; he almost wrote them in 1960 , but he quit after the co @-@ writer assigned to him confused him with Moe Howard of the Three Stooges . 
 = = Death = = 
 Moe Berg died on May 29 , 1972 , at age 70 , from injuries sustained in a fall at home . A nurse at the Belleville , New Jersey hospital where he died recalled his final words as , " How did the Mets do today ? " ( They won . ) His remains were cremated and spread over Mount Scopus in Israel . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Berg was inducted into the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in 1996 , and the Baseball Reliquary 's Shrine of the Eternals in 2000 . His is the only baseball card on display at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency . 
 In 1976 , reporters Louis Kaufman of the Boston Globe and Tom Sewell of the Boston Herald joined writer Barbara Fitzgerald to write Moe Berg : Athlete , Scholar , Spy . In 1994 Nicholas <unk> wrote a biography , The Catcher Was a Spy : The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg . Rick Wilber has a story , Something Real , in the April / May 2012 issue of Asimov 's Science Fiction that presents a lightly altered history of Berg 's spying activities for the OSS in 1944 . Berg makes an appearance again in the March 2013 issue of Asimov 's Science Fiction in the story by Kristine Kathryn Rush Uncertainty . Berg makes a third appearance in the July issue of Asimov 's Science Fiction in Rick Wilber 's story , At Palomar . 
 Berg is the subject of " Moe Berg : The Song " by Chuck Brodsky . 
 In July 2015 , Berg was the subject of an ESPN 30 for 30 Short , <unk> . Directed by Christina Burchard and Daniel Newman , and narrated by former MLB pitcher Bill " Spaceman " Lee . 
 In April 2016 , it was announced that American actor Paul Rudd will portray Berg in an upcoming biographical drama film called The Catcher Was a Spy , based on the book of the same name . The film will be directed by Ben Lewin , and is likely to be released in 2017 . 
 = Bart Carny = 
 " Bart Carny " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 11 , 1998 . Homer and Bart start working at a carnival and befriend a father and son duo named Cooder and Spud . It was written by John Swartzwelder , directed by Mark Kirkland and guest stars Jim Varney as Cooder the carny . The episode contains several cultural references and received a generally mixed critical reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Marge unsuccessfully tries to get the kids to clean up the backyard , Homer runs into the house to exclaim to the family that the carnival is in town . After trying some rides , Bart gets himself into trouble by crashing a display of Hitler 's limousine into a tree . To repay the loss , Bart and Homer become carnies . 
 They meet up with carnies Cooder and his son , Spud . Cooder asks Homer to run his fixed game , but Homer fails to bribe Chief Wiggum , and Cooder 's game is shut down . Feeling guilty , Homer invites Cooder and Spud to stay at the Simpson residence , much to Marge 's dismay . 
 To express their gratitude , the <unk> give the Simpsons tickets on a glass @-@ bottom boat ride . When the Simpsons return , they find that the locks have been changed , the windows are all boarded up , and the Simpsons ' name is crossed off the mailbox and replaced by " The <unk> " . The family is forced to take up residence in Bart 's treehouse . 
 Homer proposes to Cooder , that if he can throw a hula hoop onto the chimney , they get their house back . If he misses , he will sign the deed over to Cooder . Cooder agrees and steps onto the lawn to watch Homer 's attempt . Homer stretches and warms up , as if about to throw , but instead he and his family suddenly rush into the house , leaving Cooder and Spud dumbfounded . 
 = = Production = = 
 The carnival in this episode is based on The Eastern States Exposition ( currently known as The Big E ) fair . As a child , Mike Scully went to the fair , and had hoped one day to be a carny . This is the only episode that Mark Kirkland did not tell his parents to watch . This is due to Bart 's line " Out of my way , I 'm Hitler " . Kirkland 's stepfather was a lieutenant in World War II and was injured while in combat . Cooder was modeled after David Mirkin , the showrunner of seasons five and six and co @-@ writer and the executive producer of two episodes in the ninth season . Spud 's head shape is modeled after Bart 's head . The " fisheye effect " , when Cooder is looking through the peep hole was drawn by hand , not optically by assistant director Matthew Nastuk . Matt Groening said they had several endings worked out , including one where Homer made the hula hoop over the chimney . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Homer and Bart talk through their teeth while holding the chickens , it is a reference to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby films . Some of the prizes for the ring toss game are a Def Leppard mirror , a Rubik 's Cube , and a Magic 8 @-@ Ball . The song being played , at the end when Homer fixes his " ass groove " is " Groove Me " by King Floyd . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Carny " finished 13th in ratings for the week of January 5 – 11 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 7 million viewing households , making it the highest rated episode of Season 9 . It was tied with King of the Hill as the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " one of the most dismally unfunny episodes ever , lifted only by the brief appearance of a talking camel and Homer 's clever way of getting Cooder and Spud out of his home . Whereas most of the series ' politically incorrect moments are funny and well @-@ observed , this episode seems to be saying that fairground folk and travelers really are deeply unpleasant criminals who are both irredeemable and unworthy of help . Nasty @-@ taste @-@ in @-@ the @-@ mouth time . " Despite the negative review from I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Isaac Mitchell @-@ Frey of the Herald Sun described the episode as " brilliant " , and highlighted it along with episodes " The Trouble with Trillions " and " The Joy of Sect " and it has been described by the other Simpsons writers in the DVD audio commentary as " criminally underrated " . 
 = The Castafiore Emerald = 
 The Castafiore Emerald ( French : Les Bijoux de la Castafiore ) is the twenty @-@ first volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . It was serialised weekly from July 1961 to September 1962 in Tintin magazine . 
 The book was considered by critics to be an antithesis of the previous Tintin books as Hergé deliberately broke the adventure genre he had created , making it the only book in the Tintin series where the characters remain at Marlinspike Hall , Captain Haddock 's family estate in the fictional town of <unk> , England , and do not venture to another part of the world . The story tells of opera singer Bianca Castafiore 's holiday visit to Marlinspike Hall , and the subsequent theft of her emerald , which was given to her by the Maharajah of the fictional province of Gopal . 
 Although The Castafiore Emerald received critical acclaim for making its characters follow a lead of false trails , it was not a commercial success due to the experimental nature of its narrative . It was published as a book by Casterman shortly after its conclusion . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Flight 714 , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . The story was adapted for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tintin and Captain Haddock are walking through the countryside of <unk> , England when they come across a Romani community camped in a garbage dump , and re @-@ unite a lost little girl named Miarka with her family there . The Romani explain that they are not allowed to camp anywhere else so Haddock invites them to the grounds of his estate , Marlinspike Hall . 
 Haddock has been trying for some time to get the local stonemason , Mr. Arthur Bolt , to fix a broken step in the Marlinspike foyer , but Bolt is never available . Shortly afterwards , Milanese opera diva Bianca Castafiore invites herself to Marlinspike Hall for a vacation . Haddock , who dislikes her company , decides to leave before she arrives but trips on the broken step and sprains his ankle . The doctor puts his foot and ankle in a cast and imposes a minimum of a fortnight 's bed rest . Castafiore then arrives with her maid , Irma , and pianist , Igor Wagner . Castafiore presents a parrot for Haddock called " Iago " to keep as a pet and <unk> over him , to his great discomfort . 
 Some time later , two reporters from the magazine Paris Flash publish a story that Haddock and Castafiore intend to get married , on the basis of a misinterpreted conversation with the hard @-@ of @-@ hearing Professor Calculus . This results in an avalanche of congratulations from Haddock 's friends . Haddock is next forced to accommodate a television crew , who occupy Marlinspike Hall for an interview with Castafiore , during which a mysterious photographer , Gino , appears with the crew . Suddenly , Irma informs Castafiore that her jewels were stolen , and Tintin suspects Gino who runs away when there is a temporary power cut , to be the thief . Castafiore , however , finds the case containing her Jewels , earlier misplaced by herself . The next day , Castafiore shows Tintin and Haddock a copy of the magazine , Tempo Di Roma , with the front cover showing a picture of Castafiore taken at Marlinspike Hall without her permission , thereby revealing that Gino was a reporter for the magazine and not a thief . 
 A few days later , Castafiore 's most valuable jewel , an emerald , given to her by the Maharajah of the fictional province of Gopal , goes missing . After initially questioning Irma and Nestor , the detectives Thomson and Thompson suspect the Romani . Their suspicions are heightened when they find that a pair of golden scissors belonging to Irma in Miarka 's possession , though she claims to have found them . After the Romani depart , the police starts looking for them . Tintin also investigates Igor Wagner , whose behaviour Tintin finds suspicious , but finds out that the musician is simply sneaking out to indulge a horse @-@ gambling habit . 
 Castafiore leaves for Milan to perform an opera . When Tintin finds that the name of the opera is La <unk> <unk> ( Italian : The Thieving Magpie ) , he realises that the true culprit responsible for the theft of the emerald and the scissors is a Magpie . He later explains to Haddock that the scissors must have fallen out of the nest and was found by Miarka . Tintin retrieves the emerald and hands it to Thomson and Thompson to return it to Castafiore . The stonemason mends the broken step , only for Haddock to step on it again . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following the culmination of the previous story , Tintin in Tibet ( 1960 ) , Hergé began planning his next adventure , seeking advice from the cartoonist Greg . Greg produced two plot outlines , Les <unk> ( " The Pills " ) and Tintin et le <unk> ( " Tintin and the <unk> " ) . Hergé began drawing the latter of these stories , but soon abandoned it . Instead , he decided to set his new Adventure entirely at Marlinspike Hall , the only instalment in the series to do this . This was the first and last adventure after The Secret of the Unicorn ( 1943 ) to be set entirely in Belgium , and he admitted that with his proposed scenario , it was difficult " to create suspense , a semblance of danger . " The titles that Hergé had previously considered for the book were : The Castafiore Affair , Castafiore 's Sapphire , The Castafiore Jewels and The Captain and the Nightingale , but The Castafiore Emerald eventually emerged as the favourite . 
 Hergé 's depiction of Bianca <unk> in the story – a famous opera singer , pursued by the press , and changing her outfit for every occasion – was influenced by the life of the opera singer Maria Callas . One of the new characters that Hergé introduced into the story was the stonemason Arthur Bolt ( M. <unk> in the original French version ) , whose characterisation was based on a real individual who worked for Hergé . Hergé 's depiction of the paparazzi within the story may have been influenced by his own repeat encounters with the press throughout his career . The reporter and the photographer , Christopher Willoughby @-@ <unk> and Marco Rizotto ( Jean @-@ Loup de la <unk> and Walter Rizotto respectively in the original French version ) of the Paris Flash , are introduced into the series here , and would later be retroactively added into a re @-@ drawing of The Black Island ( 1938 ) by Bob de Moor , also making a reappearance in Tintin and the Picaros ( 1976 ) . The idea of having a proposed marriage between Castafiore and Haddock was based on a reader 's suggestion that Haddock marry . 
 On page 17 of the book , Jolyon Wagg mentions Castafiore 's Emerald to be a gift from , in his own words , " some character , Marjorie something or other ... " , to which Castafiore corrects Wagg by saying it was from the Maharajah of Gopal . The Maharajah of Gopal does not make an appearance in The Adventures of Tintin , but is one of the title characters in The Valley of the Cobras ( 1956 ) , which is a part of another Franco @-@ Belgian comics series created by Hergé , The Adventures of Jo , Zette and Jocko ( 1935 @-@ 1958 ) . Hergé also introduced the Romani people , members of whose community had previously appeared in Destination New York ( 1951 ) , another book from The Adventures of Jo , Zette and Jocko . The idea of including them in the story was inspired by an occasion on which Hergé came across a Romani gypsy camp near to his country home in Céroux @-@ Mousty . To ensure that his depiction of them had some accuracy , he approached Father Rupert in Verviers , who had some experience with the community , reassuring him that " The episode with the Romas will not pain you " . 
 The Castafiore Emerald was also one of the few instances of romance seen in The Adventures of Tintin , which begins when Calculus breeds a new variety of white @-@ coloured roses , and names it " Bianca " in honour of Castafiore . At her departure , Calculus presents a bouquet of the roses he created to Castafiore , who happily receives them and embraces Calculus , kissing him in the process . Unlike Haddock , who resents being kissed by Castafiore , Calculus willingly accepts it and blushes . Calculus also makes an imperfect attempt at colour television , which according to Michael Farr , was " some five years ahead of its day . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The incident of the unwelcome band playing outside Marlinspike Hall , called the " Marlinspike Prize Band " ( Harmonie de Moulinsart in the original French version ) , was based on a similar experience of Hergé 's who was also obliged to serve a band with drinks . To add insult to injury , they gave a toast to " Spirou " , the cartoon character created by Robert <unk> . Another influence for the band was a cutting of the " L <unk> France " band . Whenever Castafiore fears her jewels her stolen , her expressions , which involve placing her hands on her face , were influenced by a photograph of her model in real life , Maria Callas , taken by Cecil Beaton in 1957 . In page 43 of the book , Tintin is shown reading Robert Louis Stevenson 's novel Treasure Island ( 1883 ) , which was also one of Hergé 's favourite books . The depiction of the Romani wagons and clothing was closely modelled on photographs of Romani communities that Hergé had consulted , and he depicted members of the group engaged in basket weaving and fortune telling after reading that the Romani engaged in such activities in the Oxford English Dictionary . 
 The book alludes to the well @-@ known French weekly Paris Match in its depiction of the reporters from the magazine Paris Flash and jibes at its reputation for the questionable accuracy of the articles . Hergé 's use of the word Paris Flash is also based on a previous encounter of his with the Paris Match when it featured an " error @-@ ridden " article on him . It also mentions a fashion designing company named Tristan <unk> , based upon the French luxury goods company , Christian Dior . Andy ( André in the original French version ) , the director of the television crew belonging to the fictional company , <unk> , was compared by Farr to an employee of Belgian Television , Jacques <unk> . In a tribute to Auguste Piccard , Calculus ' model in real life , Castafiore greets him as a famous balloonist . Hergé also inserted references to previous stories in the narrative ; he included the three models of the Unicorn , originally featured in The Secret of the Unicorn , in a background scene at Marlinspike Hall . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 The Castafiore Emerald was serialised weekly from 4 July 1961 to 4 September 1962 in Tintin magazine and published in book form as Les Bijoux De La Castafiore by Casterman in 1963 . For the English version of the book , the gramophone record that Tintin receives from Castafiore , which is the " Jewel Song " from Charles Gounod 's Faust , is titled " Margarethe " , the name by which Gounod 's opera is known in Germany but not in England . 
 The Castafiore Emerald was the first book in The Adventures of Tintin that was published in England the same year — 1963 — it was published in Belgium and France . When Hergé read the English version of the book , he found it to be " absolutely delirious " and even suggested to the book 's translator , " You really would think that this was originally written in English . " In the original French version , Calculus explains about his invention and ignores Haddock 's attempt to refer to the latest developments in the United States . This is not seen in the English edition . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 The book was considered by critics to be an antithesis of the previous Tintin ventures . Michael Farr , author of Tintin : The Complete Companion , stated that in The Castafiore Emerald , Hergé permits Haddock to remain at home in Marlinspike , an ideal that the " increasingly travel weary " character had long cherished , further stating that if Hergé had decided to end the Tintin series , The Castafiore Emerald would have been " a suitable final volume " . He compared the story to the detective novels by Agatha Christie , in that the narrative was " littered from start to finish with clues , most of which are false " , misleading both Tintin and the reader . He felt that in setting the story entirely at Marlinspike , Hergé " deliberately broke the classic adventure mould he had created " , and in doing so " succeeded in creating a masterpiece in the manner of a well constructed stage comedy or farce " . Farr viewed the volume as " a tour de force " , noting that it was quite dissimilar to any other instalment in The Adventures of Tintin . As such , he felt that it would have been a suitable story on which to end the series . As a result of its " experimental , exceptional nature " , Farr believed that The Castafiore Emerald " never gained the public recognition it merits " , stating that while attracting " a loyal following " it had not become one of the most popular Adventures of Tintin , something that he thought was " unjust " . 
 Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier , co @-@ authors of the book , The Pocket Essential Tintin , described Hergé 's depiction of Castafiore in the story as " a force of nature " , praising the way that he depicted her many outfit changes . They described Mr Bolt as being both a " Godot @-@ like character " and as being akin to Basil Fawlty from the British sitcom Fawlty Towers , while adding that the broken step acts " like a Greek God 's curse " in the story that affects everyone except Castafiore . They interpreted The Castafiore Emerald as Hergé 's Nouveau Roman , in which he realises that he cannot improve upon the standard set in Tintin in Tibet and thus decides to " deconstruct his own myth and create the antithesis of a Tintin adventure . " Given that accidents and bad luck befall most of the characters in the story , Lofficier and Lofficier described the story as " a comedy of errors , a wonderful tribute to Murphy 's Law . " Ultimately , they awarded the story four stars out of five . 
 English screenwriter and author of Tintin : Hergé and his Creation ( 1991 ) , Harry Thompson stated that in The Castafiore Emerald , " everything is topsy @-@ turvy " , with obvious villains being shown to be harmless , and alleged crimes turning out to have not happened . He thought that Haddock was a clear parallel for Hergé himself in the story , representing his own desires and frustrations . Ultimately , he considered the volume to be " Hergé 's masterpiece " when it came to technical issues , representing " the high tide of his creative abilities " . 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters described the story as " the most surprising of Tintin 's adventures " , with Hergé having been " determined to push his reexamination of the comic strip even further . " He noted that in the story , Castafiore 's " dramatic femininity " disrupted the " idea of sociability " that pervaded Marlinspike , with its " proper respect of space , a form of harmony in independence " . He added that " this casually alluring tale is one of the most subtly handled of the adventures ; a riot of clues , both real and false , give The Castafiore Emerald an unequaled density " , elsewhere referring to it as " a catalogue of mishaps with nothing or no one spared " . He described it as having brought to the foreground the " anarchist and non @-@ conformist tendencies of Hergé 's work " which had previously been shown in Quick & Flupke . He also saw the book as being " a sort of flashback " for Hergé , allowing him to relive events from his own past ; thus , Peeters thought that the constant renovations at Marlinspike represented the constant renovations at Hergé 's country home of Céroux @-@ Mousty , while Haddock 's time in the wheelchair represented his former wife 's Germaine time spent similarly disabled , and Castafiore was a parody of Germaine herself . Ultimately , he felt that the story – " the last great adventure of Tintin " – was " also a swan song " , for Hergé " did not dare to continue down this path , where not all of his readers had followed him " , and which had represented " a permanent loss of innocence . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In June 1970 , a long article on The Castafiore Emerald by French philosopher and author , Michel Serres , appeared in the literary review , Critique , under the title , Les Bijoux <unk> ou la <unk> sauve . 
 In 1991 , a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana adapted 21 of the stories into a series of episodes , each 42 minutes long . The Castafiore Emerald was the nineteenth episode of The Adventures of Tintin to be produced , although it ran half as long as most of the others . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " , with compositions having been actually directly taken from the panels in the original comic book . 
 = Russian monitor Smerch = 
 Smerch ( Russian : <unk> ) was a monitor built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the early 1860s . She was designed by the British shipbuilder Charles Mitchell and built in Saint Petersburg . The ship spent her entire career with the Baltic Fleet . She ran aground and sank shortly after she entered service in 1865 . Smerch was refloated and repaired shortly afterwards . She became a training ship sometime after 1892 and was stricken from the Navy List in 1904 . The ship was hulked five years later and renamed Blokshiv No. 2 . She was in Finland when that country declared its independence in 1918 , but was returned to the Soviets after the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk was signed . Blokshiv No. 1 , as the ship was now known , was sunk by German artillery fire in 1941 . She was salvaged the following year and remained in service until she was stricken in 1959 and subsequently broken up . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Russian Admiralty Board had previously licensed the design of the Passaic class from the United States and wished to compare the John Ericsson @-@ designed gun turrets of those ships with the turrets designed by the British inventor Captain Cowper Coles . The board therefore commissioned Mitchell to design a twin @-@ turret monitor based on the Danish ironclad Rolf Krake and to build it in the shipyard that he had modernized for the board in Saint Petersburg , Russia . 
 Smerch was 188 feet 8 inches ( 57 @.@ 5 m ) long at the waterline . She had a beam of 38 feet 2 inches ( 11 @.@ 6 m ) and a maximum draft of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . The ship was designed to displace 1 @,@ 460 long tons ( 1 @,@ 480 t ) , but turned out to be overweight and actually displaced 1 @,@ 560 long tons ( 1 @,@ 590 t ) . Smerch was fitted with a double bottom that could be flooded in combat to reduce her freeboard . Her crew numbered 11 officers and 122 enlisted men in 1867 and 12 officers and 143 crewmen in 1875 . 
 She had a freeboard of only 2 – 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 m ) and her deck was often awash in any sort of moderate sea . Smerch rolled heavily and was fitted with three telescoping iron pole masts , probably fore @-@ and @-@ aft rigged , that were used to steady the ship rather than for propulsion . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had two simple horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engines , built by Maudslay , Sons and Field of London . The engines had a bore of 36 inches ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) and a stroke of 18 inches ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) and each drove a single 7 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 39 m ) propeller . Steam was provided by three rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers at a pressure of 1 @.@ 7 atm ( 172 kPa ; 25 psi ) . The engines produced a total of 800 indicated horsepower ( 600 kW ) which gave Smerch a maximum speed of about 8 @.@ 3 knots ( 15 @.@ 4 km / h ; 9 @.@ 6 mph ) when she ran her sea trials from 12 to 17 June 1865 . The ship also had a small donkey boiler for the small steam engine that powered the ventilation fans , the main water pump and rotated the aft turret . Another such engine probably rotated the forward turret . She carried 110 long tons ( 112 t ) of coal which gave her a range of 600 – 800 nmi ( 1 @,@ 100 – 1 @,@ 500 km ; 690 – 920 mi ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Smerch was initially armed with four 60 @-@ pounder 7 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns , a pair in each turret . Various deckhouses and ventilation hatches prevented the turrets from firing directly forward or aft , so each turret could bear approximately 145 ° to each side , although this changed slightly over time as changes were made to the ship . In 1867 these were replaced by two Krupp 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) rifled breech @-@ loading guns . Only one gun could fit in the turrets so the old gun ports were plated over and new ones cut in each turret . Three years later , the Krupp guns were replaced by Obukhov 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled guns . They were replaced in their turn in 1876 by two longer , more powerful 9 @-@ inch Obukhov guns . The ship carried 120 rounds for each gun . A furnace for the molten iron required by Martin 's incendiary shells was fitted between the turrets . 
 Light guns for use against torpedo boats are not known to have been fitted aboard the ship before the 1870s when Smerch received four 4 @-@ pounder 3 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 86 mm ) guns , one 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) Engström quick @-@ firing ( QF ) gun , and a .65 @-@ inch ( 17 mm ) Gatling gun . At some point the ship received four QF 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon . They were mounted on the turret tops and probably replaced the older 4 @-@ pounders . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Smerch had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick amidships and thinned to 4 inches ( 102 mm ) at the ends of the ship . It was 7 feet ( 2 m ) high and completely covered the hull to 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 m ) below the waterline . The armor was backed by 8 inches of teak . The circular turrets were protected by armor 4 @.@ 5 inches thick and the area around the gun ports was reinforced by 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) plates to give a total thickness of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) . The walls of the ship 's oval conning tower were also 4 @.@ 5 inches thick . Her deck was 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Smerch ( Waterspout ) was ordered on 25 June 1863 and construction began on 13 August at the Admiralty Shipyard , Saint Petersburg , although the formal keel @-@ laying was not until 1 December . She was launched on 23 June 1864 and completed in 1865 at the cost of 554 @,@ 100 rubles . The ship spent her career with the Baltic Fleet . Smerch struck an uncharted rock off the Finnish coast on 4 August in shallow water and sank . Using pontoons , she was refloated on 1 September and repaired . Little is known of her service other than she was extensively refitted in 1882 and 1889 which included replacement of much of the plating of her hull bottom . The ship was reclassified as a coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and subsequently became a training ship . 
 The ship was stricken from the Navy List on 20 February 1904 and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal . Smerch was renamed Blokshiv ( Hulk ) No. 2 on 27 October 1909 and converted into a mine storage hulk . She was abandoned in April 1918 as the Soviets abandoned Finland , but was returned to them the following month according to the terms of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk . The hulk was renamed Blokshiv No. 3 in 1923 and later as Blokshiv No. 1 on 1 January 1932 . She was sunk by German artillery on 7 October 1941 in Kronstadt harbor and was stricken on 6 March 1942 . The hulk was salvaged in mid @-@ 1942 and reentered service on 8 December . She was renamed BSh @-@ 1 on 16 May 1949 , stricken for the last time on 2 April 1959 , and subsequently scrapped . 
 = Brooks – Baxter War = 
 The Brooks – Baxter War ( or sometimes referred to as the Brooks – Baxter Affair ) was an armed conflict in Little Rock , Arkansas , in the United States , in 1874 between factions of the Republican Party over the disputed 1872 election for governor . The victor in the end was the " Minstrel " faction led by Elisha Baxter over the " Brindle Tail " faction led by Joseph Brooks , which included most of the scalawags and blacks . 
 It came at the end of a struggle between white Republican residents in the state before the War , known as scalawags , and newer Republican arrivals called carpetbaggers , over power in state government during Reconstruction after the American Civil War . 
 The struggle began with the ratification of the 1868 Arkansas constitution , rewritten to allow Arkansas to rejoin the United States after the Civil War . Congress 's 1867 Reconstruction Acts required rebel states to accept the 14th Amendment – establishing civil rights for blacks – and enact new constitutions providing suffrage to freedmen ( ex @-@ slaves ) while temporarily disenfranchising former Confederate Army officers . Some conservatives and democrats refused to participate in the writing of the constitution and ceased participation in government . Republicans and unionists wanting Arkansas to rejoin the United States formed a coalition to write and pass the new constitution , and formed a new state government . In the wake of a wave of reactionary violence by the Ku Klux Klan and a poor economy , the coalition soon fractured into two factions : the " Minstrels " , who were mostly carpetbaggers , and the " Brindle Tails " , who were mostly Scalawags . This led to a failed impeachment trial of the carpetbagger Republican governor , Powell Clayton ; he was then elected a U.S. Senator by the General Assembly . 
 The 1872 gubernatorial election resulted in a narrow victory for Minstrel Elisha Baxter over Brindle Tail Joseph Brooks in an election marked by fraud and intimidation . Brooks challenged the result through legal means , initially without success , but Baxter alienated much of his base by re @-@ enfranchising former Confederates and in 1874 , Brooks was declared governor by a county judge who declared the results of the election to have been fraudulent . Brooks took control of the government by force , but Baxter refused to resign . Each side was supported by its own militia of several hundred Black men . Several bloody battles ensued between the two factions . Finally , President Ulysses S. Grant reluctantly intervened and supported Governor Baxter , bringing the affair to an end . 
 The incident , followed by the new Arkansas Constitution of 1874 , marked end to Reconstruction in Arkansas . The conflict significantly weakened the Republican Party in the state as the Democrats took power and controlled the governorship for 90 years . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = 1868 Constitution = = = 
 After the Civil War , many northerners , whom Southerners called carpetbaggers , came to the defeated Southern states to work in the rebuilding process . Many did so as part of a widespread migration out of former Colonial states in the 1850 @-@ 60s . In 1866 , Congress grew increasingly disturbed by post @-@ war developments in the rebel states : pre @-@ Civil War elites were reelected to government positions , southern legislatures enacted " Black Codes " limiting the rights of former slaves , and violence against blacks was common . To redress the matter , Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts of 1867 , dissolving rebel state governments and dividing the South into military districts . Rebel states could only be readmitted to the union if they wrote and ratified new constitutions providing civil rights for freedmen , and accepting the 14th Amendment . 
 In the Fall of 1867 Arkansans voted to convene a new constitutional convention and selected delegates , who convened in Little Rock in January , 1868 . A coalition of native white unionists , freedman , and carpetbagger Republicans prevailed on most critical proposals . Prominent leaders included James Hinds , Joseph Brooks , John McClure , and Powell Clayton . The new constitution required suffrage ( the right to vote ) for emancipated adult male slaves , now called Freedmen ; it reapportioned the legislative districts to reflect the new status of freedmen as citizens , counting them as full members of the population . It conferred broad powers upon the state government , establishing universal public education ( for blacks and whites ) for the first time , as well as welfare institutions , absent under the previous government , which were needed in the aftermath of the war . The governor was given wide @-@ ranging powers of appointment without legislative approval , including the power to appoint such top state officials as Supreme Court Judges . The governor was also the president of virtually all state organizations , including the board of trustees of the state 's newly created Technical University , the board for public printing , and even the railroad commission . It also temporarily disenfranchised former Confederate Army officers and persons who refused to pledge allegiance to the civil and political equality of all men . 
 The Democratic Party was in disarray in Arkansas in 1867 @-@ 68 . It lacked the clarity of purpose that the Republican Party had , and its members were unable to unite under basic principles . One unifying principle of the Democrats , however , was white supremacy . At the January 27 , 1868 , Democratic State Convention in Little Rock , Democrats announced the avowed purpose of uniting " the opponents of negro suffrage and domination . " Some party leaders opposed Reconstruction in favor of continued military rule , which was far from what they wanted , but seemed like a better option than allowing freedmen all the civil rights of white citizens , including the right to vote . The more conservative wings of the party simply showed no interest in the new constitution and remained loyal to the ideas embodied in the Confederacy . During the constitutional convention , Democrats convened their own party convention . Many chose to boycott elections on the grounds that the new constitution was illegal , because it disenfranchised them while giving suffrage to the Freedmen , whom they insisted were an inferior race . They also alienated the Freedmen who were now the largest block of voters in the state , by adopting resolutions against them : their first resolution of the convention was " Resolved , that we are in favor of a White Man 's Government in a White Man 's country . " Only about ½ of the registered voters in the state cast ballots in the April 1868 elections , and ⅔ of those who voted approved the new constitution . 
 = = = Clayton Administration = = = 
