 Powell Clayton , a 35 @-@ year @-@ old former Brigadier General in the Union Army who remained in Arkansas after marrying an Arkansas woman , was elected governor as a Republican in April , 1868 . The election was scarred with irregularities . For example , the return of votes in Pulaski County exceeded the number of registered voters . Also , the registrars , who controlled the distribution of ballots , admitted that they had given ballots to voters from other counties if they could show a valid registration certificate . Both sides claimed election fraud and voter intimidation : armed parties had been stationed on roads to keep voters away from the polls . General Gillem , commander of the military district that included Arkansas , wrote to General Grant that it would take months to sort out which side had committed the greater election fraud . 
 In July 1868 , Arkansas rejoined the union and Clayton was inaugurated governor . The new general assembly had already begun meeting back in April , but had been unable to do anything other than prepare legislation for the time when the state was readmitted . The prior governor , Isaac Murphy , whose administration was not recognized by the Federal Government , continued to act as executive of the state during this time . Interestingly , both Clayton and Murphy managed to draw a paycheck as governor at the same time . When Clayton took office , he appointed most of the key Republican politicians to positions within the new state government ; however , he failed to find a place for Joseph Brooks . 
 Rivalry between Brooks and Clayton predated the 1868 election . Clayton saw Brooks as his strongest competitor for preference and distinction and did not want him to become too entrenched with the party leadership . Brooks felt that his service and ability to the party were not being recognized or appreciated , and he grew bitter and resentful of the other Republicans , including Clayton . 
 The Democrats in the state , calling themselves " the Conservatives " to differentiate themselves from the Radical Republicans , were incensed that freedmen – former slaves – had been not only emancipated , but cloaked with the status of citizens , with full civil rights , by the 14th Amendment . Worst of all , in the view of Conservatives , freedmen were permitted to vote . Even though the Freedmen , whom Conservatives considered inherently inferior , were allowed to vote , former Confederate officers were not . This was especially infuriating since they were expected to pay taxes to fund newly proposed infrastructure changes without any ability to vote against it . They even saw this as an attempt by the Radicals to circumvent the will of God . Violence soon erupted throughout the state . Former Confederate Army officers in nearby Memphis , Tennessee , formed the Ku Klux Klan to fight against the new order . The Klan quickly spread into Arkansas . Republican officials , including Congressmen James Hinds , were attacked , as were black citizens seeking to exercise their new civil rights . Hinds and Brooks were ambushed by gunmen on the road in Monroe County , while travelling to a political event . Brooks was severely wounded and Hinds was killed . The murder created national disgust for ongoing political violence in the South . A Coroner 's Jury identified a local Democratic official and suspected Klan member as the killer . Most contemporaries blamed the Ku Klux Klan , which had threatened to kill Hinds and was actively killing and assaulting other Republicans . Reflecting the times , no @-@ one was ever arrested for the first murder of a Congressman . As more violence spread throughout the state , Clayton declared martial law in 14 counties . Many Democratic newspapers denied the existence of the secretive Ku Klux Klan while still reporting on the violence . 20th @-@ century research shows the Klan was responsible for most of the violence in the state at this time . A state militia was organized to put down the violence , although it was poorly equipped . With no uniforms and irregular weapons and mounts , the militia was often mistaken for wandering bands of plunderers , sparking a brief but long @-@ remembered " Militia War " , and causing terror throughout the state . This was similar to what was going on in North Carolina at the same time now referred to as the Kirk @-@ Holden war . 
 Fearing he could not guarantee the integrity of the polling places , Clayton canceled fall elections in counties where political violence had broken out . In doing so , however , he further reduced the Democratic vote , and the state ended up supporting the election of President Grant , the Republican candidate , despite the population being mostly Democratic . 
 = = = Paying for the new infrastructure = = = 
 Clayton used various tactics to pay for the needed infrastructure changes in the state . Most of the South was in desperate need of infrastructure and was behind the rest of the country in this respect . He raised taxes , tried to fix the state 's bad credit by repaying and issuing bonds , and flooded the state with paper scrip . All of these tactics failed and drove up the state debt . 
 Introducing more taxes proved to be hugely unpopular among both Democrats and Republicans , and the people of the state simply did not have that much money to give . Bond issues generated controversy and were the source of scandals in the administration . All of the old railroad and infrastructure bonds , including the controversial Holford bonds which had already been declared illegal by the Arkansas Supreme Court , were gathered into a funding act and passed by the legislature . Many bonds were issued for roads and railroads that were never built , or were constructed and then torn up and rebuilt in another direction . Some projects even received the same amount of funding from different bonds , such as embankments built for railroads where roads were funded to be built by a different bond . One of the most controversial bonds involved the purchase of slate for a state penitentiary roof , which was diverted for the construction of a mansion of a Republican official J.L. Hodges , who eventually served jail time for the incident . <unk> notes , or scrip , were issued to raise money . The money was used for construction projects , and invested in public infrastructure . Article VI , Sec 10 of the new constitution stated that the credit of the state could not be loaned without the consent of the voters , making these promissory notes illegal . Their introduction also caused actual currency to go out of circulation . 
 The Radical Republicans did create some improvement within the state . Levees were constructed and railroads were built . Also , Arkansas ' first public school system was created . The administration and its supporters formed the Arkansas Industrial University , the basis for the future University of Arkansas in Fayetteville ; what would become the Arkansas School for the Deaf ; and the Arkansas School for the Blind , which relocated from Arkadelphia to Little Rock . However , state debt increased dramatically . The state had a budget surplus when Clayton came to office , but by the end of his term , the state debt had increased to $ 5 million . 
 = = = Minstrels and Brindle Tails = = = 
 The " scalawag " native conservative Republicans and the " carpetbagger " migrant radical Republicans had managed to form a coalition to seize complete control of the state in 1868 . However , once they had power , the extravagant spending of the carpetbaggers proved to be a wedge issue between the two groups , and factions developed within the party . There was especially strong opposition to the questionable financial maneuvers of the Clayton administration . Despite conciliatory tactics in 1869 , the Arkansas Republican Party publicly split in two as scalawags began denouncing the carpetbaggers ' reckless spending . 
 The scalawags met in convention and adopted the name the " Liberal Republicans " and a populist platform for universal amnesty , universal suffrage , economic reforms , and an end to the so @-@ called Clayton dictatorship . A small group of <unk> , disgruntled with the extravagance of the administration , also defected to this group . Among them was Joseph Brooks , who claimed to be the originator of Radicalism in Arkansas and became their natural leader . Brooks was a Northern Methodist preacher and had been a chaplain for the Union Army . He was known for his fiery speeches that united political and religious themes . He had been the chairman of the 1868 Republican state convention and was currently the State Senator from White County and Pulaski County . Although he had been involved with the carpetbaggers since the beginning , Clayton had not given him a government position , seeing Brooks as a potential rival . 
 The <unk> started calling the new faction " the Brindle Tails " . This name can be traced back to Clayton supporter Jack <unk> , who was a Freedman , contractor , and orator in the state . In a speech he gave in Eagle Township in Pulaski County , he said that Brooks reminded him of a " brindle tailed bull " he had known as a child that scared all the other cattle . The <unk> then began mockingly referring to Joseph Brooks and his supporters as " Brindle Tails " , and this is how they were referred to from then on . The Brindle Tails ' platform included a proposal for a new constitution that would re @-@ enfranchise ex @-@ Confederates , which appealed to Democrats and pre @-@ war Whigs . They began gaining support among the disenfranchised and the Liberal Republicans . 
 For their part , the Brindle Tails mockingly referred to the Carpetbaggers and <unk> Republicans as " the Minstrels " , and that name stuck as well . This moniker can probably be traced to John G. Price , the editor of the Little Rock Republican and a staunch Clayton supporter . Price was known to be a good musician and comedian and had even once filled in for a sick performer in a minstrel show , complete with blackface . 
 The Brindle Tails desperately wanted Clayton out of the governor 's office . Conveniently , Lieutenant Governor James M. Johnson was a Brindle Tail , so the natural course of action was to try to get rid of Clayton and let Johnson succeed him . Clayton was well aware of their plans , and when he left the state briefly for New York on business concerning the Holford Bonds , he informed no one . When Johnson , who was at home some distance from the capital , found out he tried to head to the capital to take control and have Clayton arrested and impeached . He arrived too late . Subsequently , after Johnson made a speech demanding changes in the administration , the Minstrels started to target Johnson . On January 30 , 1871 , they introduced articles of impeachment in the General Assembly against him . The chief charge was that Johnson , acting as the President of the Senate , had administered the oath of office to Joseph Brooks , who had recently been elected as state senator , and then recognized him on the floor . Although this was legitimately within his powers as the lieutenant governor to do , he escaped impeachment by only two votes . The scrutiny of the proceedings seriously damaged his reputation , even though he had done nothing wrong , and his political career never recovered . 
 In 1871 , Clayton was accused of deliberately tampering with the results of the U.S. house election between Thomas Boles and John Edwards in the third congressional district . According to Arkansas law , the results were to be certified and given to the Secretary of State , then Robert J.T. White . After that , the governor and Secretary of State would take up and arrange the results and the governor would issue a proclamation declaring the winner and deliver the Seal of the State to the him . Clayton was accused of adding around a hundred votes to the final count for Edwards , and declaring him the winner . Boles successfully contested the election and Clayton was indicted by the federal Circuit Court . Although the Court found that Clayton did in fact falsify his proclamation and delivered the seal to Edwards knowing full well that he had not won , this was in fact not illegal . His actions were in no way binding to the Congress and under federal law of the time , state governors were not considered election officials . Boles became a congressman . 
 To sequester Clayton from the affairs in the state , the <unk> and the Democrats decided the only thing they could do was elect him to the US Senate . However , even though he won unanimously , he refused to take his seat , which would mean letting Johnson become governor . In 1871 , the state House of Representatives drafted articles of impeachment against Clayton , charging him with a wide variety of impeachable actions , including depriving Johnson and several other state officials of offices to which they had been fairly elected , removing state officials and judges from offices to which they had been fairly elected , aiding in fraudulent elections , taking bribes for state railroad bonds , and various other high crimes and misdemeanors . The members of the House then tried to suspend Clayton from his duties as governor by force . They even apparently tried locking him in his office and nailing the door shut . However , Clayton responded that they had no right by the state constitution to deprive him of his office . At the same time , the House also brought impeachment charges against Chief Justice John McClure for his part in trying to deny Johnson the privileges of his office of lieutenant governor . 
 Two successive inquiries failed to find evidence against Clayton . The legislature refused to continue , all charges were dropped , and Clayton was exonerated . In fact , he was never found guilty of any wrongdoing while governor . Finally a deal was reached . Johnson , now politically badly damaged by his impeachment ordeal and willing to take any position he could get , resigned as lieutenant governor , was appointed Secretary of State , and was given a compensation of several thousand dollars for his loss of power and prestige , since he would not become governor . A staunch Clayton supporter , <unk> Hadley , was then appointed lieutenant governor . Three days later , Clayton left the state for Washington , D.C. , to join the US Senate , and Hadley succeeded him as governor . 
 The Democrats ' paper , the Arkansas Daily Gazette crowed : 
 It will be a source of infinite joy and satisfaction , to the oppressed and long suffering people of Arkansas , to learn that , on yesterday , the tyrant , despot and usurper , late of Kansas , but more recently , governor of Arkansas , took his departure from the city and his hateful presence out of our state , it is to be hoped , forever and ever . 
 Although no longer a state official , Clayton remained the leader of the state Republicans and was controlling now not only appointments within the state , but also the flow of federal money and positions . He began purging <unk> from federal office , including Joseph Brooks , who was at this point an Internal Revenue Assessor . 
 = = Election of 1872 = = 
 = = = Brooks and Baxter = = = 
 In the gubernatorial election of 1872 , the Minstrels faction nominated Elisha Baxter as their candidate . Baxter was a lawyer , politician , and merchant from North Carolina who had settled in Batesville , and a life long Whig . He was elected Mayor of Batesville in 1853 and elected to the state legislature in 1858 . At the outbreak of the Civil War , he had been conflicted about which side he supported . When General Samuel Curtis and the 2nd Iowa Infantry occupied Batesville in the Spring of 1862 , the General recognized Baxter as a loyal Unionist , and tried to bestow upon him the title of " <unk> of loyal <unk> " which he refused . When Curtis left Batesville , Baxter was forced to flee to Missouri . He was captured , brought back to Little Rock , and charged with treason , only to escape later before his trial could take place . He describes this episode in his life in his autobiography : 
 Through a fortunate combination of circumstances I escaped from prison before my trial came on and lived for eighteen days in the <unk> ( sic ) and fields near Little Rock without a <unk> ( sic ) of food except such raw corn and berries as I could gather in my lone wanderings . While a prisoner I felt that I was <unk> treated by the harsh criticisms of the press and individuals not only in regard to my want of loyalty to the southern <unk> ( sic ) but also with regard to my supposed want of courage . I therefore resolved if God would grant me deliverance I would at once enter the Federal Army . 
 When Baxter returned to Batesville , he organized the 4th Arkansas Mounted Infantry for the Union and commanded it until he was named a State Supreme Court judge by Governor Murphy in the Spring 1864 . Shortly after being named a judge , he was elected to the U.S. Senate by the legislature along with Rev. Andrew Hunter , but they were not seated in the Senate as the senate did not recognize the Murphy Administration . In 1867 , he was appointed by Governor Clayton judge of the 3rd Judicial circuit . In 1868 he was appointed the 1st Congressional district of Arkansas . He held these two positions until he was nominated for governor in 1872 . Baxter was virtually unknown and privately clean of scandals , unlike most of the Minstrels . They believed he could attract votes from Unionists and Northerners , their core base , as well as natives of the state . 
 Joseph Brooks ran for governor representing the Brindle Tails . Brooks was a very vocal supporter of civil rights for former slaves , but also a supporter of re @-@ enfranchisement for ex @-@ Confederates , which was the sentiment nationally of Liberal Republicans . When the Democrats met , they agreed not only to not run a candidate , but even to support Joseph Brooks , as long as the election was fair and legal , since elections in the state had been wrought with fraud for five years . The issue of re @-@ enfranchisement of Confederates was central to the election . 
 = = = The outcome = = = 
 The election of 1872 has been described as a " masterpiece of confusion " by Arkansas historian Michael B. Dougan . " That carpetbagger Brooks ran with Democratic support against a scalawag nominated by a party composed almost exclusively of carpetbaggers was enough to <unk> most voters as well as the modern student . " 
 In the days before the election and the days afterward , predictions and reports of fraud were printed daily in the Gazette . Because of the relatively slow communications , messages from other counties were often delayed up to a week . There were numerous reports of anomalies in state polling centers , including names being inexplicably stricken from the voter registration lists and persons voting without proof of registration . The Gazette wrote : 
 It would be as great a farce of yesterday 's election to designate it otherwise than a fraud . It was one of the worst ever yet perpetrated in the state . The city judges paid no attention to any registration either old or new , but permitted everybody to vote , and in many instances without question . Men were marched from one ward to another and voted early and often . 
 On November 6 , 1872 , the day after the general election , the Gazette reported : " The election was one of the most quiet in Little Rock we ever witnessed . The returns on that day were too small to report with any certainty who had won , and the newspaper reported fraud . Rumors flew about claiming that registration had been cut short or extended in many counties to suit the needs of whoever controlled the polling places . The following Monday , the Gazette published incomplete tallies from the various counties , showing a small majority for Baxter . They also reported more forms of attempted fraud . Some unofficial polling places had apparently been set up , but only those votes cast at the regular polls had been certified . 
 By November 15 , the Gazette claimed victory for Brooks . By the next day , because of the irregularities and votes that would be thrown out , the projected winner was Baxter , by only 3 @,@ 000 votes . The General Assembly met on January 6 for a special joint session to declare Baxter , who by their count had received the most votes , the legal winner of the election . After a short address he was sworn in by Chief Justice John McClure . He then assumed the duties of Governor of the State of Arkansas . 
 Brooks supporters immediately claimed that the election had been dishonest . The Democrats , the Brindle Tails , and all non @-@ Republican newspapers openly and vocally denounced the election as fraudulent , and insisted that Brooks had in fact received the most votes . The general citizenry of both parties , however , accepted the results . The Brooks supporters were in the minority in believing that the election had been fraudulent . 
 = = = Brooks 's legal battle = = = 
 The first to file suit over the election was Judge William M. Harrison , who had been on the Brooks ticket . He filed a Bill of Equity with the US Circuit Court in Little Rock , claiming he had a right to a seat on the Supreme Court due to the fraudulent election . The Brooks Campaign likewise filed suit in the Circuit Court shortly thereafter on January 7 , 1873 . Judge H.C. Caldwell heard the Harrison case , and rendered an opinion stating that the Federal Court had no jurisdiction in the matter , and dismissed the case . The Harrison decision resulted in the dismissal of the Brooks case as well . 
 Brooks then took a petition to the General Assembly , asking for a recount . The assembly took up the matter on April 20 , 1873 and voted 63 to 9 not to allow Brooks to contest the election . This did not deter Brooks , and he applied to the Arkansas Supreme Court for a writ of quo warranto , and was again denied . They also ruled that state courts had no jurisdiction in the matter , and dismissed the case . They gave a lengthy explanation as to why the General Assembly should decide contested gubernatorial elections in Joint Session , since they are the directly elected representatives of the people . 
 It appeared that Brooks had exhausted all legal avenues at this point , but on June 16 , 1873 , he filed another lawsuit against Baxter , this time with the Pulaski County district court . Under Arkansas Civil Code sec . 525 , if a person usurps an office or franchise to which he is not entitled , an action at law may be instituted against him either by the State or by the party rightly entitled to the office . On October 8 , 1873 , Baxter filed a plea of non @-@ jurisdiction , but he believed that the court might decide against him . He issued a telegram to President Grant informing him of the basic situation in Arkansas and asked for federal troops to help him maintain the peace . Grant denied his request . 
 = = = Baxter and Brooks switch positions = = = 
 There were rumors that Joseph McClure , the Chief Justice who had sworn him into office , intended to have Baxter either arrested or killed , ostensibly because Baxter had replaced W. W. Wilshire , a Minstrel , with Robert C. Newton , an ex @-@ Confederate , as head of the state militia . U.S. Attorney General Williams contacted Baxter and suggested that he ask for federal troops for protection again . A letter from President Grant followed , offering protection . The Grant administration usually followed Powell Clayton 's lead where Arkansas matters were concerned , so it can be concluded that the former governor was still supporting Baxter . The Republican Party of Arkansas , still controlled by the Minstrel faction , issued a statement denouncing Brooks ' attempt to contest the election , which was published in the Little Rock Republican on October 8 , 1873 and signed by all the major members of the party , including Clayton . However , the Minstrels would soon turn on Baxter for not following the party line . 
 Baxter had now been governor for a year and was following an independent course . He began dismantling the systems put in place by the Minstrels . He appointed honest Democrats and Republicans to the Election Commission , reorganized the militia by placing it under the control of the State , rather than the governor , and pushed for an amendment to the state constitution to re @-@ enfranchise ex @-@ Confederates . 
 On March 3 , 1873 , the state legislature passed a bill re @-@ enfranchising ex @-@ Confederates , to the delight of much of the state population and the concern of the Minstrels . The legislature called a special election in November to replace 33 members , mostly Minstrels , who had left for patronage jobs in the Baxter government . Baxter refused to let the Minstrels manipulate the election , declaring that free , honest elections would be held during his term . With the help of the newly re @-@ enfranchised voters , conservative Democrats swept the election and gained a small majority in the legislature . Baxter was about to erode his Republican base out from under him . 
 In March 1874 , Baxter vetoed the Railroad Steel Bill , the centerpiece of the Radical Republican Reconstruction plan . The bill would have released the railroad companies from their debts to the state and created a tax to pay the interest on the bonds . This was clearly not legal and the veto called into question the legality of the 1868 railroad bonds , which created a public bonded debt . It is likely the Minstrels struck a deal with Brooks to support the railroad bonds , and within a month the political backers of Brooks and Baxter began to switch . Senator Clayton issued a statement saying that " Brooks was fairly elected in 1872 ; and kept out of office by fraud . " Governor Baxter was now being supported by the Brindle Tails , re @-@ <unk> , and the Democrats ; whereas Brooks was finding support among the <unk> , Northerners , Unionists , the Minstrel Republicans . 
 Brooks was assigned three prominent Minstrel attorneys , and after a year of sitting on the docket , at about 11 AM on April 15 , 1874 , Baxter 's demurrer to Brook 's complaint was suddenly called up . Neither of Baxter 's lawyers were present in the court room , and the demurrer had been submitted without their knowledge . Without giving Baxter any time to testify , Judge Whytock overruled the demurrer and awarded Brooks $ 2 @,@ 000 in damages and the office of Governor of Arkansas . Neither Brooks nor the court notified the legislature or Governor Baxter . Judge Wytock then swore in Joseph Brooks as the new governor of Arkansas , despite having no authority to do so . 
 = = = Brooks seizes power = = = 
 With the aid of General Robert F. <unk> and state militia , Brooks , accompanied by about 20 armed men , marched to the Arkansas Capitol building ( now known as " the Old Statehouse " ) , located at Markham and Center streets in downtown Little Rock . They ordered Baxter to abdicate his office , but Baxter refused to do so unless physically forced . The mob obliged and dragged Baxter out of the Capitol building and onto the street . 
 By the end of the afternoon , nearly 300 armed men had converged on the lawn of the State Capitol . Brooks ' men seized the state arsenal and began turning the Statehouse into an armed camp . Telegrams covered in signatures were sent to President Ulysses S. Grant supporting Brooks as the legal governor . Three out of the five Supreme Court justices also telegraphed the President in support of Brooks . Brooks telegraphed the President himself asking for access to weapons housed at the federal arsenal . He also issued a statement to the press proclaiming himself governor . The senators from the state , Clayton and Steven Dorsey , met with President Grant , and they sent a message to Brooks giving their support . 
 Unusually for someone physically removed from power , Baxter was allowed to remain free in Pulaski County . He first retired to the Anthony House , three blocks away from the State Capitol . Ads placed in the Gazette indicate that the Anthony House continued to function as an upscale hotel during the entirety of the crisis . Fighting occurred outside the hotel , and at least one man , Dave Shall , a prominent real estate dealer , was shot dead while standing in a window of the building . 
 Baxter then moved his headquarters to St. Johns College , a Masonic institution on the southeastern edge of the state . Baxter issued two proclamations to the press from his temporary office , asserting his rights to the governorship by vote of the people and the decision of the legislature ; both were printed in the Gazette . He received support from many prominent Democrats in the city , all of whom had initially voted for Brooks . He then issued a dispatch to President Grant explaining the situation , calling Brooks and his band " revolutionaries " , and stating that he would do everything up to and including armed conflict to regain control of the state organs . He asked for the support of the Federal Government . 
 Brooks issued a proclamation to the people of Arkansas asking them for their support . Baxter answered with proclamation to the people of Arkansas declaring martial law in Pulaski County . A company was then issued from the young men of Little Rock . On the evening of April 16 , the assembled army , now being referred to as the " Hallie <unk> " , escorted Baxter back to the Anthony House , where he set up his headquarters , and from there he began trying to do the state 's business once more . 
 There were now two militias marching and singing through Little Rock as the city became a battle ground . Commanding both forces were ex @-@ Confederate soldiers . Former Brigadier General James F. Fagan commanded the Brooks men , and Robert C. Newton , a former Colonel , commanded the Hallie <unk> , or Baxter forces . The Baxter 's men occupied the downstairs billiards area of the Anthony House , and patrolled the cross streets outside . Down the street , the Brooks men patrolled the front of the state house . The front line was Main Street . The post @-@ master handled the situation by only delivering mail addressed to Brooks or Baxter , and holding all mail simply addressed to " Governor of Arkansas . " 
 The Baxter men found an old cannon lying half @-@ embedded in the ground at the foot of Byrd street . The cannon , an 8 in ( 200 mm ) Naval <unk> cannon , had been brought to Little Rock in 1861 by the steamboat " <unk> " and placed on the North side of the State House to ward off any ships coming up stream . It sat there for two years until Little Rock was occupied by federal troops , and the Confederates spiked the cannon disabling it . The Baxter men pulled the cannon out of the soil , repaired it , rechristened it the " Lady Baxter " , and made it ready to fire . It was placed in the rear of the Metropolitan Hotel on the corner of Main and Markham streets to hit any boats bringing supplies for Brooks up the river . The cannon was only fired once – when Baxter finally returned to the governor 's seat . It now sits on the lawn of the Old State House on permanent display . 
 Overtones of the Civil War and racial conflict were evident . Brooks ' men numbered 600 by this time , and were all freedmen who supported Republicans as their <unk> . Baxter 's forces , all white Democrats , continued to grow steadily during the conflict until they reached nearly 2 @,@ 000 . Several bloody skirmishes occurred . Known as the Battle of <unk> , a small naval battle erupted on the Arkansas River near Natural Steps , where Brooks ' men attacked a flatboat known as the " Hallie " , thought to be bringing supplies . The shooting lasted around ten to fifteen minutes before the pilot ran up a white flag signaling a surrender . One stray bullet pierced the vessel 's supply pipe between the boiler and engine , cutting off its power , and the boat drifted downriver , out of gun range , and lodged on the Southern ( Western ) shore . Sources vary as to the actual casualties of the incident . The boat 's captain , a pilot , and one rifleman were killed ; the other pilot and three or four riflemen were wounded . One source stated that the Brooks regiment suffered one man killed and three wounded ; another report was that five men were killed and " quite a number " wounded . 
 Casualty reports vary widely depending on the source ; the New York Times of May 30 , 1874 gave the following for casualties and fatalities : 
 = = = Brooks loses favor = = = 
 On May 3 , men claiming to be acting on behalf of Baxter supporters hijacked a train from Memphis , Tennessee , and arrested federal Court Justices John E. Bennett and E.J. Earle , thinking that the Court would be unable to rule without a quorum of Judges . Baxter denied that they were acting under his direction . The Judges were taken to Benton , Arkansas . For several days , their whereabouts were unknown to the public and federal officials began a search for the Justices . Justice Bennett was able to send a letter to Captain Rose demanding to know why they were being held by the Governor of Arkansas . Upon receipt of the letter , troops were sent to Benton to retrieve the two Justices , but they had escaped by May 6 and made their way to Little Rock . 
 In Washington , Brooks was supported politically , but Baxter also had support because of the undemocratic way he had been removed from office . President Grant had already dealt with the outcome of the contested election for Governor of Louisiana Colfax massacre where federal troops had to be sent . As Brooks and Baxter scrambled for support in Washington , D.C. , Grant pushed for the dispute to be settled in Arkansas . Baxter demanded the General Assembly be called into session . He knew he had their support , but so did Brooks , so he and his men would not allow anyone to enter the capitol building . Brooks , on the other hand , had the support of the district court . He enlisted Little Rock 's premiere lawyer , Uriah M. Rose , head of the still @-@ prominent Rose Law Firm . However , Grant 's decision would soon set in motion the demise of Brooks ' governorship . 
 It was becoming clear that federal intervention was required to settle the dispute , despite the general policy of the Grant administration to stay out of the affairs of Southern states . The President often expressed annoyance with Southern governors who requested help from federal troops to combat regular waves of election year violence , with little compassion for the issues they faced . Grant and the United States Attorney General , George Henry Williams , issued a joint communique supporting Baxter and ordering Brooks to vacate the capitol . They also referred the dispute back to the State Legislature . 
 Historian Allan Nevins believes Grant had been hoodwinked . When Baxter refused to sign two million dollars ' worth of fraudulent railroad bonds , Boss Shepherd and Senator Dorsey turned against him and convinced Grant to do the same . 
 President Grant on May 15 , 1874 , had declared Baxter to be governor , denouncing Brooks and his party ; now on February 8 , 1875 , he declared that Brooks had been elected and denounced Baxter and his followers ! Senator Dorsey , later a principal in the Star Route frauds , was a neighbor and close friend of Boss Shepherd 's , living in a house owned by him .... " I believe , " commented [ Secretary of State ] Fish , " that there is a large steal in the Arkansas matter , and fear that the President has been led into a grievous error . " 
 On May 11 , Governor Baxter asked the General Assembly to meet in special session , which they did . Apparently , they met " behind Baxter lines " although where that was isn 't exactly clear . Since the Speaker of the House and President pro tempore of the Senate were both absent , being that they were both Brooks supporters , they were replaced . J.G. Frierson was elected President pro tempore of the Senate and James H. Berry Speaker of the House . They then passed an act calling for a constitutional convention , which Governor Baxter approved on May 18 . The act scheduled an election for the last day of June and appointed delegates from the counties of Arkansas . Two days later , Generals Newton and Fagan negotiated an armistice . At the same time , the Arkansas Supreme Court had finally decided to hear the Brooks case , and voted three to one in favor of Baxter 's election , further solidifying the Grant proclamation and Baxter as governor . The bar of the Pulaski County Circuit court also met and issued a resolution that stated that Judge Wytock had acted independently , and his decision did not represent the court . The trial had been deliberately unfair for the defendant Baxter , and the Supreme Court had already ruled that , under the state constitution , the court had no jurisdiction . They rendered Judge Wytock 's decision null and void . 
 On May 19 , General Newton and his troops reoccupied the State House grounds , which had just been evacuated by Brooks ' forces , and on the 20th , he reinstated Governor Baxter . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In June 1874 , Clayton announced that he could no longer control matters in Arkansas and that he and his friends would be willing to enter into any arrangement whereby they could at least be safe from persecution and prosecution . However , the Democrats retaliated by impeaching many Minstrels , including Supreme Court Justice John McClure . Clayton finished his Senate term but was not re @-@ elected . 
 On September 7 , 1874 , the new constitution was completed and signed by a majority of delegates . The entire electorate , including the disenfranchised Confederates and the Freedmen , voted . The election not only was for ratification of the new constitution but also for state officials that would be elected if the constitution was indeed ratified . The Republicans actually took the same position that the Democrats had taken earlier , believing that the election was illegal they nominated no candidates . Conservative Democrats and allied paramilitary groups suppressed black voting , using a combination of intimidation , blocking blacks from the polls , and outright assassinations . The new constitution was ratified on October 13 , 1874 and Democratic officials elected almost unanimously , including new Democratic Governor Augustus H. Garland who was inaugurated November 12 , 1874 , and Baxter left office after only serving two years of a four @-@ year term . 
 It was a long time after the Brooks – Baxter War that people of Arkansas allowed another Republican to become governor . The following 35 governors of Arkansas , ruling for a total of 90 years , were all Democrats , until Republican Winthrop Rockefeller became governor in 1966 defeating James D. Johnson . Winthrop became governor while his brother Nelson was governor of New York , while the defeat of Johnson in Arkansas and William M. <unk> in Louisiana ended the once mighty hold of segregation over politics . 
 = Clint Black = 
 Clint Patrick Black ( born February 4 , 1962 ) is an American singer , songwriter , musician , multi @-@ instrumentalist , record producer and actor . Signed to RCA Records in 1989 , Black 's debut album Killin ' Time produced five straight number one singles on the US Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks charts . Although his momentum gradually slowed throughout the 1990s , Black consistently charted hit songs into the 2000s . He has had more than 30 singles on the US Billboard country charts , twenty @-@ two of which have reached number one , in addition to having released nine studio albums and several compilation albums . In 2003 , Black founded his own record label , Equity Music Group . Black has also ventured into acting , having made a cameo appearance in the 1994 film Maverick , as well as a starring role in 1998 's Still Holding On : The Legend of Cadillac Jack . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clint Patrick Black was born in Long Branch , New Jersey , the youngest of four children born to G.A. and Ann Black , and lived in nearby Red Bank . The family moved back to Texas , where G.A. Black had been raised , before Clint was one year old . He was raised in Katy , Texas . Music was always present in the house . Black taught himself to play harmonica before he was 13 , and at 14 wrote his first song . His father remarked that it was at that age that the parents " first noticed that he had a great voice " . By 15 , Black had learned to play guitar . As a teenager Black joined his elder brothers , Mark , Kevin and Brian , in their small band . On Saturday afternoons , the family would host backyard barbecues and invite the neighborhood to listen to the boys sing . Some weekends would attract up to 70 people . Black eventually dropped out of high school to play with his brothers , before becoming a solo act . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 1983 – 88 : Early career = = = 
 Black was initially drawn to a variety of musical genres . According to his father , he chose to focus on country music in the early 1980s , after singers George Strait and Reba McEntire moved the genre back toward the more traditional ; in the style kept alive by George Jones and Merle Haggard . For six years , Black supported himself as a construction worker , bait cutter , and fishing guide , while singing at various lounges as a solo singer and guitarist . In 1987 , at one of the gigs he met another guitarist , Hayden Nicholas . The two men connected musically and began a song writing partnership that would last decades . In the late 1980s , Black delivered a demo of their collaboration " Nobody 's Home " to record promoter Sammy Alfano . Within two days of that delivery , Black was invited to a meeting with Bill Ham , who managed ZZ Top . 
 = = = 1989 – 91 : Breakthrough = = = 
 Black soon signed with RCA at that time considered one of the " most aggressive " labels in country music . His first album , Killin ' Time , was released in 1989 . Each song on the album was penned at least in part by Black ; four of them were attributed solely to him , while the rest were collaborations with Nicholas . In a departure from most other country albums , Black used his road band instead of session musicians to record Killin ' Time . The album was a critical and commercial success , reaching number one on the Billboard Country Albums chart and certified platinum in 1990 . The first single , " A Better Man " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot Country Songs in early June . This marked the first time in 14 years that a debut single by a male artist had peaked at the top of the chart . In total , five singles off of his debut album reached number one , the first time any country artist had accomplished this feat . Black won the Country Music Association 's Horizon Award for best newcomer in 1989 . At the end of the year , his singles , " A Better Man " and " Killin ' Time " place number one and number two on the year @-@ end country singles charts . It had been 36 years since another artist had claimed both top spots in a single year . Looking back at the early stages of his career , Black recalled : " ' At one point , I knew I crossed this line out of obscurity and I felt like no matter what happened from that point on I would always be remembered for " Killin ' Time . " There was this kind of mixed feeling of remorse and excitement . ' " 
 In late 1990 , the Los Angeles Times surveyed country music industry insiders to determine which acts could be expected to sell the most records over the next seven years . Black placed second in the poll , two votes behind Garth Brooks . The survey results were surprising in that 10 of the top 20 artists named were relative newcomers to the industry ; in the past , country music had been dominated by artists with several decades experience . The plethora of new acts confused some reviewers , however . Many reviewers lumped many of the new acts together ; as Newsweek 's David Gates wrote : " Good song , good voice , hot band : who cares which one it is this time ? " Black soon became known as one of Nashville 's " hat acts " ; like other country artists such as Garth Brooks , Alan Jackson , and Mark Chesnutt , Black was a relative newcomer who wore a hat , and had " clean , <unk> sound with pop appeal " . 
 Killin ' Time was certified platinum in 1990 . Black 's second album , Put Yourself in My Shoes , was released in November 1990 . It reached number two on the country chart and was in the top 20 on the pop album charts . This success on the pop charts resulted from a change in the way Billboard calculated album sales ; a new reliance on Nielsen SoundScan instead of information from selected record stores showed that sales of country albums had previously been undercounted . The album did not meet with as much critical acclaim as his debut , but nonetheless still included several hit singles . He began touring with Alabama . 
 Black began dating actress Lisa Hartman in 1990 . The couple kept their relationship very quiet . The first picture of the two of them together was not published until the week they were engaged . The couple married in Katy , Texas in October 1991 . 
 Black has been a member of the Grand Ole Opry since 1991 . 
 = = = 1992 : Lawsuits and The Hard Way = = = 
 In March 1992 , Black sued his manager , Bill Ham , for breach of contract ; Black sought $ 2 million in damages and requested that Ham return $ 4 million in royalties . Under the terms of their initial contract , Ham controlled all publishing royalties for any song that Black wrote or co @-@ wrote for his first eight albums . Because Black wrote all of his own music , this amounted to a fee of 20 to 30 cents per album sold . Industry standards generally counseled songwriters to form their own publication companies , so they would be able to retain more of the royalties . 
 Ham promptly countersued , blaming the initial lawsuit on poor advice Black received from his new personal assistant , his mother @-@ in @-@ law Jonni Hartman . His lawyer told the press that " Mr. Ham invested $ 1 million of his own money in Clint Black 's career at a time when nobody else would do so . For that commitment , Mr. Black should show a little gratitude and honor his contracts " . 
 By mid @-@ 1992 , Black 's first two albums had sold a combined 5 million copies . The difficulties with Ham caused a delay in the release of Black 's third album , The Hard Way , which was released on July 14 . The album had been expected the year previously , and during the delay the country music scene changed . Both Alan Jackson and Travis Tritt achieved greater success , and Billy Ray Cyrus became a teen idol . The competition that Black faced was now much stiffer than with his earlier albums . 
 According to Black , he and producer James Stroud spent more time putting this album together than either of those preceding and were " a lot more aggressive in the way we cut and mixed the album " . Black was also more satisfied with the vocals on this album . Several of the songs on The Hard Way , including " Burn One Down " , were initially reported to be Black 's responses to his situation with Ham . <unk> Nicholas refuted the rumors , maintaining that most of those songs were written in the late 1980s . 
 To promote the album , Black launched The Hard Way Tour on June 26 , 1992 . The tour ran for 11 months . Reviewers noticed that with this album Black presented a " new , sexier image " , wearing tighter clothing and in many cases leaving behind his trademark hat . Black commented simply that he was bored wearing the hat all the time . 
 = = = 1993 – 99 : Continued success = = = 
 Black 's fourth album , No Time to Kill was released almost a year after The Hard Way . The album received mixed reviews . The Houston Chronicle noted that Black 's duet with <unk> Judd , " A Bad Goodbye " , was " precisely the kind of radio @-@ ready , big @-@ production ballad that record companies tend to force on their artists when they sense that their careers are in trouble .... [ I ] t sticks out like a sore thumb in his body of work . " On the other hand , a review in Time magazine thought the duet helped Black show his emotions more intensely . Some reviewers also noted that in some of the more serious songs on the album , Black 's voice sounded strained . 
 One Emotion followed in 1995 . Also a platinum certified album in the US , this album accounted for five straight top five hits . First was the number four " <unk> ' My Mind " , a Merle Haggard co @-@ write . After it came the number three " Wherever You Go " , number one " Summer 's Comin ' " , the number two title track and finally the number four " Life Gets Away . " The latter two were also number one country hits in Canada . 
 In 1996 , Black became the fourth country music singer to earn a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . Later that year , he released his first greatest @-@ hits package . This was led off by the chart @-@ topper " Like the Rain " , which spent three weeks at number one . After it came the number six " Half Way Up " , his first single since " One More Payment " to miss the top five . 
 Black 's next album , 1997 's Nothin ' but the <unk> , was released to mediocre reviews . Thom Owens of AllMusic said that the album made no attempt to change his sound , and was " sturdy " but less country than his previous efforts . Lead @-@ off single " Still Holding On " , a duet with labelmate Martina McBride , became his first single to land outside the top 10 , with a number 11 peak that year . He soon recovered his chart momentum with the number two " Something That We Do " followed by two straight chart @-@ toppers in the album 's Steve Wariner @-@ penned title track and " The Shoes You 're Wearing " . The next two singles – the number 12 " <unk> Up My Strings " and number 29 " You Don 't Need Me Now " – were less successful . 
 In 1999 , Black released D <unk> , which relied completely on acoustic instruments . Nevertheless , USAToday thought the " album sounds as full and brash as an electric album since he used creative arrangements and horn sections " . Three of the songs on the albums were remakes of previous Black singles . Several others featured guest appearances by some of Black 's idols , including Waylon Jennings , Kenny Loggins , and Eric Idle . The songs tended to be longer than most of those played on country radio , with many stretching more than five minutes . 
 = = = 1999 – 2013 : Later career = = = 
 Black and Hartman welcomed their only child , Lily Pearl Black , in May 2001 . Black took a three @-@ year break from the music industry to stay home with his daughter . He explained that " it ended up not being a smart career move , but it was a real smart dad move . … I wouldn 't go back and try to do anything for my career in exchange for that . " 
 During his sabbatical , Black spent time reassessing his career . After deciding he was unwilling to work within the current recording industry system , he formed his own record label , Equity Music Group . Black admitted that it was difficult to leave RCA . In his 14 years with the label , he had sold over 12 million records . 
 The new label operated under very different rules than those Black had begun his own career under . Artists were guaranteed ownership of their songs and were granted an equity stake in the label . The first release from the new label was Black 's next album , Spend My Time ; his eighth studio album was Black 's first release in five years . The Houston Chronicle called it " arguably the most adventurous of his career " . 
 In 2005 Black released Drinkin ' Songs and Other Logic . Black chose the title of the album to limit himself to simple topics in his past . He explained : " I went out and bought all the music I grew up on that I didn 't already have and spent three months listening to only that . Only stuff from before I started making records , so it was pre @-@ 1989 — Waylon , Willie , Buck Owens , Haggard , Don Williams , Jim Croce . And what I discovered was a simplicity in song that I had moved away from . It was quite an emotional journey because these were all the songs that moved me and inspired me to do what I 've been doing ever since . " 
 Black has continued to record new material , however . In 2007 , he released the single " The Strong One " the first original song he has recorded that he did not write . The song was included on his first digital EP , released on March 11 , 2008 . Titled " The Long Cool EP , " the collection features Black 's single , " Long Cool Woman " , " The Strong One " and a duet with his wife titled " You Still Get to Me " . Equity Music Group closed its doors in December 2008 due to economic difficulties . 
 Black was also a judge for the 8th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Return to music = = = 
 Since the closure of his label in 2008 , Black had intermittently hinted at a new album that never materialized . In 2013 , he issued a Cracker Barrel @-@ exclusive album which featured re @-@ recorded versions of some of his biggest hits as well as three new songs . Black stated that he hired the same musicians that had played on the original versions to perform the new ones , and that some songs were approached from a " fresh angle " while others were made to be as close to the originals as possible . 
 In early 2015 , Black appeared with Joe Nichols on the ACM Superstar Duets special , which featured modern artists teaming up with older icons that had influenced their music . In July 2015 , it was reported that Black had signed a new record deal with independent label Thirty Tigers to release an album of new studio material in the Fall . The record title was revealed shortly thereafter as On Purpose , with a release date of September 25 . 
 = = Songwriting = = 
 Few country singers fill their albums primarily with their own material , and although RCA Records often pushed Black to record the material of other artists , he refused . Black recorded only his own songs until 2007 , when he released the single " The Strong One " . Many of his songs were the result of a collaboration with Hayden Nicholas . Their first collaboration , " Straight From the Factory " , took them only 20 minutes to write , although Nicholas would later comment that " most of ' em weren 't that easy " . 
 Many listeners were incredulous that such a young man ( 27 at the release of his first album ) could have such " a remarkably mature perspective " . According to Black , " To me , a song is more than just something to sing . It 's something to learn from . It 's somebody else 's true feeling . I 'm always trying to get at the meaning . … When I write a line , I 'm doing the same thing . I 'm looking at it from the perspective of if I was driving down the road listening to it , what am I gonna get out of it ? " 
 Many of his songs make clever use of puns and other creative turns of phrase . While the wordplay in many of the songs on his earlier albums was widely appreciated , by the fourth album reviewers felt that the songs were not as high in quality . Rick Mitchell of the Houston Chronicle stated his opinion that The Hard Way " clever wordplay is no substitute for heartfelt emotion " . 
 = = Film and television = = 
 Shortly after his music career took off , began receiving offers for acting roles . He turned down every request until 1994 , when he was offered a bit part in the star @-@ studded comedy film Maverick . Although the part required very little actual acting , after the movie 's release Black received an increasing number of calls from directors who thought he would be perfect for a particular role . Black has appeared in several television shows , including Wings and The Larry Sanders Show . He has since starred in the 1998 television film , Still Holding On : The Legend of Cadillac Jack , based on the rodeo star Jack Favor , who was falsely accused of double murders in Haughton , Louisiana in 1967 . Lisa Hartman Black portrayed Ponder I. Favor , Jack 's wife . Black had a major role in another television movie Going Home , and appeared briefly in the 2003 film Anger Management . 
 He has also had a presence on various reality television shows . In 2003 , Black appeared on Nashville Star , where he acted as a mentor to the contestants . He later produced the debut album of series winner Buddy Jewell . In 2004 , Clint appeared as himself in the TV show Las Vegas . In 2008 , Black was a contestant on a short @-@ lived CBS reality show , Secret Talents of the Stars , in which he practiced stand @-@ up comedy . The following year , he competed on the second season of Celebrity Apprentice . He was fired after the eleventh task , placing himself in fifth place , although he returned as a member of Joan Rivers ' victorious team in the season finale . In 2009 , Black appeared on ABC 's Extreme Makeover : Home Edition . 
 Black has enjoyed his television experiences , describing acting as " another way for me to expand my creative canvas . … I love to challenge myself . " He believes that most of his fans " just see me as a musician who is stepping into [ television and film ] temporarily and either doing it alright or not " . More recently , he appeared in the movies Flicka 2 in 2010 and Flicka 3 in 2011 . 
 On July 4 , 2012 , Black appeared on an episode of Lifetime 's reality series , Coming Home , which documents servicemen and women returning to their loved ones in surprise reunions . In the episode , he is featured helping two children write a song about their Army captain father , who is returning from Afghanistan to surprise his family . 
 On July 24 , 2012 Black is surprised by History Detectives on PBS . In the episode , the show pays a visit to his Nashville residence , to uncover the story behind an artifact given to him by his wife decades ago . 
 = = Musical styles and legacy = = 
 Merle Haggard , Waylon Jennings , George Strait , and Willie Nelson are Black 's biggest musical influences . His style is traditional country . His voice is described as a smooth baritone and was initially compared to Merle Haggard . Black was self @-@ taught on harmonica , guitar and bass at an early age . On his studio albums he plays acoustic guitar , harmonica , percussion , electric guitar and bass harp . In concert he plays primarily guitar , but does play drums and harmonica . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He & his wife , Lisa Hartman have a daughter , Lily Pearl Black , born in 2001 . They have lived in Nashville , Tennessee since 2002 after living in Laurel Canyon , Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Academy of Country Music 
 1989 Album of the Year – " Killin ' Time " 
 1989 Top Male Vocalist 
 1989 Top New Male Vocalist 
 1989 Single of the Year – " A Better Man " 
 1999 Vocal Event of the Year with Lisa Hartman Black – " When I Said I Do " 
 American Music Awards 
 1990 Favorite Country New Artist 
 Country Music Association 
 1989 Horizon Award 
 1990 Male Vocalist of the Year 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 1989 : Killin ' Time 
 1990 : Put Yourself in My Shoes 
 1992 : The Hard Way 
 1993 : No Time to Kill 
 1994 : One Emotion 
 1997 : Nothin ' but the <unk> 
 1999 : D <unk> 
 2004 : Spend My Time 
 2005 : Drinkin ' Songs and Other Logic 
 2015 : On Purpose 
 Compilations 
 1996 : Greatest Hits 
 2001 : Greatest Hits II 
 2007 : The Love Songs 
 2013 : When I Said I Do 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Flicka : Country Pride ( 2012 ) – Toby 
 Flicka 2 ( 2010 ) – Toby 
 Anger Management ( 2003 ) – <unk> 
 Going Home ( 2000 ) – Dr. Warren 
 Still Holding On : The Legend of Cadillac Jack ( 1998 ) – Cadillac Jack Favor 
 Maverick ( 1994 ) – Sweet @-@ Faced Gambler 
 Wings " I Love Brian " ( 1993 ) – Himself 
 Montana Christmas Skies ( 1991 ) – Clint Black , with John Denver , Kathy <unk> , Patty Loveless 
 = Malcolm II of Scotland = 
 Malcolm ( Gaelic : Máel Coluim ; died 25 November 1034 ) , was King of the Scots from 1005 until his death . He was a son of King Kenneth II ; the Prophecy of Berchán says that his mother was a woman of Leinster and refers to him as <unk> , " the destroyer " . 
 To the Irish annals which recorded his death , Malcolm was ard rí Alban , High King of Scotland . In the same way that Brian Bóruma , High King of Ireland , was not the only king in Ireland , Malcolm was one of several kings within the geographical boundaries of modern Scotland : his fellow kings included the king of Strathclyde , who ruled much of the south @-@ west , various Norse @-@ Gael kings on the western coast and the Hebrides and , nearest and most dangerous rivals , the kings or Mormaers of Moray . To the south , in the Kingdom of England , the Earls of Bernicia and Northumbria , whose predecessors as kings of Northumbria had once ruled most of southern Scotland , still controlled large parts of the southeast . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Malcolm II was born to Kenneth II of Scotland . He was grandson of Malcolm I of Scotland . In 997 , the killer of Constantine is credited as being Kenneth , son of Malcolm . Since there is no known and relevant Kenneth alive at that time ( King Kenneth having died in 995 ) , it is considered an error for either Kenneth III , who succeeded Constantine , or , possibly , Malcolm himself , the son of Kenneth II . Whether Malcolm killed Constantine or not , there is no doubt that in 1005 he killed Constantine 's successor Kenneth III in battle at <unk> in Strathearn . 
 John of Fordun writes that Malcolm defeated a Norwegian army " in almost the first days after his coronation " , but this is not reported elsewhere . Fordun says that the Bishopric of Mortlach ( later moved to Aberdeen ) was founded in thanks for this victory over the Norwegians . 
 = = Children = = 
 Malcolm demonstrated a rare ability to survive among early Scottish kings by reigning for twenty @-@ nine years . He was a clever and ambitious man . Brehon tradition provided that the successor to Malcolm was to be selected by him from among the descendants of King <unk> , with the consent of Malcolm ’ s ministers and of the church . Ostensibly in an attempt to end the devastating feuds in the north of Scotland , but obviously influenced by the Norman feudal model , Malcolm ignored tradition and determined to retain the succession within his own line . But since Malcolm had no son of his own , he undertook to negotiate a series of dynastic marriages of his three daughters to men who might otherwise be his rivals , while securing the loyalty of the principal chiefs , their relatives . First he married his daughter <unk> to Crinan , Thane of The Isles , head of the house of Atholl and secular Abbot of Dunkeld ; then his youngest daughter , <unk> , to Sigurd , Earl of Orkney . His middle daughter , <unk> , was married to Finlay , Earl of Moray , Thane of Ross and Cromarty and a descendant of Loarn of Dalriada . This was risky business under the rules of succession of the Gael , but he thereby secured his rear and , taking advantage of the renewal of Viking attacks on England , marched south to fight the English . He defeated the Angles at Carham in 1018 and installed his grandson , Duncan , son of the Abbot of Dunkeld and his choice as <unk> , in Carlisle as King of Cumbria that same year . 
 = = Bernicia = = 
 The first reliable report of Malcolm II 's reign is of an invasion of Bernicia in 1006 , perhaps the customary <unk> ríg ( literally royal prey , a raid by a new king made to demonstrate prowess in war ) , which involved a siege of Durham . This appears to have resulted in a heavy defeat by the Northumbrians , led by Uhtred of Bamburgh , later Earl of Bernicia , which is reported by the Annals of Ulster . 
 A second war in Bernicia , probably in 1018 , was more successful . The Battle of Carham , by the River Tweed , was a victory for the Scots led by Malcolm II and the men of Strathclyde led by their king , Owen the Bald . By this time Earl <unk> may have been dead , and Eiríkr Hákonarson was appointed Earl of Northumbria by his brother @-@ in @-@ law Cnut the Great , although his authority seems to have been limited to the south , the former kingdom of Deira , and he took no action against the Scots so far as is known . The work De <unk> <unk> ( The siege of Durham , associated with Symeon of Durham ) claims that <unk> 's brother Eadwulf <unk> surrendered Lothian to Malcolm II , presumably in the aftermath of the defeat at Carham . This is likely to have been the lands between Dunbar and the Tweed as other parts of Lothian had been under Scots control before this time . It has been suggested that Cnut received tribute from the Scots for Lothian , but as he had likely received none from the Bernician Earls this is not very probable . 
 = = Cnut = = 
 Cnut , reports the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , led an army into Scotland on his return from pilgrimage to Rome . The Chronicle dates this to 1031 , but there are reasons to suppose that it should be dated to 1027 . Burgundian chronicler Rodulfus Glaber recounts the expedition soon afterwards , describing Malcolm as " powerful in resources and arms … very Christian in faith and deed . " Ralph claims that peace was made between Malcolm and Cnut through the intervention of Richard , Duke of Normandy , brother of Cnut 's wife Emma . Richard died in about 1027 and Rodulfus wrote close in time to the events . 
 It has been suggested that the root of the quarrel between Cnut and Malcolm lies in Cnut 's pilgrimage to Rome , and the coronation of Holy Roman Emperor Conrad II , where Cnut and Rudolph III , King of Burgundy had the place of honour . If Malcolm were present , and the repeated mentions of his piety in the annals make it quite possible that he made a pilgrimage to Rome , as did Mac Bethad mac <unk> ( " Macbeth " ) in later times , then the coronation would have allowed Malcolm to publicly snub Cnut 's claims to overlordship . 
 Cnut obtained rather less than previous English kings , a promise of peace and friendship rather than the promise of aid on land and sea that Edgar and others had obtained . The sources say that Malcolm was accompanied by one or two other kings , certainly Mac Bethad , and perhaps Echmarcach mac Ragnaill , King of Mann and the Isles , and of Galloway . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle remarks of the submission " but he [ Malcolm ] adhered to that for only a little while " . Cnut was soon occupied in Norway against Olaf Haraldsson and appears to have had no further involvement with Scotland . 
 = = Orkney and Moray = = 
 <unk> a daughter of Malcolm , married Sigurd <unk> , Earl of Orkney . Their son Thorfinn Sigurdsson was said to be five years old when Sigurd was killed on 23 April 1014 in the Battle of Clontarf . The Orkneyinga Saga says that Thorfinn was raised at Malcolm 's court and was given the <unk> of Caithness by his grandfather . Thorfinn , says the Heimskringla , was the ally of the king of Scots , and counted on Malcolm 's support to resist the " tyranny " of Norwegian King Olaf Haraldsson . The chronology of Thorfinn 's life is problematic , and he may have had a share in the Earldom of Orkney while still a child , if he was indeed only five in 1014 . Whatever the exact chronology , before Malcolm 's death a client of the king of Scots was in control of Caithness and Orkney , although , as with all such relationships , it is unlikely to have lasted beyond his death . 
 If Malcolm exercised control over Moray , which is far from being generally accepted , then the annals record a number of events pointing to a struggle for power in the north . In 1020 , Mac Bethad 's father Findláech mac Ruaidrí was killed by the sons of his brother Máel Brigte . It seems that Máel Coluim mac <unk> <unk> took control of Moray , for his death is reported in 1029 . 
 Despite the accounts of the Irish annals , English and Scandinavian writers appear to see Mac Bethad as the rightful king of Moray : this is clear from their descriptions of the meeting with Cnut in 1027 , before the death of Malcolm mac <unk> <unk> . Malcolm was followed as king or earl by his brother Gillecomgan , husband of Gruoch , a granddaughter of King Kenneth III . It has been supposed that Mac Bethad was responsible for the killing of Gille <unk> in 1032 , but if Mac Bethad had a cause for feud in the killing of his father in 1020 , Malcolm too had reason to see Gille <unk> dead . Not only had Gillecomgan 's ancestors killed many of Malcolm 's kin , but Gillecomgan and his son Lulach might be rivals for the throne . Malcolm had no living sons , and the threat to his plans for the succession was obvious . As a result , the following year Gruoch 's brother or nephew , who might have eventually become king , was killed by Malcolm . 
 = = Strathclyde and the succession = = 
 It has traditionally been supposed that King Owen the Bald of Strathclyde died at the Battle of Carham and that the kingdom passed into the hands of the Scots afterwards . This rests on some very weak evidence . It is far from certain that Owen died at Carham , and it is reasonably certain that there were kings of Strathclyde as late as the 1054 , when Edward the Confessor sent Earl Siward to install " Malcolm son of the king of the Cumbrians " . The confusion is old , probably inspired by William of Malmesbury and embellished by John of Fordun , but there is no firm evidence that the kingdom of Strathclyde was a part of the kingdom of the Scots , rather than a loosely subjected kingdom , before the time of Malcolm II of Scotland 's great @-@ grandson Malcolm Canmore . 
 By the 1030s Malcolm 's sons , if he had any , were dead . The only evidence that he did have a son or sons is in Rodulfus Glaber 's chronicle where Cnut is said to have stood as godfather to a son of Malcolm . His grandson Thorfinn would have been unlikely to be accepted as king by the Scots , and he chose the sons of his other daughter , Bethóc , who was married to Crínán , lay abbot of Dunkeld , and perhaps Mormaer of Atholl . It may be no more than coincidence , but in 1027 the Irish annals had reported the burning of Dunkeld , although no mention is made of the circumstances . Malcolm 's chosen heir , and the first <unk> ríg certainly known in Scotland , was Duncan . 
 It is possible that a third daughter of Malcolm married Findláech mac Ruaidrí and that Mac Bethad was thus his grandson , but this rests on relatively weak evidence . 
 = = Death and posterity = = 
 Malcolm died in 1034 , Marianus Scotus giving the date as 25 November 1034 . The king lists say that he died at Glamis , variously describing him as a " most glorious " or " most victorious " king . The Annals of Tigernach report that " Malcolm mac Cináeda , king of Scotland , the honour of all the west of Europe , died . " The Prophecy of Berchán , perhaps the inspiration for John of Fordun and Andrew of Wyntoun 's accounts where Malcolm is killed fighting bandits , says that he died by violence , fighting " the parricides " , suggested to be the sons of Máel Brigte of Moray . 
 Perhaps the most notable feature of Malcolm 's death is the account of Marianus , matched by the silence of the Irish annals , which tells us that Duncan I became king and ruled for five years and nine months . Given that his death in 1040 is described as being " at an immature age " in the Annals of Tigernach , he must have been a young man in 1034 . The absence of any opposition suggests that Malcolm had dealt thoroughly with any likely opposition in his own lifetime . 
 Tradition , dating from Fordun 's time if not earlier , knew the Pictish stone now called " Glamis 2 " as " King Malcolm 's grave stone " . The stone is a Class II stone , apparently formed by re @-@ using a Bronze Age standing stone . Its dating is uncertain , with dates from the 8th century onwards having been proposed . While an earlier date is favoured , an association with accounts of Malcolm 's has been proposed on the basis of the iconography of the carvings . 
 On the question of Malcolm 's putative pilgrimage , pilgrimages to Rome , or other long @-@ distance journeys , were far from unusual . Thorfinn Sigurdsson , Cnut and Mac Bethad have already been mentioned . Rognvald Kali Kolsson is known to have gone crusading in the Mediterranean in the 12th century . Nearer in time , Dyfnwal of Strathclyde died on pilgrimage to Rome in 975 as did Máel <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , King of the Cenél Conaill , in 1025 . 
 Not a great deal is known of Malcolm 's activities beyond the wars and killings . The Book of Deer records that Malcolm " gave a king 's dues in <unk> and in Pett Meic @-@ <unk> , and two <unk> " to the monastery of Old Deer . He was also probably not the founder of the Bishopric of Mortlach @-@ Aberdeen . John of Fordun has a peculiar tale to tell , related to the supposed " Laws of Malcolm <unk> " , saying that Malcolm gave away all of Scotland , except for the Moot Hill at Scone , which is unlikely to have any basis in fact . 
 = 2015 Tour of Chongming Island World Cup = 
 The 2015 Tour of Chongming Island World Cup was a one @-@ day road cycling race . It was run as part of the ninth Tour of Chongming Island , which includes both a multi @-@ stage event and a single @-@ stage event . The single @-@ stage race , which was part of the 2015 UCI Women 's Road World Cup , was held on 17 May 2015 , in Shanghai , China . 
 On wide , mostly flat highways , there were no significant breakaways in the first half of the race , until the duo of <unk> Liang ( China Chongming – Liv – Champion System ) and Anastasia Chulkova ( BePink – La Classica ) established a one @-@ minute lead over the peloton . Their advantage was slowly broken down , predominately due to the work of the Team Hitec Products riders , and they were reabsorbed into the peloton with 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) to go . In a bunch sprint , the Italian rider , Giorgia Bronzini ( Wiggle – Honda ) won , beating 2014 winners Kirsten Wild ( Team Hitec Products ) and Fanny <unk> ( France national team ) . 
 = = Entry = = 
 Ten of the UCI women 's team entered the race , each featuring five or six riders . They were joined by eight national teams containing either four or five riders , bringing the total entry up to 93 riders . 
 = = Course = = 
 The route changed from previous years . The race started at the Shanghai Oriental Sports Center and took place almost entirely on wide , straight highways , with corners predominantly being expansive ninety @-@ degree bends . The course initially followed the Middle Ring Road , the Huaxia Elevated Road and the <unk> Shanghai Ring Expressway , before entering the 10 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) tunnel under the Yangtze River to reach Changxing Island , shortly followed by a 8 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) bridge to Chongming Island , from where the route followed the course of previous years , along slightly smaller roads to the finish . 
 = = Preview = = 
 After four rounds of the 2015 UCI Women 's Road World Cup , there had been four different winners ; Jolien D 'Hoore at the Ronde van Drenthe , Lizzie Armitstead at the Trofeo Alfredo Binda @-@ Comune di <unk> , Elisa Longo Borghini at the Tour of Flanders , and Anna van der Breggen at the La Flèche Wallonne Féminine . Anna van der Breggen led the World Cup standings as the racing moved to China for the Tour of Chongming Island , with 290 points , but her Rabo @-@ Liv team were not invited to take part in the event . Kirsten Wild won both the stage race and the World Cup event in 2014 , and repeated her success in the 2015 stage race . She was the pre @-@ race favourite to win the 2015 World Cup race on a course that favoured sprinters . 
 = = Race = = 
 There were early attacks by two of the Asian teams , China Chongming @-@ Liv @-@ Champion System and the Korean national team , but on each occasion they were caught back up by the peloton reasonably quickly . The first intermediate sprint was won by Simona <unk> ( <unk> – Cipollini ) , while a subsequent Queen of the Mountain climb was won by Lauren Kitchen ( Team Hitec Products ) . Crossing the Shanghai Yangtze River Bridge , some riders fell off the back of the peloton in the strong crosswinds . Shortly after , two riders , <unk> Liang ( China Chongming – Liv – Champion System ) and Anastasia Chulkova ( BePink – La Classica ) , broke away and established a lead of roughly one minute , during which Chulkova claimed the second intermediate sprint . Team Hitec Products riders were at the front of the peloton to close the gap , though another group threatened to split around 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from the finish . The peloton caught up with the leading duo with 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) of the race remaining . 
 Closing towards the finish in a bunch sprint , Wiggle @-@ Honda had intended Chloe Hosking to be the sprinter to try and win , but she got caught up behind a crash in the final kilometre , and so Giorgia Bronzini acted as a lead @-@ out for Annette Edmondson . She had initially intended to move out from behind Kirsten Wild ( Team Hitec Products ) for a sprint with around 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) to go , but there was no room , so she stayed in Wild 's draft . She then found that Edmondson had not been able to follow her , and opted to defend her position and launch a late sprint to pass Wild . Bronzini won , followed by Wild and Fanny <unk> , riding for the France national team . The first 74 riders were all designated the same time . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = World Cup standings = = 
 = The Author 's Farce = 
 The Author 's Farce and the Pleasures of the Town is a play by the English playwright and novelist Henry Fielding , first performed on 30 March 1730 at the Little Theatre , Haymarket . Written in response to the Theatre Royal 's rejection of his earlier plays , The Author 's Farce was Fielding 's first theatrical success . The Little Theatre allowed Fielding the freedom to experiment , and to alter the traditional comedy genre . The play ran during the early 1730s and was altered for its run starting 21 April 1730 and again in response to the Actor Rebellion of 1733 . Throughout its life , the play was coupled with several different plays , including The Cheats of <unk> and Fielding 's Tom Thumb . 
 The first and second acts deal with the attempts of the central character , Harry Luckless , to woo his landlady 's daughter , and his efforts to make money by writing plays . In the second act , he finishes a puppet theatre play titled The Pleasures of the Town , about the Goddess Nonsense 's choice of a husband from allegorical representatives of theatre and other literary genres . After its rejection by one theatre , Luckless 's play is staged at another . The third act becomes a play within a play , in which the characters in the puppet play are portrayed by humans . The Author 's Farce ends with a merging of the play 's and the puppet show 's realities . 
 The play established Fielding as a popular London playwright , and the press reported that seats were in great demand . Although largely ignored by critics until the 20th century , most agree that the play is primarily a commentary on events in Fielding 's life , signalling his transition from older forms of comedy to the new satire of his contemporaries . Fielding 's play within a play satirised the way in which the London theatre scene , in his view , abused the literary public by offering new and inferior genres . The Author 's Farce is now considered to be a critical success and a highly skilled satire . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Most of Fielding 's plays were written in five acts , but The Author 's Farce was written in three . The opening introduces the main character , Harry Luckless , and his attempts to woo Harriot , the daughter of his landlady Mrs. <unk> . The play begins in much the same way as Fielding 's earlier romance @-@ themed comedies , but quickly becomes a different type of play , mocking the literary and theatrical establishment . Luckless is trying to become a successful writer , but lacks the income that would allow him to concentrate on his writing . Although others try to support him financially , Luckless refuses their help ; when his friend , <unk> , pays his rent behind his back , Luckless steals the money from Mrs. <unk> . In the second act , Luckless seeks assistance to help finish his play , The Pleasures of the Town , but is poorly advised , and the work is rejected by his local theatre . Luckless revises his play and succeeds in finding an alternative venue , leading to the third act , in which the work is performed as a puppet show , with actors taking the place of the puppets . 
 The third act is dominated by the puppet show , a play within the play . It begins when the Goddess of Nonsense chooses a mate from a series of suitors along the River Styx . All dunces , the suitors include Dr. Orator , Sir <unk> Comic , Mrs. Novel , Bookseller , Poet , Monsieur Pantomime , Don <unk> and Signior Opera . The goddess eventually chooses a foreign castrato opera singer as her favourite — Signior Opera — after he sings an aria about money . Mrs. Novel then claims that she loved Signior Opera , and died giving birth to his child . At this revelation , the goddess becomes upset , but is quick to forgive . The play within the play is interrupted by Constable and Murdertext , who arrive to arrest Luckless " for abusing Nonsense " , but Mrs. Novel persuades Murdertext to let the play finish . Someone from the land of Bantam then arrives to tell Luckless that he is the prince of Bantam . News follows that the King of Bantam has died , and that Luckless is to be made the new king . The play concludes with the revelation that Luckless 's landlady is in reality the Queen of " Old Brentford " and that her daughter , Harriot , is now royalty . An epilogue in which four poets discuss how the play should end is brought to a conclusion by a cat , in the form of a woman . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Fielding uses Luckless and The Author 's Farce to portray aspects of his life , including his experience with the London theatre community . The plot serves as revenge for the Theatre Royal 's rejection of Fielding 's earlier plays . However , this and his being forced into minor theatres proved beneficial , because it allowed him more freedom to experiment with his plays in ways that would have been unacceptable at larger locations . This experimentation , beginning with The Author 's Farce , is an attempt by Fielding to try writing in formats beyond the standard five @-@ act comedy play . Though he returned to writing five @-@ act plays later , many of his plays contain plot structures that differ from those common to contemporary plays . To distinguish his satirical intent , Fielding claims that the work was written by " Scriblerus Secundus , " which places his play within an earlier literary tradition . The name refers to the Scriblerus Club , a satirical group whose members included Alexander Pope , Jonathan Swift , John Gay , and John Arbuthnot . Fielding 's use of the pseudonym connects his play to the satirical writings of the Scriblerus Club 's members , and reveals their influence on his new style , such as incorporating in their work the styles of the entertainments that they were ridiculing . Fielding thus allows the audience to believe that he is poking fun at others , less discriminating than themselves , and less able to distinguish good art from bad . Fielding also borrowed characters from the work of the Club 's members , such as the Goddess of Nonsense , influenced by Pope 's character from The Dunciad , Dulness , who is at war with reason . Nonsense , like Dulness , is a force that promotes the corruption of literature and taste , to which Fielding adds a sexual element . This sexuality is complicated , yet also made comical , when Nonsense chooses a castrated man as her mate . Her choice emphasises a lack of morality , one of the problems that Fielding believed dominated 18th @-@ century British society . Despite the link to Dulness , the general satire of the play more closely resembles Gay 's Beggar 's Opera than the other works produced by the Scriblerus Club . 
 The Author 's Farce is not a standard comedy ; rather , it is a farce , and as such employs petty forms of humour like slapstick . Instead of relying on rhetorical wit , Fielding incorporates dramatic incongruities . For example , actors play puppets in a life @-@ size version of a puppet play . Fielding 's purpose in relying on the farce tradition was specifically to criticise society as a whole . Like others , Fielding believed that there was a decline in popular theatre related to the expansion of its audience , therefore he satirises it , its audiences , and its writers throughout The Author 's Farce . Speaking of popular entertainment in London , Fielding 's character Luckless claims , " If you must write , write nonsense , write operas , write entertainments , write <unk> , set up an Oratory and preach nonsense , and you may meet with encouragement enough . " Luckless 's only ambition is to become successful . Many of the characters in the play believe that the substance of a play matters little as long as it can earn a profit . Harriot believes that the only important characteristic of a lover is his merit , which , to her , is his ability to become financially successful . Fielding later continues this line of attacks on audiences , morality , and genres when he criticises Samuel Richardson 's epistolary novel Pamela , in which a nobleman makes advances upon a servant @-@ maid with the intent of making her his mistress . 
 The blending of the fictional and real worlds at the end of the play represents the inability of individuals to distinguish between fictional and real experience . The final act of the play also serves as Fielding 's defence of traditional hierarchical views of literature . He satirises new literary genres with low standards by using personified versions of them during the puppet show . In particular , Fielding mocks how contemporary audiences favoured Italian opera , a dramatic form that he regarded with contempt . Fielding considered it " a foreign intruder that has weaned the public from their native entertainments " . The character Signior Opera , the image of the favoured castrato singer within the puppet show , is a parody of the foreigners who performed as singers , along with the audiences that accepted them . Additionally , the character serves as a source of humour that targets 18th @-@ century literary genres ; after the character Nonsense chooses the castrato Signior Opera as her husband , Mrs Novel objects , declaring that she gave birth to his child . This act would be physically impossible because Opera is a castrato , and it pokes fun at how the genres and the public treated such individuals . Fielding was not alone in using the castrato image for humour and satire ; William Hogarth connects the castrato singer with politics and social problems , and many other contemporary works mock women who favour eunuchs . 
 = = Performance history and publication = = 
 The Author 's Farce and the Pleasures of the Town was written during 1729 . The first press announcement of the play appeared on 18 March 1730 in the Daily Post , stating that it was in rehearsal . An advertisement appeared in the same newspaper shortly afterwards mentioning restricted seating and high ticket prices , suggesting that the play was expected to be a popular entertainment . It opened on Easter Monday , 30 March 1730 , at the Little Theatre , Haymarket , and shortly thereafter was billed alongside The Cheats of <unk> . The last act was later made into the companion piece to <unk> for one show . 
 Fielding altered and rewrote The Author 's Farce for its second run beginning on 21 April 1730 , when it shared the bill with his earlier play Tom Thumb . This combination continued through May and June and was later billed for a revival on 3 July 1730 . Starting on 1 August 1730 , the third act of the The Author 's Farce was revived by the Little Theatre during the week of the Tottenham Court fair . On 17 October 1730 an advertisement in the Daily Post announced that a new prologue was to be added . A version without the prologue followed before the play 's run ended , to be replaced by The Beggar 's Wedding by Charles Coffey . The Author 's Farce was briefly revived in November 1730 and January 1731 , but only the first two acts of the play were shown . It was paired with the afterpiece Damon and Phillida , which was later replaced by The Jealous Taylor in January 1731 . Performances continued into February and March 1731 . Productions in 1732 included a new prologue , now lost , that had been added for the 10 May 1731 performance . 
 On 31 March 1731 , The Author 's Farce was paired with the Tom Thumb remake , The Tragedy of Tragedies , as a replacement for The Letter Writers , the original companion piece . Although both Tragedy of Tragedies and The Author 's Farce were main shows , they alternated on the billing until the 18 June 1731 performance , the final showing of any Fielding play in the Little Theatre except for a 12 May 1732 benefit show of The Author 's Farce . The last documented non @-@ puppet version was performed on 28 March 1748 by Theophilus Cibber as a two @-@ act companion piece for a benefit show . The Pleasures of the Town act was performed as a one @-@ act play outside London throughout the century , including a 15 @-@ show run at Norwich in 1749 and during the 1750s , and a production at York during the 1751 – 52 theatre season . Additionally , there were benefit shows that included the third act at a variety of locations , including Dublin , on 19 December 1763 and Edinburgh in 1763 . There were also many performances of the puppet theatre versions , including a travelling show by Thomas Yeates , titled Punch 's Oratory , or The Pleasures of the Town , which started in 1734 . 
 In response to the Actor Rebellion of 1733 , Fielding produced a revised version of The Author 's Farce , incorporating a new prologue and epilogue . Performed at the Theatre Royal , it was advertised in the Daily Journal , opening with an inferior replacement cast for some of the important characters . It was joined by The Intriguing Chambermaid and The Harlot 's Progress . These were the only performances of the revised version , which was printed together with The Intriguing <unk> ( 1734 ) and included a letter by an unknown writer , possibly Fielding himself . The 1734 edition of the play was printed in 1750 , and it was used for all later publications until 1966 . Printed texts of the play were included in Arthur Murphy 's 1762 Works of Henry Fielding and George Saintsbury 's 1893 Works of Henry Fielding . The latter includes The Author 's Farce along with only two other plays . The 1903 Works of Henry Fielding , edited by G. H. Maynadier , included only the first two acts . Only three scenes were included in Alfred Howard 's The Beauties of Fielding , which collected passages from Fielding 's works . George Saintsbury included The Author 's Farce and two other plays in a Fielding collected edition of 1893 , but ignored the others . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The success of The Author 's Farce established Fielding as a London playwright ; writing in 1998 , Harold Pagliaro describes the play as Fielding 's " first great success " . Catherine Ingrassia , in 2004 , attributes its popularity to Fielding 's satirical attack on the archetypal woman writer , specifically Haywood . Among contemporary accounts the Daily Post of 2 May 1730 reported that the play received universal approval , and on 6 May that seats were in great demand . The 7 May issue of the Grub Street Journal noted that the play was popular among " Persons of Quality " ; many notable figures attended the show , including on the first night John Perceval , 1st Earl of Egmont , and Frederick , Prince of Wales , whose presence was mentioned in the 28 April 1730 London Evening Post and the 15 May 1730 Daily Post . The only surviving comments from any of those who saw the play come from the diary of the Earl of Egmont , who reported that The Author 's Farce and Tom Thumb " are a ridicule on poets , several of their works , as also of operas , etc . , and the last of our modern tragedians , and are exceedingly full of humour , with some wit . " 
 The play was hardly discussed at all during the 18th century , and the 19th century mostly followed the same trend . A chapter on the play is included in Frederick Lawrence 's Life of Fielding ( 1855 ) , and it is mentioned by Leslie Stephen and Austin Dobson , who focus on what the play says about Grub Street and Fielding . Most later critics agree with Dobson 's judgement that the play primarily provides a commentary on events in Fielding 's life , and marks his transition from older forms of comedy to the new satire of his contemporaries . Charles Woods , writing in 1966 , argues that The Author 's Farce was an integral part of Fielding 's career , and dismisses a political reading of the work . Some years earlier , in 1918 , Wilbur Lucius Cross had held that the play revealed Fielding 's talent for writing farces and burlesques . Writing in 1993 , Martin and Ruthe Battestin maintain that the play " was [ Fielding 's ] first experiment in the irregular comic modes ... where his true genius as a playwright at last found scope " . They further assert that Fielding was the first to offer audiences " a kind of pointed , inventive <unk> " , and that his talent for " ridicule and brisk dialogue " and for devising " absurd yet expressionistic plots " was unmatched even in 20th @-@ century theatre . Earlier , Frederick Homes Dudden , had described the puppet show in the third act as " a highly original satire on the theatrical and quasi @-@ theatrical amusements of the day . " F. W. Bateson included the play in his 1963 list of " satirical extravaganzas " . 
 J. Paul Hunter , in his 1975 comparison of Fielding 's theatrical style and form , notes that while " many of the literary and theatrical jibes are witty , " the slow pacing and lack of dramatic conflict make the play seem " essentially <unk> " . Pat Rogers disagrees , reasoning that " Few livelier theatrical occasions can ever have been seen than the original runs of The Author 's Farce , with their mixture of broad comedy , personal satire , tuneful scenes and rapid action . " Robert Hume , in 1988 , comments that the literary structure of The Author 's Farce is " ramshackle but effective " , although he considers that " Fielding 's parody of recognition scenes is done with verve " and " the ' realistic ' part of the show is a clever combination of the straightforward and the ironic . " Writing in 1998 , Thomas Lockwood explains various aspects that make the play great , putting particular emphasis on the " musical third act " , which he believes " shows a gift for brilliant theatrical arrangement " . Lockwood praises the play 's conclusion in particular , and the ever @-@ increasing tempo of events following Murdertext 's " explosive invasion " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = 1730 cast = = = 
 Play : 
 Internal puppet show : 
 = = = 1734 altered cast = = = 
 Play : 
 Internal puppet show : 
 = Kappa Kappa Psi = 
 Kappa Kappa Psi , National Honorary Band Fraternity ( <unk> , colloquially referred to as <unk> ) , is a fraternity for college and university band members in the United States . It was founded on November 27 , 1919 at Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College , now known as Oklahoma State University , in Stillwater , Oklahoma . 
 Kappa Kappa Psi primarily operates as a recognition society providing service , leadership opportunities , and social programming for band members . Tau Beta Sigma , National Honorary Band Sorority , has been recognized as a sister organization since 1947 , and the two organizations share National Headquarters in Stillwater Station , a converted historical Santa Fe rail depot that was purchased by the fraternity and sorority in 1991 . 
 Since 1919 , more than 66 @,@ 000 men and women have been initiated into Kappa Kappa Psi , with nearly 6 @,@ 000 collegiate members active today . Members of Kappa Kappa Psi include President Bill Clinton ; astronaut Neil Armstrong ; chancellor and eleventh president of Indiana University , Herman B Wells ; composers John Williams and John Philip Sousa ; conductor William Revelli ; and jazz pianist and bandleader Count Basie . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and expansion = = = 
 William A. Scroggs , a student at Oklahoma A & M College , sought to establish an organization that would " bind [ dear ] friendship together indefinitely " and unite members across colleges and universities . After some initial planning , he consulted band president A. Frank Martin and Bohumil Makovsky , director of bands at Oklahoma A & M , both of whom agreed to help with the creation of the fraternity . From Makovsky 's band , 10 members were selected as the first members of Kappa Kappa Psi : William Alexander Scroggs , Andrew Franklin Martin , Raymond David Shannon , Clyde DeWitt Haston , Clayton Everett Soule , Carl Anderson Stevens , William Houston <unk> , Dick Hurst , George Asher Hendrickson , and Iron Hawthorne Nelson . The founders accepted chemistry professor Hilton Ira Jones ' suggestion to name the fraternity " Kappa Kappa Psi . " It was organized on November 27 , 1919 , and Scroggs was unanimously elected to serve as the President . Legal organization was completed on March 5 , 1920 , when the fraternity received its charter from the state of Oklahoma . The formal organization of the fraternity was celebrated on either March 23 or 25 , 1920 , with the initiation of the first membership class and a banquet . 
 The fraternity grew rapidly in its first years . Within ten years , there were 27 chapters spanning from the University of Washington in the west to Duke University in the east . Only 14 were installed during the Great Depression , while World War II put a further damper on fraternal activities . 
 At the 1939 National Convention in Cincinnati , Ohio , plans were set into action to make Kappa Kappa Psi an international fraternity . Invitations were sent to colleges and universities in Canada and South America , but no chapters were ever installed at those institutions . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Before World War II , most college bands were military @-@ style and exclusively male . When the war began , most band members left to serve in the armed forces , which greatly strained the fraternity — to the point that 90 percent of chapters were forced to suspend activities . The Grand Council granted those chapters that were forced to suspend their activities " war furlough " so that instead of treating the chapter as inactive , their service would be honored . War furlough enabled a chapter to seal its records and keep its materials in safekeeping for the duration of the war . Petitions for war furlough required the signatures of all active members , the director of bands or other faculty member who was an honorary member of the fraternity , as well as the signature of the college or university president . Only five chapters remained active during the war : the Alpha chapter at Oklahoma A & M College , Alpha Beta at Butler University , Alpha Iota at the University of Colorado at Boulder , Alpha Omicron at Texas Technological College , and Alpha Pi at the University of Tulsa . With so many members serving overseas , including members of the Grand Council , the 1943 and 1945 national conventions were canceled . 
 Because of the number of men serving in the military , many band programs opened up to women during this time . At Texas Tech , a local sorority for women in the band was established as Tau Beta Sigma . The women of Tau Beta Sigma petitioned Kappa Kappa Psi to be chartered as an auxiliary chapter of the fraternity , which was supported by founder A. Frank Martin , who was serving as National Executive Secretary , and Max Mitchell , Grand Second Vice President . On January 25 , 1944 , Martin wrote to fellow founder , William Scroggs , " If we do not meet this new situation and give recognition to the girls who are coming into the bands or make it possible to give aid or assistance to the many universities and colleges that have bands composed of both boys and girls , we will be playing second fiddle within the next five years to some band fraternity that will grant membership to boys and girls and their chapters will open up in the smaller schools where ours have died . " The fraternity was unable to decide whether or not to accept Tau Beta Sigma 's petition due to the severely reduced number of members and the cancelation of the 1943 and 1945 national conventions . 
 Ultimately , Tau Beta Sigma decided not to become an auxiliary chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi and chartered as a national organization on March 26 , 1946 . They were officially recognized and accepted as a sister organization of the fraternity at the first national convention following the war in 1947 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war expansion = = = 
 After the war , Kappa Kappa Psi began an ambitious expansion program to reactivate old chapters and install new ones . The fraternity had been divided into 11 districts since 1941 , which were led by a Grand Counselor ( now called Governors ) . With the revitalization of the fraternity , these districts were reorganized and pamphlets were printed detailing the fraternity 's purposes and history . District governors were charged with giving information to potential chapters . The expansion program was quite successful — in the ten years following the fraternity 's reorganization in 1947 , Kappa Kappa Psi more than doubled the number of installed chapters , growing from 45 chapters installed before the war to 98 by the end of 1957 . 
 May 1957 saw the first chapters at historically black universities : On May 19 , the Delta Alpha chapter at Langston University was installed ; three days later , the Gamma Omega chapter was established at Texas Southern University . 
 On September 1 , 1967 , the 11 districts were consolidated into nine . These districts would again be consolidated in 1987 , to six districts with regional names : Northeast , Southeast , Southwest , North Central , Midwest , and Western . 
 = = = Effect of Title IX = = = 
 On June 23 , 1972 , Title IX was enacted and had tremendous repercussions for the women 's rights movement . Title IX prevented organizations from excluding members based on sex . Although social fraternities were exempt from the law , Kappa Kappa Psi , as a recognition society , fell under its purview . Rutgers University 's board of trustees decided that Rutgers should serve as a model for the rest of the United States in Title IX implementation and mandated that all organizations on campus become coeducational or face disciplinary actions . The men of the Alpha Phi chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi regarded this issue as minor given the ongoing Vietnam War . With dwindling numbers , Alpha Phi looked to the new women members of the Rutgers band as potential members . The national constitution of Kappa Kappa Psi prohibited women from holding membership , so the Alpha Phi chapter explored the possibility of establishing a chapter of Tau Beta Sigma . This was unrealistic , as the undergraduate college for women prohibited the formation of or membership in any sorority . 
 On October 8 , 1972 , the men of Alpha Phi voted to admit women into their chapter . They alerted National Headquarters , and National Secretary Robert H. Rubin replied telling Alpha Phi not to administer any degree of ritual until the issue could be discussed in person . When Rubin arrived at Rutgers on November 11 , 1972 , he learned that the first degree of ritual had been administered , which began formal probationary membership . Alpha Phi 's charter was immediately revoked and their chapter was placed on suspension . On November 13 , the former Alpha Phi chapter formally reorganized as Mu Upsilon Alpha . On October 7 , 2007 , Mu Upsilon Alpha became a chapter of Mu Beta Psi . 
 At the national convention of 1973 , the issues presented by Title IX were discussed by the Grand Chapter . The jurisdiction committee considered several options that would bring the fraternity into compliance , but were not receptive of the general idea . At the insistence of committee chair Richard Adler , from the Nu chapter at the University of Michigan , the jurisdiction committee presented the Grand Chapter with an amendment " without prejudice " — that is , without recommendation for or against the amendment — that would strike the section of the constitution that read , " All members of the Fraternity shall be of the male sex . " The committee simultaneously recommended that the delegation take no action to change the constitution or consider a merger with Tau Beta Sigma . The amendment was defeated , and a separate amendment was proposed and approved that changed the wording to say , " All active , alumni , inactive , and life members of the Fraternity be of the male sex . " This amendment was approved , allowing the fraternity to initiate women as honorary members . 
 During the 1973 – 1975 biennium , pressure was put on Kappa Kappa Psi chapters by their host institutions to admit women to comply with Title IX . The issue was again brought up at the 1975 national convention , and a joint committee consisting of an equal number of members from Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma was formed to explore the legal possibilities of a corporate merger of the two organizations , with the results of their investigation to be read at the 1977 convention . At the 1977 national convention , votes were cast by the Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma delegations for a merger — Kappa Kappa Psi voted 211 against , 9 for ; Tau Beta Sigma voted 104 against , 4 for . With the idea of a merger soundly defeated , the delegation voted to remove all references to gender from the constitution , allowing women to become active members in full and regular standing . 
 The first women to join the fraternity were sisters of the Sigma chapter of Tau Beta Sigma at Arizona State University , who merged with the Beta Omicron chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi after a unanimous vote of both organizations . These women were Patricia A. Childress , Lydia L. Lennon , Leslie A. Anderson , Mary L. <unk> , Mary M. <unk> , Kristina M. <unk> , Clara M. <unk> , and Toni Ryon , who were initiated into Beta Omicron on August 26 , 1977 . On August 27 , Lea F. Fuller was initiated . The first woman to participate in the formal probationary membership process and become a member of Kappa Kappa Psi was Darragh Hill Young , who was initiated into the Beta Tau chapter at Wichita State University on September 1 , 1977 . 
 = = = Early 21st century = = = 
 Beginning with the installation of the Kappa Pi chapter at Claflin University on February 24 , 2001 , 57 new chapters have been installed in the 21st century . 
 In 2006 , Kappa Kappa Psi celebrated its inaugural National Month of Musicianship during the month of November , the month in which the fraternity was founded . The annual month @-@ long event is intended to promote music and university bands . Local chapters celebrate the National Month of Musicianship in various ways , such as creating lab bands for student conductors , organizing reading bands , and hosting master classes . 
 Also in 2008 , Kappa Kappa Psi joined other Greek organizations in sponsoring <unk> , a national anti @-@ hazing organization . Dr. Malinda <unk> , past National President and current member of the Kappa Kappa Psi Board of Trustees , has served on the <unk> Board of Directors since 2009 . 
 On December 1 , 2011 , following the death of Florida A & M University drum major Robert Champion , the Delta Iota chapter was placed on investigative hold pending an investigation by the national fraternity . In January 2012 , the Tallahassee Democrat reported alleged hazing by the FAMU chapter in spring 2010 . According to the allegations , two members of the FAMU band faculty were involved in a hazing incident at a professor 's home in which prospective members were struck on the back and neck and forced to recite information . The fraternity 's investigation was postponed at the request of FAMU due to the ongoing police investigation . The investigations cleared Delta Iota of any connection to Champion 's death ; Champion was not a member or prospective member of the fraternity . After the conclusion of both the police and fraternity investigations , the national council closed down the chapter because of its violations of fraternity policy and the uncertainty of the future of the FAMU band program . As part of the chapter 's termination , 28 members , including all active and prospective members in spring 2010 , were expelled from the fraternity . Alumni members of the chapter who were present at the hazing were also expelled . Furthermore , the Delta Iota chapter may not return to FAMU before May 2017 . Members who joined the fraternity after spring 2010 were transferred to alumni status but cannot participate in any fraternity events due to the shutdown of the chapter . No criminal charges were filed due to the delay in reporting and investigation . 
 = = Programs = = 
 = = = National scope = = = 
 = = = = National Intercollegiate Band = = = = 
 In 1922 , plans were made to hold the first national intercollegiate band contest . A brief dispatch in the 1922 Baton explained , " Sometime within the next two years the Kappa Kappa Psi Fraternity will hold a National Intercollegiate Band Contest . This enterprise will be the first of its kind ever attempted . As Music is becoming the foremost Art in America , our Fraternity aims to assist in so spreading the good work . " Nothing came of these early plans , however , and the idea of a national intercollegiate band was not revisited until the 1940s . 
 Beginning in 1933 , the first intercollegiate band was established , with musicians from the University of Colorado ( home of the Alpha Iota chapter ) , the University of Denver ( Alpha Lambda ) , Colorado State College of Agricultural and Mechanical Arts ( Kappa ) , Colorado State College of Education ( Alpha Theta ) , the Colorado School of Mines ( Xi ) , and the University of Utah participating . In 1934 , the University of Utah left the intercollegiate band and the University of Wyoming ( Alpha Nu ) took its place . The concerts held by this intercollegiate band were sponsored by the local chapters of Kappa Kappa Psi and many members of the fraternity were involved with the ensemble , including F. Lee Bowling , who served as the band 's manager . 
 F. Lee Bowling was elected Grand President of the fraternity in 1941 and presented a plan to hold a national intercollegiate band concert , modeled after the Rocky Mountain intercollegiate bands . The plan was endorsed by the delegation to be executed at the next national convention in 1943 . However , due to World War II , the 1943 and 1945 national conventions were not held , and so the first National Intercollegiate Band was formed and gave a concert on the evening of Friday , March 7 , 1947 . Today , participation in the National Intercollegiate Band is open to any college band member who auditions — membership in Kappa Kappa Psi or Tau Beta Sigma is not required . 
 In June and July 2002 , Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma sponsored the first National Intercollegiate Marching Band , which traveled to the French Riviera , including the cities of Nice , Grasse , Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , Cannes , Antibes , and the Principality of Monaco . The thirty @-@ five member band performed at Le <unk> in Cannes , in Nice , and in front of the Prince 's Palace of Monaco . After the inaugural trip , the program was dissolved by the joint national councils due to its high cost and low attendance , which was believed to be caused by a fear of traveling abroad after the September 11 attacks . 
 The success of the National Intercollegiate Band led to districts creating their own bands . One such group was the Atlantic Coast Intercollegiate Band , formed in 1958 at the convention of Districts X and XI . The Atlantic Coast band comprised around one hundred musicians and was conducted by Paul V. Yoder . The convention was hosted by the Beta Chi chapter at the University of Virginia , and the convention and concert were co @-@ sponsored by the Universities of Rutgers , Maryland , and Pittsburgh . In 2009 , the North Central District organized the first North Central District Intercollegiate Band . The North Central District Intercollegiate Band is the only currently functioning district intercollegiate band and has performed at every North Central District convention since its inaugural . 
 = = = = Commissioning Program = = = = 
 Since 1953 , Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma have commissioned a new work for wind band to be premiered at almost every National Intercollegiate Band concert . This program was begun to add to the wind repertoire under the direction of Grand President Hugh McMillen , and is the longest @-@ running commissioning project in the United States . A number of these commissioned compositions have garnered national acclaim , including Robert Russell Bennett 's Symphonic Songs for Band and Karel Husa 's Concerto for Trumpet and Wind Orchestra . In the years following the start of the national commissioning program , local chapters have begun to commission new band works themselves , such as Frank <unk> 's An American Elegy , commissioned by the Alpha Iota chapter in memory of the Columbine High School massacre . 
 = = = = Stillwater Station = = = = 
 The Stillwater Santa Fe Depot is a historic building originally built in March 1900 . In 1915 , a brick depot was added . The depot was used as a passenger rail station until 1953 . The depot was purchased at auction by five Stillwater residents , including three Alpha chapter alumni , in November 1991 . Stillwater Station replaced Oklahoma State University 's <unk> Center for the Performing Arts as the National Headquarters of the two organizations . The fraternity and sorority share office space , a conference room , and storage space in the converted station , which also hosts the organizations ' archives . The brick path leading to the building 's entrance has become a " Walk of Fame " with engraved bricks purchased by individuals or chapters . 
 In 2006 , Kappa Kappa Psi purchased a retired Detroit , Toledo and Ironton caboose to provide additional space for the fraternity 's history and archives program . After it was purchased , the caboose was placed on newly laid tracks outside the headquarters and wired for electricity , phone , and internet . The caboose is intended to host archives , artifacts , and chapter histories , as well as displays of historical items . 
 = = = Local programs and activities = = = 
 The mission statement and five purposes of Kappa Kappa Psi shape the activities of local chapters . Chapters of Kappa Kappa Psi provide service and support to the bands at its hosting institutions , from major projects like undertaking major renovations of rehearsal spaces used by the institution 's bands to relatively minor support such as providing apples and water to athletic bands or cleaning practice rooms . Some chapters also include general community service in their activities , such as sponsoring blood drives and other activities . 
 The fifth purpose of the fraternity charges chapters and members is to " provide a pleasant and helpful social experience for all engaged in college band work , " and chapters fulfill this charge through social programming such as hosting receptions after band concerts , sponsoring dances and socials for band members or their campus community in general , or by hosting concerts and providing food . Some chapters , especially southern chapters , also take part in step shows . 
 = = Jewelry and symbols = = 
 = = = Membership pins = = = 
 The Crown Pearl Badge is considered the " official means of identifying oneself with the Fraternity . " The fraternity badge is in the shape of an ancient Venetian harp , with a musical staff of gold lines on black enamel in the center of the badge , with the Greek letters " Kappa Kappa Psi " in gold across the staff . Five pearls adorn the bar across the top of the badge , and ten gems are set in the harp 's semicircle . In the upper left corner , the Greek letters " Alpha Epsilon Alpha " appear in gold on black enamel . A golden baton penetrates the badge diagonally from right to left . Unlike other Greek organizations , however , purchase of the badge is optional for members of Kappa Kappa Psi . Many brothers instead wear the recognition pin , which is a gold lapel pin in the shape of the fraternity 's coat of arms . 
 Prospective members may wear a lapel pin that has a musical staff and bass clef of silver on a background of blue enamel . The notes A , E , and A are placed on the staff in silver , representing the Greek phrase " Alpha Epsilon Alpha . " This is the only piece of regalia that prospective members are allowed to wear — all other jewelry is restricted to initiated members , and even the coat of arms and letters ( usually worn in the form of embroidered or ironed @-@ on blocked letters ) are restricted unless there is a clear indication that the wearer is a prospective member or colony member . 
 = = = Flag = = = 
 The Fraternity Flag was created by G. R. Schaag , a member of the Eta Sigma chapter at the University of Central Florida . The idea of a national flag was raised with the History and Traditions committee by Schaag at the 1987 national convention , but the committee ultimately decided not to take the idea to the national delegation . Schaag quickly drafted a motion to consider a national flag , which was presented by the chapter 's delegate and passed . In 1989 , Schaag presented a design for a flag , which won the committee 's recommendation over other submissions and was accepted by the national chapter . The upper half of the flag consists of a white field with the Greek letters " Kappa Kappa Psi " inscribed in an arc . On the lower half , three alternating stars of white , blue , and white appear on a blue field , with the top point of the lower white star extending into the white field above it . 
 = = = Other symbols = = = 
 The Fraternity Hymn was written by brother Scott Jeffrey Heckstall Jr. when he was a prospective member of the Eta Gamma chapter in 1977 . Heckstall had wanted to be a charter member , but was not chosen . Heckstall was encouraged to rush , and he recalled that as part of his rush process , a couple of brothers took him to a piano and told him , " We know that you play [ piano ] in church . We need a fraternity hymn . We 'll give you three hours , and you sit over there and come up with a hymn . We 'll come back in three hours , and we expect a hymn . " Heckstall recalled the hymn Someday ( Beams of Heaven As I Go ) by Charles Albert Tindley and changed a few words — for example , " Beams of Heaven as I go through this wilderness below " became " K K Psi , as we go through this wilderness here below . " The brothers of Eta Gamma were satisfied with Heckstall 's hymn . Years later , the hymn was presented to the brotherhood assembled at the 1995 National Convention and accepted as the national fraternity hymn . Blue and white are the fraternity 's official colors . The fraternity flower is a red carnation , so chosen because it was founder William Scroggs 's favorite flower . 
 = = Membership = = 
 A member of a college or university band who has completed one term in such a band may be offered membership in the fraternity . First @-@ term freshmen may only join if an exception is made by that chapter 's sponsor or director of bands . There were almost 6 @,@ 000 members active across the country in 2011 , and more than 66 @,@ 000 have joined the organization since 1919 . 
 A member of Kappa Kappa Psi may not be initiated as an active member of Tau Beta Sigma and vice versa — if a member of Kappa Kappa Psi transfers to a school with a chapter of Tau Beta Sigma and no Kappa Kappa Psi , he or she may instead join the sorority chapter as an " associate member " after going through a short orientation process <unk> the member to the sorority . 
 Brothers of Kappa Kappa Psi are not restricted from joining Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia or Sigma Alpha Iota , except by the gender restrictions or other eligibility requirements of either organization . Joint statements between Kappa Kappa Psi and Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia have affirmed this since at least 1973 , and have been reaffirmed as recently as 2005 , when the organizations released a joint statement saying , " there are equally important roles for Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia , Sigma Alpha Iota , Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma to fulfill on any campus where our chapters mutually exist , now or in the future . Each organization possesses a distinct mission and , as a result , fulfills a unique and vital role in the musical environment of a college campus . " Indeed , founder Raymond Shannon went on to join Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia after starting Kappa Kappa Psi . 
 = = = Chapters and districts = = = 
 By 2011 there were 210 active chapters out of 314 chapters chartered since 1919 , and 7 colonies . Colonies are probationary chapters at universities that have not historically had a chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi or whose chapter has gone inactive . Chapters and colonies of Kappa Kappa Psi are organized into seven districts , six of which are named for the geographical region of the United States that they represent . These are the North Central , Northeast , Midwest , Southeast , Southwest , and Western Districts . Although an International District is provided for , it has no chapters . 
 = = = National conventions = = = 
 Every two years in odd @-@ numbered years , Kappa Kappa Psi holds a national convention . The first such convention was held in 1922 in Stillwater , and only three conventions since then have not been held : 1931 , and the 1943 and 1945 conventions which were canceled due to World War II . The assembly of chapters in these conventions is called the National Chapter , which is the governing body of the fraternity and has the power to elect members of the National Council and Board of Trustees . The location of the National Convention rotates among the districts . 
 = = = National Presidents of Kappa Kappa Psi = = = 
 = Azotobacter = 
 Azotobacter is a genus of usually motile , oval or spherical bacteria that form thick @-@ walled cysts and may produce large quantities of capsular slime . They are aerobic , free @-@ living soil microbes which play an important role in the nitrogen cycle in nature , binding atmospheric nitrogen , which is inaccessible to plants , and releasing it in the form of ammonium ions into the soil ( nitrogen fixation ) . In addition to being a model organism for studying <unk> , it is used by humans for the production of <unk> , food additives , and some biopolymers . The first representative of the genus , Azotobacter chroococcum , was discovered and described in 1901 by the Dutch microbiologist and botanist Martinus Beijerinck . Azotobacter species are Gram @-@ negative bacteria found in neutral and alkaline soils , in water , and in association with some plants . 
 = = Biological characteristics = = 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Cells of the genus Azotobacter are relatively large for bacteria ( 1 – 2 μm in diameter ) . They are usually oval , but may take various forms from rods to spheres . In microscopic preparations , the cells can be dispersed or form irregular clusters or occasionally chains of varying lengths . In fresh cultures , cells are mobile due to the numerous flagella . Later , the cells lose their mobility , become almost spherical , and produce a thick layer of mucus , forming the cell capsule . The shape of the cell is affected by the amino acid glycine which is present in the nutrient medium <unk> . 
 Under magnification , the cells show inclusions , some of which are colored . In the early 1900s , the colored inclusions were regarded as " reproductive grains " , or <unk> – a kind of embryo cells . However , it was later demonstrated that the granules do not participate in the cell division . The colored grains are composed of <unk> , whereas the colorless inclusions are drops of fat , which act as energy reserves . 
 = = = = Cysts = = = = 
 Cysts of the genus Azotobacter are more resistant to adverse environmental factors than the vegetative cells ; in particular , they are twice as resistant to UV light . They are also resistant to drying , ultrasound and gamma and solar irradiation , but not to heating . 
 The formation of cysts is induced by changes in the concentration of nutrients in the medium and addition of some organic substances such as ethanol , n @-@ butanol , or β @-@ hydroxybutyrate . Cysts are rarely formed in liquid media . The formation of cysts is induced by chemical factors and is accompanied by metabolic shifts , changes in catabolism , respiration , and biosynthesis of macromolecules ; it is also affected by aldehyde dehydrogenase and the response regulator <unk> . 
 The cysts of Azotobacter are spherical and consist of the so @-@ called ' central body ' – a reduced copy of vegetative cells with several vacuoles – and the ' two @-@ layer shell ' . The inner part of the shell is called <unk> and has a fibrous structure . The outer part has a hexagonal crystalline structure and is called exine . <unk> is partially hydrolyzed by trypsin and is resistant to lysozyme , in contrast to the central body . The central body can be isolated in a viable state by some chelation agents . The main constituents of the outer shell are <unk> composed of long aliphatic chains and aromatic rings . <unk> are also found in other bacteria , animals , and plants . 
 = = = = Germination of cysts = = = = 
 A cyst of the genus Azotobacter is the resting form of a vegetative cell ; however , whereas usual vegetative cells are reproductive , the cyst of Azotobacter does not serve this purpose and is necessary for surviving adverse environmental factors . Following the resumption of optimal environmental conditions , which include a certain value of pH , temperature , and source of carbon , the cysts germinate , and the newly formed vegetative cells multiply by a simple division . During the germination , the cysts sustain damage and release a large vegetative cell . Microscopically , the first manifestation of spore germination is the gradual decrease in light refractive by cysts , which is detected with phase contrast microscopy . Germination of cysts , a slow process , takes about 4 – 6 h . During germination , the central body grows and captures the granules of <unk> , which were located in the intima ( the innermost layer ) . Then the exine bursts and the vegetative cell is freed from the exine , which has a characteristic horseshoe shape . This process is accompanied by metabolic changes . Immediately after being supplied with a carbon source , the cysts begin to absorb oxygen and emit carbon dioxide ; the rate of this process gradually increases and saturates after four hours . The synthesis of proteins and RNA , occurs in parallel , but it intensifies only after five hours after the addition of the carbon source . The synthesis of DNA and nitrogen fixation are initiated 5 h after the addition of glucose to a nitrogen @-@ free nutrient medium . 
 Germination of cysts is accompanied by changes in the intima , visible with an electron microscope . The intima consists of carbohydrates , lipids , and proteins and has almost the same volume as the central body . During germination of cysts , the intima hydrolyses and is used by the cell for the synthesis its components . 
 = = = Physiological properties = = = 
 Azotobacter <unk> aerobically , receiving energy from redox reactions , using organic compounds as electron donors . Azotobacter can use a variety of carbohydrates , alcohols , and salts of organic acids as sources of carbon . 
 Azotobacter can fix at least 10 μg of nitrogen per gram of glucose consumed . Nitrogen fixation requires molybdenum ions , but they can be partially or completely replaced by vanadium ions . If atmospheric nitrogen is not fixed , the source of nitrogen can alternatively be nitrates , ammonium ions , or amino acids . The optimal pH for the growth and nitrogen fixation is 7 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 , but growth is sustained in the pH range from 4 @.@ 8 to 8 @.@ 5 . Azotobacter can also grow <unk> , in a molecular @-@ nitrogen @-@ free medium containing mannose ; this growth mode is hydrogen @-@ dependent . Hydrogen is available in the soil , thus this growth mode may occur in nature . 
 While growing , Azotobacter produces flat , slimy , paste @-@ like colonies with a diameter of 5 – 10 mm , which may form films in liquid nutrient media . The colonies can be dark @-@ brown , green , or other colors , or may be colorless , depending on the species . The growth is favored at a temperature of 20 – 30 ° C. 
 Bacteria of the genus Azotobacter are also known to form intracellular inclusions of <unk> under certain environmental conditions ( e.g. lack of elements such as phosphorus , nitrogen , or oxygen combined with an excessive supply of carbon sources ) . 
 = = = Pigments = = = 
 Azotobacter produces pigments . For example , Azotobacter chroococcum forms a dark @-@ brown water @-@ soluble pigment melanin . This process occurs at high levels of metabolism during the fixation of nitrogen , and is thought to protect the nitrogenase system from oxygen . Other Azotobacter species produce pigments from yellow @-@ green to purple colors , including a green pigment which fluoresces with a yellow @-@ green light and a pigment with blue @-@ white fluorescence . 
 = = = Genome = = = 
 The nucleotide sequence of chromosomes of Azotobacter vinelandii , strain <unk> , is partially determined . This chromosome is a circular DNA molecule which contains 5 @,@ 342 @,@ 073 nucleotide pairs and 5 @,@ 043 genes , of which 4 @,@ 988 encode proteins . The fraction of guanine + cytosine pairs is 65 mole percent . The number of chromosomes in the cells and the DNA content increases upon aging , and in the stationary growth phase , cultures may contain more than 100 copies of a chromosome per cell . The original DNA content ( one copy ) is restored when replanting the culture into a fresh medium . In addition to chromosomal DNA , Azotobacter can contain plasmids . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Azotobacter species are ubiquitous in neutral and weakly basic soils , but not acidic soils . They are also found in the Arctic and Antarctic soils , despite the cold climate , short growing season , and relatively low pH values of these soils . In dry soils , Azotobacter can survive in the form of cysts for up to 24 years . 
 Representatives of the genus Azotobacter are also found in aquatic habitats , including freshwater and brackish marshes . Several members are associated with plants and are found in the rhizosphere , having certain relationships with the plant . Some strains are also found in the cocoons of the earthworm <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Nitrogen fixation = = 
 Azotobacter species are free @-@ living , nitrogen @-@ fixing bacteria ; in contrast to <unk> species , they normally fix molecular nitrogen from the atmosphere without symbiotic relations with plants , although some Azotobacter species are associated with plants . Nitrogen fixation is inhibited in the presence of available nitrogen sources , such as ammonium ions and nitrates . 
 Azotobacter species have a full range of enzymes needed to perform the nitrogen fixation : <unk> , <unk> , and an important enzyme nitrogenase . The process of nitrogen fixation requires an influx of energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate . Nitrogen fixation is highly sensitive to the presence of oxygen , so Azotobacter developed a special defensive mechanism against oxygen , namely a significant intensification of metabolism that reduces the concentration of oxygen in the cells . Also , a special nitrogenase @-@ protective protein protects nitrogenase and is involved in protecting the cells from oxygen . Mutants not producing this protein are killed by oxygen during nitrogen fixation in the absence of a nitrogen source in the medium . <unk> ions play a certain role in the processes of nitrogen fixation by Azotobacter . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is the most important enzyme involved in nitrogen fixation . Azotobacter species have several types of nitrogenase . The basic one is molybdenum @-@ iron nitrogenase . An alternative type contains vanadium ; it is independent of molybdenum ions and is more active than the Mo @-@ Fe nitrogenase at low temperatures . So it can fix nitrogen at temperatures as low as 5 ° C , and its low @-@ temperature activity is 10 times higher than that of Mo @-@ Fe nitrogenase . An important role in maturation of Mo @-@ Fe nitrogenase plays the so @-@ called P @-@ cluster . Synthesis of nitrogenase is controlled by the <unk> genes . Nitrogen fixation is regulated by the enhancer protein <unk> and the " sensor " flavoprotein <unk> which modulates the activation of gene transcription of nitrogen fixation by redox @-@ dependent switching . This regulatory mechanism , relying on two proteins forming complexes with each other , is uncommon for other systems . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Nitrogen fixation plays an important role in the nitrogen cycle . Azotobacter also synthesizes some biologically active substances , including some phytohormones such as auxins , thereby stimulating plant growth . They also facilitate the mobility of heavy metals in the soil , thus enhancing bioremediation of soil from heavy metals , such as cadmium , mercury and lead . Some kinds of Azotobacter can also biodegrade chlorine @-@ containing aromatic compounds , such as 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> . The latter was previously used as an insecticide , fungicide , and herbicide , but later was found to have mutagenic and carcinogenic effects . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Owing to their ability to fix molecular nitrogen and therefore increase the soil fertility and stimulate plant growth , Azotobacter species are widely used in agriculture , particularly in nitrogen <unk> such as <unk> . They are also used in production of <unk> acid , which is applied in medicine as an antacid , in the food industry as an additive to ice cream , puddings , and creams , and in the biosorption of metals . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Azotobacter genus was discovered in 1901 by Dutch microbiologist and botanist Martinus Beijerinck , who was one of the founders of environmental microbiology . He selected and described the species Azotobacter chroococcum – the first aerobic , free @-@ living nitrogen fixer . 
 In 1909 , Lipman described Azotobacter vinelandii , and a year later Azotobacter <unk> Lipman , 1904 , which he named in honor of Beijerinck . In 1949 , Russian microbiologist Nikolai <unk> identified the species of Azotobacter nigricans <unk> <unk> , 1949 which was divided in 1981 by Thompson Skerman into two subspecies - Azotobacter nigricans subsp. nigricans and Azotobacter nigricans subsp. <unk> ; in the same year , Thompson and Skerman described Azotobacter armeniacus Thompson and Skerman , 1981 . In 1991 , Page and <unk> reported a microaerophilic and air @-@ tolerant type Azotobacter <unk> Page and <unk> 1991 which was dependent on sodium ions . 
 Earlier , representatives of the genus were assigned to the family <unk> Pribram , 1933 , but then were transferred to the family <unk> based on the studies of nucleotide sequences 16S rRNA . In 2004 , a phylogenetic study revealed that A. vinelandii belongs to the same clade as the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and in 2007 it was suggested that the genera Azotobacter , <unk> and Pseudomonas are related and might be synonyms . 
 = Battle of Akroinon = 
 The Battle of Akroinon was fought at Akroinon or <unk> ( near modern <unk> ) in Phrygia , on the western edge of the Anatolian plateau , in 740 between an Umayyad Arab army and the Byzantine forces . The Arabs had been conducting regular raids into Anatolia for the past century , and the 740 expedition was the largest in recent decades , consisting of three separate divisions . One division , 20 @,@ 000 strong under Abdallah al @-@ Battal and al @-@ Malik ibn Shu 'aib , was confronted at Akroinon by the Byzantines under the command of Emperor Leo III the Isaurian ( r . 717 – 741 ) and his son , the future Constantine V ( r . 741 – 775 ) . The battle resulted in a decisive Byzantine victory . Coupled with the Umayyad Caliphate 's troubles on other fronts and the internal instability before and after the Abbasid Revolt , this put an end to major Arab incursions into Anatolia for three decades . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since the beginning of the Muslim conquests , the Byzantine Empire , as the largest , richest and militarily strongest state bordering the expanding Caliphate , had been the Muslims ' primary enemy . Following the disastrous Battle of <unk> , the Byzantines had largely confined themselves to a strategy of passive defence , while the Muslim armies regularly launched raids into Byzantine @-@ held Anatolia . Following their failure to capture the Byzantine capital , Constantinople , in 717 – 718 , the Umayyads for a time diverted their attention elsewhere . From 720 / 721 , however , they resumed these expeditions in a regular pattern : each summer one or two campaigns ( pl. <unk> 'if , sing. <unk> <unk> ) would be launched , sometimes accompanied by a naval attack and sometimes followed by winter expeditions ( <unk> ) . These were no longer aimed at permanent conquest but rather large @-@ scale raids , plundering and devastating the countryside and only occasionally attacking forts or major settlements . The raids of this period were also largely confined to the central Anatolian plateau ( chiefly its eastern half , Cappadocia ) , and only rarely reached the peripheral coastlands . 
 Under the more aggressive Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 723 – 743 ) , the Arab raids became more large @-@ scale affairs and were led by some of the Caliphate 's most capable generals , including princes of the Umayyad dynasty , such as Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik or Hisham 's own sons Mu 'awiyah , Maslama and Sulayman . Gradually , however , the Muslim successes became fewer , especially as their resources were drawn into the mounting conflict with the Khazars in the Caucasus . The raids continued , but the Arab and Byzantine chroniclers mention fewer successful captures of forts or towns . Nevertheless , in 737 a major victory over the Khazars allowed the Arabs to shift their focus and intensify their campaigns against Byzantium . Thus in 738 and 739 Maslamah ibn Hisham led successful raids , including the capture of the town of Ancyra . For the year 740 , Hisham assembled the largest expedition of his reign , placing it under his son Sulayman . 
 = = Battle = = 
 According to the chronicle of Theophanes the Confessor , the invading Umayyad force totalled 90 @,@ 000 men . 10 @,@ 000 lightly armed men under al @-@ <unk> ibn Yazid were sent to raid the western coastlands , followed by 20 @,@ 000 under Abdallah al @-@ Battal and al @-@ Malik ibn Su 'aib who marched towards Akroinon , while the main force of some 60 @,@ 000 ( this last number is certainly much inflated ) , under Sulayman ibn Hisham , raided Cappadocia . 
 The Emperor Leo confronted the second force at Akroinon . Details of the battle are not known , but the Emperor secured a crushing victory : both Arab commanders fell , as well as the larger part of their army , some 13 @,@ 200 men . The rest of the Arab troops managed to conduct an orderly retreat to Synnada , where they joined Sulayman . The other two Arab forces devastated the countryside unopposed , but failed to take any towns or forts . The Arab invasion army also suffered from severe hunger and lack of supplies before returning to Syria , while the 10th @-@ century Arab Christian historian Agapius records that the Byzantines took 20 @,@ 000 prisoners from the invading forces . 
 = = Effect and aftermath = = 
 Akroinon was a major success for the Byzantines , as it was the first large @-@ scale victory they had scored in a pitched battle against the Arabs . Seeing it as evidence of God 's renewed favour , the victory also served to strengthen Leo 's belief in the policy of iconoclasm that he had adopted some years before . In the immediate aftermath , this success opened up the way for a more aggressive stance by the Byzantines , who in 741 attacked the major Arab base of Melitene . In 742 and 743 , the Umayyads were able to exploit a civil war between Constantine V and Artabasdos and raid into Anatolia with relative impunity , but the Arab sources do not report any major achievements . 
 The Arab defeat at Akroinon has traditionally been seen as a " decisive " battle and a " turning point " of the Arab – Byzantine wars , causing the slackening of Arab pressure on Byzantium . Other historians however , from the early 20th @-@ century Syriac scholar E.W. Brooks to more recent ones such as Walter Kaegi and Ralph @-@ Johannes Lilie , have challenged this view , attributing the reduced Arab threat after Akroinon to the fact that it coincided with other heavy reversals on the most remote provinces of the Caliphate , which exhausted its overextended military resources , as well as with internal turmoil due to civil wars and the Abbasid Revolution . As a result , the Arab attacks against the Byzantine Empire in the 740s were rather ineffectual and soon ceased completely . Indeed , Constantine V was able to take advantage of the Umayyad Caliphate 's collapse to launch a series of expeditions into Syria and secure a Byzantine ascendancy on the eastern frontier which lasted until the 770s . 
 In the Muslim world , the memory of the defeated Arab commander , Abdallah al @-@ Battal , was preserved , and he became one of the greatest heroes of Arab and later Turkish epic poetry as Sayyid Battal Ghazi . 
 = Jihad ( song ) = 
 " Jihad " is a song by the American thrash metal band Slayer which appears on their 2006 album Christ Illusion . The song portrays the imagined viewpoint of a terrorist who has participated in the September 11 , 2001 attacks , concluding with spoken lyrics taken from words left behind by Mohamed Atta ; Atta was named by the FBI as the " head suicide terrorist " of the first plane to crash into the World Trade Center . " Jihad " was primarily written by guitarist Jeff Hanneman ; the lyrics were co @-@ authored with vocalist Tom Araya . 
 " Jihad " received a mixed reception in the music press , and reviews generally focused on the lyrics ' controversial subject matter . The song drew comparisons to Slayer 's 1986 track " Angel of Death " — also penned by Hanneman — which similarly caused outrage at the time of its release . 
 Joseph Dias of the Mumbai Christian group " Catholic Secular Forum " expressed concern over " Jihad " ' s lyrics , and contributed to Christ Illusion 's recall by EMI India , who to date have no plans for a reissue in that country . ABC @-@ TV 's Broadcast Standards and Practices Department censored the song during Slayer 's first US network television appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! Only the opening minute was broadcast over the show 's credits , thus omitting 40 % of the lyrics . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Primarily written by guitarist Jeff Hanneman , " Jihad " features lyrical contributions by vocalist Tom Araya . Both Hanneman and Araya had previously written about controversial lyrical matter in past Slayer tracks ; while Hanneman had written songs like " Angel of Death " and " SS @-@ 3 " which explored the atrocities committed by Nazi figures such as Auschwitz concentration camp physician Josef Mengele and Third Reich henchman Reinhard Heydrich , Araya had delved into the lives of serial killers such as Jeffrey Dahmer and Ed Gein in the tracks " 213 " and " Dead Skin Mask " respectively . " Jihad " is written from the perspective of a 9 / 11 terrorist , and imagines the thoughts that " the enemy " might have . The climax of the song features spoken text taken from a motivational letter left behind by Mohamed Atta , who was named by the FBI as the head suicide terrorist of American Airlines Flight 11 , the first plane to crash into the World Trade Center in the September 11 , 2001 attacks . 
 Guitarist Kerry King has been outspoken in his defense of " Jihad " , and has claimed that the song has the " coolest angle " on Christ Illusion . " These new songs aren 't political at all , " King states , " ' Jihad ' , ' Eyes of the Insane ' — it 's what 's spewing out at us from the TV . " He further clarified that the band was not attempting to promote the terrorists ' perspective of the war , nor their ideological beliefs , although he expected others to assume that Slayer was doing so . They did not wish to dwell on the topic " because every band on the planet already has " and " came from a certain perspective " , so felt they had to present an alternative viewpoint . " We 're Slayer , we have to be different " was King 's assertion . 
 American singer / songwriter Steve Earle attempted a similar concept in penning " John Walker 's Blues " ( from the 2002 album Jerusalem ) , written from the perspective of the Washington @-@ born John Walker <unk> , a Taliban member captured during the 2001 US @-@ led invasion of Afghanistan . Earle was criticised for this track ; King anticipated a comparable reaction to " Jihad " : " People make an assumption before they ( read ) the lyrics . It 's definitely not only human nature , it 's very American @-@ natured . " 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Jihad " is 3 minutes 31 seconds long . A skittering vamp leads into the track , during which Lombardo shimmers his hi @-@ hat . Smoothly mixing up tempos , the band build the song with a fast , " wonky , catchy and angular " guitar riff reminiscent of the breakdown in 1986 's " Angel of Death " . This guitar riff decelerates before bursting forward again in two @-@ bar stretches underpinned by Lombardo 's pounding , fifth @-@ gear drumming . 
 IGN reviewer Andy Patrizio was dismissive of the song 's musical structure in comparison to other tracks on Christ Illusion : " ' Jihad , ' ' Flesh Storm , ' ' Skeleton Christ , ' ' <unk> , ' and felt there was too much similarity in the riffs , tuning , tempos , and arrangements . " MusicOMH.com 's Ian Robinson was also negative , remarking that the song " concludes with the ' now getting slightly old hat ' Slayer trick ( but still atmospheric ) of over sampling voices over the solo . " 
 = = Reception and criticism = = 
 " Jihad " — alongside fellow Christ Illusion album tracks " Eyes of the Insane " and " Cult " — was made available for streaming on June 26 , 2006 , via the Spanish website <unk> The album was Slayer 's ninth studio recording , and was released on August 8 , 2006 . During reviews " Jihad " received a mixed reception . 
 Blabbermouth 's Don Kaye gave the opinion that " a handful of songs " on Christ Illusion " are either too generic or the arrangements are too clumsy to work well " , and specifically singled out the track : " I 'm looking at you , ' Jihad ' and ' Skeleton Christ ' . " Ben Ratliff of New York Times remarked that the song is " predictably tough stuff , but let 's put it on a scale . It is tougher , and less reasoned , than Martin Amis 's recent short story ' The Last Days of Muhammad Atta . ' It is no tougher than a taped message from Al Qaeda . " Peter Atkinson of KNAC.com was equally unimpressed , describing the group 's choice of song climax as : 
 Not all reviews were so negative . Thom Jurek of Allmusic observed that " the band begins to enter and twist and turn looking for a place to create a new rhythmic thrash that 's the most insane deconstruction of four / four time on tape . " The Austin Chronicle 's Marc Savlov asked readers to " listen to the eerie , stop @-@ start cadence of lunacy in ' Jihad , ' with Araya playing the role of a suicide bomber almost too convincingly . " 
 King would have appointed " Jihad " as the group 's nomination in the " Best Metal Performance " award category at the 49th Grammy Awards , deeming the chosen track " Eyes of the Insane " " the poorest representations " of the group on ninth studio album Christ Illusion . Despite King 's statement , " Eyes of the Insane " won Slayer their first Grammy award . The Slayer guitarist has also stated ; " I like playing ' Jihad ' because I 'm back changing my guitars , and Jeff starts it and he starts it quietly so you can hear the fans go crazy about it and you can 't always hear that at the beginning of a song . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 " Jihad " ' s lyrical matter provoked controversy from several quarters . Peter Atkinson of KNAC.com remarked that the song , " no doubt will be Christ Illusion ’ s most controversial track . " In May 2006 , World Entertainment News Network announced that revelations of the song 's lyrical content had angered the families of 9 / 11 victims . 
 Joseph Dias of the Mumbai Christian group " Catholic Secular Forum " ( CSF ) issued a memorandum to his police commissioner , in which he expressed concern that " Jihad " would offend " the sensibilities of the Muslims ... and secular Indians who have respect for all faiths . " EMI India met with the CSF , apologising for the album 's release , and recalled all copies , with no plans for a reissue . On October 11 , 2006 , it was announced all stocks had been destroyed . The track , alongside the album 's controversial Larry Carroll painted cover art and provocative lyrics , were the specific reasons for EMI India 's decision . Araya had expected " Jihad " ' s treatment of the events of 9 / 11 to create a backlash in America , however it failed to materialise . This was in part , he believes , because of peoples ' view that the song was merely " Slayer being Slayer " . Hanneman expected that the Muslim community would either " embrace " or hate Slayer for penning the track , or that the victims of 9 / 11 would criticize the band over the song 's subject matter . 
 " Jihad " was one of six songs performed by Slayer during their first US network television appearance on ABC @-@ TV 's Jimmy Kimmel Live ! ( January 19 , 2007 ) , although only the opening minute of the track was broadcast . ABC @-@ TV 's Broadcast Standards and Practices department censored " Jihad " , and approached Slayer the day prior to broadcast with roughly 40 % of the song lyrics deleted . King has since confirmed that the group were ten minutes from withdrawing from the show , but eventually decided to " just go do it . " 
 = = = Comparisons to " Angel of Death " = = = 
 On a number of occasions the song has been compared to " Angel of Death " , a Hanneman @-@ penned Slayer track from 1986 's Reign in Blood , which was lyrically inspired by Nazi physician Josef Mengele . " Angel of Death " focused on human experiments conducted by Mengele at the Auschwitz concentration camp in World War II . KNAC.com 's Peter Atkinson commented upon the similarities , to which King responded that the whole affair " was blown out of proportion " . 
 Making the connection , King remembers thinking " Great , now we 're gonna be answering for this one ! " after listening to a playback of the song . " But as with ' Angel [ of Death ] , ' we 're not endorsing anything . It 's just not an ' anti ' song , either . " Hanneman emphasised , " Like ' Angel of Death , ' it 's just a documentary . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jeff Hanneman - guitar 
 Kerry King - guitar 
 Tom Araya - bass , vocals 
 Dave Lombardo - drums 
 = Mary of Teck = 
 Mary of Teck ( Victoria Mary Augusta Louise Olga Pauline Claudine Agnes ; 26 May 1867 – 24 March 1953 ) was Queen consort of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions , and Empress consort of India , as the wife of King @-@ Emperor George V. 
 Although technically a princess of Teck , in the Kingdom of Württemberg , she was born and raised in England . Her parents were Francis , Duke of Teck , who was of German extraction , and Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge , a granddaughter of King George III . She was informally known as " May " , after her birth month . At the age of 24 she was betrothed to Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale , the eldest son of the Prince of Wales , but six weeks after the announcement of the engagement he died unexpectedly of pneumonia . The following year she became engaged to Albert Victor 's next surviving brother , George , who subsequently became King . Before her husband 's accession she was successively Duchess of York , Duchess of Cornwall and York and Princess of Wales . 
 As queen consort from 1910 , she supported her husband through the First World War , his ill health and major political changes arising from the aftermath of the war and the rise of socialism and nationalism . After George 's death in 1936 , she became queen mother when her eldest son , Edward , ascended the throne , but to her dismay he abdicated later the same year in order to marry twice @-@ divorced American socialite Wallis Simpson . She supported her second son , Albert , who succeeded to the throne as George VI , until his death in 1952 . She died the following year , during the reign of her granddaughter Queen Elizabeth II , who had not yet been crowned . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Princess Victoria Mary ( " May " ) of Teck was born on 26 May 1867 at Kensington Palace , London . Her father was Prince Francis , Duke of Teck , the son of Duke Alexander of Württemberg by his morganatic wife , Countess Claudine <unk> von Kis @-@ <unk> . Her mother was Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge , the third child and younger daughter of Prince Adolphus , Duke of Cambridge , and Princess Augusta of Hesse @-@ Kassel . She was baptised in the Chapel Royal of Kensington Palace on 27 July 1867 by Charles Thomas Longley , Archbishop of Canterbury , and her three godparents were Queen Victoria , the Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII and May 's future father @-@ in @-@ law ) , and Princess Augusta , the Duchess of Cambridge . Before she became Queen , she was known to her family , friends and the public by the diminutive name of " May " , after her birth month . 
 May 's upbringing was " merry but fairly strict " . She was the eldest of four children , the only girl , and " learned to exercise her native discretion , firmness and tact " by resolving her three younger brothers ' petty boyhood squabbles . They played with their cousins , the children of the Prince of Wales , who were similar in age . May was educated at home by her mother and governess ( as were her brothers until they were sent to boarding schools ) . The Duchess of Teck spent an unusually long time with her children for a lady of her time and class , and enlisted May in various charitable endeavours , which included visiting the tenements of the poor . 
 Although her mother was a grandchild of King George III , May was only a minor member of the British Royal Family . Her father , the Duke of Teck , had no inheritance or wealth , and carried the lower royal style of Serene Highness because his parents ' marriage was morganatic . However , the Duchess of Teck was granted a parliamentary annuity of £ 5 @,@ 000 , and received about £ 4 @,@ 000 a year from her mother , the Duchess of Cambridge . Despite this , the family was deeply in debt and lived abroad from 1883 , in order to economise . The <unk> travelled throughout Europe , visiting their various relations . They stayed in Florence , Italy , for a time , where May enjoyed visiting the art galleries , churches , and museums . 
 In 1885 , the <unk> returned to London , and took up residence at White Lodge , in Richmond Park . May was close to her mother , and acted as an unofficial secretary , helping to organise parties and social events . She was also close to her aunt , the Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz , and wrote to her every week . During the First World War , the Crown Princess of Sweden helped pass letters from May to her aunt , who lived in enemy territory in Germany until her death in 1916 . 
 = = Engagements = = 
 In December 1891 , May was engaged to her second cousin once removed , Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale , the eldest son of the Prince of Wales . The choice of May as bride for the Duke owed much to Queen Victoria 's fondness for her , as well as to her strong character and sense of duty . However , Albert Victor died six weeks later , in the worldwide influenza pandemic that swept through Britain in the winter of 1891 – 92 . 
 Albert Victor 's brother , Prince George , Duke of York , now second in line to the throne , evidently became close to May during their shared period of mourning , and Queen Victoria still favoured May as a suitable candidate to marry a future king . In May 1893 , George proposed , and May accepted . They were soon deeply in love , and their marriage was a success . George wrote to May every day they were apart and , unlike his father , never took a mistress . 
 = = Duchess of York = = 
 May married Prince George , Duke of York , in London on 6 July 1893 at the Chapel Royal , St James 's Palace . The new Duke and Duchess of York lived in York Cottage on the Sandringham Estate in Norfolk , and in apartments in St James 's Palace . York Cottage was a modest house for royalty , but it was a favourite of George , who liked a relatively simple life . They had six children : Edward , Albert , Mary , Henry , George , and John . 
 The Duchess loved her children , but she put them in the care of a nanny , as was usual in upper @-@ class families at the time . The first nanny was dismissed for insolence and the second for abusing the children . This second woman , anxious to suggest that the children preferred her to anyone else , would pinch Edward and Albert whenever they were about to be presented to their parents , so that they would start crying and be speedily returned to her . On discovery , she was replaced by her effective and much @-@ loved assistant , Charlotte Bill . 
 Sometimes , Mary appears to have been a distant mother . At first , she failed to notice the nanny 's abuse of the young Princes Edward and Albert , and her youngest son , Prince John , was housed in a private farm on the Sandringham Estate , in the care of Mrs. Bill , perhaps to hide his epilepsy from the public . However , despite her austere public image and her strait @-@ laced private life , Mary was a caring mother in many respects , revealing a fun @-@ loving and frivolous side to her children and teaching them history and music . Edward wrote fondly of his mother in his memoirs : " Her soft voice , her cultivated mind , the cosy room overflowing with personal treasures were all inseparable ingredients of the happiness associated with this last hour of a child 's day ... Such was my mother 's pride in her children that everything that happened to each one was of the utmost importance to her . With the birth of each new child , Mama started an album in which she painstakingly recorded each progressive stage of our childhood " . He expressed a less charitable view , however , in private letters to his wife after his mother 's death : " My sadness was mixed with incredulity that any mother could have been so hard and cruel towards her eldest son for so many years and yet so demanding at the end without relenting a scrap . I 'm afraid the fluids in her veins have always been as icy cold as they are now in death . " 
 As Duke and Duchess of York , George and May carried out a variety of public duties . In 1897 , she became the Patron of the London Needlework Guild in succession to her mother . The Guild , initially established as The London Guild in 1882 , was renamed several times , and was named after May between 1914 and 2010 . Samples of her own embroidery range from chair seats to tea <unk> . 
 On 22 January 1901 , Queen Victoria died , and May 's father @-@ in @-@ law ascended the throne as King Edward VII . For most of the rest of that year , George and May were styled Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York . For eight months they toured the British Empire , visiting Gibraltar , Malta , Egypt , Ceylon , Singapore , Australia , New Zealand , Mauritius , South Africa and Canada . No royal had undertaken such an ambitious tour before . She broke down in tears at the thought of leaving her children , who were to be left in the care of their grandparents , for such a long time . 
 = = Princess of Wales = = 
 On 9 November 1901 , nine days after arriving back in Britain and on the King 's sixtieth birthday , George was created Prince of Wales . The family moved their London residence from St James 's Palace to Marlborough House . As Princess of Wales , May accompanied her husband on trips to Austria @-@ Hungary and Württemberg in 1904 . The following year , she gave birth to her last child , John . It was a difficult labour , and although May recovered quickly , her newborn son suffered respiratory problems . 
 From October 1905 the Prince and Princess of Wales undertook another eight @-@ month tour , this time of India , and the children were once again left in the care of their grandparents . They passed through Egypt both ways and on the way back stopped in Greece . The tour was almost immediately followed by a trip to Spain for the wedding of King Alfonso XIII to Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg , at which the bride and groom narrowly avoided assassination . Only a week after returning to Britain , May and George went to Norway for the coronation of George 's brother @-@ in @-@ law and sister , King Haakon VII and Queen Maud . 
 = = Queen consort = = 
 On 6 May 1910 , Edward VII died . Mary 's husband ascended the throne as King George V , and she became queen consort . When her husband asked her to drop one of her two official names , Victoria Mary , she chose to be called Mary , preferring not to take the name of her husband 's grandmother , Queen Victoria . Queen Mary was crowned with the King on 22 June 1911 at Westminster Abbey . Later in the year , the new King and Queen travelled to India for the Delhi Durbar held on 12 December 1911 , and toured the sub @-@ continent as Emperor and Empress of India , returning to Britain in February . The beginning of Mary 's period as consort brought her into conflict with her mother @-@ in @-@ law , Queen Alexandra . Although the two were on friendly terms , Alexandra could be stubborn ; she demanded precedence over Mary at the funeral of Edward VII , was slow in leaving Buckingham Palace , and kept some of the royal jewels that should have been passed to the new Queen . 
 During the First World War , Queen Mary instituted an austerity drive at the palace , where she rationed food , and visited wounded and dying servicemen in hospital , which caused her great emotional strain . After three years of war against Germany , and with anti @-@ German feeling in Britain running high , the Russian Imperial Family , which had been deposed by a revolutionary government , was refused asylum , possibly in part because the Tsar 's wife was German @-@ born . News of the Tsar 's abdication provided a boost to those in Britain who wished to replace their own monarchy with a republic . After republicans used the couple 's German heritage as an argument for reform , George abandoned his German titles and renamed the royal house from the German " Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha " to the British " Windsor " . Other royals anglicised their names ; the <unk> became the <unk> , for example . The Queen 's relatives also abandoned their German titles , and adopted the British surname of Cambridge ( derived from the Dukedom held by Queen Mary 's British grandfather ) . The war ended in 1918 with the defeat of Germany and the abdication and exile of the Kaiser . 
 Two months after the end of the war , Queen Mary 's youngest son , John , died at the age of thirteen . She described her shock and sorrow in her diary and letters , extracts of which were published after her death : " our poor darling little Johnnie had passed away suddenly ... The first break in the family circle is hard to bear but people have been so kind & sympathetic & this has helped us [ the King and me ] much . " Her staunch support of her husband continued during the latter half of his reign . She advised him on speeches , and used her extensive knowledge of history and royalty to advise him on matters affecting his position . He appreciated her discretion , intelligence and judgement . She maintained an air of self @-@ assured calm throughout all her public engagements in the years after the war , a period marked by civil unrest over social conditions , Irish independence and Indian nationalism . 
 In the late 1920s , George V became increasingly ill with lung problems , exacerbated by his heavy smoking . Queen Mary paid particular attention to his care . During his illness in 1928 , one of his doctors , Sir Farquhar Buzzard , was asked who had saved the King 's life . He replied , " The Queen " . In 1935 , King George V and Queen Mary celebrated their silver jubilee , with celebrations taking place throughout the British Empire . In his jubilee speech , George paid public tribute to his wife , having told his speechwriter , " Put that paragraph at the very end . I cannot trust myself to speak of the Queen when I think of all I owe her . " 
 = = Queen mother = = 
 George V died on 20 January 1936 , after his physician , Lord Dawson of Penn , gave him an injection of morphine and cocaine that may have hastened his death . Queen Mary 's eldest son , Edward , Prince of Wales , ascended the throne as Edward VIII . She was now a queen mother , though she did not use that style , and was instead known as Her Majesty Queen Mary . 
 Within the year , Edward caused a constitutional crisis by announcing his desire to marry his twice @-@ divorced American mistress , Wallis Simpson . Mary disapproved of divorce , which was against the teaching of the Anglican church , and thought Simpson wholly unsuitable to be the wife of a king . After receiving advice from the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Stanley Baldwin , as well as the Dominion governments , that he could not remain King and marry Simpson , Edward abdicated . Though loyal and supportive of her son , Mary could not comprehend why Edward would neglect his royal duties in favour of his personal feelings . Simpson had been presented formally to both King George V and Queen Mary at court , but Mary later refused to meet her either in public or privately . She saw it as her duty to provide moral support for her second son , the reserved and stammering Prince Albert , Duke of York , who ascended the throne on Edward 's abdication , taking the name George VI . When Mary attended the coronation , she became the first British dowager queen to do so . Edward 's abdication did not lessen her love for him , but she never wavered in her disapproval of his actions . 
 Mary took an interest in the upbringing of her granddaughters , Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret , and took them on various excursions in London , to art galleries and museums . ( The Princesses ' own parents thought it unnecessary for them to be taxed with any demanding educational regime . ) 
 During the Second World War , George VI wished his mother to be evacuated from London . Although she was reluctant , she decided to live at Badminton House , Gloucestershire , with her niece , Mary Somerset , Duchess of Beaufort , the daughter of her brother Lord Cambridge . Her personal belongings were transported from London in seventy pieces of luggage . Her household , which comprised fifty @-@ five servants , occupied most of the house , except for the Duke and Duchess 's private suites , until after the war . The only people to complain about the arrangements were the royal servants , who found the house too small , though Queen Mary annoyed her niece by having the ancient ivy torn from the walls as she considered it unattractive and a hazard . From Badminton , in support of the war effort , she visited troops and factories , and directed the gathering of scrap materials . She was known to offer lifts to soldiers she spotted on the roads . In 1942 , her youngest surviving son , Prince George , Duke of Kent , was killed in an air crash while on active service . Mary finally returned to Marlborough House in June 1945 , after the war in Europe had resulted in the defeat of Nazi Germany . 
 Mary was an eager collector of objects and pictures with a royal connection . She paid above @-@ market estimates when purchasing jewels from the estate of Dowager Empress Marie of Russia and paid almost three times the estimate when buying the family 's Cambridge Emeralds from Lady Kilmorey , the mistress of her late brother Prince Francis . In 1924 , the famous architect Sir Edwin Lutyens created Queen Mary 's Dolls ' House for her collection of miniature pieces . Indeed , she has sometimes been criticised for her aggressive acquisition of objets d 'art for the Royal Collection . On several occasions , she would express to hosts , or others , that she admired something they had in their possession , in the expectation that the owner would be willing to donate it . Her extensive knowledge of , and research into , the Royal Collection helped in identifying artefacts and artwork that had gone astray over the years . The Royal Family had lent out many objects over previous generations . Once she had identified unreturned items through old inventories , she would write to the holders , requesting that they be returned . 
 In 1952 , King George VI died , the third of Queen Mary 's children to predecease her ; her eldest granddaughter , Princess Elizabeth , ascended the throne as Queen Elizabeth II . Mary died the next year of lung cancer ( referred to publicly as " gastric problems " ) on 24 March 1953 at the age of 85 , only ten weeks before her granddaughter 's coronation . Mary let it be known that , in the event of her death , the coronation was not to be postponed . Her remains lay in state at Westminster Hall , where large numbers of mourners filed past her coffin . She is buried beside her husband in the nave of St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sir Henry " Chips " Channon wrote that she was " above politics ... magnificent , humorous , worldly , in fact nearly sublime , though cold and hard . But what a grand Queen . " 
 The ocean liners RMS Queen Mary and RMS Queen Mary 2 ; the Royal Navy battlecruiser , HMS Queen Mary , which was destroyed at the Battle of Jutland in 1916 ; Queen Mary University of London ; Queen Mary Reservoir in Surrey , United Kingdom ; Queen Mary College , Lahore ; Queen Mary Hospital , Hong Kong ; Queen Mary 's Peak , the highest mountain in Tristan da Cunha ; Queen Mary Land in Antarctica ; and Queen Mary 's College in Chennai , India , are named in her honour . 
 Actresses who have portrayed Queen Mary on stage and screen include Dame Wendy Hiller ( on the London stage in Crown Matrimonial ) , Greer Garson ( in the Hallmark television production of Crown Matrimonial ) , Dame Flora Robson ( in A King 's Story ) , Dame Peggy Ashcroft ( in Edward & Mrs. Simpson ) , Phyllis Calvert ( in The Woman He Loved ) , Gaye Brown ( in All the King 's Men ) , Dame Eileen Atkins ( in Bertie and Elizabeth ) , Miranda Richardson ( in The Lost Prince ) , Margaret Tyzack ( in Wallis & Edward ) , Claire Bloom ( in The King 's Speech ) and Judy Parfitt ( in W.E. ) . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 26 May 1867 – 6 July 1893 : Her Serene Highness Princess Victoria Mary of Teck 
 6 July 1893 – 22 January 1901 : Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York 
 22 January 1901 – 9 November 1901 : Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Cornwall and York 
 9 November 1901 – 6 May 1910 : Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales 
 6 May 1910 – 20 January 1936 : Her Majesty The Queen 
 20 January 1936 – 24 March 1953 : Her Majesty Queen Mary 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 Queen Mary 's arms were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom impaled with her family arms – the arms of her grandfather , Prince Adolphus , Duke of Cambridge , in the 1st and 4th quarters , and the arms of her father , Prince Francis , Duke of Teck , in the 2nd and 3rd quarters . The shield is surmounted by the imperial crown , and supported by the crowned lion of England and " a stag Proper " as in the arms of Württemberg . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = 2011 Daytona 500 = 
 The 2011 Daytona 500 , the 53rd running of the event , was held on February 20 , 2011 at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach , Florida as the first race of the 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup season . Trevor Bayne , driving for Wood Brothers Racing , won the race becoming the youngest Daytona 500 winner . Carl Edwards finished second , while David Gilliland , Bobby Labonte , and Kurt Busch rounded out the Top 5 . Bayne had taken the lead shortly before the final restart and maintained it to win his first Cup Series race and Wood Brothers ' fifth Daytona 500 . 
 The race featured 16 cautions and 74 lead changes among 22 different drivers . Following the race , Edwards led the Drivers ' Championship with 42 points , one ahead of Gilliland and Labonte . Ford led the Manufacturers ' Championship with nine points , three ahead of Toyota and five ahead of Dodge . A total of 182 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 15 @.@ 6 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Daytona International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races , the others being Michigan International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Talladega Superspeedway . The standard track at Daytona International Speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at 31 degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at 18 degrees . Jamie McMurray was the defending race winner . 
 In preparation for the race , NASCAR held several test sessions on January 20 – 22 , 2011 for teams to test the newer pavement at Daytona . Also in the sessions , the opening of the restrictor plate was reduced from the 30 / 32 inch plate used in tire testing to 29 / 32 inch . NASCAR vice president for competition Robin Pemberton stated , " We 'll have to get back and talk to the teams and look at the speeds from the last two days of testing . I think we have some high @-@ water marks at 197 @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half [ miles per hour ] which , depending on where they pulled up in the draft , it may be a little quick , but it 's hard to say . " 
 Every test session began at 9 a.m. EST , stopped at 12 : 00 – 1 : 00 p.m. EST , and concluded at 5 : 00 p.m. EST . During the first session on the morning of January 20 , 2011 , thirty @-@ three drivers participated , and Clint Bowyer was quickest with a speed of 184 @.@ 216 mph while David Reutimann had the highest speed of 195 @.@ 780 mph during the second session in the afternoon . The third test session , scheduled for the morning of January 21 , was canceled because of wet weather . During the fourth session , held during the afternoon , 34 drivers participated with Denny Hamlin being quickest with a speed of 196 @.@ 868 mph . Several drivers decided to leave after the session , which included Reutimann , Martin Truex , Jr . , Jimmie Johnson , and Bowyer . During the fifth session , held on the morning of January 22 , 29 drivers participated , and Joey Logano was quickest with a speed of 197 @.@ 516 mph . Brad Keselowski was quickest with a speed of 198 @.@ 605 mph in the final session . 
 After the two @-@ car draft style dominated the 2011 Budweiser Shootout , NASCAR reduced the front grille opening to 50 square inches and the overflow valve for the cooling system would be supplied by NASCAR and set at 33 pounds per square inch . Also , high speeds in the race caused NASCAR to reduce the size of the restrictor plate by 1 / 64 @-@ inch , with the expectations of cutting 10 horsepower from the engines . 
 This race also marked the tenth anniversary of the 2001 death of Dale Earnhardt . As such , several tributes took place during the race . All of the cars fielded by Earnhardt 's former team , Richard Childress Racing , and the team he started , Earnhardt Ganassi Racing , carried No. 3 decals . During the race itself , NASCAR held a " silent lap " on Lap 3 , a practice that was first used in memory of Earnhardt during the 2001 season . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Seven practice sessions were held before the race . The first two on February 12 ran 120 minutes and 105 minutes each . The next two on February 16 were for shortened 90 minutes and 55 minutes long after rain delays . Two days later , two more practice sessions were scheduled , which ran 60 and 85 minutes long . The final practice session was held on February 19 . Mark Martin was quickest with a time of 48 @.@ 681 seconds in the first session , less than one @-@ tenth of a second faster than Jeff Gordon . Paul Menard was just off Gordon 's pace , followed by Dale Earnhardt Jr . , Jeff Burton , and Bill Elliott . Johnson was seventh , still within a second of Martin 's time . In the second practice session , Martin remained fastest with a time of 48 @.@ 567 seconds , less than one @-@ tenth of a second quicker than second @-@ placed Johnson . Burton took third place , ahead of Trevor Bayne , Menard and Gordon . Also in the second practice session , McMurray collided into the wall after his tire failed , and had to move to his back @-@ up car . 
 Forty @-@ nine cars were entered for qualifying , but only 43 raced per NASCAR 's qualifying procedure . Unlike most races during the season , the qualifying session only determined the first two positions , while the rest of the drivers qualified by the 2011 Gatorade Duels . Earnhardt clinched his 10th pole position during his career , with a time of 48 @.@ 364 seconds . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Jeff Gordon . Once the qualifying session completed , Earnhardt commented , " The main thing [ the pole ] does for me is take the pressure off Thursday 's race . I can go out and have fun and not worry about where I finish or getting a good starting spot for the Daytona 500 . " 
 Kyle Busch was quickest in the rain @-@ delayed third practice with 44 @.@ 943 seconds , followed by Greg Biffle , Earnhardt , Johnson , and Juan Pablo Montoya . Earnhardt and Truex collided and hit the wall , both needing to use their back @-@ up cars which meant Earnhardt forfeited pole position . Kasey Kahne led fourth practice with 44 @.@ 985 seconds , only one @-@ thousandth of a second faster than Joey Logano . Gordon was third ahead of David Ragan and Kyle Busch . Kurt Busch and Burton were the winners of the Gatorade Duels . The qualifying grid was finalized with Busch in third and Burton fourth . Regan Smith qualified fifth ahead of Bowyer , Kevin Harvick , Waltrip , Matt Kenseth , and Kyle Busch . Drivers who failed to qualify were Derrike Cope , Kevin Conway , Todd Bodine , Michael McDowell and Casey Mears . 
 Burton was fastest in fifth practice with a 45 @.@ 767 seconds lap , ahead of Menard , Ragan , Marcos Ambrose and Hamlin . Martin led the sixth session ahead of Johnson and Kahne . Brian Vickers was next with a 46 @.@ 225 seconds lap ahead of Biffle with 46 @.@ 426 seconds . Burton 's 44 @.@ 929 seconds topped the final practice session , followed by Bowyer and Keselowski . Robby Gordon and Kurt Busch rounded out the top five drivers , claiming the fourth and fifth positions respectively . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race began at 1 : 00 p.m. EST and was televised live in the United States on Fox . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race with the air temperature at 71 ° F ( 22 ° C ) . Rev. Dr. L. Ronald Durham , senior pastor of the Greater Friendship Baptist Church of Daytona Beach , Florida , began pre @-@ race ceremonies by giving the invocation . Famous country music singer Martina McBride performed the national anthem , and Josh Duhamel , Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley and movie director Michael Bay of the upcoming film Transformers : Dark of the Moon , gave the command for the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Dale Earnhardt , Jr . ; David Ragan , Joey Logano , and David Reutimann had to move to the rear of the grid due to changing to their back @-@ up car . Wrecker ( an elite team of Autobots ) versions of Earnhardt , Jr . ' s , Juan Pablo Montoya 's , and Jimmie Johnson 's cars led the field during the pace laps as well . 
 Kurt Busch retained his pole position lead into the first corner , followed by outside polesitter Jeff Gordon . On the following lap , Smith began to assist Busch by drafting . On lap 3 , NASCAR held a moment of silence to honor Dale Earnhardt , who was killed ten years earlier in the 2001 race . On lap 4 , A. J. Allmendinger and Mark Martin moved to the first and second positions . A lap later , the first caution was flown when Kyle Busch got turned sideways . Under caution , he made a pit stop to have his car 's toe plate checked and to have the front end aligned . When the race restarted on lap 8 , Kevin Harvick led but after one lap , Martin and Allmendinger passed him . Three laps later , the second caution came out when J. J. Yeley had an engine failure . Most of the drivers made pit stops under the caution , except for Brad Keselowski . At the restart , he would lead and Bobby Labonte passed him for the lead on the next lap . 
 On lap 17 , Paul Menard , with assistance from Tony Stewart , took the lead from Labonte . Montoya and Jamie McMurray passed him and Stewart for the first and second positions four laps later . On lap 22 , Harvick 's engine failed , allowing the third caution to come out . During the caution , most of the front runners made pit stops under caution for mostly fuel , while some decided to change tires . Afterward , Clint Bowyer lead on the restart . He remained leading the next two laps , while Earnhardt , Jr. moved to the 5th position . On lap 29 , Reutimann and Michael Waltrip collided , causing a multi @-@ car pileup , involving 17 drivers , including three of the four drivers from Hendrick Motorsports : Johnson , Martin , and Gordon . Some of the drivers who have led made pit stops during the caution , while McMurray and Montoya out in front as the race restarted lap 35 . 
 McMurray and Montoya continued to lead for the next three laps , as 14 teams were repairing their cars in the garage after the lap 29 crash . On lap 39 , Keselowski retook the lead , after having assistance from Regan Smith . Three laps later , Johnson was preparing to return to the race . On lap 43 , Stewart took the lead one lap before Keselowski retook it from him . On lap 45th , Bowyer became the quickest in the race with a speed of over 200 mph . Two laps later , Robert Richardson , Jr. spun off the bumper of Travis Kvapil , bringing out yet the fifth caution . He sustained major damage to his car in the accident . Under caution , the leaders made pit stops , giving the first and second positions to Terry Labonte and Dave Blaney at the restart . On lap 51 , Kurt Busch led before Menard overtook him . 
 Menard remained leading , as Bowyer and Burton moved to the third and fourth positions on lap 53 . On the following lap , they moved to first and second after passing Menard . On lap 57 , the sixth caution was given after Brian Vickers ' car stalled . The front runners made pit stops during the caution , as McMurray and Montoya reclaimed the first two positions at the restart . On lap 61 , Johnson returned to the race after his team repaired the car in the garage . Also on the same lap , Ku . Busch overtook McMurray to become the leader , as both McMurray and Montoya fell to the 17th and 18th positions . On the 63rd lap , Logano , with assistance from Stewart , moved into the fifth position , as Kasey Kahne moved to tenth . By lap 65 , Logano and Stewart had fell to seventh and eighth . On the next lap , Burton moved into the first position . On the 67th lap , Keselowski moved to third , as Smith became the leader . Smith remained the leader until lap 72 when Jeff Burton and Bowyer passed him . By lap 73 , the race had 26 lead changes . On the following lap , Burton passed Bowyer for the first position . Three laps later , Kvapil prompted the caution after spinning sideways . At the lap 78 restart , Bowyer was the leader ahead of Earnhardt , Jr. in second . 
 On the following lap , Earnhardt , Jr. overtook Bowyer for the first position . On lap 82 , McMurray reclaimed the first position , as Smith made a pit stop . After leading one lap , McMurray was passed by Ryan Newman and Logano . On the 86th lap , Martin Truex , Jr . , with assistance from Carl Edwards , became the leader before Bowyer and Burton passed them on lap 87 . Five laps later , Kurt Busch reclaimed the first position as Smith moved into second . On lap 94 , Burton 's engine failed , but no caution was given . Two laps later , Robby Gordon became the leader , after having assistance from Bayne . On the 100th lap , McMurray reclaimed the first position . On the following lap , Newman became the leader , but after four laps , Gordon passed him for the position . On lap 107 , the eighth caution was given after Montoya spun following a bump from team @-@ mate McMurray . During the caution all the drivers made pit stops , with Gordon reclaiming the lead afterward . On lap 110 , Kurt Busch moved to the first position , but after four laps , he was passed by Bowyer . Bowyer was passed by Truex two laps later on lap 116 , but Truex , Jr. himself was passed by Busch on the next lap . 
 On the 118th lap , Bowyer and Menard moved to the first two positions . By lap 120 , the race had experienced 47 lead changes among 18 different leaders . Two laps later , Truex reclaimed the first position , as the ninth caution was given for Kvapil . During the caution , most of the front runners made pit stops . At the lap 127 restart , Truex led the grid to the green flag , but on the following lap , Bowyer passed him . Seven laps later , the tenth caution was given after Kenseth collided into the wall . Some of the front runners made pit stops during the caution . At the lap 140 restart , Bowyer was the leader , but after one lap , Truex passed him . On lap 143 , the eleventh caution was given following contact between Greg Biffle and Montoya . More of the front runners made pit stops again during the caution . At the lap 146 restart , Truex was the leader . One lap later , Earnhardt , Jr. claimed the lead for six laps before Newman passed him . On lap 158 , a record twelfth caution was given , as Kvapil collided into the wall . Most of the drivers made pit stops during the caution , with Newman the leader . At the lap 163 restart , Newman was the leader ahead of Hamlin and Earnhardt . On the following lap , Hamlin became the leader , as Montoya moved up to third . On lap 167 , the thirteenth caution was caused by Keselowski colliding into the wall . The accident also involved Smith and Logano . At the lap 170 restart , Hamlin was the leader , but on the following lap he was passed by Earnhardt , Jr .. 
 On the next lap , Newman became the leader , as Logano drove to pit road . On the 173rd lap , Menard moved to the third position , after having assistance from Stewart . Two laps later , Ragan became the leader , but two laps later , Bowyer reclaimed the position . On lap 179 , Newman moved up to the first position , as Earnhardt moved to eleventh . Three laps later , Kahne collided into the wall , prompting the caution to come out . On the same lap , McMurray had one cylinder to fail . At the lap 185 restart , Newman remained the leader . On the following lap , Earnhardt and Stewart moved into the third and fourth positions . On lap 192 , Bowyer moved up to the third position , then to the first position . Three laps later , Smith moved into the first position . On lap 197 , the fifteenth caution was given after Smith spun sideways , as Bowyer was also involved and sustained major damage . During the caution , Earnhardt made a pit stop because of a possible deflating tire . At the lap 202 restart , for a green @-@ white @-@ checker finish , Ragan was the leader , ahead of Bayne . 
 On the ensuing restart , Ragan was black flagged for changing lanes before the start / finish line just before the sixteenth caution came out after a three @-@ car accident , involving Earnhardt , Jr . ; Newman ; and Truex , Jr . During the caution , Ragan drove to pit road , giving the lead to Trevor Bayne , with Labonte second . On the final lap of a second green @-@ white @-@ checker finish , Edwards and David Gilliland mounted a charge on the inside lane . Exiting turn four , Edwards drew alongside Labonte and closed in on Bayne , who moved to the bottom to block Edwards and maintained the lead to win his first race in his Sprint Cup Series career at the age of 20 . Edwards finished second , ahead of Gilliland in third and Labonte in fourth . Kurt Busch clinched the fifth position ; Montoya , Smith , Kyle Busch , Menard , and Martin rounded out the top ten finishers in the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The 20 @-@ year @-@ old , Bayne , appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his first win of his Sprint Cup Series career , in front of a crowd of 182 @,@ 000 people . Also by winning the race , he became the youngest winner of the Daytona 500 at 20 years and one day . Jeff Gordon previously held the title at 25 years old . The race was Bayne 's second Sprint Cup Series start , and became the Wood Brothers Racing team 's fifth Daytona 500 win . He also became the second driver to win the race in his first attempt , with the other begin Lee Petty who won the 1959 Daytona 500 , which was the inaugural race . With the win coming in his second start in the Sprint Cup Series , Bayne also matched Jamie McMurray for quickest victory at the start of a career ; however , since Bayne was racing for the Nationwide Series points championship , he did not earn any Sprint Cup points for the win . The race victory was the Wood Brothers first win since the 2001 season . Following his win , he described his happiness , " If I tried to put it into words , I couldn 't do it any justice . " 
 Following the race , which experienced a record 16 cautions and 74 lead changes , among 22 different drivers , Edwards commented , " A new winner , up @-@ and @-@ coming guy that 's tied to so much history . This is as good as it gets . If people aren 't watching , that 's their problem , because we got some great stuff going on here . " In the post @-@ race press conference , the third @-@ place finisher , Gilliland , said , " It 's a credit to NASCAR and their new rules , trying to get the ( cars ) closer , to let teams like us have a chance to be competitive . A lot of the rules ( are ) making these races more competitive . " Jeff Gordon also commented about Bayne , " I think it 's very cool . Trevor 's a good kid , and I love the Wood Brothers . I 'm really happy for him . And I think it 's great for the sport . To have a young talent like that – he 's got that spark , you know ? " 
 Ragan , who was the leader before the fifteenth caution , described his frustration after being black flagged by saying , " It was tough to swallow . Who knows what would have happened in that next lap ? We had a top @-@ five car [ Sunday ] and we didn 't finish in the top five , so that 's a bummer . We had a car that could 've won the Daytona 500 . We were sitting in position and just didn 't do it . This thing only comes around once a year , so I 'll think about it until we throw the checkered flag on next year 's Daytona 500 . So it 's tough , but there is a bright side – we finished , we got some points and we ran up front , but we just didn 't get what we come down here to do . " 
 As Bayne was running for the Nationwide Series Championship and was thus ineligible to receive points , the result left Edwards leading the Driver 's Championship with 42 points . Gilliland , who finished third , was second with 41 , which was tied with Bobby Labonte and was one point ahead of Kurt Busch . Montoya was fifth with 39 points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Ford became the leader with 9 points . Toyota became second with 6 points . Dodge followed with 4 points , one point ahead of Chevrolet in fourth . 15 @.@ 6 million people watched the race on television . The race took three hours , fifty @-@ nine minutes and twenty @-@ four seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 118 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = TIE fighter = 
 TIE fighters are fictional starfighters in the Star Wars universe . Propelled by twin ion engines ( hence the TIE acronym ) , TIE fighters are fast , fragile starfighters produced by <unk> Fleet Systems for the Galactic Empire . TIE fighters and other TIE craft appear in Star Wars films , television shows , and throughout the Star Wars expanded universe . Several TIE fighter replicas and toys , as well as a TIE flight simulator , have been produced and sold by merchandise companies . 
 = = Origin and design = = 
 Industrial Light & Magic 's ( ILM ) Colin Cantwell created the concept model that established the TIE fighter 's ball @-@ cockpit and hexagonal panels design for Star Wars ( 1977 ) . Star Wars creator George Lucas liked the basic design consisting of two panels connected by a stick with a ball @-@ shaped cockpit , but the Cantwell 's concept had few details . Joe Johnston created additional details , such as the cockpit window and the attachment points between the solar panels and the hull . 
 Initially given a blue color scheme , the TIE fighter models for the first film were grey to better film against a bluescreen ; TIE fighters in The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) and Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) shifted back to being a muted blue . Sound designer Ben Burtt created the distinctive TIE fighter sound effect by combining an elephant call with a car driving on wet pavement . Combat scenes between TIE fighters and the Millennium Falcon and Rebel Alliance X @-@ wing fighters in Star Wars were meant to be reminiscent of World War II dogfight footage ; editors used World War II air combat clips as placeholders while Industrial Light & Magic completed the movie 's special effects . Darth Vader 's distinct TIE fighter in Star Wars was designed to make it instantly recognizable , and the TIE interceptors developed for Jedi were designed to look fast , deadly , and frightening . 
 The Jedi starfighter , created for Revenge of the Sith ( 2005 ) , was designed to bridge the appearance of the Jedi starfighter in Attack of the Clones ( 2002 ) and the TIE fighter design from the original trilogy . The V @-@ wing starfighter , seen at the end of Revenge of the Sith , also makes the distinctive TIE fighter sound when flying by a Star Destroyer . Dark Horse Comics ' Sean Cooke designed the TIE predator for Star Wars : Legacy ( 2006 ) , set 130 years after the events of Star Wars , to appear both reminiscent of and more advanced than the original TIE fighter . 
 Designers for The Force Awakens ( 2015 ) had numerous discussions about how much to " update " the TIE fighter for the first sequel film set 30 years after Return of the Jedi . They retained the starfighter 's design but altered its aesthetic to suggest improvements to the vessel 's manufacturing process and materials . 
 = = Depiction = = 
 Star Wars literature states that <unk> Fleet Systems manufactures TIE fighters and most TIE variants . TIE fighters ' solar panels power a twin ion engine ( TIE ) system that accelerates gases at a high speed along almost any vector , affording the ships tremendous speed and maneuverability . Described as lacking a hyperdrive , life support , or shield generators , the fragile TIE fighters are deployed in large numbers from bases or larger ships ; a Star Destroyer carries a wing of 72 various TIE craft . Expanded Universe material holds that TIE fighter pilots , who undergo intense physical and psychological testing , are trained to be intensely loyal to Emperor Palpatine and the Empire , willing to sacrifice themselves and their <unk> to accomplish their mission . TIE pilots were seen as expendable assets , as it was far cheaper to manufacture a great deal of standardized spacecraft in overwhelming numbers than it was to fully equip the craft . Although Expanded Universe material often describes TIE fighters as lacking an ejection seat , the player can eject from TIE craft in LucasArts ' TIE Fighter flight simulator . During the events of The Force Awakens , the First Order sees the value in its TIE pilots and equips its TIE fighters with shields to protect their occupants . A TIE fighter stolen by Poe Dameron and Finn in The Force Awakens has an ejection seat , allowing both characters to survive a crash . 
 = = = Other TIE craft = = = 
 In addition to the TIE fighter , a variety of other TIE craft appear throughout the films . Darth Vader flies a TIE Advanced in Star Wars . The Empire Strikes Back introduces a TIE shuttle and TIE bombers , which ferry Captain Needa ( Michael Culver ) to Darth Vader 's Super Star Destroyer and bomb asteroids in the hunt for the Millennium Falcon , respectively . Both TIE craft have a design that stems from an unused " TIE boarding craft " concept developed for A New Hope . The TIE bomber 's double @-@ hull design led ILM 's modelmakers to dub the ship a " double chili dog " fighter . TIE interceptors — faster TIE fighters with dagger @-@ shaped wings and four laser cannons — appear at various points in Return of the Jedi . Two scales of TIE interceptor models were used during filming . The Force Awakens features TIE / FO starfighters that have deflector shields and special operations TIE / SF fighters with heavier weapons , a hyperdrive , and shields . " <unk> , fang @-@ like " TIE Striker interceptors will appear in Rogue One ( 2016 ) . 
 Additionally , LucasArts Star Wars video games introduce several TIE variants , such as the TIE Hunter starfighter in Rogue Squadron III and the TIE Mauler surface vehicle in Empire at War . The TIE Advanced ( nicknamed " Avenger " in @-@ game ) and TIE Defender — heavily upgraded derivatives of previous craft seen in the Star Wars universe — first appear in TIE Fighter as player @-@ <unk> craft . The plot of Rebel Assault II revolves around destroying the Empire 's ability to manufacture the cloaking TIE Phantom starfighter , and a campaign in X @-@ Wing Alliance centers on destroying experimental remote @-@ controlled TIE fighters . Star Wars Rebels saw the introduction of another TIE Advanced model used by certain high @-@ ranking Imperials . 
 Star Wars literature also introduces TIE varieties . Corran Horn flies a TIE clutch in I , Jedi and TIE raptors attack Rogue Squadron in Solo Command . <unk> wings — TIE fighter and Y @-@ wing hybrids — appear both in I , Jedi and Rogue Squadron : Masquerade . Dark Horse 's Dark Empire introduces both the droid @-@ piloted TIE / D and the TIE crawler " century tank " . West End Games ' roleplaying sourcebooks introduce varieties that include the TIE / fc fire @-@ control support ship , the TIE / <unk> ground @-@ attack fighter , the TIE / rc reconnaissance vessel , and the TIE scout . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 A TIE fighter model used in filming the climax of Star Wars sold at auction for $ 350 @,@ 000 . Fans built a 16 @-@ foot @-@ by @-@ 20 @-@ foot , 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound TIE fighter float to commemorate Star Wars ' thirtieth anniversary as part of the 2007 Crystal Lake Gala Parade . A Wired editor 's creation of a TIE fighter model out of Starbucks cups and stirrers prompted the magazine to create a contest for its readers to submit their own art out of similar Starbucks <unk> io9 mocked the variety of TIE fighters in the franchise , listing four TIE models on its list of the eleven " silliest " Star Wars ships . 
 Kenner released TIE fighter and TIE interceptor toys during the original Star Wars trilogy 's theatrical release , and Kenner 's die @-@ cast TIE bomber is a rare collector 's item . Hasbro also released TIE fighter , TIE bomber , and TIE interceptor toys . Both Kenner and Hasbro also manufactured TIE fighter pilot action figures . Lego manufactured TIE fighter , TIE bomber , TIE interceptor , TIE defender , and TIE advanced models . One of eight Lego mini @-@ kit vehicles released in 2002 is a TIE advanced , and the pieces to all eight can be combined to create a TIE bomber . Lucasfilm members had access to a limited @-@ edition mini @-@ kit TIE fighter . Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published various TIE starfighter and TIE @-@ related cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game , respectively . In 2012 , Fantasy Flight Games released Star Wars : X @-@ Wing Miniatures Game , a miniatures game with pre @-@ painted and to scale miniature X @-@ wings and TIE fighters . In 1994 , LucasArts released the TIE Fighter flight simulator , which casts the player as an Imperial pilot flying a variety of TIE starfighters . TIE starfighters and their variants are also playable in third- or first @-@ person <unk> in several Star Wars titles . 
 = Gay Power , Gay Politics = 
 " Gay Power , Gay Politics " is a 1980 episode of the American documentary television series CBS Reports . It was anchored by Harry Reasoner with reportage by George Crile . Crile also produced the episode with co @-@ producer Grace Diekhaus . He conceived the show after becoming aware of the 1979 National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights and took as his focus the 1979 San Francisco mayoral election . After intermittent shooting over several months in 1979 with the cooperation of prominent members of the city 's LGBT community , CBS aired " Gay Power , Gay Politics " on April 26 , 1980 . 
 Although described by CBS as a report on the growing influence of the LGBT community in San Francisco politics , " Gay Power , Gay Politics " focused largely on the supposed sexual practices of the gay male community , especially sadomasochism . The documentary sparked outrage in the city and CBS was roundly criticized for its journalistic tactics . The National News Council , a media watchdog organization , found that CBS had violated journalistic standards through misrepresentation purposely to reinforce stereotypes and through deceptive editing . 
 " Gay Power , Gay Politics " was used as a tool of the religious right to block or repeal anti @-@ discrimination ordinances . LGBT writers and theorists have continued to criticize the documentary , although some have suggested that there is some truth to its assertions . 
 = = Production = = 
 George Crile became interested in making " Gay Power , Gay Politics " after learning of the National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights scheduled for October 1979 . Crile had earlier produced a piece on assassinated San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk that ran on the program CBS Magazine . For this new program , he intended to focus on the 1979 San Francisco mayoral election and the political strength of the gay voting bloc in the city , which the several candidates were courting . He brought Grace Diekhaus in to co @-@ produce with him and secured approval from CBS . 
 Filming began in the summer of 1979 and continued periodically through November , with the production team shooting in several intervals for a few days each . A number of prominent gay activists , including Armistead Maupin , Cleve Jones and Sally Gearhart , assisted Crile and Diekhaus with the project , although Gearhart and fellow activist Del Martin began questioning their motives , coming to believe the network " was out to do a hatchet job " . Crile interviewed Gearhart for the piece but by the date of her interview she was so mistrustful of the producers that she took measures to try to prevent herself from being misrepresented . " I would lift my voice at a certain point so what I said could not be cut . He seemed to want me to vilify Diane ( sic ) Feinstein in some way and set her in opposition to the gay community .... During one of the breaks I told him that I didn 't feel good about it ... I felt I had been twisted and manipulated . " Ultimately Gearhart 's interview was cut entirely , for which she was " ecstatic " . When Crile began his interview with then @-@ Mayor Dianne Feinstein by asking " How does it feel to be the mayor of Sodom and Gomorrah ? " Feinstein threw him and his crew out of her office . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Anchor Harry Reasoner opened the hour with the following narration , over shots of the 1979 March on Washington : 
 For someone of my generation , it sounds a bit preposterous . Political power for homosexuals ? But those predictions are already coming true . In this report , we 'll see how the gays of San Francisco are using the political process to further their own special interest , just like every other minority group before them . Gay power , gay politics , that 's what this report is about . It 's not a story about life @-@ styles or the average gay experience . What we 'll see is the birth of a political movement and the troubling questions it raises for the eighties , not only for San Francisco , but for other cities throughout the country . 
 Crile 's report , rather than exploring the thesis laid out by Reasoner , instead focused in large measure on sexual activity , including men cruising in Buena Vista Park and interviews with so @-@ called sadomasochism consultants . He reported that one out of every ten deaths in San Francisco was attributable to gay men participating in BDSM and that one gay @-@ oriented BDSM establishment 's clientele engaged in sexual activity " so dangerous that they have a gynecological table there with a doctor and nurse on hand to sew people up . " He compared San Francisco to the Weimar Republic , asking Cleve Jones , " Isn 't it a sign of decadence when you have so many gays emerging , breaking apart all the values of a society ? " Crile also included footage of Feinstein , in the midst of a run @-@ off election to retain her mayorship , appearing before the Harvey Milk Democratic Club , an LGBT Democrat organization . The program as aired showed Feinstein apologizing for remarks she had made in an earlier Ladies ' Home Journal interview , followed immediately by applause . 
 Following footage of Jones at a candlelight vigil for Harvey Milk and additional footage from the March on Washington , Reasoner closed with : 
 Gay political organizations are acting all across the country . The right of homosexuals to organize like any other minority seeking to further its own interests is no longer in question . The question is , what will those interests be ? Will they include a demand for absolute sexual freedom , as they did in San Francisco ? And if so , will this challenge to traditional values provoke far more hostility and controversy when it is put to the test elsewhere ? It is no longer a matter of whether homosexuals will achieve political power , but what they will attempt to do with it . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Representation of the gay community and journalistic standards = = = 
 Crile and CBS were sharply criticized for the reporting and editing practices used in the documentary . A gay journalist named Randy Alfred , who had covered many of the same campaign events that were included in the episode , spent some 300 hours researching what he believed to be factual errors and misrepresentations within the broadcast . By July 10 he had prepared a 20 @-@ page complaint outlining 44 alleged instances of misrepresentation which he filed with the National News Council , a media watchdog organization . " Gay Power , Gay Politics " , Alfred said , relied on " a systematic use of hearsay , oversights , exaggerations , distortions , inflammatory buzzwords , leading questions , and misleading and deceitful editing " that had as its result " patterned distortion " . Of particular note was the scene of Feinstein at the Harvey Milk Democratic Club . The editor had inserted applause immediately after Feinstein apologized for her earlier Ladies ' Home Journal comments , which Crile had described as Feinstein 's " groveling to atone " . The applause had in fact come after her condemnation of anti @-@ gay violence and a promise to appoint a gay or lesbian member of the police commission . 
 In response to complaints before the episode even aired , CBS had flown the producers to San Francisco , where in an interview with local CBS affiliate KPIX the pair acknowledged that the material for the show was selected for its likelihood to be shocking . Two months after Alfred 's complaint to the NNC , CBS defended its people . Network vice @-@ president Robert Chandler dismissed the bulk of Alfred 's complaints as " trivial , irrelevant or clearly represent [ ing ] matters of opinion or judgment " . Chandler went on to acknowledge that the applause was broadcast out of sequence but denied that it was intended to deceive . " Whatever the motivation , it is clear that our producers indicated the applause out of its actual time sequence and therefore misled our viewers . This , then , constitutes an acknowledgment of error and an apology for a breach of our own journalistic standards . " Regarding the program as a whole , Chandler denied any bias . 
 The NNC met on September 18 , 1980 to consider Alfred 's allegations . After dismissing many of them as without merit , The NNC found by a vote of 9 – 2 that CBS had unfairly misrepresented a number of sexual issues , including in the BDSM scenes . " By concentrating on certain flamboyant examples of homosexual behavior the program tended to reinforce stereotypes ... The program exaggerated political concessions to gays and made them appear as threats to public morals and decency . " CBS was also found to have offered distorted coverage of the city 's annual Beaux Arts Ball and to have manipulated the soundtrack by adding the applause . The network later apologized for this on the air , the first time that the LGBT community had received an apology from a major news organization . 
 Many in the city were angered by the broadcast . The San Francisco Board of Supervisors was outraged and sent a letter of protest to CBS . Feinstein wrote to the station manager of KPIX denouncing the episode . She compared the program to " doing a documentary on Italians and only showing the Mafia " . She asked for three minutes of national airtime to respond but CBS denied her request . Armistead Maupin , who had worked closely with the production team , repudiated the program , saying " I had no idea they were doing a hit piece . " Jeff Jarvis of The San Francisco Examiner wrote , " It 's shocking that CBS News , home of Walter Cronkite , would partake of such bigotry . " Writing for the San Francisco Chronicle , Terrence O 'Flaherty labeled the documentary " a dreadful little program ... deadly for everyone it touches " . Nationally , a spokesperson for the National Gay Task Force condemned the documentary for its premise of gays wanting political power for purposes of having sex in public , for ignoring lesbians and for failing to address issues of anti @-@ gay discrimination . 
 = = = Representation of BDSM = = = 
 " Gay Power , Gay Politics " has also been criticized for its negative portrayal of the BDSM sub @-@ culture . CBS used BDSM to discredit the LGBT community by implying that an increase in gay political power would correspond with an increase in BDSM and BDSM @-@ related deaths . The program also <unk> BDSM as an exclusively gay male activity , despite the fact that most of the BDSM material filmed for the documentary was shot at a location called The Chateau , which had a heterosexual customer base . Reporter Crile interviewed San Francisco coroner Dr. Boyd Stephens , who stated that 10 % of homicides in the city were gay @-@ related and that some of those were related to the BDSM community . His words , which Stephens would later acknowledge were based on hearsay , were widely and inaccurately reported as meaning that 10 % of all homicides in San Francisco were related to BDSM . 
 = = = Anti @-@ LGBT backlash = = = 
 Following the airing of the report , the Community United Against Violence ( <unk> ) , a San Francisco group dedicated to addressing anti @-@ gay violence in the city , reported a 400 % increase of reported violent incidents against LGBT people . This marked a reversal of the decrease in violence reports to that point in 1980 . Right @-@ wing groups used " Gay Power , Gay Politics " as a fundraising tool until CBS forced them to stop . The Moral Majority , in its successful campaign to repeal a San Jose , California gay rights ordinance , used an image from the program along with the slogan " Don 't Let It Spread ! " on billboards . In 1985 , a Houston group opposed to a proposed LGBT rights ordinance for the city used clips from the program in its commercials and voters overwhelmingly rejected the ordinance . Controversial psychologist Paul Cameron , on behalf of the right wing Family Research Institute , has used the 10 % homicide figure to support his views on homosexuality , views which have been repudiated by a number of professional psychological and sociological associations . 
 = = = Continued criticism = = = 
 " Gay Power , Gay Politics " continued to be a target of criticism by LGBT community leaders and authors , although some have acknowledged that the program included " more than a few kernels of truth " . Former National Gay and Lesbian Task Force executive director Urvashi Vaid attacked the program for its presentation of gays as " sexual hedonists , privileged <unk> , and arrogant men scheming to force their ' lifestyle ' on a recalcitrant public " . She further castigated the show for excluding lesbians and people of color ( although she acknowledges that this to an extent mirrored the state of gay leadership at the time ) and noted her belief that anti @-@ gay attack videos produced in the 1990s were modeled on this broadcast . Gay cultural critic Frank Browning , while agreeing with the criticism of the tone of the documentary , nonetheless found the dudgeon that many in the community expressed to be " layered with <unk> " . Browning wrote : 
 As a credentialed , respectable , middle @-@ class professional — an ordinary person who reports , writes and speaks through the airwaves about conventional social issues of family , economy , health , and politics and who pursues the limits of lust in parks and sex clubs — I continue to wonder whether CBS was really incorrect in its characterization of gay men . 
 While echoing criticism about the exclusion of lesbian concerns and the distortions contained in the broadcast , Browning went on to note that sexual freedom has always been part of the gay male agenda and that it would be absurd to pretend otherwise . 
 = Psilocybe aztecorum = 
 Psilocybe aztecorum is a species of psilocybin mushroom in the family Hymenogastraceae . Known only from central Mexico , the fungus grows on decomposing woody debris and is found in mountainous areas at elevations of 3 @,@ 200 to 4 @,@ 000 m ( 10 @,@ 500 to 13 @,@ 100 ft ) , typically in meadows or open , grassy forests associated with Hartweg 's pine ( Pinus <unk> ) . The mushrooms have convex to bell @-@ shaped caps 1 @.@ 5 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , atop slender cylindrical stems that are up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) long . The color of the caps changes with variations in hydration , ranging from dark chestnut brown to straw yellow or whitish when dry . The base of the stem is densely covered with conspicuous white rhizomorphs , a characteristic uncommon amongst Psilocybe species . 
 The species was first reported by French mycologist Roger Heim in 1956 as a variety of Psilocybe mexicana before he officially described it under its current name a year later . Named for its association with the Nahua people also called Aztecs , P. aztecorum may have been one of the sacred mushroom species , or teonanácatl ( A Nahuatl word translated variously as " sacred mushroom " or " flesh of the gods " ) , reported in the codices of 16th @-@ century Spanish chronicler Bernardino de Sahagún . The mushrooms are still used for spiritual ceremonies by Nahua Indians in the Popocatépetl region , although this traditional usage is waning . The variety P. aztecorum var. bonetii has smaller spores than the main variety , and is found at lower elevations with Montezuma pine ( Pinus <unk> ) and sacred fir ( Abies religiosa ) . P. aztecorum may be distinguished from similar temperate species such as P. baeocystis and P. quebecensis by their ranges , and by differences in the morphology of microscopic structures like cystidia . 
 = = Taxonomy and nomenclature = = 
 The species was first mentioned by French mycologist Roger Heim in 1956 based on material collected by American ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson in Paso de Cortés , on the slopes of Popocatépetl mountain in Mexico . Heim originally named the species as a variety of Psilocybe mexicana ; limited to dried mushroom material for analysis , he only described the spores , which he explained were " relatively longer and narrower than that of Psilocybe mexicana " . A year later , Heim renamed the fungus Psilocybe aztecorum and officially described it , in addition to several other Mexican Psilocybe taxa . Some of these mushrooms , including P. aztecorum , were illustrated in the popular American weekly magazine Life ( " Seeking the Magic Mushroom " ) , in which Wasson recounted the psychedelic visions that he experienced during the divinatory rituals of the Mazatec people , thereby introducing psilocybin mushrooms to Western popular culture . 
 In 1978 , Mexican mycologist and Psilocybe specialist Gastón Guzmán emended the description of P. aztecorum to include the color variation of the cap resulting from its strongly hygrophanous nature , the mycenoid form , the rhizoids at the base of the stem , the lignicolous habitat , and the size of the spores — all features that he thought were either confused , or not sufficiently detailed , in Heim 's original description . In the same publication , Guzmán also characterized the variety P. aztecorum var. bonetii , distinguished from the main variety by its smaller spores . He had originally described this variant as a separate species , Psilocybe bonetii , in 1970 . Further , Guzmán later published Psilocybe <unk> , originally described by him from Tamil Nadu in southern India , as a synonym of P. aztecorum var. bonetii ; this putative synonymy , however , is confirmed by neither MycoBank nor Index Fungorum . Guzmán called the main variety P. aztecorum var. aztecorum ; for this reason , the species authority is often cited as " P. aztecorum var. aztecorum R. Heim emend . Guzmán " . 
 Psilocybe aztecorum is the type species of Guzmán 's section Aztecorum , a group of bluing ( i.e. , psilocybin @-@ containing ) Psilocybe mushrooms characterized by having a strongly hygrophanous cap that dries to brown or brownish white when dry ; spores that appear asymmetrical when seen in side view ; and pleurocystidia that , when present , are hyaline ( translucent ) . Other species classified in section Aztecorum are P. baeocystis and P. quebecensis . 
 The specific epithet aztecorum refers to the Aztec Indians of central Mexico , who used this mushroom in traditional ceremonies long before the Spanish came to America . The variety P. aztecorum var. <unk> is named after Dr. Federico Bonet ( died 1980 ) , emeritus professor of the Escuela Nacional de Ciencias <unk> , who assisted Guzmán with his doctoral studies . The popular names of P. aztecorum are niños or <unk> ( children or little children ) , or in the Nahuatl language <unk> which means niños del agua ( " children of the water " ) , alluding to their habitat along ravines . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is convex to bell @-@ shaped , sometimes developing a broad umbo before expanding and flattening in age ; it reaches a diameter of 1 @.@ 5 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) . In maturity , the cap eventually forms a central depression , and , in some old specimens , opens into the hollow stem . The cap surface is slimy to the touch , and has translucent striations along the margin when moist . The cap is strongly hygrophanous , meaning that it will change color depending on its level of hydration . The color ranges from yellowish @-@ brown to golden yellow in young button forms to brownish @-@ gray in age , with greenish @-@ gray tints on the margin . The color later changes to whitish from the center to the margin , finally remaining completely white ; dried specimens are straw colored to pale brownish . In contrast to most psilocybin mushrooms , the cap of P. aztecorum does not have a strong bluing reaction upon injury — only the margin stains slightly green @-@ blue . 
 The gills are adnate ( broadly attached to the stem slightly above the bottom of the gill ) or adnexed ( reaching the stem , but not attached to it ) , and are light violet gray to dark violet brown . They are either uniform in color , or have whitish edges . The hollow stem is 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) by 3 to 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 16 in ) thick , equal in width throughout or thicker at the top , cylindric or sometimes flattened , and either straight or with turns and windings . Its surface is smooth , silky @-@ fibrillose , whitish to greyish , and stains blue @-@ green irregularly when touched or in age . The base of the stem is densely covered with well @-@ developed white rhizomorphs . Young mushrooms have a white cobweb @-@ like partial veil that does not last long before it disappears , although it sometimes remains as a non @-@ permanent ring on the upper part of the stem . The flesh is whitish to yellowish or reddish @-@ yellow in the cap , or reddish @-@ brown in the stem , and shows little or no bluing reaction to injury . Like most of the bluing Psilocybe mushrooms , the odor and taste of P. aztecorum is slightly farinaceous ( similar to freshly ground flour ) in fresh specimens ; dried specimens have a more intense odor . A drop of dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) stains the cap , stem , and flesh reddish @-@ brown ; sometimes , the stem does not stain or stains slightly yellowish red . The spore print is blackish @-@ violet . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are elongated @-@ ellipsoid in face view , roughly terete ( more or less cylindrical but usually tapering at both ends ) , slightly inequilateral or asymmetrical in side view — the so @-@ called " mango " form . They typically have dimensions of 12 – 14 by 6 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 7 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 μm , although some spores have irregular shapes and are strongly elongated , up to 23 μm . Spores are thick @-@ walled ( generally between 1 – 1 @.@ 5 μm ) , dark yellowish @-@ brown , and have a broad germ pore . The variety bonetii has smaller spores measuring 10 – 13 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 by 6 – 7 μm . 
 The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) measure 24 – 33 by 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 8 μm , and may be attached to anywhere from one to four spores , although four @-@ spored basidia are most common . They are hyaline to sometimes somewhat yellowish , club @-@ shaped or roughly cylindrical , and some have a slight constriction around the middle . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the edge of a gill ) are abundant , forming a sterile band on the gill edge . They are hyaline , fusoid @-@ ampullaceous ( with a shape ranging from a spindle to a swollen bottle ) , with dimensions of 20 – 45 by 5 – 8 @.@ 2 μm , and have a filamentous neck measuring 6 – 11 by 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 5 μm . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are scattered , similar to the cheilocystidia in form and size , hyaline , and some have bifurcated or branched necks . 
 The subhymenium ( a layer of cells immediately below the hymenium ) consists of spherical cells that are interwoven with hyphae ; this layer is hyaline to yellowish or brownish , and does not have pigment crusted on the walls of the hyphae . The epicutis ( the upper of two layers of the cap cuticle ) is made of a thin gelatinous layer of hyaline or brownish hyphae measuring 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 μm in diameter . The hypodermium ( the cuticle tissue layer under the epicutis ) is hyaline , and has elongated to roughly spherical hyphae that are 10 – 18 μm in diameter . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of P. aztecorum . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Psilocybe pseudoaztecorum , found in India , differs from P. aztecorum in the morphology of the pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia . The characteristic filamentous neck present in the cystidia of P. aztecorum is absent in P. pseudoaztecorum . P. pseudoaztecorum had been previously described by K. Natarajan and N. Raman as P. aztecorum , but they published the taxon with a new name after consultation with Guzmán . Fresh specimens of P. aztecorum resemble P. pelliculosa , but this latter species is found only in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada . Like P. aztecorum , the caps of the South African species P. natalensis also bleach to nearly white when dried . The closely related P. baeocystis also bleaches in color to white when dry . Found in northwest North America from British Columbia to Washington and Oregon , P. baeocystis has thinner cheilocystidia than P. aztecorum ( typically measuring 20 – 32 by 4 @.@ 4 – 6 μm ) and its pleurocystidia , when present , are found only near the gill edge . P. quebecensis , known only from Quebec , Canada , has pleurocystidia measuring 12 – 25 by 5 – 10 μm . Although the phylogeny of the species comprising section Aztecorum is not known with certainty , Guzmán has suggested that P. aztecorum was the ancestor of P. baeocystis in northwestern North America and of P. quebecensis in northeastern North America . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 A lignicolous species , Psilocybe aztecorum lives in and decays dead wood , leaves , sticks , or other similar organic debris . Mushrooms typically fruit in groups of 5 to 20 , sometimes in bundles . Usual substrates include wood debris buried in soil , twigs or very rotten logs , and , rarely , pine cones . The mushroom is found in woodlands ( a low @-@ density forest or wooded area that allows sunlight to penetrate to the forest floor ) containing Hartweg 's pine ( Pinus <unk> ) in addition to grasses such as Festuca <unk> and <unk> <unk> , and the herbaceous plant Alchemilla procumbens , at elevations of 3 @,@ 200 – 4 @,@ 000 m ( 10 @,@ 500 – 13 @,@ 100 ft ) . Heim found the type specimens at an altitude of 3 @,@ 500 m ( 11 @,@ 500 ft ) in an alpine pine forest . P. aztecorum fruits from August to October . 
 Psilocybe aztecorum is known only from the high mountains of central Mexico , such as Sierra Nevada , Nevado de Toluca , and La Malinche in the States of Mexico , Puebla , and Tlaxcala . According to Guzmán , it is likely that the species also grows in other areas with high mountains , such as the States of Nuevo Leon , Veracruz , Colima , and Chiapas , which have ecological conditions similar to those of the known localities . Variety bonetii grows in the same substrata as the type variety , mainly on humus , but only in forests with Montezuma pine ( Pinus <unk> ) and sacred fir ( Abies religiosa ) , between 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 300 m ( 6 @,@ 600 – 10 @,@ 800 ft ) elevation ; it has not been recorded from Hartweg 's pine forests . Also known only from Mexico , in the states of Mexico and Morelos , and in the Federal District , P. aztecorum var. bonetii usually fruits from August to November . According to Guzmán , P. aztecorum should be of conservation concern owing to loss of its natural habitat . 
 = = <unk> use = = 
 Psilocybe aztecorum contains the psychoactive compound psilocybin . In 1958 , Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann reported a relatively low concentration of 0 @.@ 02 % psilocybin , but this analysis was performed on two @-@ year @-@ old specimens . Jonathan Ott and Guzmán indicated the presence of psilocybin in the variety <unk> . In terms of psychoactive potency , Paul Stamets rates P. aztecorum as " moderately to highly active " . 
 The statue of the Aztec " god of flowers " , <unk> , a 16th @-@ century stone effigy unearthed on the side of the volcano Popocatépetl , depicts a single figure seated cross @-@ legged upon a temple @-@ like base ; his body is covered in carvings of sacred and psychoactive organisms . Circular patterns on his kneecaps , right forearm , and headdress have been interpreted by R. Gordon Wasson as stylized fruit bodies of Psilocybe aztecorum . Wasson says that the convex shape and incurved margins depicted in these images show the mushroom caps just before maturity . P. aztecorum is , in addition to P. caerulescens , one of two mushrooms thought to be the species described by 16th @-@ century Spanish chronicler Bernardino de Sahagún as the teonanácatl . The word teonanácatl ( Nahuatl pronunciation : [ <unk> ͡ ɬ ] ) has been variously translated as " sacred or divine mushroom " or as " flesh of the gods " . These mushrooms , considered holy sacraments by the Aztecs , were consumed during spiritual and divinatory rituals to induce hallucinatory visions . 
 Psilocybe aztecorum is still used ceremonially by the indigenous people of Oaxaca , and by Nahua people in the Popocatépetl region , although this usage is gradually diminishing . Traditional folk healers , or curanderos , maintain familiarity with psychoactive mushrooms ( and other mind @-@ altering plants used in ceremonial rituals ) , and diagnose illnesses by having the client ingest the mushrooms . One Mixe <unk> initiation ritual involves ingestion of mushrooms following a period of " abstinence from talking , sexual intercourse , and all foods except nuts for three days , whereupon the individual goes up to a mountain , subsists on nothing but a little honey , and prays to God for the power to heal . " 
 = Canis Minor = 
 Canis Minor / <unk> <unk> / is a small constellation in the northern celestial hemisphere . In the second century , it was included as an asterism , or pattern , of two stars in Ptolemy 's 48 constellations , and it is counted among the 88 modern constellations . Its name is Latin for " lesser dog " , in contrast to Canis Major , the " greater dog " ; both figures are commonly represented as following the constellation of Orion the hunter . 
 Canis Minor contains only two stars brighter than the fourth magnitude , Procyon ( Alpha Canis Minoris ) , with a magnitude of 0 @.@ 34 , and Gomeisa ( Beta Canis Minoris ) , with a magnitude of 2 @.@ 9 . The constellation 's dimmer stars were noted by Johann Bayer , who named eight stars including Alpha and Beta , and John Flamsteed , who numbered fourteen . Procyon is the seventh @-@ brightest star in the night sky , as well as one of the closest . A yellow @-@ white main sequence star , it has a white dwarf companion . Gomeisa is a blue @-@ white main sequence star . Luyten 's Star is a ninth @-@ magnitude red dwarf and the Solar System 's next closest stellar neighbour in the constellation after Procyon . The fourth @-@ magnitude HD 66141 , which has evolved into an orange giant towards the end of its life cycle , was discovered to have a planet in 2012 . There are two faint deep sky objects within the constellation 's borders . The 11 Canis @-@ Minorids are a meteor shower that can be seen in early December . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 Though strongly associated with the Classical Greek <unk> tradition , Canis Minor originates from ancient Mesopotamia . Procyon and Gomeisa were called <unk> or " twins " in the Three Stars Each tablets , dating to around 1100 BC . In the later MUL.APIN , this name was also applied to the pairs of <unk> and <unk> Orionis and Zeta and Xi Orionis . The meaning of <unk> evolved as well , becoming the twin deities <unk> and <unk> , who are on the opposite side of the sky from <unk> , the True Shepherd of Heaven in Babylonian mythology . Canis Minor was also given the name <unk> , which translates to " the star which stands behind it " , in the MUL.APIN ; the constellation represents a rooster . This name may have also referred to the constellation Lepus . <unk> was also denoted <unk> and <unk> in Babylonia . Canis Minor was then called <unk> in Akkadian astronomy . 
 Canis Minor was one of the original 48 constellations formulated by Ptolemy in his second @-@ century Almagest , in which it was defined as a specific pattern ( asterism ) of stars ; Ptolemy identified only two stars and hence no depiction was possible . The Ancient Greeks called the constellation <unk> / Procyon , " coming before the dog " , transliterated into Latin as <unk> , <unk> , or variations thereof , by Cicero and others . Roman writers also appended the descriptors parvus , minor or <unk> ( " small " or " lesser " , for its faintness ) , septentrionalis ( " northerly " , for its position in relation to Canis Major ) , primus ( rising " first " ) or sinister ( rising to the " left " ) to its name Canis . In Greek mythology , Canis Minor was sometimes connected with the Teumessian Fox , a beast turned into stone with its hunter , Laelaps , by Zeus , who placed them in heaven as Canis Major ( Laelaps ) and Canis Minor ( Teumessian Fox ) . Eratosthenes accompanied the Little Dog with Orion , while Hyginus linked the constellation with <unk> , a dog owned by Icarius of Athens . On discovering the latter 's death , the dog and Icarius ' daughter <unk> took their lives and all three were placed in the sky — <unk> as Virgo and Icarius as Boötes . As a reward for his faithfulness , the dog was placed along the " banks " of the Milky Way , which the ancients believed to be a heavenly river , where he would never suffer from thirst . 
 The medieval Arabic astronomers maintained the depiction of Canis Minor ( al @-@ Kalb al @-@ Asghar in Arabic ) as a dog ; in his Book of the Fixed Stars , Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Sufi included a diagram of the constellation with a canine figure superimposed . There was one slight difference between the Ptolemaic vision of Canis Minor and the Arabic ; al @-@ Sufi claims Mirzam , now assigned to Orion , as part of both Canis Minor — the collar of the dog — and its modern home . The Arabic names for both Procyon and Gomeisa alluded to their proximity and resemblance to Sirius , though they were not direct translations of the Greek ; Procyon was called ash @-@ Shi 'ra ash @-@ <unk> , the " Syrian Sirius " and Gomeisa was called ash @-@ Shira al @-@ <unk> , the Sirius with bleary eyes . Among the <unk> of Tunisia , shepherds note six constellations that mark the passage of the dry , hot season . One of them , called <unk> , includes the stars of Canis Minor and Canis Major and is the herald of two weeks of hot weather . 
 The ancient Egyptians thought of this constellation as Anubis , the jackal god . 
 Alternative names have been proposed : Johann Bayer in the early 17th century termed the constellation <unk> " The Pit " , and Morus " <unk> Tree " . Seventeenth @-@ century German poet and author Philippus Caesius linked it to the dog of Tobias from the Apocrypha . Richard A. Proctor gave the constellation the name Felis " the Cat " in 1870 ( contrasting with Canis Major , which he had abbreviated to Canis " the Dog " ) , explaining that he sought to shorten the constellation names to make them more manageable on celestial charts . Occasionally , Canis Minor is confused with Canis Major and given the name Canis Orionis ( " Orion 's Dog " ) . 
 = = = In non @-@ Western astronomy = = = 
 In Chinese astronomy , the stars corresponding to Canis Minor lie in the The Vermilion Bird of the South ( <unk> , <unk> Fāng Zhū <unk> ) . Procyon , Gomeisa and Eta Canis Minoris form an asterism known as <unk> , the Southern River . With its counterpart , the Northern River <unk> ( Castor and Pollux ) , <unk> was also associated with a gate or sentry . Along with Zeta and 8 Cancri , 6 Canis Minoris and 11 Canis Minoris formed the asterism <unk> , which literally means " water level " . Combined with additional stars in Gemini , <unk> represented an official who managed floodwaters or a marker of the water level . Neighboring Korea recognized four stars in Canis Minor as part of a different constellation , " the position of the water " . This constellation was located in the Red Bird , the southern portion of the sky . 
 Polynesian peoples often did not recognize Canis Minor as a constellation , but they saw Procyon as significant and often named it ; in the Tuamotu Archipelago it was known as Hiro , meaning " twist as a thread of coconut fiber " , and <unk> @-@ nui @-@ o @-@ Hiro ( " great paunch of Hiro " ) , which was either a name for the modern figure of Canis Minor or an alternative name for Procyon . Other names included Vena ( after a goddess ) , on Mangaia and <unk> @-@ <unk> ( false <unk> , the name for Rigel ) , in New Zealand . In the Society Islands , Procyon was called Ana @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ o @-@ <unk> @-@ te @-@ <unk> , literally " Aster the priestess of brave heart " , figuratively the " pillar for elocution " . The Wardaman people of the Northern Territory in Australia gave Procyon and Gomeisa the names <unk> and <unk> , describing them as humans who were transformed into gum trees in the dreamtime . Although their skin had turned to bark , they were able to speak with a human voice by rustling their leaves . 
 The Aztec calendar was related to their cosmology . The stars of Canis Minor were incorporated along with some stars of Orion and Gemini into an asterism associated with the day called " Water " . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Lying directly south of Gemini 's bright stars Castor and Pollux , Canis Minor is a small constellation bordered by Monoceros to the south , Gemini to the north , Cancer to the northeast , and Hydra to the east . It does not border Canis Major ; Monoceros is in between the two . Covering 183 square degrees , Canis Minor ranks seventy @-@ first of the 88 constellations in size . It appears prominently in the southern sky during the Northern Hemisphere 's winter . The constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 14 sides . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between 13 @.@ 22 ° and − 0 @.@ 36 ° . Most visible in the evening sky from January to March , Canis Minor is most prominent at 10 PM during mid @-@ February . It is then seen earlier in the evening until July , when it is only visible after sunset before setting itself , and rising in the morning sky before dawn . The constellation 's three @-@ letter abbreviation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is " <unk> " . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Canis Minor contains only two stars brighter than fourth magnitude . At magnitude 0 @.@ 34 , Procyon , or Alpha Canis Minoris , is the seventh @-@ brightest star in the night sky , as well as one of the closest . Its name means " before the dog " or " preceding the dog " in Greek , as it rises an hour before the " Dog Star " , Sirius , of Canis Major . It is a binary star system , consisting of a yellow @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type F5 IV @-@ V , named Procyon A , and a faint white dwarf companion of spectral type DA , named Procyon B. Procyon B , which orbits the more massive star every 41 years , is of magnitude 10 @.@ 7 . Procyon A is 1 @.@ 4 times the Sun 's mass , while its smaller companion is 0 @.@ 6 times as massive as the Sun . The system is 11 @.@ 4 light @-@ years ( 3 @.@ 5 parsecs ) from Earth , the shortest distance to a northern @-@ hemisphere star of the first magnitude . Gomeisa , or Beta Canis Minoris , with a magnitude of 2 @.@ 89 , is the second @-@ brightest star in Canis Minor . Lying 162 light @-@ years ( 50 parsecs ) from the Solar System , it is a blue @-@ white main sequence star of spectral class B8 Ve . Although fainter to Earth observers , it is much brighter than Procyon , and is 250 times as luminous and three times as massive as the Sun . Although its variations are slight , Gomeisa is classified as a shell star ( Gamma Cassiopeiae variable ) , with a maximum magnitude of 2 @.@ 84 and a minimum magnitude of 2 @.@ 92 . It is surrounded by a disk of gas which it heats and causes to emit radiation . 
 Johann Bayer used the Greek letters Alpha to Eta to label the most prominent eight stars in the constellation , designating two stars as Delta ( named Delta1 and Delta2 ) . John Flamsteed numbered fourteen stars , discerning a third star he named <unk> ; his star 12 Canis Minoris was not found subsequently . In Bayer 's 1603 work Uranometria , Procyon is located on the dog 's belly , and Gomeisa on its neck . Gamma , Epsilon and Eta Canis Minoris lie nearby , marking the dog 's neck , crown and chest respectively . Although it has an apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 34 , Gamma Canis Minoris is an orange K @-@ type giant of spectral class K3 @-@ III C , which lies 318 light @-@ years ( 97 parsecs ) away . Its colour is obvious when seen through binoculars . It is a multiple system , consisting of the spectroscopic binary Gamma A and three optical companions , Gamma B , magnitude 13 ; Gamma C , magnitude 12 ; and Gamma D , magnitude 10 . The two components of Gamma A orbit each other every 389 @.@ 2 days , with an eccentric orbit that takes their separation between 2 @.@ 3 and 1 @.@ 4 astronomical units ( AU ) . Epsilon Canis Minoris is a yellow bright giant of spectral class <unk> of magnitude of 4 @.@ 99 . It lies 988 – 1 @,@ 196 light @-@ years ( 303 – 367 parsecs ) from Earth , with 13 times the diameter and 750 times the luminosity of the Sun . Eta Canis Minoris is a giant of spectral class <unk> of magnitude 5 @.@ 24 , which has a yellowish hue when viewed through binoculars as well as a faint companion of magnitude 11 @.@ 1 . Located 4 arcseconds from the primary , the companion star is actually around 440 AU from the main star and takes around 5000 years to orbit it . 
 Near Procyon , three stars share the name Delta Canis Minoris . Delta1 is a yellow @-@ white F @-@ type giant of magnitude 5 @.@ 25 located around 790 light @-@ years ( 240 parsecs ) from Earth . About 360 times as luminous and 3 @.@ 75 times as massive as the Sun , it is expanding and cooling as it ages , having spent much of its life as a main sequence star of spectrum <unk> . Also known as 8 Canis Minoris , Delta2 is an F @-@ type main @-@ sequence star of spectral type <unk> and magnitude 5 @.@ 59 which is 136 light @-@ years ( 42 parsecs ) distant . The last of the trio , <unk> ( also known as 9 Canis Minoris ) , is a white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> and magnitude 5 @.@ 83 which is 680 light @-@ years ( 210 parsecs ) distant . These stars mark the paws of the Lesser Dog 's left hind leg , while magnitude 5 @.@ 13 Zeta marks the right . A blue @-@ white bright giant of spectral type <unk> , Zeta lies around 623 light @-@ years ( 191 parsecs ) away from the Solar System . 
 Lying approximately 264 light @-@ years ( 81 parsecs ) away with an apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 39 , HD 66141 is 6 @.@ 8 billion years old and has evolved into an orange giant of spectral type K2III with a diameter around 22 times that of the Sun , and weighing 1 @.@ 1 solar masses . It is 174 times as luminous as the Sun , with an absolute magnitude of − 0 @.@ 15 . HD 66141 was mistakenly named 13 Puppis , as its celestial coordinates were recorded incorrectly when catalogued and hence mistakenly thought to be in the constellation of Puppis ; Bode gave it the name Lambda Canis Minoris , which is now obsolete . The orange giant is orbited by a planet , HD <unk> , which was detected in 2012 by measuring the star 's radial velocity . The planet has a mass around 6 times that of Jupiter and a period of 480 days . 
 A red giant of spectral type M4III , BC Canis Minoris lies around 500 light @-@ years ( 150 parsecs ) distant from the Solar System . It is a semiregular variable star that varies between a maximum magnitude of 6 @.@ 14 and minimum magnitude of 6 @.@ 42 . Periods of 27 @.@ 7 , 143 @.@ 3 and 208 @.@ 3 days have been recorded in its pulsations . AZ , AD and BI Canis Minoris are Delta Scuti variables — short period ( six hours at most ) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology . AZ is of spectral type <unk> , and ranges between magnitudes 6 @.@ 44 and 6 @.@ 51 over a period of 2 @.@ 3 hours . AD has a spectral type of <unk> , and has a maximum magnitude of 9 @.@ 21 and minimum of 9 @.@ 51 , with a period of approximately 2 @.@ 95 hours . BI is of spectral type F2 with an apparent magnitude varying around 9 @.@ 19 and a period of approximately 2 @.@ 91 hours . 
 At least three red giants are Mira variables in Canis Minor . S Canis Minoris , of spectral type <unk> , is the brightest , ranging from magnitude 6 @.@ 6 to 13 @.@ 2 over a period of 332 @.@ 94 days . V Canis Minoris ranges from magnitude 7 @.@ 4 to 15 @.@ 1 over a period of 366 @.@ 1 days . Similar in magnitude is R Canis Minoris , which has a maximum of 7 @.@ 3 , but a significantly brighter minimum of 11 @.@ 6 . An S @-@ type star , it has a period of 337 @.@ 8 days . 
 <unk> Canis Minoris is a red dwarf of spectral type M4.5V and magnitude 11 @.@ 2 , roughly three times the size of Jupiter and 20 light @-@ years ( 6 @.@ 1 parsecs ) from Earth . It is a flare star , emitting unpredictable outbursts of energy for mere minutes , which might be much more powerful analogues of solar flares . Luyten 's Star ( GJ 273 ) is a red dwarf star of spectral type <unk> and close neighbour of the Solar System . Its visual magnitude of 9 @.@ 9 renders it too faint to be seen with the naked eye , even though it is only 12 @.@ 39 light @-@ years ( 3 @.@ 80 parsecs ) away . Fainter still is PSS 544 @-@ 7 , an eighteenth @-@ magnitude red dwarf around 20 percent the mass of the Sun , located 685 light @-@ years ( 210 parsecs ) from Earth . First noticed in 1991 , it is thought to be a cannonball star , shot out of a star cluster and now moving rapidly through space directly away from the galactic disc . 
 The WZ Sagittae @-@ type dwarf nova DY <unk> ( also known as <unk> <unk> + <unk> ) flared up to magnitude 11 @.@ 4 over January and February 2008 before dropping eight magnitudes to around 19 @.@ 5 over approximately 80 days . It is a remote binary star system where a white dwarf and low mass star orbit each other close enough for the former star to draw material off the latter and form an accretion disc . This material builds up until it erupts dramatically . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The Milky Way passes through much of Canis Minor , yet it has few deep @-@ sky objects . William Herschel recorded four objects in his 1786 work Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars , including two he mistakenly believed were star clusters . NGC <unk> is a group of five <unk> and fourteenth @-@ magnitude stars that appear to lie close together in the sky but are not related . A similar situation has occurred with NGC <unk> , also in Canis Minor . This is a collection of fifteen unrelated stars of ninth @-@ magnitude and fainter . 
 Herschel also observed three faint galaxies , two of which are interacting with each other . NGC <unk> is a lenticular galaxy of thirteenth @-@ magnitude , estimated at 205 million light @-@ years ( 63 million parsecs ) distance with a diameter of 80 thousand light @-@ years ( 25 thousand parsecs ) . Named as a single object by Herschel , NGC <unk> is actually a pair of near @-@ adjacent galaxies that appear to be interacting with each other . Only of <unk> and fifteenth @-@ magnitudes respectively , the elliptical and spiral galaxy are thought to be approximately 245 million light @-@ years distant , and each measure 55 @,@ 000 light @-@ years in diameter . 
 = = = Canis Minorids = = = 
 The 11 Canis @-@ Minorids , also called the Beta Canis Minorids , are a meteor shower that arise near the fifth @-@ magnitude star 11 Canis Minoris and were discovered in 1964 by Keith Hindley , who investigated their trajectory and proposed a common origin with the comet D / 1917 F1 Mellish . However , this conclusion has been refuted subsequently as the number of orbits analysed was low and their trajectories too disparate to confirm a link . They last from 4 to 15 December , peaking over 10 and 11 December . 
 = Honoré Théodore Maxime Gazan de la Peyrière = 
 Honoré Théodore Maxime Gazan de la Peyrière ( October 29 , 1764 – April 9 , 1845 ) was a French general who fought in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Gazan started his military career as a <unk> in the French Coast Guard . He was later appointed to the Royal Life Guards and , upon the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789 , he joined the French National Guard . After service in the Upper Rhine valley and the Netherlands , he joined André Masséna in Switzerland in 1799 , and fought at the battles of Winterthur and First Zurich . In August 1805 , Gazan commanded of a division of the Army that encircled the Austrians in Ulm . On November 11 , under Joseph Mortier , his division provided the advance guard in the advance on Vienna . Mortier over @-@ extended his line of march and Gazan 's division was surrounded by Kutuzov 's Coalition army ; Gazan lost 40 percent of his force in the Battle of Dürenstein . Following the Prussian defeat at the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstadt , he transferred with Jean Lannes to the Iberian peninsula . There he participated in the French capture of Zaragoza and in several important actions of the long Peninsular War , including the Battle of Albuera and the Battle of Vitoria . 
 During the Hundred Days , Gazan eventually joined Napoleon 's cause , although he did not have a field command . In 1815 , he judged Michel Ney 's trial for treason , but refused to reach a verdict . He dabbled briefly , and unsuccessfully , in politics in the 1820s . In 1830 , He was raised to the French peerage and held a divisional command in <unk> , but by then was an old man , and he retired in 1832 . He died in 1845 . 
 = = Family and early military career = = 
 Gazan was born in the small town of Grasse , in the Alpes @-@ Maritimes . His father , a lawyer , sent him to the College of <unk> , where he received military training . Gazan was a second lieutenant in the Coast Guard <unk> of Antibes at the age of fifteen . In 1786 , he was appointed to the Royal Life Guards , Company Écossaise . Afterward he also joined the Freemasons . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 At the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 , Gazan returned to Grasse and joined the National Guard . In 1790 , he became a captain and , in 1791 , a lieutenant colonel of the local volunteer battalion of the Var . In 1792 , with the declaration of war with Austria , he was sent to the 27th Regiment . His regiment first served garrison duty in Strasbourg , but in December 1793 , participated in the Battle of Wissembourg . In May 1794 , Gazan became a battalion commander of the new 54th Demi @-@ Brigade . On 4 July , he routed the Prussians in <unk> by ordering his drummers to beat a charge , convincing the Prussians that they were outnumbered . He was promoted to brigade colonel on 11 July and led his troops to victory against the Prussians at <unk> . 
 In 1796 , he joined the Army of the Rhine , under the command of Jean Victor Moreau . This was his first campaign and he was promoted to brigadier general in recognition of his outstanding achievements at the Battle of Ettlingen . Gazan was wounded on 22 November 1796 and taken to hospital in Strasbourg for his recovery , where he met Marie Madeleine Reiss ; after their marriage , she frequently accompanied him on his campaigns and they had several children . 
 = = = Swiss campaign = = = 
 On 4 April 1799 , his superior and friend André Masséna transferred him to the Army of the Danube , at that time located in the northeastern Swiss plateau . There , he took command of a weak ( under @-@ manned ) brigade at the small town of Winterthur , in northern Switzerland . On 26 May , Michel Ney , the newly appointed general of division , took command of the forward line protecting the main French force at Zürich . The following day , Friedrich , Baron von Hotze , arrived with close to 8 @,@ 000 battle @-@ hardened and experienced Austrian border troops , including the 12th Infantry Manfredini , a battalion of Hungarian grenadiers , and six squadrons of the Waldeck Dragoons . In the ensuing clash , Ney ordered Gazan 's under @-@ manned brigade to the center , where it was soon overwhelmed . In retreat , they safely crossed a bridge spanning a small river , the Töss , but the cavalry guarding the bridge was itself forced back . After stationing his batteries on a slight incline , to protect the retreat from the Austrians , the injured Ney handed command to Gazan , who organized and conducted the successful retreat . 
 A few days later , at the First Battle of Zürich ( 4 June 1799 ) , the Austrian force overpowered the French lines . As part of the V. Division of the Army of the Danube , Gazan again commanded the rear guard after Massena 's force disengaged from Archduke Charles ' army and withdrew across the Limmat river . Later that year , he faced a combined Austrian and Russian force at the Second Battle of Zürich ( 27 September ) . His division repulsed Russian outposts at the Limmat river . He subsequently participated in the wild pursuit of the Austrians , resulting in a decisive French victory . He was promoted to division commander and continued in the campaign against Coalition troops in Switzerland . 
 In 1800 , Gazan accompanied the Masséna 's Army of Italy , as a general of division in the Corps of Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult . The 1st Division included the Grenadiers <unk> , the 30th <unk> ( light infantry ) , and portions of the 2nd , 3rd , and 78th Regiments Ligne ( line infantry ) , totaling approximately 4 @,@ 500 men . While Soult 's Corps campaigned in central northern Italy , Masséna was besieged in Genoa by an Austrian army of 24 @,@ 000 and a British naval squadron . Soult moved his Corps to the east to relieve Genoa . As part of Soult 's Corps , Gazan participated in the battle at <unk> ( 9 April ) , where he commanded the right wing , and again at the battle of Sassello ( 10 April ) . In both clashes , his division was outnumbered nearly three to one took heavy casualties French had heavy casualties . Later in the month , he participated in the clash at <unk> ( 18 April 1800 ) . To relieve Masséna at Genoa , Soult organized several assaults on strong Austrian positions around the city . At Monte <unk> ( 13 May 1800 ) , Gazan 's division and the first column of Soult 's main force ( approximately 5 @,@ 000 men ) , attacked a stronger Austrian position of 7 @,@ 000 , under command of Prince Hohenzollern . Soult was taken prisoner , General of Brigade Joseph Perrin was killed , and the cavalry commander , Jean @-@ Joseph Gauthier , was badly wounded . The defeat could be seen from the ramparts at Genoa and caused the French garrison 's morale to plummet ; many units were already near mutiny and food was scarce . Gazan , who had been wounded , took his troops to Lozano and joined Louis Gabriel Suchet . There he commanded a division of the Army of Italy and fought in a French victory at the battle in <unk> ( 25 December ) against the Austrians . He was appointed commander of the First Subdivision of the 27th Military Division in Piedmont . After the peace in 1801 , Gazan returned home , but shortly after his return , received a new assignment as commander of a brigade in northern Italy , where he stayed until the declaration of the First French Empire in 1804 . 
 = = Service during the Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = <unk> and Jena = = = 
 In the War of the Third Coalition , Gazan initially was assigned as a division commander of Napoleon 's Grande Armée in Lille , in preparation for the planned invasion of England ; he remained there until the idea was abandoned . In August 1805 , Gazan commanded of a division of the army that encircled Austrians in Ulm . On November 11 , under Marshal Mortier , his division provided the advance guard in the march against Kutuzov 's army . As they advanced through a narrow Danube canyon , the division was isolated from the main force , near Dürenstein . By the small village on the Danube , famous as the prison of Richard the <unk> at the end of the twelfth century , he and his division were trapped in a narrow canyon , attacked by a Russian force at his rear and more Russians at his front . Gazan 's division fought desperately for a harrowing day and suffered 40 percent casualties . He and Mortier were finally rescued by the arrival of the VIII . Corps ' 1st Division , commanded by Pierre Dupont de l 'Étang , but only after the loss of nearly 4 @,@ 000 men . In addition , 47 officers and 895 men were captured , and he lost five guns , as well as the eagles of the 4th Infantry Regiment , and the eagle and guidon of the 4th Dragoons . As recognition of his conduct in " the immortal Battle of Dürenstein , " he received the Officers Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor and the survivors of his division was sent to Vienna to recuperate . When Austria sued for peace , Gazan 's division was sent to Würzburg in Bavaria , where it remained until Prussia declared war in October 1806 . 
 Gazan 's division fought in the French victory over Prussia at the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstedt ( 14 October 1806 ) . At <unk> ( 16 February 1807 ) , Gazan 's troops took three guns and two Russian colors . Otherwise , his troops stayed in their winter quarters . After the new peace treaty , Gazan 's troops were sent to Silesia to restore order . In 1808 , he was named Comte de la <unk> . 
 = = = Early Peninsular War = = = 
 In October 1808 , now attached to the VI . Corps , Gazan went to Spain with Jean Lannes and arrived at Zaragoza in December . The city was under siege and defended by Spanish under José de Palafox . Lannes ordered an attack on 22 January 1809 to capture the city in street by street fighting ; when the French took a block , sappers tunneled under the houses and blew them up , which prevented Spanish street fighters from slipping into houses behind them . The method was effective but painstaking . Gazan 's assignment , to take the well @-@ fortified Jesus Convent . Palafox surrendered on 20 February . The VI . Corps occupied northern Aragon afterward . 
 In July 1810 , Gazan 's force guarded the valleys of Extremadura , near Alcantara . In September he fought against Spanish general La Romana . In January 1811 he crossed the Sierra Morena to guard the supply On 15 – 21 March , his 2nd Division of the V. Corps besieged and captured the small fortified town of Campo Maior , in eastern Portugal . There they captured 50 guns and the 100 @-@ man Portuguese garrison . As General Latour @-@ Maubourg , four squadrons of dragoons and hussars and three battalions of the 100th Light Infantry moved the cannons to Badajoz the following week , a combined force of the 1st and 7th Portuguese Cavalry and the British 13th Light Dragoons , commanded by Brigadier General Robert Ballard Long , charged and scattered the French 26th Dragoons . In the melee , the drivers of the convoy were cut down , but instead of securing the convoy of guns , the British and Portuguese enthusiastically pursued the fleeing infantry for more than 11 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) ; meanwhile , the French sallied out of Badajoz , carefully avoiding the fleeing infantry and its pursuers , and recovered all but one of the guns . 
 At the Battle of Albuera ( 16 May 1811 ) , the " bloodiest battle of the Peninsular Campaign , " Gazan 's division was hammered by the British . The force , composed of two brigades of infantry , one of cavalry and 40 guns , were enveloped by the British on three sides . General of Division Girard 's 1st Division was also trapped . The fire @-@ fight wrought massive casualties , and the bodies were reportedly stacked three and four men high ; the distinction was in 360 French muskets in deep and narrow columns versus 2000 British flintlocks in a double line of infantry . Only a costly mistake by the British commander , Major General Colborne , prevented a worse disaster for the French . Colborne had deployed his infantry in the standard line , two men deep , and had prepared to fire close range volleys into the French flank . Recognizing the opportunity , Latour @-@ <unk> 's 2nd Hussars and First Vistula Lancers ( a Polish unit ) to attack the British line before the infantry could form its defensive squares . The French cavalry wrought massive casualties on Colborne 's brigade . The 3rd ( East Kent ) Regiment of Foot ( " The Buffs " ) lost 643 of its 754 men at Albuera , most of them in the initial onslaught of French cavalry . The next two regiments in line lost over 500 men combined and Colborne ’ s brigade lost 1 @,@ 413 out of its 2 @,@ 166 men . Despite the mounted assault , however , the French 2nd Division suffered high casualties and lost five colors , a significant blow to its morale and pride . Gazan was wounded in the battle , and returned to Seville , where he was assigned to a staff position during his recovery . 
 = = = Gazan and the 1813 Peninsular War = = = 
 In June 1813 , Gazan was appointed commander of the Joseph Bonaparte 's Army of the South . Joseph had established a long defensive line on the heights of Puebla , with the Army of Portugal at the left flank , the Army of the Center , commanded by Jean @-@ Baptiste Drouet , Comte d 'Erlon and the Army of the South , at the southern flank . On 21 June , Generals Rowland Hill and Pablo Morillo moved toward the south end of the valley ; Gazan and d 'Erlon asked Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan for reinforcements , but the Corps ' commander was preoccupied with the possibility of an attack at the opposite flank , and sent none . In their own turn , D 'Erlon and Gazan could not agree on how to deal with the approaching threat . In the initial stages of battle , the Army of Portugal started to pull back . Realizing that his southern flank would not hold up in the face of Hill and Morillo , Joseph ordered Gazan to withdraw in ordered masses . Hill and Morillo attacked Gazan 's forces with such force that Gazan withdrew . 
 This was Gazan 's last field command . Gazan 's pre @-@ emptive withdrawal created a gap in French line , exposing D 'Erlon 's army in the center . D 'Erlon held his position as long as he could , but the line collapsed around him . Joseph 's planned orderly withdrawal turned into a rout . Gazan abandoned all his artillery . The Allies captured the entire supply convoy , all the baggage and took many prisoners , including Gazan 's wife and children , although they later managed to rejoin him . After losing their supply train , the plight of the French army was terrible . Gazan mentioned that general officers and subordinates alike " were reduced to the clothes on their backs and most of them were barefoot , " but the rank and file of the army also suffered enormously from hunger , exposure , and disease . When Soult took command of the new Army of the Pyrenees , Gazan became his chief of staff until Napoleon 's abdication . 
 = = Napoleon 's return and later life = = 
 During the Hundred Days , Gazan hesitated but eventually joined Napoleon , with little enthusiasm and he did not receive a field command . After the war , Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan persuaded Gazan to be part of the Conseil convened on 9 November 1815 to try Michel Ney for treason . Despite his oath of allegiance to the restored monarchy , the loyal Ney had rallied to Napoleon 's banner immediately upon his landing in southern France and had led a corps into battle at Waterloo . The King wished to make a point to Napoleon 's former marshals and Ney became the focus of his wrath . Gazan 's relationship with Ney had begun in the French Revolutionary Wars shortly after Ney 's promotion to general of division . At the Battle of Winterthur ( 1799 ) , he had been one of Ney 's first brigade commanders . Although the King 's government may have expected the Conseil to find Ney guilty , the members voted 5 – 2 to declare themselves incapable of reaching a verdict , and deferred the case to the Chamber of Peers . 
 Some historians maintain that that Ney 's death penalty resulted from the military court 's refusal to act in the case ; only the military court could have returned a verdict of " guilty under exceptional circumstances . " Such a verdict would have meant Ney 's lifelong incarceration , but would not have required his execution . When the military court refused to reach a verdict , Ney 's case went to the Chamber of Peers , which was populated by a mix of old and new peers . The old peers might not have been receptive to Ney 's predicament ; he had been , after all , a highly visible party to Napoleon 's success throughout Europe . If some of the new peers were sympathetic to Ney 's situation , they may also have been anxious to prove their own loyalty to the new regime . Ney 's penalty was a foregone conclusion . 
 Despite this , or perhaps because of it , Louis XVIII forced Gazan into retirement in Grasse , where the aging general dabbled unsuccessfully in politics . After the 1830 revolution , the new King of the French Louis Philippe made Gazan a peer of France , and he received a command of a military division in Marseille . By this time , he was an old man , and in poor health , and he retired in June 1832 . Gazan de la <unk> died in Grasse on 9 April 1845 . 
 = The Stolen Invention = 
 The Stolen Invention is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on John Deering , an inventor , whose invention interests Mr. Cobleigh . Deering rejects the small sum Cobleigh offers for the invention , so Cobleigh decides to drugs Deering . The effect of the drug makes him temporarily insane and Deering is sent to the asylum , Cobleigh than forges Deering 's signature and secure the invention . Deering 's daughter breaks her father out of the asylum and nurses him back to health . The girl 's sweetheart , Tom , is a lawyer who takes Cobleigh to court and reveals the forgery through a stereopticon and Cobleigh is arrested . The film was released on September 16 , 1910 , and received neutral to negative reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from September 17 , 1910 . It states : " John Deering is a poor inventor living modestly with his wife and only daughter . He has approached Mr. Cobleigh , a capitalist , with a proposition to share the profits of a new invention with him , providing that he ( Cobleigh ) furnish the capital to swing it . Cobleigh comes to see the model of Deering 's invention and is greatly impressed with it . Cobleigh offers Deering a small amount of money for the invention , but Deering refuses to accept it . Then Cobleigh , having failed to get his invention by fair means , determines to secure it by foul . He drugs Deering , and the result of the poison is to make the inventor temporarily insane . While in this condition , Cobleigh has Deering transferred to an insane asylum . Then he forges the inventor 's name to the bill of sale and thinks that his crime will never be discovered . Deering 's daughter , Grace , failing to induce her sweetheart , Tom Reynolds , to aid in rescuing Deering , breaks into the asylum and takes her father out singlehandedly . She conveys him to a camp in the woods where her tender care restores him to health . Then she takes him home again and he demands his rights from Cobleigh . The latter denies that he owes Deering a cent , and the inventor goes to law . Tom , who acts as his counsel , shows by enlarged stereopticon views of the two signatures that Cobleigh had traced the one from the other . Cobleigh , overcome by the revelation of his crime , is arrested , and the Deering family and the faithful Tom are happy . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . The Celluloid Couch does not include any credits and only a brief summary of the film in its filmography listing . It is also listed in <unk> on Film without further detailing onto the cast or credits . A surviving film still gives the possibility of identifying the actors of Deering and his daughter . 
 A reviewer for the The New York Dramatic Mirror stated , " It is rather difficult to understand by what magic the two signatures are made to appear in the court room without human agency . They come and go in anything but legal fashion . Evidently their appearance is to be taken symbolically - not realistically . " The final part of the review is difficult to infer because the film is lost , but the synopsis states that a stereopticon was used . A stereopticon , not to be confused with a <unk> , is a type of slide projector that projects an image . According to the synopsis , the production employs one , or possibly two , stereopticon 's to display the two different signatures to compare and reveal the forgery . The reviewer seems to state that the appearance as unnatural , perhaps referencing a dissolve effect . The ability to project with a dissolve was a known ability of more advanced <unk> . According to another reviewer the film included shots of Long Island Sound . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on September 16 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with known theater advertisements in Pennsylvania , Kansas , Minnesota , Washington , North Carolina , Arizona , and Indiana . The film was also shown in Vancouver , Canada by the Province Theatre . 
 Reception for this film was mixed , but not praised highly in the three main trade publications . Walton of The Moving Picture News merely commented on how the water scenery and the reviewer for the Moving Picture World stated it was , " [ an interesting domestic story , representing the machinations of a capitalist to secure a poor man 's invention . " The most detailed review was the negative one published in The New York Dramatic Mirror which states , " This film is not so good as the Thanhouser trademark would lead one to expect . The story is long and rambling and the acting is not notable at any point . A drugged potion , a forged receipt , an escape from an insane asylum , and the confounding of the villain are the points around which the threads are woven . The result looks a good deal like crazy work . The sheer impossibility of the plot is not relieved by the details of the mounting or of the action . The wild escape from the lunatic asylum , the row across the river , and hiding in the woods , are all cut upon an absurd pattern . Probably for those who like highly seasoned drama the film will prove entertaining ; for others it is too mellow . " 
 = North Yemen Civil War = 
 The North Yemen Civil War ( Arabic : <unk> 26 <unk> ) was fought in North Yemen from 1962 to 1970 between royalist partisans of the <unk> Kingdom and supporters of the Yemen Arab Republic . The war began with a coup d 'état carried out in 1962 by revolutionary republicans led by the army under the command of Abdullah as @-@ Sallal , who dethroned the newly crowned Imam Muhammad al @-@ Badr and declared Yemen a republic under his presidency . The Imam escaped to the Saudi Arabian border where he rallied popular support from northern Shia tribes to retake power , escalating shortly to a full @-@ scale civil war . 
 On the royalist side Jordan and Saudi Arabia supplied military aid , and Britain gave covert support , while the republicans were supported by Egypt and were supplied warplanes from the Soviet Union . Both foreign irregular and conventional forces were involved . Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser , supported the republicans with as many as 70 @,@ 000 Egyptian troops and weapons . Despite several military moves and peace conferences , the war sank into a stalemate by mid @-@ 1960s . Egypt 's commitment to the war is considered to have been detrimental to its performance in the Six @-@ Day War of June 1967 , after which Nasser found it increasingly difficult to maintain his army 's involvement and began to pull his forces out of Yemen . The surprising removal of Sallal on November 5 by Yemeni dissidents , supported by republican tribesmen , resulted in internal shift of power in the capital , while the royalists approached it from the north . The new republic government was headed by Qadi Abdul Rahman Iryani , Ahmed Noman and Mohamed Ali Uthman , all of which shortly either resigned or fled the country , leaving the disarrayed capital under the control of Prime Minister Hassan Amri . The 1967 siege of Sana 'a became the turning point of the war - the remaining republican Prime Minister succeeded in keeping control of Sana 'a and by February 1968 , the royalists lifted the siege . Clashes continued in parallel with peace talks between the sides , until in 1970 , Saudi Arabia recognized the Republic , and a ceasefire came into effect . 
 Egyptian military historians refer to the war in Yemen as their Vietnam and historian Michael Oren ( former Israeli Ambassador to the U.S ) wrote that Egypt 's military adventure in Yemen was so disastrous that " the imminent Vietnam War could easily have been dubbed America 's Yemen . " 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Yemen = = = 
 Imam Ahmad bin Yahya inherited the Yemeni throne in 1948 . In 1955 , Iraq @-@ trained Colonel Ahmad Thalaya led a revolt against him . A group of soldiers under his command surrounded the royal palace of Al <unk> at Taiz , a fortified stronghold where the Imam lived with his harem , the royal treasure , an arsenal of modern weapons , and a 150 strong palace @-@ guard , and demanded Ahmad 's abdication . Ahmad agreed , but demanded that his son , Muhammad al @-@ Badr succeed him . Thalaya refused , preferring the king 's half brother , the Emir Saif el Islam Abdullah , the 48 @-@ year @-@ old Foreign Minister . While Abdullah began forming a new government , Ahmad opened the treasury coffers and secretly began buying off the besieging soldiers . After five days , the number of besiegers was reduced from 600 to 40 . Ahmad then came out of the palace , wearing a devil 's mask and wielding a long scimitar , terrifying the besiegers . He slashed two sentries dead before exchanging the sword for a sub @-@ machine gun and leading his 150 guards onto the roof of the palace to begin a direct attack on the rebels . After 28 hours , 23 rebels and one palace guard were dead and Thalaya gave up . Abdullah was later reported executed , and Thalaya was publicly decapitated . 
 In March 1958 , al @-@ Badr arrived in Damascus to tell Nasser of Yemen 's adherence to the UAR . However , Ahmad was to keep his throne and his absolute power , and the arrangement constituted only a close alliance . In 1959 Ahmad went to Rome to treat his arthritis , rheumatism , heart trouble and , reportedly , drug addiction . Fights between tribal chieftains erupted , and al @-@ Badr unsuccessfully tried to buy off the dissidents by promising " reforms " , including the appointment of a representative council , more army pay and promotions . Upon his return , Ahmad swore to crush the " agents of the Christians " . He ordered the decapitation of one of his subjects and the amputation of the left hand and right foot of 15 others , in punishment for the murder of a high official the previous June . Al @-@ Badr was only rebuked for his leniency , but the Yemeni radio stopped broadcasting army officers ' speeches , and talks of reforms were silenced . 
 In June 1961 , Ahmad was still recovering from an assassination attempt four months earlier , and moved out of the capital , Taiz , into the pleasure palace of Sala . Already Defense and Foreign Minister , Badr became acting Prime Minister and Interior Minister as well . Despite being Crown Prince , al @-@ Badr still needed to be picked by the Ulema in San 'a . Al @-@ Badr was not popular with the Ulema due to his association with Nasser , and the Ulema had refused Ahmad 's request to ratify Badr 's title . Imam Ahmad died on September 18 , 1962 , and was succeeded by his son , Muhammad al @-@ Badr . One of al @-@ Badr 's first acts was to appoint Colonel Abdullah Sallal , a known socialist and Nasserist , as commander of the palace guard . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 Nasser had looked to a regime change in Yemen since 1957 and finally put his desires into practice in January 1962 by giving the Free Yemen Movement office space , financial support , and radio air time . Anthony Nutting 's biography of Gamal Abdel @-@ Nasser identifies several factors that led the Egyptian President to send expeditionary forces to Yemen . These included the unraveling of the union with Syria in 1961 , which dissolved his United Arab Republic ( UAR ) , damaging his prestige . A quick decisive victory in Yemen could help him recover leadership of the Arab world . Nasser also had his reputation as an anti @-@ colonial force , setting his sights on ridding South Yemen , and its strategic port city of Aden , of British forces . 
 Mohamed Heikal , a chronicler of Egyptian national policy decision making and confidant of Nasser , wrote in For Egypt Not For Nasser , that he had engaged Nasser on the subject of supporting the coup in Yemen . Heikal argued that Sallal 's revolution could not absorb the massive number of Egyptian personnel who would arrive in Yemen to prop up his regime , and that it would be wise to consider sending Arab nationalist volunteers from throughout the Middle East to fight alongside the republican Yemeni forces , suggesting the Spanish Civil War as a template from which to conduct events in Yemen . Nasser refused Heikal 's ideas , insisting on the need to protect the Arab nationalist movement . Nasser was convinced that a regiment of Egyptian Special Forces and a wing of fighter @-@ bombers would be able to secure the Yemeni republican coup d 'état . 
 Nasser 's considerations for sending troops to Yemen may have included the following : ( 1 ) impact of his support to the Algerian War of Independence from 1954 – 62 ; ( 2 ) Syria breaking up from Nasser 's United Arab Republic ( UAR ) in 1961 ; ( 3 ) taking advantage of a breach in British and French relations , which had been strained by Nasser 's support for the FLN in Algeria and primarily for his efforts to undermine the Central Treaty Organization ( <unk> ) , which caused the downfall of the Iraqi monarchy in 1958 ; ( 4 ) confronting imperialism , which Nasser saw as Egypt 's destiny ; ( 5 ) guaranteeing dominance of the Red Sea from the Suez Canal to the Bab @-@ el @-@ Mandeb strait ; ( 6 ) retribution against the Saudi royal family , whom Nasser felt had undermined his union with Syria . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Coup d 'état = = = 
 = = = = Plot = = = = 
 At least four plots were going on in San 'a . One was headed by Lieutenant Ali Abdul al Moghny . Another one was conceived by Sallal . His plot merged into a third conspiracy prodded by the <unk> tribal confederation in revenge for Ahmad 's execution of their paramount sheik and his son . A fourth plot was shaped by several young princes who sought to get rid of al @-@ Badr but not the imamate . The only men who knew about those plots were the Egyptian chargé d 'affaires , Abdul Wahad , and al @-@ Badr himself . The day after Ahmad 's death , al @-@ Badr 's minister in London , Ahmad al Shami , sent him a telegram urging him not to go to San 'a to attend his father 's funeral because several Egyptian officers , as well as some of his own , were plotting against him . Al @-@ Badr 's private secretary did not pass this message to him , pretending he did not understand the code . Al @-@ Badr may have been saved by the gathering of thousands of men at the funeral . Al @-@ Badr learned of the telegram only later . 
 A day before the coup Wahad , who claimed to have information from the Egyptian intelligence service , warned al @-@ Badr that Sallal and fifteen other officers , including Moghny , were planning a revolution . Wahad 's purpose was to cover himself and Egypt in case the coup failed , to prompt the plotters into immediate action , and drive Sallal and Moghny into a single conspiracy . Sallal got <unk> permission to bring in the armed forces . Then , Wahad went to Moghny , and told him that al @-@ Badr had somehow discovered the plot , and that he must act immediately before the other officers would be arrested . He told him that if he could hold San 'a , the radio and the airport for three days , the whole of Europe would recognize him . 
 Sallal ordered that the military academy in San 'a go on full alert — opening all armories and issuing weapons to all junior officers and troops . On the evening of September 25 , Sallal gathered known leaders of the Yemeni nationalist movement and other officers who had sympathized or participated in the military protests of 1955 . Each officer and cell would be given orders and would commence as soon as the shelling of al @-@ Badr 's palace began . Key areas that would be secured included Al @-@ <unk> palace ( al @-@ Badr 's palace ) , Al @-@ <unk> palace ( Reception area for dignitaries ) , the radio station , the telephone exchange , Qasr al @-@ <unk> ( The Main Armory ) , and the central security headquarters ( Intelligence and Internal Security ) . 
 = = = = Execution = = = = 
 At 10 : 30 p.m. , al @-@ Badr heard tanks moving through the nearby streets , and reckoned that they were the ones Sallal had asked to move . At 11 @.@ 45 p.m. the army began shelling the palace . Al @-@ Badr seized a machine gun and began firing at the tanks , although they were out of range . Moghny sent an armored car to Sallal 's house and invited him to the headquarters , where he asked him to join the revolution . Sallal agreed , on condition that he would be President . Moghny agreed . The coup d 'état was carried out with 13 tanks from the Badr Brigade , six armored cars , two mobile artillery cannons , and two anti @-@ air guns . Command and control of the forces loyal to the coup would take place at the Military Academy . A unit of revolutionary officers accompanied by tanks headed towards Al @-@ <unk> Palace . By microphone , they voiced an appeal to the imamate Guard for tribal solidarity and to surrender Muhammad al @-@ Badr , who would be sent peacefully into exile . The imamate Guard refused to surrender and opened fire , prompting the revolutionary leaders to respond with tank and artillery shells . The rebels planned to deploy tanks and artillery in the coup . 
 The battle at the palace continued until guards surrendered to the revolutionaries the following morning . The radio station was first to fall , secured after a loyalist officer was killed and resistance collapsed . The armory was perhaps the easiest target , as a written order from Sallal was sufficient to open the storage facility , beat the royalists , and secure rifles , artillery and ammunition for the revolutionaries . The telephone exchange likewise fell without any resistance . At the Al @-@ <unk> Palace , revolutionary units remained secure under the guise of granting and protecting diplomats and dignitaries staying there to greet the new Imam of Yemen . By late morning on September 26 , all areas of San 'a were secure and the radio broadcast that Muhammad al @-@ Badr had been overthrown by the new revolutionary government in power . Revolutionary cells in the cities of Taiz , Al @-@ <unk> and the port city of Hodeida then began securing arsenals , airports and port facilities . 
 = = = = Coup aftermath = = = = 
 Al @-@ Badr and his personal servants managed to escape through a door in the garden wall in the back of the palace . Because of the curfew declared , they had to avoid the main streets . They decided to escape individually and meet in the village of Gabi al <unk> , where they were reunited after a forty @-@ five @-@ minute walk . Sallal had to defeat a fellow revolutionary , Al @-@ <unk> , an intellectual holding a doctorate degree , who did not share in Nasser 's vision . On September 28 , the radio announced al @-@ Badr 's death . Sallal gathered tribesmen in San 'a and proclaimed : " The corrupt monarchy which ruled for a thousand years was a disgrace to the Arab nation and to all humanity . Anyone who tries to restore it is an enemy of God and man ! " By then , he had learned that al @-@ Badr was still alive and had made his way to Saudi Arabia . 
 Egyptian General Ali Abdul Hameed was dispatched by plane , and arrived on September 29 to assess the situation and needs of the Yemeni Revolutionary Command Council . Egypt sent a battalion of Special Forces ( <unk> ) on a mission to act as personal guards for Sallal . They arrived at Hodeida on October 5 . Fifteen days after he had left San 'a , al @-@ Badr sent a man ahead to the Saudi Arabia to announce that he was alive . He then went there himself , crossing the border near Khobar , at the north @-@ eastern edge of the kingdom . 
 = = = Diplomatic attempts = = = 
 Saudi Arabia , fearing Nasserist encroachment , moved troops along its border with Yemen , as the Jordanian monarch dispatched his Army chief of staff for discussions with al @-@ Badr 's uncle , Prince Hassan . Between October 2 – 8 four Saudi cargo planes left Saudi Arabia loaded with arms and military material for Yemeni royalist tribesmen ; however , the pilots defected to Aswan . Ambassadors from Bonn , London , Washington D.C. and Amman supported the Imam while ambassadors from Cairo , Rome and Belgrade declared support for the republican revolution . The USSR was the first nation to recognize the new republic , and Nikita Khrushchev cabled Sallal : " Any act of aggression against Yemen will be considered an act of aggression against the Soviet Union . " 
 The United States was concerned that the conflict might spread to other parts of the Middle East . President John F. Kennedy rushed off notes to Nasser , Feisal , Hussein and Sallal . His plan was that Nasser 's troops should withdraw from Yemen while Saudi Arabia and Jordan halted their aid to the Imam . Nasser agreed to pull out his forces only after Jordan and Saudi Arabia " stop all aggressive operations on the frontiers " . Feisal and Hussein rejected Kennedy 's plan , since it would involve US recognition of the " rebels " . They insisted that the US should withhold recognition of Sallal 's Presidency since the Imam might still regain control of Yemen , and that Nasser had no intention of pulling out . The Saudis argued that Nasser wanted their oil fields and was hoping to use Yemen as a springboard for revolt in the rest of the Arabian peninsula . King Hussein of Jordan was also convinced that Nasser 's target was Saudi Arabia 's oil , and that if the Saudis went , he would be next . 
 Sallal declared " I warn America that if it does not recognize the Yemen Arab Republic , I shall not recognize it ! " . US Chargé d 'Affaires in Taiz , Robert Stookey , reported that the republican regime was in full control of the country , except in some border areas . However , the British government was insisting on the strength of the Imam 's tribal support . A letter written by President Kennedy to Faisal dated October 25 , which was kept confidential until January 1963 , said : " You may be assured of full US support for the maintenance of Saudi Arabian integrity " . American jet aircraft twice staged shows of force in Saudi Arabia . The first involved six F @-@ 100 jets staging stunt @-@ flying demonstrations over Riyadh and Jeddah ; on the second , two jet bombers and a giant jet transport , while returning to their base near Paris after a visit to Karachi , Pakistan , put on a demonstration over Riyadh . 
 Sallal proclaimed Yemen 's " firm policy to honor its international obligations " , including a 1934 treaty pledging respect for Britain 's Aden Protectorate . Nasser promised to " start gradual withdrawal " of its 18 @,@ 000 @-@ man force , " provided Saudi and Jordanian forces also retire from border regions " , but would leave his technicians and advisers behind . On December 19 , the US became the 34th nation to recognize the Yemen Arab Republic . United Nations recognition followed that of the US by a day . The UN continued to consider the republic the only authority in the land and completely ignored the royalists . 
 Britain , with its commitment to South Arabia and its base in Aden , considered the Egyptian invasion a real threat . Recognition of the republic posed a problem to several treaties Britain had signed with the sheiks and sultans of the South Arabian Federation . Saudi Arabia urged the British to identify themselves with the royalists . On the other hand , there were some in the British Foreign Office who believed Britain could buy security for Aden by recognizing the republic . However , Britain eventually decided not to recognize . Iran , Turkey and most of western Europe also withheld recognition . The republic did receive the recognition of West Germany , Italy , Canada and Australia , as well as the remaining Arab governments , Ethiopia and the entire communist bloc . 
 A week after the American recognition , Sallal boasted at a military parade the republic had rockets that could strike " the palaces of Saudi Arabia " , and in early January the Egyptians again bombed and strafed Najran , a Saudi Arabian city near the Yemenite border . The US responded with another aerial demonstration over Jeddah and a destroyer joined on January 15 . The US reportedly agreed to send antiaircraft batteries and radar @-@ control equipment to Najran . In addition , Ralph Bunche was sent to Yemen , where he met with Sallal and Egyptian Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer . On March 6 Bunche was in Cairo , where Nasser reportedly assured him that he would withdraw his troops from Yemen if the Saudis would stop supporting the royalists . 
 = = = Operation Hard @-@ surface = = = 
 While Bunche was reporting to UN Secretary @-@ General U Thant , the United States Department of State sought the help of ambassador Ellsworth Bunker . His mission was based on a decision made by the National Security Council , which was conceived by McGeorge Bundy and Robert <unk> . The idea behind what became known as " Operation Hard @-@ surface " was to trade American protection ( or the appearance of it ) for a Saudi commitment to halt aid to the royalists , on the basis of which the Americans would get Nasser to withdraw his troops . The operation would consist of " eight little planes . " 
 Bunker arrived in Riyadh on March 6 . Faisal refused Bunker 's offer , which was also hitched to pledges of reform . The original instructions for Operation Hard @-@ surface were that American planes would " attack and destroy " any intruders over Saudi air space , but were later changed to read that the Saudis could defend themselves if attacked . Bunker evidently stuck to the original formula and stressed that if only Faisal would halt his aid to the royalists , the US would be able pressure Nasser to withdraw . Faisal eventually accepted the offer , and Bunker went on to meet with Nasser in Beirut , where the Egyptian President repeated the assurance he had given Bunche . 
 The Bunche and Bunker mission gave birth to the idea of an observer mission to Yemen , which eventually became the United Nations Yemen Observation Mission . The U.N. observer team , which would be set up by the former UN Congo commander , Swedish Major General Carl von Horn . His disengagement agreement called for ( 1 ) Establishment of a demilitarized zone extending twenty kilometers on either side of a demarcated Saudi Arabian Yemen border , from which all military equipment was to be excluded ; ( 2 ) <unk> of UN observers within this zone on both sides of the border to observe , report and prevent any continued attempt by the Saudis to supply royalist forces . 
 On April 30 , von Horn was sent to discover what kind of force was required . A few days later , he met with Amer in Cairo and found out that Egypt had no intention of drawing all its troops from Yemen . After a few more days , he was told by the Saudi deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs , Omar <unk> , that the Saudis would not accept any attempt by Egypt to leave security forces after their withdrawal . Saudi Arabia had already been cutting back on its support to the royalists , in part because Egypt 's projected plan for unity with Syria and Iraq made Nasser seem too dangerous . By that time , the war cost Egypt $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 a day and nearly 5 @,@ 000 casualties . Though promising to remove her troops , Egypt had the privilege of leaving an unspecified number for the " training " of Yemen 's republican army . 
 In June , von Horn went to San 'a , unsuccessfully trying to achieve the objective of 1 ) ending Saudi aid to the royalists , 2 ) creating a 25 @-@ mile demilitarized strip along the Saudi border , and 3 ) supervising the phased withdrawal of the Egyptian troops . In September , von Horn cabled his resignation to Thant , who announced that the mission would continue , due to " oral assurances " by Egypt and Saudi Arabia to continue financing it . The number of Egyptian troops increased , and in the end of January , the " Hard @-@ surface " squadron was withdrawn after a wrangle with Faisal . On September 4 , 1964 , the UN admitted failure and withdrew its mission . 
 = = = Egyptian offensives = = = 
 The Egyptian General Staff divided the Yemen War into three operational objectives . The first was the air phase , it began with jet trainers modified to strafe and carry bombs and ended with three wings of fighter @-@ bombers , stationed near the Saudi @-@ Yemeni border . Egyptian sorties went along the <unk> Coast of Yemen and into the Saudi towns of Najran and <unk> . It was designed to attack royalist ground formations and substitute the lack of Egyptian formations on the ground with high @-@ tech air power . In combination with Egyptian air strikes , a second operational phase involved securing major routes leading to San 'a , and from there secure key towns and hamlets . The largest offensive based on this operational tactic was the March 1963 " Ramadan Offensive " that lasted until February 1964 , focused on opening and securing roads from San 'a to Sadah to the North , and San 'a to Marib to the East . The success of the Egyptian forces meant that royalist resistance could take refuge in hills and mountains to regroup and carry out hit @-@ and @-@ run offensives against republican and Egyptian units controlling towns and roads . The third strategic offensive was the pacification of tribes and their enticement to the republican government , meaning the expenditures of massive amounts of funds for humanitarian needs and outright bribery of tribal leaders . 
 = = = = Ramadan offensive = = = = 
 The Ramadan offensive began in February 1963 when Amer and Sadat arrived in San 'a . Amer asked Cairo to double the 20 @,@ 000 men in Yemen , and in early February the first 5 @,@ 000 of the reinforcement arrived . On February 18 a task force of fifteen tanks , twenty armored cars , eighteen trucks and numerous jeeps took off from San 'a ' moving northwards , heading for Sadah . More garrison troops followed . A few days later another task force , spearheaded by 350 men in tanks and armored cars , struck out from Sadah southeastwards toward Marib . The maneuvered into the Rub al @-@ Khali desert , perhaps well into Saudi territory , and there they were built up by an airlift . Then they headed westwards . On February 25 they occupied Marib and on March 7 they took Harib . A royalist force of 1 @,@ 500 men ordered down from Najran failed to stop them on their way out from Sadah . The royalist commander at Harib fled to <unk> , on the British @-@ protected side of the border . In the battle of El <unk> , 25 miles southeast of San 'a , 500 royalists under Prince Abdullah 's command attacked an Egyptian position on top of a sheer @-@ sided hill that was fortified with six Soviet T @-@ 54 tanks , a dozen armored cars and entrenched machine guns . The royalists advanced in a thin skirmish line and were plastered by artillery , mortars and strafing planes . They replied with rifles , one mortar with 20 rounds , and a bazooka with four rounds . The battle lasted a week and cost the Egyptians three tanks , seven armored cars and 160 dead . The Egyptians were now in positions from which they could hope to interdict the royalist movement of supplies in the mountains north and east of San 'a ' . 
 In the beginning of April the royalists held a conference with Faisal in Riyadh . They decided to adopt new tactics , including attempts to get supplies around the positions now held by the Egyptians by using camels instead of trucks to cross the mountains to reach the positions east of San 'a . Camel caravans from <unk> would swing into the Rub al @-@ Khali and enter Yemen north of Marib . It was also decided that the royalists must now strengthen their operations west of the mountains with three " armies " . By the end of April , they began to recover and contended to have regained some of positions from the Egyptians had taken in the Jawf , particularly the small but strategic towns of Barat and <unk> , both in the mountains between Sadah and the Jawf , and were able to move freely in the eastern <unk> desert . In the Jawf they claimed to have cleaned up all Egyptian strong @-@ points except Hazm , and in the west the town of <unk> . 
 = = = = Haradh offensive = = = = 
 On June 12 , Egyptian infantry numbering at about 4 @,@ 000 , reinforced by the republican army and mercenaries from the Aden protectorate invaded the town of Beit <unk> , about thirty miles west of San 'a , where Prince Abdullah held a front extending from the Hodeida road , through <unk> province , to southern Hajjah . In two days , the attackers advanced about twelve miles , before being repelled by a counter @-@ attack . The royalists admitted about 250 casualties . Next , the Egyptians attacked <unk> , about 100 miles north @-@ west of San 'a . They used the unpopularity of the local royalist commander to bribe several local sheiks and occupied the town unopposed . After a month , the sheiks sent delegations to al @-@ Badr soliciting pardons and asking for guns and money with which to fight the Egyptians . Al @-@ Badr sent new forces and managed to regain the surroundings of <unk> , though not the town itself . 
 On August 15 , the Egyptians launched an offensive from their major north @-@ western base in Haradh . They had 1 @,@ 000 troops and about 2 @,@ 000 republicans . The plan , as interpreted by British intelligence , seemed to have been to cut the thirty @-@ mile track southward through the mountains from the Saudi border at <unk> to al @-@ Badr 's headquarters in the Qara mountains near <unk> , and then to split into two task forces , one moving east through <unk> to the headquarters and the other north @-@ eastwards along the track to the Saudi border below the Razih mountains . The Egyptians began their move on Saturday morning , moving along the Haradh and <unk> ravines . On Saturday and Sunday afternoons they were caught in heavy rain and their vehicles , including twenty tanks and about forty armored cars sank axle deep into the mud . The defenders left them alone until Monday at dawn . Al @-@ Badr left his headquarters at three that morning with 1 @,@ 000 men to direct a counterattack in the <unk> ravine , while Abdullah Hussein attacked in the Haradh ravine . 
 Meanwhile , the Egyptians had planned a coordinated drive from Sadah to the southwest , below the Razih mountains , hoping to link up with the force coming from Haradh . They were counting on a local sheik , whose forces were to supposed to join 250 Egyptian parachutists . The sheik failed to deliver , and the parachutists made their way back to Sadah , suffering losses from snipers on the way . Al @-@ Badr had sent radio messages and summonses by runner in all directions calling for reinforcement . He asked reserve forces training in the Jawf to arrive in trucks mounting <unk> and 57 @-@ millimeter cannon and 81 millimeter mortars and heavy machine guns . They arrived within forty @-@ eight hours , in time to face the attackers . They outflanked the Egyptian columns , still stuck in mud in the ravines . They later announced they had knocked out ten of the Egyptian tanks and about half of their armored cars , and claimed to have shot down an Ilyushin bomber . The royalists also carried out two supporting movements . One was a raid on <unk> , in which several staff officers were killed . The second was an attempt , involving British advisors and French and Belgian mercenaries from Katanga , to bombard San 'a from a nearby mountain peak . Other diversionary operations included raids on Egyptian aircraft and tanks at the south airport of San 'a and a mortar at the Egyptian and republican residence in a suburb of Taiz . Although the Egyptians managed to drive al @-@ Badr out of his headquarters to a cave on Jabal <unk> , they could not close the Saudi border . They declared victory on the radio and on the press , but were obliged to agree to a ceasefire on the upcoming Erkwit conference on November 2 . 
 = = = Alexandria summit and Erkwit ceasefire = = = 
 In September , 1964 , Nasser and Faisal met in the Arab summit in Alexandria . By that time Egypt had 40 @,@ 000 troops in Yemen and had suffered an estimated 10 @,@ 000 casualties . In their official communiqué the two leaders promised to 1 ) cooperate fully to solve the existing differences between the various factions in Yemen , 2 ) work together in preventing armed clashes in Yemen , and 3 ) reach a solution by peaceful agreement . The communiqué was widely hailed in the Arab world , and Washington called it a " statesmanlike action " and a " major step toward eventual peaceful settlement of the long civil war . " Nasser and Faisal warmly embraced at Alexandria 's airport and called each other " brother " . Faisal said he was leaving Egypt " with my heart brimming with love for President Nasser . " 
 On November 2 , at a secret conference in Erkwit , Sudan , the royalists and republicans declared a ceasefire effective at 1 : 00 PM on Monday , November 8 . Tribesmen of both sides celebrated the decision until that day , and for two days after it went into effect , they fraternized at several places . On November 2 and 3 , nine royalists and nine republicans , with a Saudi and an Egyptian observer , worked out the terms . A conference of 168 tribal leaders was planned for November 23 . For the royalists , the conference was to become an embryo national assembly that would name a provisional national executive of two royalists , two republicans and one neutral , to administer the country provisionally and to plan a plebiscite . Until that plebiscite , which would decide whether Yemen would be a monarchy or a republic , both Sallal and al @-@ Badr were to step aside . At the end of the two days the Egyptians resumed their bombing of royalist positions . The conference planned for November 23 was postponed to the 30th , then indefinitely . The republicans blamed the royalists for not arriving , while the royalists blamed the Egyptian bombings . 
