 On 5 August , Pash received a secret message from Washington , D.C. , reporting that the French physicist Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie had been sighted at his holiday home at L 'Arcouest in Brittany . Joliot @-@ Curie was at the top of Alsos 's wanted list , so Pash and CIC Special Agent Gerry Beatson set out to investigate in the wake of the advancing U.S. Third Army . They searched the University of Rennes and found some documents there on 9 August . On 11 August they reached the homes of Joliot @-@ Curie , Francis Perrin , and Pierre Auger in the L 'Arcouest area . Joliot @-@ Curie was not home , but German snipers fired on them , and they had to wait until 12 August before they could search the house . 
 The rest of the advance party of the Alsos Mission moved to Normandy in August 1944 , where it joined T @-@ Force , a similar formation to S @-@ Force , at Rambouillet , where it was preparing for the liberation of Paris . An Alsos Mission team including Pash and Calvert reached Joliot @-@ Curie 's house in the Paris suburbs on 24 August to find that he was not there , but at his laboratory at the Collège de France . The next day they reached the Porte d 'Orléans where they encountered troops of the French 2e Division Blindée , who were engaged in liberating the city , and came under small arms fire from the German defenders . The Alsos Mission replied with their M1 carbine and Tommy guns as they made their way through the back streets to the college , where they found Joliot @-@ Curie in his office . 
 Goudsmit interviewed Joliot @-@ Curie in Paris on 27 August . Accompanied by Calvert , Joliot @-@ Curie was flown to London where Perrin and Goudsmit interviewed him about the activities of German scientists . Joliot @-@ Curie recalled visits to the College , which had a cyclotron , by German scientists including Erich Schumann , who had initiated the German nuclear project , and controlled it until it had been handed over to the Reichsforschungsrat ( National Research Council ) in 1942 ; by Abraham Esau , who had been in charge of nuclear physics under the Reichsforschungsrat ; and by Walter Gerlach , who had replaced him in January 1944 . Other German physicists who had used the facilities included Kurt Diebner , Walther Bothe , and Erich Bagge , all of whom were known to be associated with the German nuclear project . 
 Meanwhile , T @-@ Force had moved into the Petit Palais . The main body of the Alsos Mission soon followed , and the Mission opened an office at the Place de l 'Opéra . On 5 September , word was received that the British 21st Army Group was about to enter Brussels . There were two important Alsos Mission objectives in Belgium : the corporate headquarters of Union Minière du Haut Katanga , the world 's largest supplier of uranium ore , in Antwerp , and its uranium processing plant in Olen . A six @-@ man Alsos Mission team set out to secure them , led by Pash and the Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 , at ETOUSA , Colonel G. Bryan Conrad . 
 On reaching Brussels , they made contact with Lieutenant Colonel David Strangeways , the commander of R Force , who provided them with an escort of Royal Air Force armored vehicles . They entered Antwerp on 7 September and found the office of Union Minière . They discovered that over 1 @,@ 000 tons of refined uranium had been sent to Germany , but about 150 tons still remained at Olen . They set out for Olen , where they located 68 tons , but another 80 tons were missing , having been shipped to France in 1940 ahead of the German invasion of Belgium . The capture of Eindhoven by the U.S. 101st Airborne Division allowed early access to another high priority target , the Philips plant there . Brigadier Edgar Williams , the 21st Army Group 's Chief of Intelligence , facilitated the Alsos Mission 's detour to Eindhoven , where it was able to interview Dutch scientists . Williams also furnished a detachment of Royal Engineers to transport and move the uranium from Olen . Groves had it shipped to England , and , ultimately , to the United States . 
 The Alsos Mission now attempted to recover the shipment that had been sent to France . Documentation was discovered that said that part of it had been sent to Toulouse . An Alsos Mission team under Pash 's command reached Toulouse on 1 October and inspected a French Army arsenal . They used a Geiger counter to find barrels containing 31 tons of the uranium from Belgium . Conrad persuaded Major General Frank S. Ross to release the U.S. 3342nd Quartermaster Truck Company from the Red Ball Express to retrieve the shipment . The barrels were collected and transported to Marseille , where they were loaded on a ship bound for the United States . During the loading process a barrel fell into the water and had to be retrieved by a Navy diver . In Marseilles , the Alsos Mission detachment also met up with the detachment that had been sent to Italy , which now rejoined them . The remaining 49 tons of the original shipment to France were never found . 
 Information gathered in Rennes , Paris , and Eindhoven pointed to Strasbourg as a place of particular interest . Physicists Rudolf Fleischmann and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker were known to be working at the University of Strasbourg , as was Eugen von Haagen , an expert on viruses whose work was of great concern to the Alsos Mission 's Biological Warfare section . The Naval section was interested in the torpedo research being carried out there , and jet engine development was being undertaken at Strasbourg 's Junkers plant . 
 On 22 November , the U.S. Sixth Army Group notified the Alsos Mission that the capture of Strasbourg was imminent , and it should join T @-@ Force in Saarburg , where it was preparing to enter the city . The Alsos Mission joined T @-@ Force in Strasbourg on 25 November . The German nuclear laboratory was discovered on the grounds of the Strasbourg Hospital , where the physicists attempted to pass themselves off as medics . Fleischmann was taken into custody , but Weizsäcker and von Haagen had fled the city . 
 Documents discovered in Weizsäcker 's office , Fleischmann 's laboratory and the Strasbourg Hospital pointed to nuclear activities taking place at Stadtilm , Haigerloch , Hechingen , and Tailfingen . After establishing its headquarters in von Haagen 's office Alsos staff uncovered documents concerning secret medical experiments at Natzweiler concentration camp . These indicated the Germans had been unable to develop a practical process for uranium enrichment . For the first time the Alsos Mission was able to categorically report that the Germans did not have nuclear weapons , and would not have them for some time . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 When the German Operation Nordwind offensive threatened Strasbourg , Pash ordered all captured documents to be removed . Papers indicating the nature of the Alsos Mission were removed or destroyed . Although Strasbourg was not abandoned by the Allies , and ultimately did not fall , the Alsos Mission departed the city on 8 January 1945 . Pash even ordered an evacuation plan to be prepared for the Alsos Mission 's main headquarters in Paris . The embarrassing series of intelligence failures that had led up to the Battle of the Bulge cast doubts on the Alsos Mission 's own findings . A four @-@ man team under Eckman was sent to investigate a suspiciously devastating V @-@ 2 explosion near Antwerp , and Fred <unk> had to confirm that it was not a small nuclear explosion . Rumors that Germany had an atomic bomb persisted as late as March 1945 . 
 A new forward headquarters , Alsos Forward North ( <unk> ) , was opened at Aachen , and on 8 February the Alsos Mission reopened its forward headquarters in Strasbourg as Alsos Forward South ( <unk> ) . In March , the U.S. Twelfth Army Group launched Operation Lumberjack , an offensive to clear the Germans west of the Rhine . Pash , who was promoted to colonel on 6 March , led an Alsos Mission detachment into Cologne on 7 March , but little additional information was found . 
 The interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Germany , mostly at the <unk> plant at Oranienburg , so Groves arranged for the plant to be bombed on 15 March 1945 . Some 612 B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses of the U.S. Eighth Air Force dropped 1 @,@ 500 tons of high explosive and 178 tons of incendiary bombs on the plant . 
 On 30 March , the Alsos Mission reached Heidelberg , where important scientists were captured including Walther Bothe , Richard Kuhn , Philipp Lenard , and Wolfgang Gertner . Their interrogation revealed that Otto Hahn was at his laboratory in Tailfingen , while Werner Heisenberg and Max von Laue were at Heisenberg 's laboratory in Hechingen , and the experimental natural uranium reactor that Heisenberg 's team had built in Berlin had been moved to Haigerloch . Henceforth , the main focus of the Alsos Mission was on these nuclear facilities in the Württemberg area . 
 As the Allied armies advanced into Germany in April 1945 , Alsos Mission teams searched Stadtilm , where they found documentation concerning the German nuclear program , components of a nuclear reactor , and eight tons of uranium oxide . Scientists captured at Göttingen and <unk> @-@ Lindau included Werner <unk> , the chief of the planning board of the Reichsforschungsrat , and Fritz Houtermans , who provided information about the Soviet atomic bomb project . At Celle , the Alsos Mission uncovered an experimental centrifuge for separating uranium isotopes , the result of work undertaken at the University of Hamburg by a team under Paul Harteck . 
 The problem with the targets in the Württemberg area was that they not only lay in the path of the French First Army 's advance , but were also in the occupation zone allocated to France . Groves attempted to get the occupation boundaries changed , but the State Department wanted to know why first , and Groves refused to provide this information . Groves , Marshall , and Stimson then decided that the area would have to be secured by American troops that would carry off what they could and destroy everything else . Pash was sent to ask General Jacob Devers , the commander of the U.S. Sixth Army Group , if the zones of the French First Army and the U.S. Seventh Army could be swapped around . He was informed that the matter would have to be taken up with Eisenhower . 
 Groves dispatched Lieutenant Colonel John Lansdale , Jr . , to Europe , where he participated in a meeting with Lieutenant General Bedell Smith and Major General Harold Bull of SHAEF ; Major General Eldridge G. Chapman , the commander of the U.S. 13th Airborne Division ; Pash , Furman , and Goudsmit of Alsos ; and Brigadier General Reuben E. Jenkins from the Sixth Army Group . The plan , codenamed Operation Effective , called for the 13th Airborne Division to occupy the area to prevent its capture by the French , and seize an airfield that could be used to fly in an Alsos Mission team , and later to fly it out , along with captured German scientists . Operation Effective was scheduled for 22 April . Meanwhile , Devers took steps to delay the French advance . 
 The Alsos Mission had learned that the uranium ores that had been taken from Belgium in 1944 had been shipped to the <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) plant in Staßfurt . The 83rd Infantry Division captured this on 15 April . As it was in the occupation zone allocated to the Soviet Union at the Yalta Conference , the Alsos Mission , led by Pash and accompanied by Lansdale , Perrin and Air Commodore Sir Charles Hambro , arrived on 17 April to remove anything of interest . Over the following ten days , 260 truckloads of uranium ore , sodium uranate and <unk> weighing about 1 @,@ 000 tons , were taken away by an African @-@ American truck company . The uranium was taken to Hildesheim and most of it was flown to the United Kingdom by the Royal Air Force ; the rest had to be moved to Antwerp by train and loaded onto a ship to England . 
 On 20 April , the French First Army captured an intact bridge over the Neckar River at Horb and established a bridgehead . It was decided to send in a force on the ground instead of Operation Effective , which was cancelled on 19 April . This time , instead of following or accompanying the front @-@ line troops , the Alsos Mission would operate behind enemy lines . The Alsos Mission had taken delivery of two armored cars , four jeeps with machine gun mounts , and two .50 caliber machine guns . The other two jeeps would carry captured German machine guns . They would be accompanied by three unarmed jeeps . For the operation , codenamed Operation Big , Pash would command a special force called Task Force A , built around his Alsos Mission team and Lieutenant Colonel Wilbur White 's U.S. 1269th Engineer Combat Battalion , less its Company B. Sir Charles Hambro decided to accompany the Alsos Mission with a British group that included Michael Perrin , David <unk> , Eric Welsh , and Rupert Cecil . Lansdale accompanied Task Force A as Groves ' representative , and Brigadier General Eugene L. Harrison , the G @-@ 2 from the Sixth Army Group , as Devers ' representative . 
 The Alsos Mission set out on 20 April and rendezvoused with the 1269th Engineer Combat Battalion at Freudenstadt . The intact bridge over the Neckar River at Horb was crossed and Haigerloch was occupied without opposition on 22 April . The main body of Task Force A arrived on 23 April . In a laboratory in a cellar they found a German experimental nuclear reactor shaped like a cylinder and made of graphite blocks , but the uranium and heavy water were missing . The scientists immediately began dismantling it . Pash left Hambro in charge , while he led troops of Task Force A to Bisingen , and then on to Hechingen , where 25 scientists were captured , including von Weizsäcker , von Laue , Karl Wirtz , Horst <unk> and Erich Bagge . At Tailfingen they took Otto Hahn and nine members of his staff into custody . At Haigerloch , a sealed drum of documents was retrieved from a cesspool , and three drums of heavy water and 1 @.@ 5 tons of uranium ingots were found buried in a field . The uranium and heavy water were loaded onto trucks . The apertures in the cellar were blown up with minor explosions to prevent their capture by the French . 
 Werner Heisenberg remained at large , having left Hechingen on 19 April . On 1 May , Pash set out in pursuit of Heisenberg with ten men in the two armored cars and two jeeps . They teamed up with the 36th Reconnaissance Troop of the U.S. 36th Infantry Division and entered <unk> on 2 May , where Pash found Heisenberg at his home . The Americans became involved in firefights with German troops attempting to enter the town , and the 36th Reconnaissance Troop had to head off on another mission , leaving Pash with just seven men . Fortunately , the German force , which numbered about 700 , offered to surrender . Pash returned on 3 May with the 3rd Battalion , 142nd Infantry , which took them prisoner , while Pash and his Alsos Mission team took Heisenberg into custody . 
 By VE day , the Alsos Mission had a strength of 114 men and women . It was officially disbanded on 15 October 1945 . 
 = = Japan = = 
 Plans for the invasion of Japan incorporated an Alsos Mission . Japanese fire balloon attacks on the United States had aroused fears that the technique might be used in combination with biological agents , which the Japanese Unit 731 was known to be experimenting with . In March 1945 , the physicist and seismologist L. Don Leet was appointed as head of the scientific section of the Alsos Mission to Japan . Leet had previously worked with the Manhattan Project on the Trinity nuclear test . Plans were drawn up to prepare and equip a T @-@ Force along the lines of the one in Europe , but made up of personnel already in the Pacific . The mission differed from its European counterpart in that it was solely American and consisted of only one intelligence agency . Responsibility for nuclear matters was subsequently handled by a separate Manhattan Project Intelligence Group organized by Groves . 
 Leet 's group reached Manila in July 1945 , where they met with the intelligence staff of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's Army Forces , Pacific . Following the surrender of Japan the mission traveled to Japan and visited various research establishments including Tokyo Imperial University , Waseda University , Tokyo Institute of Technology , the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research , the Institute for Materials Research , Tokyo Shibaura Denki ( Toshiba ) , the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , the National Research Council , and the Board of Technology . The mission , which included Karl Compton , interviewed over 300 Japanese scientists and produced reports on Japanese research into radar , rockets , and other developments , including chemical and biological warfare . The Manhattan Project Intelligence Group , under the command of Philip Morrison , arrived in Japan in September 1945 and examined Japan 's wartime nuclear weapons program . The group concluded that lack of uranium ore and low priority had doomed the Japanese effort . They reported that , contrary to American belief , Japan 's nuclear physicists were competent . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After seeing the German project at Haigerloch , Goudsmit wrote that : 
 It was so obvious the whole German uranium set up was on a ludicrously small scale . Here was the central group of laboratories , and all it amounted to was a little underground cave , a wing of a small textile factory , a few rooms in an old brewery . To be sure , the laboratories were well equipped , but compared to what we were doing in the United States it was still small @-@ time stuff . Sometimes we wondered if our government had not spent more money on our intelligence mission than the Germans had spent on their whole project . 
 In the end , the Alsos Mission contributed little to the Allied defeat of Nazi Germany , because the German nuclear and biological weapons programs that it had been formed to investigate turned out to be smaller and less threatening than had been feared . In the field of nuclear weapons development at least , the underfunded and disorganized German program lagged far behind the Allies ' own efforts . In its appropriation of the accomplishments of European science , the Alsos Mission played a small part in the wartime and subsequent scientific and technological developments that characterized and transformed the postwar world . 
 = Mother Tucker = 
 " Mother Tucker " is the second episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy , an episode produced for Season 4 . It originally aired on Fox on September 17 , 2006 . The episode follows Peter 's mother , Thelma , divorcing from Peter 's father , Francis , and dating news anchorman Tom Tucker . Peter becomes closely attached to Tucker , only for his mother to suddenly end the relationship , leaving Peter feeling abandoned . Meanwhile , Stewie and Brian are employed as DJs on a local radio station , but have creative differences over the tone of the show , which eventually forces Brian to quit . 
 The episode was written by Tom Devanney and directed by James Purdum . It received mixed reviews for its storyline , and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 23 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jon Benjamin , Max Burkholder , Phyllis Diller , Phil LaMarr , Joe Lomonaco , Tamera Mowry , Anne @-@ Michelle Seiler , Tara Strong , Nicole Sullivan , Gore Vidal , Gedde Watanabe , and Wally Wingert along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Mother Tucker " was released on DVD along with twelve other episodes from the season on September 18 , 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter 's mother , Thelma , visits the Griffin family home , and alerts her son , Peter that she has finally left his father , Francis . In an attempt to find her a new husband , Peter 's wife , Lois , takes her to a meeting for " single people , " where she meets local news anchor Tom Tucker . Thelma and Tom begin dating , which upsets Peter , causing him to attempt to sabotage the new relationship . He is eventually persuaded by Tom that he should let his mother be happy , and the two begin bonding . Eventually , his mother suddenly ends the relationship , however , causing Peter to believe it is his fault . The next day , Peter learns that it is important for fathers and sons to spend time together , and tells Tom that he should spend more time with his own son , Jake , instead . 
 Meanwhile , after interrupting a broadcast of local radio station <unk> 's program " Weenie and the Butt " , Brian gets his own radio talk show , when one of the station 's producers compliments his speaking voice . Attempting to have an intelligent dialogue with his listeners , and distancing himself from " Weenie and the Butt " ' s constant overuse of sound effects , Brian is immediately heckled by Stewie 's prank phone calls . After first planning to cancel Brian 's show , the station 's producer announces that he loved the calls , and eventually decides to hire Stewie as co @-@ host . Stewie then turns Brian 's sophisticated talk show into a lewd , raucous , shock jock @-@ style comedy show called " Dingo and the Baby " , much to Brian 's chagrin , who is reluctant to accept the new format . Upon discovering that people love the new show , however , Brian decides to play along with Stewie 's idea . However , when author Gore Vidal , whom Brian had contacted for an interview on his original show , walks into one of his " Dingo and the Baby " broadcasts and leaves in disgust , Brian quits his job in shame . The show is soon replaced by one featuring Cleveland and Quagmire , entitled " Dark Chocolate and the Rod " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series regular Tom Devanney , and directed by James Purdum . During the " Weenie and the Butt " scene , several sound effects can be heard . Each of these were recorded individually by people who have sung at such venues as the Academy Awards , and other high publicity events . Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane has commented that these sound effect recordings took much longer than expected , as they did not sound professional enough . The episode featured guest performances by actress Phyllis Diller , who has portrayed Peter 's mother Thelma in various episodes , and Tamera Mowry in her third appearance . Author Gore Vidal appeared as himself in the episode . In the scene involving Thelma trying to convince Peter to accept that she is dating Tucker , she comments , " Tom here has won a local Emmy for his work with the <unk> " . The Fox Broadcasting Company has a specific rule stating that the word " retard " or " retarded " cannot be said on their network , but this scene was nevertheless permitted . MacFarlane has commented that he cannot understand why the word is not permitted on Fox , given that it is allowed on other networks . According to MacFarlane and other episode commentators , the scene provoked an angry reaction among the mental health community . 
 There were several scenes throughout this episode that were removed from the script , and not broadcast . One of these comes just after Tom Tucker apologizes to Peter about losing his temper ; it was intended that Jake Tucker would appear , and the origin of his upside @-@ down face would be revealed . The scene with " The Peanuts Reunion " was originally meant for the season four episode " Patriot Games " , but was moved to this episode to ease time constraints in " Patriot Games " . The scene was described by 20th Century Fox worker <unk> Siegel as being depressing . 
 " Mother Tucker " , along with the twelve other episodes from Family Guy 's fifth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 18 , 2007 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discusses the process behind drawing Peter Griffin , and mini @-@ feature entitled " Toys , Toys Galore " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Jon Benjamin , child actor Max Burkholder , actress Phyllis Diller , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actor Joe Lomonaco , voice actress Tamera Mowry , actress Anne @-@ Michelle Seiler , voice actress Tara Strong , voice actress Nicole Sullivan , author Gore Vidal , actor Gedde Watanabe , and voice actor Wally Wingert guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , writer David A. Goodman , writer Mike Henry , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode opens with the Griffin family attending the local Airshow in Quahog , and are shown to be anxiously awaiting one of the pilots to crash . After a pilot successfully lands , Peter expresses his boredom , and states that he would rather be home watching " the tape from the The Ring " . In a flashback , Peter begins playing the film , after first being warned , with the 1987 film Mannequin appearing instead and having the same effect as the cursed tape . Deciding to stay at the airshow to watch their neighbor , Glenn Quagmire perform , he flies his plane through several billboards ( specifically through the crotch of the women 's images on the boards ) , including those for Veronica Mars , The Simple Life and On the Record w / Greta Van Susteren ( which he can only do after " getting some help " from a Jack Daniel 's Tennessee whiskey billboard . 
 Returning home , the Griffin family decide to watch a television show entitled Roundtable , featuring guests Al Michaels , Harold Ramis , Ray Romano and Kermit the Frog . Once Thelma appears , and alerts Peter of her split @-@ up with his father , Peter is shocked , stating that the same happened at the Peanuts reunion , with Charlie Brown then appearing as a punk rock drug dealer . 
 When Peter finds Thelma and Tom in bed , a cutaway shows Stewie reading a quotation from the movie Harold and Maude . 
 After Thelma leaves Tom , he begins showing Peter more affection , causing Lois to believe it to be strange . Peter then states that it is no stranger than when Darth Vader from the film franchise Star Wars was a parking attendant . Vader is then shown in the contemporary world as a failure , and making minimum wage . This scene , as with all scenes that contain references to Star Wars or its characters , was sent to Lucasfilm for approval , in order to protect copyright . After Stewie takes over Brian 's radio show , the two begin playing random sound clips from various films and television shows , including dialogue from the 1993 drama film Philadelphia , which was acknowledged as a mistake by Stewie . 
 In an attempt to rebel from his father , Peter decides to reach for the freezer to take out some ice cream during dinner , much to the chagrin of Tom Tucker , who attempts to stop him . As Peter lifts a spoon of ice cream to his mouth , he is warned by Tucker several times not to eat it . When he does , however , Tucker repeatedly spanks him , in reference to the 1979 drama feature Kramer vs. Kramer ( even though the spanking does not occur in the movie ) . After author Gore Vidal appears at the radio station Brian had invited him to speak at , Vidal quickly leaves after he finds the show to be low @-@ brow . This causes Brian to quit the show , noting that he has become " worse of a sell @-@ out " than when Stewie appeared in a Butterfinger commercial . Stewie is then shown eating a Butterfinger , and says " Nobody better lay a finger on my Butterfinger " , which is a parody of the many Butterfinger commercials featuring Bart Simpson , and utters the annoyed grunt , D 'oh ! , a phrase used regularly by The Simpsons character Homer Simpson . The bit is also a reference to the negative criticism and similarities between Family Guy and The Simpsons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 9 @.@ 23 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 3 in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly edging out The Simpsons , in addition to series creator Seth MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! , in both rating and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mixed , calling it a " slow start to the season . " Dan Iverson of IGN reviewed the episode positively , noting that the episode " would make even the most anti @-@ Family Guy television viewers out there laugh pretty hard . " Iverson went on to comment , however , that " it probably won 't be remembered as fondly as some of the episodes from the first few seasons . " For him , the " funniest aspect of the episode " was the radio scene , in which " we get the impression that [ radio jockeys ] are immature , simple @-@ minded idiots . " Brett Love of TV Squad reviewed the episode slightly more negatively , stating that " the whole Peter story just didn 't do much for me . " Love did find that the " Stewie and Brian stuff was the best part of the episode , " but went on to proclaim that " there are 20 more episodes to get it right . " In his review of the Family Guy Volume 5 box set , Francis Rizzo of DVD Talk wrote that the radio subplot is " a perfect parody of everything that 's wrong in radio . " 
 = The Boat Race 1856 = 
 The 13th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 15 March 1856 . Typically held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . The race , the second to be held on the ebb tide , was won by Cambridge who beat Oxford by half a length . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . It was the second race to be held on the ebb tide , the first time since the 1846 race , from Barker 's Rails to Putney , approximately 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 097 m ) longer than the conventional course . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by seven lengths in the previous race held in 1854 . Cambridge led overall with seven wins to Oxford 's five . 
 No Boat Race took place in 1855 – severe frost had caused both the Thames ( from Oxford to Henley ) and the River Cam to freeze , and heavy snow curtailed efforts to practice for the race . Instead the universities faced each other at the Henley Royal Regatta where Cambridge won the Grand Challenge Cup . Despite the victory , Cambridge agreed that they should propose the challenge to Oxford and did so during the October term ; it was duly accepted . Both crews raced in boats constructed by Searle . The umpire for the race was W. G. Rich , the former Cambridge University Boat Club president who had rowed in both the March and December races of 1849 . The starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 9 @.@ 375 lb ( 73 @.@ 9 kg ) , 8 @.@ 75 pounds ( 4 @.@ 0 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . None of the competitors had taken part in a previous Boat Race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race commenced shortly after 11am with Oxford taking an early lead . Cambridge 's number six , M <unk> , caught a wave with his oar by the Ship pub and lost his seat , allowing Oxford to extend their lead . After recovering , Cambridge made a substantial push and passed Oxford to hold a small advantage , to hold a half @-@ a @-@ length by Barnes Bridge . Although they nearly increased their lead to a length , the Light Blues encountered a barge at Corney Reach which caused them to change course and lose ground , enabling Oxford to draw level once again . The crews exchanged leads with Oxford shooting Hammersmith Bridge with a half @-@ length advantage . Cambridge steered closer to the shore and retook the lead . Despite a late surge from the Dark Blues , Cambridge passed the finish first , winning by half a length in a time of 25 minutes 45 seconds . It was Cambridge 's first win in four attempts and their eighth win overall against Oxford 's five victories . 
 = <unk> = 
 Phoronids ( scientific name Phoronida , sometimes called horseshoe worms ) are a phylum of marine animals that filter @-@ feed with a lophophore ( a " crown " of tentacles ) , and build upright tubes of chitin to support and protect their soft bodies . They live in most of the oceans and seas including the Arctic Ocean but excluding the Antarctic Ocean , and between the intertidal zone and about 400 meters down . Most adult phoronids are 2 cm long and about 1 @.@ 5 mm wide , although the largest are 50 cm long . 
 The bottom end of the body is an ampulla ( a flask @-@ like swelling ) , which anchors the animal in the tube and enables it to retract its body very quickly when threatened . When the lophophore is extended at the top of the body , cilia ( little hairs ) on the sides of the tentacles draw food particles to the mouth , which is inside and slightly to one side of the base of the lophophore . Unwanted material can be excluded by closing a lid above the mouth or be rejected by the tentacles , whose cilia can switch into reverse . The food then moves down to the stomach , which is in the ampulla . Solid wastes are moved up the intestine and out through the anus , which is outside and slightly below the lophophore . 
 A blood vessel leads up the middle of the body from the stomach to a circular vessel at the base of the lophophore , and from there a single blind vessel runs up each tentacle . A pair of blood vessels near the body wall lead downward from the lophophore ring to the stomach and also to blind branches throughout the body . There is no heart , but the major vessels can contract in waves to move the blood . Phoronids do not ventilate their trunks with oxygenated water , but rely on respiration through the lophophore . The blood contains hemoglobin , which is unusual in such small animals and seems to be an adaptation to anoxic and hypoxic environments . The blood of Phoronis architecta carries twice as much oxygen as a human of the same weight . Two metanephridia filter the body fluid , returning any useful products and dumping the remaining soluble wastes through a pair of pores beside the anus . 
 One species builds colonies by budding or by splitting into top and bottom sections , and all phoronids reproduce sexually from spring to autumn . The eggs of most species form free @-@ swimming actinotroch larvae , which feed on plankton . An actinotroch settles to the seabed after about 20 days and then undergoes a radical change in 30 minutes : the larval tentacles are replaced by the adult lophophore ; the anus moves from the bottom to just outside the lophophore ; and this changes the gut from upright to a U @-@ bend , with the stomach at the bottom of the body . One species forms a " slug @-@ like " larva , and the larvae of a few species are not known . Phoronids live for about one year . 
 Some species live separately , in vertical tubes embedded in soft sediment , while others form tangled masses buried in or encrusting rocks and shells . In some habitats populations of phoronids reach tens of thousand of individuals per square meter . The actinotroch larvae are familiar among plankton , and sometimes account for a significant proportion of the zooplankton biomass . Predators include fish , gastropods ( snails ) , and nematodes ( tiny roundworms ) . One phoronid species is unpalatable to many epibenthic predators . Various parasites infest phoronids ' body cavities , digestive tract and tentacles . It is unknown whether phoronids have any significance for humans . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has not listed any phoronid species as endangered . 
 As of 2010 there are no indisputable body fossils of phoronids . There is good evidence that phoronids created trace fossils found in the Silurian , Devonian , Permian , Jurassic and Cretaceous periods , and possibly in the Ordovician and Triassic . Phoronids , brachiopods and bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) have collectively been called lophophorates , because all use lophophores to feed . From about the 1940s to the 1990s , family trees based on embryological and morphological features placed lophophorates among or as a sister group to the deuterostomes , a super @-@ phylum which includes chordates and echinoderms . While a minority adhere to this view , most researchers now regard phoronids as members of the protostome super @-@ phylum Lophotrochozoa . Although analysts using molecular phylogeny are confident that members of Lophotrochozoa are more closely related to each other than of non @-@ members , the relationships between members are mostly unclear . Some analyses regard phoronids and brachiopods as sister @-@ groups , while others place phoronids as a sub @-@ group within <unk> . 
 = = Name = = 
 The name of the phylum comes from Phoronis , one of the many names of the Ancient Egyptian goddess Isis . Phoronis is also the name of one of the two genera of Phoronids . 
 = = Comparison of similar phyla = = 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Body structure = = = 
 Most adult phoronids are 2 to 20 cm long and about 1 @.@ 5 mm wide , although the largest are 50 cm long . Their skins have no cuticle but secrete rigid tubes of chitin , similar to the material used in arthropods ' exoskeletons , and sometimes reinforced with sediment particles and other debris . Most species ' tubes are erect , but those of Phoronis vancouverensis are horizontal and tangled . Phoronids can move within their tubes but never leave them . The bottom end of the body is an ampulla ( a flask @-@ like swelling in a tube @-@ like structure ) , which anchors the animal in the tube and enables it to retract its body when threatened , reducing the body to 20 percent of its maximum length . Longitudinal muscles retract the body very quickly , while circular muscles slowly extend the body by compressing the internal fluid . 
 For feeding and respiration each phoronid has at the top end a lophophore , a " crown " of tentacles with which the animal filter @-@ feeds . In small species the " crown " is a simple circle , in medium @-@ size species it is bent into the shape of a horseshoe with tentacles on the outer and inner sides , and in the largest species the ends of the horseshoe wind into complex spirals . These more elaborate shapes increase the area available for feeding and respiration . The tentacles are hollow , held upright by fluid pressure , and can be moved individually by muscles . 
 The mouth is inside the base of the crown of tentacles but to one side . The gut runs from the mouth to one side of the stomach , in the bottom of the ampulla . The intestine runs from the stomach , up the other side the body , and exits at the anus , outside and a little below the crown of tentacles . The gut and intestine are both supported by two mesenteries ( partitions that run the length of the body ) connected to the body wall , and another mesentery connects the gut to the intestine . 
 The body is divided into coeloms , compartments lined with mesothelium . The main body cavity , under the crown of tentacles , is called the <unk> , and the tentacles and their base share the <unk> . Above the mouth is the epistome , a hollow lid which can close the mouth . The cavity in the epistome is sometimes called the <unk> , although other authors disagree that it is a coelom and Ruppert , Fox and Barnes think it is built by a different process . 
 = = = Feeding , circulation and excretion = = = 
 When the lophophore is extended , cilia ( little hairs ) on the sides of the tentacles draw water down between the tentacles and out at the base of the lophophore . Shorter cilia on the inner sides of the tentacles flick food particles into a groove in a circle under and just inside the tentacles , and cilia in the groove push the particles into the mouth . Phoronids direct their lophophores into the water current , and quickly reorient to maximize the food @-@ catching area when currents change . Their diet includes algae , diatoms , flagellates , <unk> , small invertebrate larvae , and detritus . Unwanted material can be excluded by closing the epistome ( lid above the mouth ) or be rejected by the tentacles , whose cilia can switch into reverse . The gut uses cilia and muscles to move food towards the stomach and secretes enzymes that digest some of the food , but the stomach digests the majority of the food . Phoronids also absorb amino acids ( the building blocks of proteins ) through their skins , mainly in summer . Solid wastes are moved up the intestine and out through the anus , which is outside and slightly below the lophophore . 
 A blood vessel starts from the peritoneum ( the membrane that loosely encloses the stomach ) , with blind capillaries supplying the stomach . The blood vessel leads up the middle of the body to a circular vessel at the base of the lophophore , and from there a single blind vessel runs up each tentacle . A pair of blood vessels near the body wall lead downward from the lophophore ring , and in most species these are combined into one a little below the lophophore ring . The downward vessel ( s ) leads back to the peritoneum , and also to blind branches throughout the body . There is no heart , but muscles in the major vessels contract in waves to move the blood . Unlike many animals that live in tubes , phoronids do not ventilate their trunks with oxygenated water , but rely on respiration by the lophophore , which extends above hypoxic sediments . The blood has hemocytes containing hemoglobin , which unusual in such small animals and seems to be an adaptation to anoxic and hypoxic environments . The blood of Phoronis architecta carries as much oxygen per cm3 as that of most vertebrates ; the blood 's volume in cm3 per <unk> of body weight is twice that of a human . 
 <unk> on the walls of the blood vessels perform first @-@ stage filtration of soluble wastes into the main coelom 's fluid . Two metanephridia , each with a funnel @-@ like intake , filter the fluid a second time , returning any useful products to the coelom and dumping the remaining wastes through a pair of nephridiopores beside the anus . 
 = = = Nervous system and movement = = = 
 There is a nervous center is between the mouth and anus , and a nerve ring at the base of the lophophore . The ring supplies nerves to the tentacles and , just under the skin , to the body @-@ wall muscles . Phoronis ovalis has two nerve trunks under the skin , whereas other species have one . The trunk ( s ) have giant axons ( nerves that transmit signals very fast ) which co @-@ ordinate the retraction of the body when danger threatens . 
 Except for retracting the body into the tube , phoronids have limited and slow movement : partial emerging from the tube ; bending the body when extended ; and the lophophore 's flicking of food into the mouth . 
 = = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = = 
 Only Phoronis ovalis naturally builds colonies by budding or by splitting into top and bottom sections which then grow into full bodies . In experiments , other species have split successfully , but only when both parts have enough gonadal ( reproductive ) tissue . All phoronids breed sexually from spring to autumn . Some species are hermaphroditic ( have both male and female reproductive organs ) but cross @-@ fertilize ( fertilize the eggs of other members ) , while others are dioecious ( have separate sexes ) . The gametes ( <unk> and ova ) are produced in the swollen gonads , around the stomach . The gametes swim through the <unk> to the metanephridia . Sperm exit by the nephridiopores and some are captured by the lophophores of individuals of the same species . Species that lay small fertilized eggs release them into the water as plankton , while species with larger eggs brood them either in the body 's tube or stuck in the center of the lophophore by adhesive . The brooded eggs are released to feed on plankton when they develop into larvae . 
 Development of the eggs is a mixture of deuterostome and protostome characteristics . Early divisions of the egg are holoblastic ( the cells divide completely ) and radial ( they gradually form a stack of circles ) . The process is regulative ( the fate of each cell depends on interaction with other cells , not on a rigid program in each cell ) , and experiments that divided early embryos produced complete larvae . <unk> is formed from mesenchyme originating from the archenteron . The coelom is formed by schizocoely , and the blastopore ( a dent in the embryo ) becomes the mouth . 
 The slug @-@ like larva of Phoronis ovalis swims for about 4 days , creeps on the sea @-@ bed for 3 to 4 days , then bores into a carbonate floor . Nothing is known about three species . The remaining species develop free @-@ swimming actinotroch larvae , which feed on plankton . The actinotroch is an upright cylinder with the anus at the bottom and fringed with cilia . At the top is a lobe or hood , under which are : a ganglion , connected to a patch of cilia outside the apex of the hood ; a pair of protonephridia ( smaller and simpler than the metanephridia in the adult ) ; the mouth ; and feeding tentacles that encircle the mouth . After swimming for about 20 days , the actinotroch settles on the seabed and undergoes a catastrophic metamorphosis ( radical change ) in 30 minutes : the hood and larval tentacles are absorbed and the adult lophophore is created round the mouth , and both now points upward ; the gut develops a U @-@ bend so that the anus is just under and outside the lophophore . Finally the adult phoronid builds a tube . 
 Phoronids live for about one year . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Phoronids live in all the oceans and seas including the Arctic and excepting the Antarctic Ocean , and appear between the intertidal zone and about 400 meters down . Some occur separately , in vertical tubes embedded in soft sediment such as sand , mud , or fine gravel . Others form tangled masses of many individuals buried in or encrusting rocks and shells . In some habitats populations of phoronids reach tens of thousand of individuals per square meter . The actinotroch larvae are familiar among plankton , and sometimes account for a significant proportion of the zooplankton biomass . 
 Phoronis australis bores into the wall of the tube of a cerianthid anemone , <unk> brasiliensis , and uses this as a foundation for building its own tube . One cerianthid can house up to 100 phoronids . In this unequal relationship , the anemone experiences no significant benefits nor harm , while the phoronid benefits from : a foundation for its tube ; food ( both animals are filter @-@ feeders ) ; and protection , as the cerianthid withdraws into its tube when danger threatens , and this alerts the phoronid to retract into its own tube . 
 Although predators of phoronids are not well known , they include fish , gastropods ( snails ) , and nematodes ( tiny roundworms ) . Phoronopsis viridis , which reaches densities of 26 @,@ 500 per square meter on tidal flats in California ( USA ) , is unpalatable to many epibenthic predators , including fish and crabs . The unpalatability is strongest in the top section , including the lophophore , which is exposed to predators when phoronids feed . When the lophophores were removed in an experiment , the phoronids were more palatable , but this effect reduced over 12 days as the lophophores regenerated . These broadly effective defenses , which appear unusual among invertebrates inhabiting soft sediment , may be important in allowing Phoronopsis viridis to reach high densities . Some parasites infest phoronids : <unk> <unk> and cysts of trematodes in phoronids ' coelomic cavities ; unidentified gregarines in phoronids ' digestive tract ; and an <unk> ciliate parasite , <unk> , in the tentacles . 
 It is unknown whether phoronids have any significance for humans . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has not listed any phoronid species as endangered . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 As of 2010 there are no indisputable body fossils of phoronids . Researching the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang fossils , in 1997 Chen and Zhou interpreted <unk> <unk> as a phoronid since it had tentacles and a U @-@ shaped gut , and in 2004 Chen interpreted <unk> as a phoronid . However , in 2006 Conway Morris regarded <unk> and <unk> as synonyms for the same genus , which in his opinion looked like the <unk> <unk> . In 2009 Balthasar and Butterfield found in western Canada two specimens from about 505 million years ago of a new fossil , <unk> nuda , which had two shells like those of brachiopods but not mineralized . In the authors ' opinion , the U @-@ shaped gut extended beyond the hinge line and outside the smaller shell . This would have precluded the attachment of muscles to close and open the shells , and the 50 % of the animal 's length beyond the hinge line would have needed longitudinal muscles and also a cuticle for protection . Hence they suggest that <unk> may have been a member of a phoronid stem group within the <unk> brachiopods . 
 There is good evidence that species of Phoronis created the trace fossils of the ichnogenus <unk> , which have been found in the Devonian , Jurassic and Cretaceous periods . The <unk> animal bored into calcareous algae , corals , <unk> tests ( shells ) , mollusc shells and the rostra of belemnites . <unk> or <unk> are fossilized tubes , usually curved and between 0 @.@ 1 and 1 @.@ 8 mm wide , found from the Silurian to the Permian , and possibly in the Ordovician and Triassic . Their branching colonies may have been made by phoronids . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 Phoronids , brachiopods and bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) are collectively called lophophorates , because all feed using lophophores . From about the 1940s to the 1990s , family trees based on embryological and morphological features placed lophophorates among or as a sister group to the deuterostomes , a super @-@ phylum that includes chordates and echinoderms . In the early development of their embryos , deuterostomes form the anus before the mouth , while protostomes form the mouth first . 
 Nielsen ( 2002 ) views the phoronids and brachiopods as affiliated with the deuterostome pterobranchs , which also filter @-@ feed by tentacles , because the current @-@ driving cells of the lophophores of all three have one cilium per cell , while lophophores of bryozoans , which he regards as protostomes , have multiple cilia per cell . <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( 2008 ) summarise several authors ' embryological and morphological analyses which doubt or disagree that phoronids and brachiopods are deuterostomes : 
 While deuterostomes have three coelomic cavities , lophophorates such as phoronids and brachiopods have only two . 
 <unk> may be a sub @-@ group of <unk> ( " acorn worms " ) . This suggests that the ancestral deuterostome looks more like a mobile worm @-@ like <unk> than a sessile colonial <unk> . The fact that lophophorates and pterobranchs both use tentacles for feeding is probably not a synapomorphy of lophophorates and deuterostomes , but evolved independently as convergent adaptations to a sessile lifestyle . 
 The mesoderm does not form by enterocoely in phoronids and bryozoans , but does in deuterostomes , while there are disagreements about whether brachiopods form the mesoderm by enterocoely . 
 From 1988 onwards analyses based on molecular phylogeny , which compares biochemical features such as similarities in DNA , have placed phoronids and brachiopods among the Lophotrochozoa , a protostome super @-@ phylum that includes molluscs , annelids and flatworms but excludes the other main protostome super @-@ phylum Ecdysozoa , whose members include arthropods . Cohen wrote , " This inference , if true , undermines virtually all morphology – based reconstructions of phylogeny made during the past century or more . " 
 While analyses by molecular phylogeny are confident that members of Lophotrochozoa are more closely related to each other than of non @-@ members , the relationships between members are mostly unclear . The Lophotrochozoa are generally divided into : Lophophorata ( animals that have lophophores ) , including Phoronida and Brachiopoda ; Trochozoa ( animals many of which have trochophore larvae ) , including molluscs , annelids , echiurans , sipunculans and nemerteans ; and some other phyla ( such as Platyhelminthes , Gastrotricha , Gnathostomulida , <unk> , and Rotifera ) . 
 Molecular phylogeny indicates that Phoronida are closely related to Brachiopoda , but Bryozoa ( Ectoprocta ) are not closely related to this group , despite using a similar lophophore for feeding and respiration . This implies that the traditional definition " Lophophorata " is not monophyletic . Recently the term " Lophophorata " has been applied only to the Phoronida and Brachiopoda , and <unk> thinks this change will cause confusion . Some analyses regard Phoronida and Brachiopoda as sister @-@ groups , while others place Phoronida as a sub @-@ group within Brachiopoda , implying that Brachiopoda is paraphyletic . Cohen and <unk> 's analysis ( 2005 ) concludes that phoronids are a sub @-@ group of inarticulate brachiopods ( those in which the hinge between the two valves have no teeth and sockets ) and sister @-@ group of the other inarticulate sub @-@ groups . The authors also suggest that the ancestors of molluscs and the brachiopod + phoronid clade diverged between 900 Ma and 560 Ma , most probably about 685 Ma . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The phylum has two genera , with no class or order names . Zoologists have given the larvae , usually called an actinotroch , a separate genus name from the adults . 
 In 1999 Temereva and Malakhov described Phoronis <unk> . In 2000 Temereva described a new species , Phoronopsis <unk> , while Emig regards it as a synonym for Phoronopsis <unk> . <unk> thinks Phoronis architecta is a different species from both Phoronis <unk> and Phoronis muelleri , and that " [ the phoronids ' ] species diversity is currently underestimated " . In 2009 Temereva described what may be larvae of Phoronopsis <unk> and Phoronopsis californica . She wrote that , while there are 12 undisputed adult phoronid species , 25 morphological types of larvae have been identified . 
 = Spider @-@ Man in film = 
 The fictional character Spider @-@ Man , a comic book superhero created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko and featured in Marvel Comics publications , has appeared in six live @-@ action films since his inception ; one animated film is also in the works . Spider @-@ Man is the alter @-@ ego of Peter Parker , a talented young freelance photographer and aspiring scientist , imbued with superhuman abilities after being bitten by a radioactive / genetically @-@ altered spider . 
 The first live @-@ action film based on Spider @-@ Man was an American , made @-@ for @-@ television film that premiered on the CBS network in 1977 . It starred Nicholas Hammond and was intended as a backdoor pilot for what became a short @-@ lived , weekly episodic TV series . The rights to further films featuring the character were purchased in 1985 , and moved through various production companies and studios before being secured by Sony Pictures Entertainment , who hired Sam Raimi to direct Spider @-@ Man ( 2002 ) , Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2004 ) , and Spider @-@ Man 3 ( 2007 ) starring Tobey Maguire . The first two films were met with positive reviews from critics , while the third film met mixed reviews . In 2010 , Sony announced that the franchise would be rebooted . Marc Webb was hired to direct , with Andrew Garfield starring , and The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 2012 ) was released to positive reviews . The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2014 ) saw mixed reviews . 
 Raimi 's trilogy grossed nearly US $ 2 @.@ 5 billion worldwide on a $ 597 million total budget , while Webb 's films grossed over $ 1 @.@ 4 billion on a $ 480 million total budget . The Spider @-@ Man films are the sixth highest @-@ grossing film franchise , having grossed over $ 3 @.@ 9 billion collectively . In February 2015 , Sony , Disney and Marvel Studios announced a deal to share the Spider @-@ Man film rights , leading to a new iteration of Spider @-@ Man being introduced and integrated into the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) . This younger version of Peter Parker is played by Tom Holland , and appears in Captain America : Civil War ( 2016 ) ( distributed by Disney ) before starring in Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming ( distributed by Sony ) in 2017 . 
 = = Early films = = 
 = = = The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 1977 @-@ 79 ) = = = 
 In 1977 , the pilot episode of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man television series was released by Columbia Pictures as a feature film outside of the United States . In 1978 , episodes from the television series were re @-@ edited and released outside of the United States as a feature film titled Spider @-@ Man Strikes Back . In 1979 , a film made using the same method was released as Spider @-@ Man : The Dragon 's Challenge . 
 = = = Spider @-@ Man ( 1978 ) = = = 
 On July 22 , 1978 , <unk> released a theatrical spin @-@ off of their Spider @-@ Man TV series at the <unk> Cartoon Festival . The film was directed by Kōichi Takemoto , who also directed eight episodes of the TV series . The week after the film 's release , a character introduced in the film , <unk> Mamiya ( played by Noboru <unk> ) , began appearing in episodes of the TV series . Like the rest of the series , the film was made available for streaming on Marvel 's official website in 2009 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Cannon Films = = = 
 The underperformance of 1983 's Superman III made feature @-@ film adaptations of comic book properties a very low priority in Hollywood until the 1990s . In 1985 , after a brief option on Spider @-@ Man by Roger Corman expired , Marvel Comics optioned the property to Cannon Films . Cannon chiefs Menahem Golan and his cousin Yoram Globus agreed to pay Marvel Comics $ 225 @,@ 000 over the five @-@ year option period , plus a percentage of any film ’ s revenues . However , the rights would revert to Marvel if a film was not made by April 1990 . 
 Tobe Hooper , then preparing both Invaders From Mars and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2 , was mooted as director . Golan and Globus misunderstood the concept of the character ( " They thought it was like The Wolf Man " , said director Joseph Zito ) and instructed writer Leslie Stevens , creator of The Outer Limits , to write a treatment reflecting their misconception . In Stevens ' story , a corporate scientist intentionally subjects ID @-@ badge photographer Peter Parker to radioactive bombardment , transforming him into a hairy , suicidal , eight @-@ armed monster . This human tarantula refuses to join the scientist ’ s new master @-@ race of mutants , battling a succession of mutations kept in a basement laboratory . 
 Unhappy with this perceived debasement of his comic book creation , Marvel ’ s Stan Lee pushed for a new story and screenplay , written for Cannon by Ted Newsom and John Brancato . The variation on the origin story had Otto Octavius as a teacher and mentor to a college @-@ aged Peter Parker . The cyclotron accident which " creates " Spider @-@ Man also deforms the scientist into Doctor Octopus and results in his mad pursuit of proof of the Fifth Force . " Doc Ock " reconstructs his cyclotron and causes electromagnetic abnormalities , anti @-@ gravity effects , and bilocation which threatens to engulf New York City and the world . Joseph Zito , who had directed Cannon ’ s successful Chuck Norris film Invasion USA , replaced Tobe Hooper . The new director hired Barney Cohen to rewrite the script . Cohen , creator of TV 's Sabrina the Teenage Witch and Forever Knight , added action scenes , a non @-@ canonical comic for the villain , gave Doc Ock the catch phrase , " Okey @-@ dokey " , and altered his goal from the Fifth Force to a quest for anti @-@ gravity . Producer Golan ( using his pen name " Joseph Goldman " ) then made a minor polish to Cohen 's rewrite . Zito scouted locations and studio facilities in both the U.S. and Europe , and oversaw storyboard breakdowns supervised by Harper Goff . Cannon planned to make the film on the then @-@ substantial budget of between $ 15 and $ 20 million . 
 While no casting was finalized , Zito expressed interest in actor / stunt man Scott Leva , who had posed for Cannon 's promotional photos and ads , and made public appearances as Spider @-@ Man for Marvel . The up @-@ and @-@ coming actor Tom Cruise was also discussed for the leading role . Zito considered Bob Hoskins as Doc Ock . Stan Lee expressed his desire to play Daily Bugle editor J. Jonah Jameson . Lauren Bacall and Katharine Hepburn were considered for Aunt May , Peter Cushing as a sympathetic scientist , and Adolph Caesar as a police detective . With Cannon finances siphoned by the expensive Superman IV : The Quest for Peace and Masters of the Universe , the company slashed the proposed Spider @-@ Man budget to under $ 10 million . Director Zito opted out , unwilling to make a compromised Spider @-@ Man . The company commissioned low @-@ budget rewrites from writers Shepard Goldman , Don Michael Paul , and finally Ethan Wiley , and penciled in company workhorse Albert Pyun as director , who also made script alterations . 
 Scott Leva was still associated with the character through Marvel ( he had appeared in photo covers of the comic ) , and read each draft . Leva commented , " Ted Newsom and John Brancato had written the script . It was good but it needed a little work . Unfortunately , with every subsequent rewrite by other writers , it went from good to bad to terrible . " Due to Cannon 's assorted financial crises , the project shut down after spending about $ 1 @.@ 5 million on the project . In 1989 , Pathé , owned by corrupt Italian financier Giancarlo <unk> , acquired the overextended Cannon . The filmmaking cousins parted , Globus remaining associated with Pathé , Golan leaving to run 21st Century Film Corporation , keeping a number of properties ( including Spider @-@ Man ) in lieu of a cash buy @-@ out . He also extended his Spider @-@ Man option with Marvel up to January 1992 . 
 Golan shelved the low @-@ budget rewrites and attempted to finance an independent production from the original big @-@ budget script , already budgeted , storyboarded and laid out . At Cannes in May 1989 , 21st Century announced a September start date , with ads touting the script by " Barney Cohen , Ted Newsom & John Brancato and Joseph Goldman . " As standard practice , Golan pre @-@ sold the unmade film to raise production funds , with television rights bought by Viacom and home video rights by Columbia Pictures , which wanted to establish a studio franchise . Stephen <unk> was attached as director at this point . Golan submitted this " new " screenplay to Columbia in late 1989 ( actually the 1985 script with an adjusted " 1989 " date ) and the studio requested yet another rewrite . Golan hired Frank <unk> , who turned in his draft but grew disenchanted with 21st Century . Neil Ruttenberg was hired for one more draft , which was also " covered " by script readers at Columbia . Columbia ’ s script analysts considered all three submissions " essentially the same story . " A tentative production deal was set . Said Stan Lee in 1990 , " 21st Century [ is ] supposed to do Spider @-@ Man and now they 're talking to Columbia and the way it looks now , Columbia may end up buying Spider @-@ Man from 21st Century . " 
 = = = Carolco Pictures = = = 
 21st Century ’ s Menahem Golan still actively immersed himself mounting " his " Spider @-@ Man , sending the original " Doc Ock " script for production bids . In 1990 , he contacted Canadian effects company Light and Motion Corporation regarding the visual effects , which in turn offered the stop @-@ motion chores to Steven Archer ( Krull , Clash of the Titans ) . 
 Toward the end of shooting True Lies , Variety carried the announcement that Carolco Pictures had received a completed screenplay from James Cameron . This script bore the names of James Cameron , John Brancato , Ted Newsom , Barry [ sic ] Cohen and " Joseph <unk> " , a typographical scrambling of Golan 's pen name ( " Joseph Goldman " ) with Marvel executive Joseph Calamari . The script text was identical to the one Golan submitted to Columbia the previous year , with the addition of a new 1993 date . Cameron stalwart Arnold Schwarzenegger was frequently linked to the project as the director 's choice for Dr. Octopus . 
 = = = = James Cameron " scriptment " = = = = 
 Months later , James Cameron submitted an undated 47 @-@ page " scriptment " with an alternate story ( the copyright registration was dated 1991 ) , part screenplay , part narrative story outline . The " scriptment " told the Spider @-@ Man origin , but used variations on the comic book characters Electro and Sandman as villains . This " Electro " ( named Carlton Strand , instead of Max Dillion ) was a megalomaniacal parody of corrupt capitalists . Instead of Flint Marko 's character , Cameron ’ s " Sandman " ( simply named Boyd ) is mutated by an accident involving Philadelphia Experiment @-@ style bilocation and atom @-@ mixing , in lieu of getting caught in a nuclear blast on a beach . The story climaxes with a battle atop the World Trade Center and had Peter Parker revealing his identity to Mary Jane Watson . In addition , the treatment was also heavy on profanity , and had Spider @-@ Man and Mary Jane having sex on the Brooklyn Bridge . 
 This treatment reflected elements in previous scripts : from the Stevens treatment , organic web @-@ shooters , and a villain who tempts Spider @-@ Man to join a coming " master race " of mutants ; from the original screenplay and rewrite , weird electrical storms causing blackouts , freak magnetic events and bi @-@ location ; from the Ethan Wiley draft , a villain addicted to toxic super @-@ powers and multiple experimental spiders , one of which escapes and bites Peter , causing an hallucinatory nightmare invoking Franz Kafka ’ s The Metamorphosis ; from the Frank <unk> script , a blizzard of stolen cash fluttering down onto surprised New Yorkers ; and from the Neil Ruttenberg screenplay , a criminal assault on the NYC Stock Exchange . In 1991 , Carolco Pictures extended Golan ’ s option agreement with Marvel through May 1996 , but in April 1992 , Carolco ceased active production on Spider @-@ Man due to continued financial and legal problems . 
 = = = = Litigation = = = = 
 When James Cameron agreed to make Spider @-@ Man , Carolco lawyers simply used his previous Terminator 2 contract as a template . A clause in this agreement gave Cameron the right to decide on movie and advertising credits . Show business trade articles and advertisements made no mention of Golan , who was still actively assembling the elements for the film . In 1993 , Golan complained publicly and finally instigated legal action against Carolco for disavowing his contractual guarantee credit as producer . On the other hand , Cameron had the contractual right to decide on credits . Eventually , Carolco sued Viacom and Columbia to recover broadcast and home video rights , and the two studios countersued . 20th Century Fox , though not part of the litigation , contested Cameron ’ s participation , claiming exclusivity on his services as a director under yet another contract . In 1996 , Carolco , 21st Century , and Marvel went bankrupt . 
 Via a quitclaim from Carolco dated March 28 , 1995 , MGM acquired 21st Century 's film library and assets , and received " ... all rights in and to all drafts and versions of the screenplay ( s ) for Spider @-@ Man written by James Cameron , Ted Newsom & John Brancato , Menahem Golan , Jon [ sic ] Michael Paul , Ethan Wiley , Leslie Stevens , Frank <unk> , Neil Ruttenberg , Barney Cohen , Shepard Goldman and any and all other writers . " MGM also sued 21st Century , Viacom , and Marvel Comics , alleging fraud in the original deal between Cannon and Marvel . In 1998 , Marvel emerged from bankruptcy with a reorganization plan that merged the company with Toy Biz . The courts determined that the original contract of Marvel 's rights to Golan had expired , returning the rights to Marvel , but the matter was still not completely resolved . In 1999 , Marvel licensed Spider @-@ Man rights to Columbia , a subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment . MGM disputed the legality , claiming it had the Spider @-@ Man rights via Cannon , 21st Century , and Carolco . 
 = = = Columbia Pictures = = = 
 In the meantime , MGM / UA chief executive John Calley moved to Columbia Pictures . Intimately familiar with the legal history of producer Kevin McClory ’ s claim to the rights to both Thunderball and other related James Bond characters and elements , Calley announced that Columbia would produce an alternate 007 series , based on the " McClory material " , which Calley acquired for Columbia . ( Columbia had made the original 1967 film spoof of Casino Royale , a non @-@ Eon production ) . 
 Both studios now faced rival projects , which could undercut their own long @-@ term financial stability and plans . Columbia had no consistent movie franchise , and had sought Spider @-@ Man since 1989 ; MGM / UA ’ s only reliable source of theatrical income was a new James Bond film every two or three years . An alternate 007 series could diminish or even eliminate the power of MGM / UA ’ s long @-@ running Bond series . Likewise , an MGM / UA Spider @-@ Man film could negate Columbia ’ s plans to create an exclusive cash cow . Both sides seemed to have strong arguments for the rights to do such films . 
 The two studios made a trade @-@ off in March 1999 ; Columbia relinquished its rights to create a new 007 series in exchange for MGM 's giving up its claim to Spider @-@ Man . Columbia acquired the rights to all previous scripts in 2000 , but exercised options only on the " Cameron Material " , i.e. , both the completed multi @-@ author screenplay and the subsequent " scriptment . " After more than a decade of attempts , Spider @-@ Man truly went into production and all of the Spider @-@ Man films were distributed by Columbia Pictures , the primary film production holding of Sony . The first three were directed by Sam Raimi , and the reboot and its sequel were directed by Marc Webb . Laura Ziskin served as producer until her death in 2011 . 
 = = Sam Raimi films = = 
 = = = Spider @-@ Man ( 2002 ) = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man follows Peter Parker ( Tobey Maguire ) , an orphaned high schooler who pines after popular girl @-@ next @-@ door Mary Jane Watson ( Kirsten Dunst ) . While on a science class field trip , Peter is bitten by a genetically @-@ engineered " super spider . " As a result , Peter gains superhuman abilities , including increased strength , speed , and the abilities to scale walls and generate organic webbing . After his beloved Uncle Ben ( Cliff Robertson ) is murdered , the teenager realizes that he must use his newfound abilities to protect New York City . Meanwhile , wealthy industrialist Norman Osborn ( Willem Dafoe ) , the father of Peter 's best friend Harry Osborn ( James Franco ) , subjects himself to an experimental performance @-@ enhancing serum , which creates a psychotic and murderous split personality . Donning a military <unk> , Norman becomes a freakish " Green Goblin " , who begins to terrorize the city . Peter , as Spider @-@ Man , now must do battle with the Goblin , all while trying to express his true feelings for Mary Jane . 
 = = = Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2004 ) = = = 
 Two years after the events of the first film , Peter struggles to balance his superhero and private lives and still pines after Mary Jane Watson , who is now engaged . Harry Osborn continues to believe Spider @-@ Man is responsible for his father Norman Osborn 's death . Spider @-@ Man contends with scientist Otto Octavius ( Alfred Molina ) , a.k.a. Dr. Octopus , who has four mechanical tentacles fused to his spine and sets out to recreate a fusion @-@ based experiment that could destroy much of New York City . 
 = = = Spider @-@ Man 3 ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man 3 picks up one year after the events of the second film . Peter is still seeing Mary Jane Watson , while Harry Osborn succeeds his father as the new Green Goblin . Eddie Brock ( Topher Grace ) , who like Peter is a photographer for the Daily Bugle , sets out to defame Spider @-@ Man and incriminate him . Flint Marko ( Thomas Haden Church ) , an escaped convict , falls into a particle accelerator and becomes a shape @-@ shifting sand monster later known as Sandman . Peter later learns that Marko is the one that killed Uncle Ben , causing Peter 's own dark intentions to grow . This vendetta is enhanced by the appearance of the mysterious black alien symbiotic substance that bonds to Peter , resulting in the formation of a new black costume . Once Peter separates himself from the alien , it finds a new host in the form of Brock , resulting in the creation of Venom . 
 = = = Canceled films = = = 
 = = = = Spider @-@ Man 4 = = = = 
 In 2008 , Spider @-@ Man 4 entered development , with Raimi attached to direct and Maguire , Dunst and other cast members set to reprise their roles . Both a fourth and a fifth film were planned and at one time the idea of shooting the two sequels concurrently was under consideration . However , Raimi stated in March 2009 that only the fourth film was in development at that time and that if there were fifth and sixth films , those two films would actually be a continuation of each <unk> Vanderbilt was hired in October 2007 to pen the screenplay after initial reports in early 2007 that Sony Pictures was in contact with David Koepp , who wrote the first Spider @-@ Man film . The script was being rewritten by Gary Ross in October 2009 . Sony also engaged Vanderbilt to write scripts for Spider @-@ Man 5 and Spider @-@ Man 6 . 
 In 2008 , Raimi expressed interest in portraying the transformation of Dr. Curt Connors into his villainous alter @-@ ego , the Lizard ; the character 's actor Dylan Baker and producer Grant Curtis were also enthusiastic about the idea . Raimi also discussed his desire to upgrade Bruce Campbell from a cameo appearance to a significant role , later revealed to be Quentin Beck / Mysterio . It was reported in December 2009 that John Malkovich was in negotiations to play Vulture and that Anne Hathaway would play Felicia Hardy , though she would not have transformed into the Black Cat as in the comics . Instead , Raimi 's Felicia was expected to become a new superpowered figure called the <unk> . However , several years later , in 2013 , Raimi stated that Anne Hathaway was going to be Black Cat if Spider @-@ Man 4 had been made . Concept art revealed in June 2016 showed the inclusion of an opening montage of Spider @-@ Man going up against C and D @-@ list villains , such as Mysterio , the Shocker , the Prowler , and the Rhino , with the Vulture serving as the main antagonist . 
 As disagreements between Sony and Raimi threatened to push the film off the intended May 6 , 2011 release date , Sony Pictures announced in January 2010 that plans for Spider @-@ Man 4 had been canceled due to Raimi 's withdrawal from the project . Raimi reportedly ended his participation due to his doubt that he could meet the planned May 6 , 2011 release date while at the same time upholding the film creatively ; he admitted that he was " very unhappy " with the way Spider @-@ Man 3 had turned out , and was under pressure to make the fourth film the best that he could . Raimi purportedly went through four iterations of the script with different screenwriters and still " hated it " . 
 = = = = Venom = = = = 
 In July 2007 , Avi Arad revealed a Venom spin @-@ off was in the works . The studio commissioned Jacob Aaron Estes to write a script , but rejected it the following year . In September 2008 , Paul Wernick and Rhett Reese signed on to write . Stan Lee signed on to make a cameo in the film . Rhett Reese later revealed that they had written two drafts for the film and that the studio was pushing the film forward . In 2009 , Gary Ross , who was then rewriting the latest draft of the unproduced Spider @-@ Man 4 , was assigned to rewrite the Venom script and direct the film , in which Venom would be an antihero rather than a supervillain . In March 2012 , Chronicle director Josh Trank negotiated with Sony about his interest in directing the film after Ross left development to direct The Hunger Games . In June 2012 , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man producer Matt Tolmach , speaking of his and fellow producer Avi Arad 's next project , a Venom film , suggested it could follow the shared @-@ universe model of the film The Avengers : " What I 'm trying to say to you without giving anything away is hopefully all these worlds will live together in peace someday . " 
 = = Marc Webb films = = 
 = = = The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 2012 ) = = = 
 Sony announced that the franchise would be rebooted with a new director and new cast . The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was released on July 3 , 2012 in 3D and IMAX 3D , and focused on Peter Parker developing his abilities in high school . He fights the Lizard , the monstrous form of Dr. Curt Connors , his father 's former partner and a scientist at OsCorp . 
 = = = The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2014 ) = = = 
 The film takes place two years after the first film 's events . Peter Parker graduates high school , continues his relationship with Gwen Stacy , and combats the electricity @-@ manipulating Electro . 
 = = = Canceled films = = = 
 = = = = Sequels = = = = 
 In June 2013 , Sony Pictures announced it had set release dates for the next two Spider @-@ Man films . The third film was scheduled to be released on June 10 , 2016 , and the fourth was scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 . Paul Giamatti confirmed that Rhino would return in the third film . That November , Sony Pictures Entertainment chief Michael Lynton told analysts , " We do very much have the ambition about creating a bigger universe around Spider @-@ Man . There are a number of scripts in the works . " Andrew Garfield stated that his contract is for three films , and is unsure of his involvement for the fourth film . In February 2014 , Sony announced that Webb would return to direct the third Amazing Spider @-@ Man film . In March 2014 , Webb stated that he would not be directing the fourth film , but would like to remain as a consultant for the series . On July 11 , 2014 , Orci told IGN that he is not working on the third film due to the third Star Trek film . Kurtzman revealed in an interview that the third film is still continuing production and there is a possibility of seeing a Black Cat film . On July 23 , 2014 , Sony Pictures announced that The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 3 was delayed to 2018 . After the announcement in February 2015 of a new franchise with Marvel Studios , the sequels to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 were canceled . 
 = = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = = 
 On December 12 , 2013 , Sony issued a press release through the viral site , Electro Arrives announcing that two films were in development , with Alex Kurtzman , Roberto Orci and Ed Solomon writing a spin @-@ off to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man focused on Venom ( with Kurtzman attached to direct ) and Drew Goddard writing one focused on the villain team Sinister Six with an eye to direct . Hannah Minghella and Rachel O ’ Connor will oversee the development and production of these films for the studio . In April 2014 , it was announced that Goddard would direct the Sinister Six film , and that both spin @-@ offs would be released before a fourth Amazing Spider @-@ Man , with Spider @-@ Man potentially appearing in both spin @-@ offs . Later in the month , Tolmach and Arad revealed the Sinister Six film would be a redemption story and that the film 's lineup might differ from the comics . On July 23 , 2014 , Sony Pictures announced that The Sinister Six was scheduled for release on November 11 , 2016 . By August 2014 , Sony was also looking to release a female @-@ centered spin @-@ off film in 2017 , with Lisa Joy Nolan writing , and had given the Venom spin @-@ off the potential title of Venom Carnage . 
 Despite the announcement in February 2015 of a new franchise with Marvel Studios , the Sinister Six , Venom , and the female @-@ led spin @-@ off films set in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man franchise were then " still moving forward " . Feige was not expected to be creatively involved with these films . However , the Sinister Six film was canceled due to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 underperforming commercially , and by November 2015 , the other prospective spin @-@ off films were canceled as well . 
 = = Licensing agreement with Marvel Studios = = 
 In December 2014 , following the hacking of Sony Pictures ' computers , both Sony and Marvel were revealed to have had discussions about allowing Spider @-@ Man to appear in the 2016 Marvel Cinematic Universe film Captain America : Civil War while having control of the film rights remaining with Sony . However , talks between the studios then broke down . Instead , Sony had considered having Sam Raimi return to direct a new trilogy . 
 However , on February 9 , 2015 , Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that Spider @-@ Man would appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , with the character appearing in a Marvel Cinematic Universe film and Sony releasing a Spider @-@ Man film co @-@ produced by Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige and Amy Pascal . Sony Pictures will continue to own , finance , distribute , and exercise final creative control over the Spider @-@ Man films . The next month , Marvel Entertainment CCO Joe Quesada indicated that the Peter Parker version of the character would be used , which Feige confirmed in April . Feige also stated that Marvel had been working to add Spider @-@ Man to the MCU since at least October 2014 . The following June , Feige clarified that the initial Sony deal does not allow the character to appear in any of the MCU television series , as it was " very specific ... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed . " 
 = = = Captain America : Civil War ( 2016 ) = = = 
 Reports indicated that the MCU film that Spider @-@ Man would appear in as part of the deal would be Captain America : Civil War . Joe and Anthony Russo , the directors of Captain America : Civil War , had lobbied for months to include the character in the film . Anthony Russo stated that , despite Marvel telling them to have a " plan B " should the deal with Sony fail , the Russos never created one because " it was very important to us to reintroduce " Spider @-@ Man in the film , adding , " We only have envisioned the movie with Spider @-@ Man . " By the end of May 2015 , Asa Butterfield , Tom Holland , Judah Lewis , Matthew Lintz , Charlie Plummer and Charlie Rowe screen tested for the lead role , against Robert Downey Jr . , who portrays Iron Man , for chemistry . The six were chosen out of a search of over 1 @,@ 500 actors to test in front of Feige , Pascal and the Russo brothers . In June , Feige and Pascal narrowed the actors considered to Holland and Rowe . Both screen tested again with Downey , with Holland also testing with Chris Evans , who portrays Captain America , and emerged as the favorite . On June 23 , 2015 , Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios jointly announced that Holland would play Spider @-@ Man . The following month , Marisa Tomei was in talks for the role of May Parker , later appearing in Civil War . 
 = = = Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming ( 2017 ) = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming is scheduled to be released on July 7 , 2017 . The film is directed by Jon Watts , from a screenplay by Jonathan M. Goldstein & John Francis Daley and Watts & Christopher Ford and Chris McKenna & Erik Sommers . Holland , Tomei , and Downey reprise their roles as Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man , May Parker , and Tony Stark / Iron Man , respectively , and are joined by Michael Keaton , among others . Production began in June 2016 in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = = Animation = = 
 On April 2015 , Sony announced that Phil Lord and Chris Miller were writing and producing a Spider @-@ Man animated comedy in development at Sony Pictures Animation . As revealed by the e @-@ mail leak one year before , the duo had been previously courted by Sony to take over the studio 's animation division . The Spider @-@ Man animation would be independent of any live @-@ action adaptations , and is currently set for release on December 21 , 2018 . Sony Pictures Animation president Kristine Belson unveiled the film 's logo , with the working title " Animated Spider @-@ Man " , at CinemaCon 2016 , and declared that “ conceptually and visually , [ the film ] will break new ground for the superhero genre . ” On June 20 , 2016 , The Hollywood Reporter reported that Bob <unk> will direct the animated film . 
 = = Recurring cast and characters = = 
 Stan Lee , one of the co @-@ creators of Spider @-@ Man , has appeared in all films except the 1977 film . In Spider @-@ Man , he was a bystander who grabs a young girl from falling debris during the battle between Spider @-@ Man and the Green Goblin in Times Square . Also , the gag reel of the film reveals Stan showing Peter Parker some sunglasses that were used for the X @-@ Men film . In Spider @-@ Man 2 , he appears once again as a bystander saving someone from falling debris , during the battle between Spider @-@ Man and Doctor Octopus at a building . In Spider @-@ Man 3 , he was a man on the street talking to Peter Parker , explaining that some people can make a difference . He then says his famous line , " ' Nuff Said ! " . In the Webb series , Lee appears as a librarian in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man listening to music on his headphones while stamping books , oblivious to the ongoing battle , and as a graduation guest in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 . In Captain America : Civil War , Lee plays a FedEx delivery man . 
 Bruce Campbell , a long @-@ time colleague of Sam Raimi , appeared in all three of his films . In Spider @-@ Man , he was the announcer at the wrestling ring Peter was in and gave him the name " Spider @-@ Man " , instead of the " Human Spider " ( the name with which Peter wanted to be introduced ) . In Spider @-@ Man 2 , he was an usher who refuses to let Peter enter the theater for Mary Jane 's play when arriving late . In Spider @-@ Man 3 , Campbell appears as a French maître d ' . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 The Sam Raimi trilogy was released on DVD , the first two being released exclusively as two @-@ disc sets and on VHS , with the third film being released in both single and two @-@ disc editions . All three films were later packaged in a " Motion Picture DVD Trilogy " box set . 
 Spider @-@ Man 3 was initially the only Spider @-@ Man film to be released individually on the high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray format . The first two films were made available on Blu @-@ ray , but only as part of a boxed set with the third film , called Spider @-@ Man : The High @-@ Definition Trilogy . The first two films lacked the bonus features from the DVDs , although Spider @-@ Man 2 did contain both cuts of the film . 
 Sony announced on April 2 , 2012 that the three films would be re @-@ released on June 12 , 2012 . The DVDs of the first two films reinstated a selection of the bonus features missing from the earlier Blu @-@ ray releases , although the Spider @-@ Man 3 reissue did not include the bonus disc of additional special features that appeared on earlier Blu @-@ ray releases . 
 All three films which comprise the Raimi trilogy are available in the U.S. on iTunes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The first three Spider @-@ Man films set new opening day records in North America in their opening weekend . The films are among the top of North American rankings of films based on Marvel Comics , with Spider @-@ Man ranking second , Spider @-@ Man 2 ranking third , and Spider @-@ Man 3 ranking fourth . In North America , Spider @-@ Man , Spider @-@ Man 2 , and Spider @-@ Man 3 are ranked third , fourth and fifth for all superhero films , with the third film ranking fifth worldwide for superhero films ( behind The Avengers , Iron Man 3 , The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Rises ) . Spider @-@ Man , Spider @-@ Man 2 , and Spider @-@ Man 3 are the most successful films produced by Sony / Columbia Pictures in North America . 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 David Ansen of Newsweek enjoyed Spider @-@ Man as a fun film to watch , though he considered Spider @-@ Man 2 to be " a little too self @-@ important for its own good . " Ansen saw Spider @-@ Man 3 as a return to form , finding it " the most grandiose chapter and the nuttiest . " Tom Charity of CNN appreciated the films ' " solidly redemptive moral convictions " , also noting the vast improvement of the visual effects from the first film to the third . While he saw the second film 's Doc Ock as the " most engaging " villain , he applauded the third film 's Sandman as " a triumph of CGI wizardry . " Richard Corliss of Time enjoyed the action of the films and thought that they did better than most action movies by " rethinking the characters , the franchise and the genre . " 
 Colin Covert of the Star Tribune praised Spider @-@ Man as a " superb debut " of the superhero as well as Spider @-@ Man 2 as a " superior sequel " for filmgoers who are fans " of spectacle and of story . " Covert expressed disappointment in Spider @-@ Man 3 as too ambitious with the multiple storylines leaving one " feeling overstuffed yet shortchanged . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times enjoyed the humor of the first two films , but found it missing in the third installment . Dargis also noted , " The bittersweet paradox of this franchise is that while the stories have grown progressively less interesting the special effects have improved tremendously . " Robert <unk> of the Rocky Mountain News ranked the films from his favorite to his least favorite : Spider @-@ Man 2 , Spider @-@ Man , and Spider @-@ Man 3 . While <unk> missed the presence of Alfred Molina as Doctor Octopus from the second film , he found the third film – despite being " bigger , though not necessarily better " – to have a " satisfying conclusion . " 
 = Morchella sextelata = 
 Morchella sextelata is a species of ascomycete fungus in the family Morchellaceae . Described as new to science in 2012 , it is found in North America ( in Washington , Idaho , Montana , Wyoming , New Mexico , and Yukon Territory ) . It has also been found in China , although it is not known if this is a result of an accidental introduction or natural dispersion . The fruit bodies have a roughly conical cap up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 in ) tall and 5 cm ( 2 in ) wide , with a surface of mostly vertically arranged pits . The cap is initially yellowish to brownish , but it darkens to become almost black in maturity . The stipe is white and hollow , measuring 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) high by 1 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) wide . 
 Morchella sextelata is one of four species of wildfire @-@ adapted morels in western North America , the others being M. capitata , M. septimelata , and M. tomentosa . M. sextelata cannot be reliably distinguished from M. septimelata without the use of DNA analysis . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Morchella sextelata was originally identified as phylogenetic species " Mel @-@ 6 " in the species @-@ rich Elata clade ( brown morels ) elucidated by microbiologist Kerry O 'Donnell and colleagues in a 2011 publication . The specific epithet sextelata alludes to this preliminary name . Although M. sextelata is not distinguishable from Morchella septimelata on physical or ecological characteristics , they are clearly genetically distinct species , and can be differentiated by comparing DNA sequences or with restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis . Allopatric speciation is thought to have been the driving evolutionary force that caused M. sextelata to diverge from its ancestors roughly 25 million years ago . The original specimens collected were obtained as part of the Morel Data Collection Project , a research effort designed to improve the understanding of North American morels . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Morchella sextelata are 4 – 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 1 in ) high with a conical cap that is 2 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) high and 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide at the widest point . The cap surface features pits and ridges , formed by the intersection of 12 – 20 primary vertical ridges and frequent shorter , secondary vertical ridges , with occasional sunken , horizontal ridges . The cap is attached to the stipe with a sinus about 2 – 4 mm deep and 2 – 4 mm wide . The ridges are smooth or very finely tomentose ( covered with densely matted filaments ) . They are initially colorless , becoming pale tan , then dark grayish brown in maturity , eventually darkening to nearly black . They are flattened when young but sometimes become sharpened or eroded in maturity . The pits are somewhat elongated vertically . They are smooth , brownish to yellowish tan to pinkish to buff . 
 The whitish to pale brownish stipe is 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long by 1 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) wide and is roughly equal in width throughout its length , or sometimes slightly club @-@ shaped near the base . Its surface is either smooth or covered with whitish granules . The flesh is whitish , measuring 1 – 2 mm thick in the hollow cap ; it may become layered and chambered in the base of the stipe . The sterile inner surface of the cap is whitish and pubescent ( covered with short , soft " hair " ) . 
 The ascospores of M. sextelata are elliptical and smooth , typically measuring 18 – 25 by 10 – 16 µm . Asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are eight @-@ spored , hyaline ( translucent ) , cylindrical , and measure 200 – 325 by 5 – 25 µm . Paraphyses are cylindrical , septate , and measure 175 – 300 by 2 – 15 µm . Their tips are variably shaped , from rounded , to club @-@ shaped , to fuse @-@ shaped . The contents of the paraphyses are hyaline ( translucent ) to faintly brownish in dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) . Hyphae on the sterile cap ridges are septate and measure 50 – 180 by 5 – 25 µm . The terminal cells are variably shaped ( similar to the paraphyses ) , and have brownish contents in KOH . 
 North American Morchella are generally considered choice edibles , but the edibility of M. sextelata was not mentioned in its original description . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Morchella sextelata is morphologically indistinguishable from several other morel species in the M. elata clade , including M. septimelata , M. brunnea , M. angusticeps , and M. septentrionalis . M. septimelata can be distinguished from these latter three lookalikes by habitat or distribution : M. brunnea is found in non @-@ burned forests of western North America ; M. angusticeps is found east of the Rocky Mountains ; and M. septentrionalis is restricted to a northern distribution ( about 44 ° N northward ) in eastern North America . M. septimelata , however , also grows in burn sites and so is both morphologically and ecologically indistinguishable from M. sextelata . Although there are subtle differences in the structure of the sterile ridges between the species , the authors were not confident that enough specimens had been examined to establish that these differences were consistent . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 Morchella sextelata may be either saprobic or mycorrhizal at different times in its life cycle . Its fruit bodies grow in partially burned conifer forests , particularly those dominated by Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) and ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) . They tend to appear in great numbers the year immediately following fire and appear in decreasing frequency in successive years . Fruiting occurs from April through July , at elevations between 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 500 m ( 3 @,@ 300 and 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . The distribution includes Washington , Idaho , Montana , Wyoming , and Yukon Territory . M. sextelata has also been found in China , but it remains unclear whether dispersal between these distant locations occurred naturally or through accidental introduction by humans . 
 Morchella sextelata , identified as phylogenetic species " Mel @-@ 6 " , has been shown to colonize the non @-@ native species Bromus tectorum ( cheatgrass ) as an endophyte , increasing the overall growth of the grass , as well as the abundance of seeds and their tolerance to extreme heat ( 60 – 65 ° C ( 140 – 149 ° F ) ) . This has been hypothesized to be a contributing factor in the success of cheatgrass as an invasive species in western North America . 
 = Churche 's Mansion = 
 Churche 's Mansion is a timber @-@ framed , black @-@ and @-@ white Elizabethan mansion house at the eastern end of Hospital Street in Nantwich , Cheshire , England . The Grade I listed building dates from 1577 , and is one of the very few to have survived the Great Fire of Nantwich in 1583 . 
 Built for Richard Churche , a wealthy Nantwich merchant , and his wife , it remained in their family until the 20th century . In 1930 , it was rescued from being shipped to the USA by Edgar <unk> and his wife , who began restoration work . As well as a dwelling , the mansion has been used as a school , restaurant , shop , and granary and hay store . 
 The building has four gables to the front ; the upper storey and the attics all overhang with jetties . The upper storeys feature decorative panels , and the exterior has many gilded carvings . The principal rooms have oak panelling , some of which is Elizabethan in date . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner considered Churche 's Mansion to be among the best timber @-@ framed Elizabethan buildings in Cheshire , describing it as " an outstanding piece of decorated half @-@ timber architecture . " 
 = = History = = 
 Churche 's Mansion was built for Richard Churche and his wife Margerye by Thomas Clease in 1577 . A panel under a window to the right of the main entrance bears the inscription : 
 <unk> Churche , and Margerye Churche , his wyfe mai iiii 
 Thomas Clease made this worke , anno <unk> , M , <unk> , <unk> , 
 in the <unk> yere of the <unk> of our noble <unk> <unk> 
 The only other remaining work signed by craftsman Thomas Clease ( also Cleese ) is the Queen 's Aid House on Nantwich High Street , known for its inscription thanking Elizabeth I for her aid in the town 's rebuilding after the Great Fire . 
 The land in " <unk> <unk> " on which the mansion was built had been granted to John and Nicolas <unk> of <unk> ( Gresty ) in 1474 / 5 by John <unk> and his son John , Richard and William Cholmondeley , and John Bromley . By the late 16th century , the Churche family ( known variously as Church , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) was a prominent one in Nantwich . Richard Churche was a wealthy local merchant who , at his death in 1592 , owned " one <unk> @-@ house of six leads in Wich <unk> " , as well as considerable land holdings both locally and in Shropshire and Stafford . His wife , Margerye or Margaret Churche , daughter of Roger Wright , came from another significant Nantwich family ; she survived her husband , living until 1599 . 
 Standing on the edge of the old town , the recently completed Churche 's Mansion survived the fire of 1583 which destroyed almost all of Nantwich east of the River Weaver . The only other buildings known to have survived were Sweetbriar Hall , also on Hospital Street , and the parish church . Richard Churche willed " the house ... wherein I now dwell on the <unk> Street " to his second son , <unk> , Randol or Randle Church ( e ) . The house is mentioned among the principal houses of the town in a 1622 / 3 account by William Webb , who describes the mansion as " a fair timber @-@ house of Mr. Randol Church , a gentleman of singular integrity . " Randle Church survived until 1648 , outliving his son and grandson , and Churche 's Mansion then passed to the Shropshire branch of the family , descended from Richard Churche 's eldest son , William . The Churche family inhabited the house until at least 1691 , when a rate book records <unk> Church as the resident and gives the rates as 2 shillings 8 ½ pence . 
 Although <unk> Church ( also Sabbath or <unk> ) was the last Churche family member to live in the mansion ( he died in 1717 ) , it remained in the family 's possession until the 20th century , with a succession of tenants . In the early 19th century , the mansion was tenanted by a tanner and later by an attorney @-@ at @-@ law . In 1858 – 68 , it was <unk> , and was used as a granary and hay store by a local <unk> . From 1869 until at least 1883 , it housed the ladies ' boarding and day school of Mrs E.H. Rhodes . The mansion later fell into disrepair , and in 1930 , it was saved from dismantling to ship to the USA by local resident Edgar <unk> and his wife , who purchased the building and began restoration work . It was listed at grade I on 19 April 1948 . During much of the 20th century it was used as a restaurant , and it has been an antiques shop since 2001 . In 2007 the mansion was featured on Most Haunted : Midsummer Murders . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The mansion house has four gables to the front and a two @-@ gabled wing to the left @-@ hand side ; its plan resembles the nearby Dorfold Hall . The roof is tiled , with two prominent brick chimney stacks . There are two storeys with an attic , with both the first and second floors overhanging the floor beneath to form jetties , a typical feature of timber @-@ framed town houses of this date . The protruding floor joists are concealed by plaster coving built up over shaped brackets and laths , in a fashion described by Pevsner as a " speciality of Cheshire " . 
 The upper storeys have ornamental panels featuring several different decorative motifs , including roundels and diagonal ogee braces . The eaves have corbel brackets with carvings including human faces and animals . These include a lion , ape and devil , as well as a salamander , supposed to give protection against fire . Gilded carvings of Richard and Margerye Churche are located above the main entrance , on either side . The timbers bear carpenters ' marks with both Roman and Arabic numerals , some being unusually long . The highly decorated style is typical of the timber @-@ framed buildings of the Elizabethan period . 
 The windows are predominantly mullioned and transomed , with three to five lights including some stained glass panels . Only the window above the porch is possibly original ; some casements date from the 18th century , and several are 20th @-@ century replacements . Two windows have inscriptions beneath them : one inscription gives the date of construction and is quoted previously ; the other states " The <unk> of <unk> is to Feare God , & the branch thereof shall too endure . " 
 = = Interior features = = 
 The house is laid out around a large central hall connecting the mansion 's two gabled end @-@ pieces , which was used for dining . The other major rooms on the ground floor are the withdrawing room to the right of the hall , and the buttery and kitchen to the left ; there is also a small entrance porch at the main Hospital Street entrance . The first floor has five main rooms : the upper hall ( never open to the roof ) and four <unk> ( private upper rooms , some of which would have contained beds ) , as well as a small chapel . The attic is divided into five rooms and provided servants ' accommodation . 
 The entrance porch has a panelled ceiling with inlaid decoration and a moulded doorcase with an 18th @-@ century oak door . The hall has a spiral staircase between storeys ; it also contains an original cupboard bearing the Churche 's initials and crest , and the inscription " Blessed art thou that <unk> and <unk> in His wayes for thou <unk> <unk> and <unk> arte . " The first floor hall features a coffin drop , a hole in the floor allowing the lowering of large items that would otherwise be difficult to manipulate on the narrow spiral staircase . Traditionally used for coffins , the coffin drop would also facilitate the movement of large pieces of furniture . Several rooms have large open fireplaces , with a brick inglenook fireplace in the kitchen . An Elizabethan well was discovered during renovation work . 
 The principal rooms on both ground and first floors feature oak panelling ; that in one of the upper rear rooms is Elizabethan . This room also features a fine carved overmantel with a woven love knot and central heart ; the ground floor room to the right of the hall contains a further good example of a carved overmantel . One of the rooms has panels decorated with intersecting triangles . 
 = = Grounds and outbuildings = = 
 Churche 's Mansion was constructed on the edge of Nantwich , and in the 16th century would presumably have been surrounded by farmland . The building was originally moated , and traces of the moat remained in the late 19th century . The transfer deed of 1474 / 5 mentions that the plot had gardens and orchards , while Richard Churche 's will of 1592 describes the property as having " gardens <unk> <unk> stable & <unk> " and an orchard is also mentioned in the 1691 rate book . The rear garden formerly featured a sunken pond . 
 The house has a small formal garden facing Hospital Street , and a walled garden at the rear with lawns , fruit trees and an oak . 
 = Purple Haze = 
 " Purple Haze " is a song written by Jimi Hendrix and released as the second record single by the Jimi Hendrix Experience on March 17 , 1967 . As a record chart hit in several countries and the opening number on the Experience 's debut American album , it was many people 's first exposure to Hendrix 's psychedelic rock sound . 
 The song features his inventive guitar playing , which uses the signature Hendrix chord and a mix of blues and Eastern modalities , shaped by novel sound processing techniques . Because of ambiguities in the lyrics , listeners often interpret the song as referring to a psychedelic experience , although Hendrix described it as a love song . 
 " Purple Haze " is one of Hendrix 's best @-@ known songs and appears on many Hendrix compilation albums . The song featured regularly in concerts and each of Hendrix 's group configurations issued live recordings . It was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame and is included on lists of the greatest guitar songs , including at number two by Rolling Stone and number one by Q magazine . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 By January 5 , 1967 , the Jimi Hendrix Experience 's first single , " Hey Joe " , backed with " Stone Free " , peaked at number six on the UK record chart . " Hey Joe " was not a Hendrix composition – it was written by Billy Roberts and recorded by several groups prior to the Experience . Hendrix commented , " That record isn 't us . The next one 's gonna be different . We 're working on an LP which will mainly be our stuff . " The group recorded several demos of original material at studios in London , including " Can You See Me " , " Foxy Lady " , " Third Stone from the Sun " , " Red House " , and " Remember " . In the middle of December , producer Chas Chandler heard Hendrix toying around with a new guitar riff . " I heard him playing it at the flat and was knocked out . I told him to keep working on that , saying , ' That 's the next single ! ' " Chandler claimed that after some more urging , Hendrix wrote the rest of " Purple Haze " in the dressing room of a London club during the afternoon of December 26 , 1966 , before a gig . In several interviews , Hendrix spoke about writing the song , but did not mention where or when he wrote it . 
 The Experience began recording " Purple Haze " on January 11 , 1967 , at De Lane Lea Studios in London . According to drummer Mitch Mitchell , he and bassist Noel Redding learned the song in the studio : " Hendrix came in and kind of hummed us the riff and showed Noel the chords and the changes . I listened to it and we went , ' OK , let 's do it . ' We got it on the third take as I recall . " The basic track was recorded in four hours , according to Chandler . <unk> recording technology allowed engineers to record and complete additional parts on the final master . After the basic track was finished , Chandler explained that he and Hendrix developed the song : 
 With ' Purple Haze ' , Hendrix and I were striving for a sound and just kept going back in [ to the studio ] , two hours at a time , trying to achieve it . It wasn 't like we were there for days on end . We recorded it , and then Hendrix and I would be sitting at home saying , ' Let 's try that . ' Then we would go in for an hour or two . That 's how it was in those days . However long it took to record one specific idea , that 's how long we would book . We kept going in and out . 
 Redding and Mitchell were not included in the process because Chandler felt that it was more efficient for him and Hendrix to do it alone . To get a better quality recording , Chandler took the four @-@ track tape recorded at De Lane Lea to Olympic Studios for overdubbing ( although Hendrix had worked with eight @-@ track recording in the US , it was not yet available in the UK ) . At Olympic , they were assigned Eddie Kramer , who , as a sound engineer , played an important role in subsequent Hendrix recordings . Hendrix added new vocals and guitar parts between February 3 and 8 , 1967 . Unlike the conventional techniques used by the Experience to record previous songs , Chandler decided to try out new effects and sounds for " Purple Haze " . He enhanced background sounds ( some contributed by Redding ) by playing them back through headphones , which were moved around the recording microphone , creating " a weird echo " . Chandler also used sped @-@ up guitar parts recorded at half @-@ speed ( which also raises the pitch ) and panning to create novel effects . The guitar solo features the first use of the Octavia guitar effects unit . Acoustical and electronics engineer Roger Mayer developed the unit with input from Hendrix . The Octavia doubles the frequency of the sound it is fed , essentially adding an upper octave . 
 = = Lyrics and interpretation = = 
 In interviews , Hendrix usually gave different answers about the development of the song 's lyrics . Biographer Harry Shapiro points out that " Purple Haze " is most likely " a pot @-@ pourri of ideas " which Hendrix developed over time . As a fan of science fiction , he frequently incorporated its imagery in his songwriting . Hendrix read Night of Light , a 1966 novel by Philip Jose Farmer , that expanded on a short story published in 1957 . In the story set on a distant planet , sunspots produce a " purplish haze " which has a disorienting effect on the inhabitants . An early handwritten draft by Hendrix , titled " Purple Haze – Jesus Saves " , uses dream @-@ like imagery where the sense of direction and time is distorted . In an interview on January 28 , 1967 , before the song was completed , Hendrix was asked how he wrote songs ; he responded , " I dream a lot and I put my dreams down as songs . I wrote one called ' First Look Around the Corner ' and another called ' The Purple Haze , ' which was about a dream I had that I was walking under the sea . " He later expressed frustration that he was unable to more fully develop his ideas for the song : 
 You know the song we had named ' Purple Haze ' ? [ It ] had about a thousand , thousand words ... I had it all written out . It was about going through , through this land . This mythical ... because that 's what I like to do is write a lot of mythical scenes . You know , like the history of the wars on Neptune . 
 So far , only a crumpled single sheet of ruled yellow tablet paper is on exhibit at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and does not include any of the lyrics used in the Experience song . Chandler admitted that in the early stages , he helped Hendrix shape the songs and lyrics to radio single length . Biographer Keith Shadwick comments that although much of the complexity may have been sacrificed , it resulted in verses that are " simple , focused and striking . " 
 After its release , Hendrix offered another explanation : " He [ the song 's protagonist ] likes this girl so much , that he doesn 't know what [ state ] he 's in , ya know . A sort of daze , I suppose . That 's what the song is all about . " This draws on an experience Hendrix had while still in New York , where he felt that a girl was attempting to use voodoo to trap him and he became ill . Shapiro believes that this is reflected in most of the first two verses : 
 Many fans and the press interpret the song as referring to a psychedelic experience due to lines such as " purple haze all in my brain " and " ' scuse me while I kiss the sky " . However , Hendrix and those closest to him never discussed any connection between psychedelic drugs and the song , although Shapiro admits that , at the time , to do so would have been " professional suicide " . Chandler , who claimed he was present when Hendrix wrote it , later denied suggestions that Hendrix did so while under the influence of psychedelics . Commenting on the lyrics , Shadwick concludes " the music [ was allowed ] to tell the larger story . Poised effectively between the twin intoxicants of drugs and desire , they could be interpreted to the listener 's taste " . In concert , Hendrix sometimes substituted lyrics for comic effect ; " ' scuse me while I kiss the sky " was rendered " ' scuse me while I kiss this guy " ( while gesturing towards Mitchell ) , " ' scuse me while I kiss that policeman " ( at a near riot in Los Angeles ) , or " ' scuse me while I fuck the sky " ( during a downpour in Seattle ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Music critic William Ruhlmann describes " Purple Haze " as having " relentlessly driving , if relatively slow @-@ paced underlying music , which provides a good platform for some of Hendrix 's inventive guitar playing . " Beginning with its dissonant opening and heavy use of distortion , Hendrix 's techniques " all contributed to the dirty , raw , metallic , [ and ] angular sounds " heard in the song , according to Shapiro . The intro consists of the melodic interval of a tritone or diminished ( sometimes called flattened ) fifth . Historically , this dissonant interval has been referred to as diabolus in musica ( literally " Devil in music " ) and was reputedly proscribed by papal bull during the Spanish Inquisition , because " to play it was like ringing Satan 's doorbell " . It is sounded during the first two measures by Hendrix playing a B ♭ on guitar against an E played by Redding on bass , followed by the respective octaves . Mitchell on drums comes in for the third measure , when Hendrix introduces the riff that piqued Chandler 's interest , and Redding continues playing the octaves in E. 
 After the riff , the verse sections begin , which Shadwick describe as " simplicity itself , consisting of just three chords " : E7 ♯ 9 , G , and A. The E7 ♯ 9 , or dominant seventh sharp ninth chord , has come to be called the " Hendrix chord " by guitarists and was used primarily in rhythm and blues and jazz before Hendrix helped popularize it . He also used an unconventional fingering technique for the G and A chords . Because Hendrix used his thumb to fret the roots of the G and A chords on the sixth string , his fingers were left in a position to create different chord voicings . Instead of the usual G barre chord ( G – B – G – B – D – G ) , a G5 ( G – X – G – G – D – G ) is sometimes played with the major third ( B ) being muted on the fifth string and replaced by the open third string ( G ) . Redding follows the chord changes mostly by playing the root with occasional passing notes , while Mitchell heightens the tension with drum flourishes that accentuate Hendrix 's vocal and guitar . 
 Biographer David Henderson describes Hendrix 's guitar tone as " at the razor edge of distort " . However , individual notes are still clear , as well as the harmonically more complex chords , even with the use of extreme overdrive for the time . The tension is maintained until the guitar solo , which " arrives as something of a release rather than a further racking up of the atmosphere . " It is also when Hendrix first introduces the Octavia , coupled with a Fuzz Face distortion unit . Whitehill describes the solo as " almost sound [ ing ] likes he 's playing a blues raga . He starts out playing in the Mixolydian mode and then he goes right into the blues side . The Octavia has the effect of a sitar , kind of like Ravi Shankar meets B.B. King . " During the song 's outro , the guitar part recorded at 7 ½ inches per second ( <unk> ) played back at 15 <unk> , is combined with the Octavia , further extending the guitar 's upper frequency range . Henderson describes it as " an uncanny piercing tone that takes off , Eastern @-@ sounding beyond the range of the guitar " and , according to Shadwick , " gives the impression that the guitar notes are flying off into the ether . " 
 = = Releases and charts = = 
 On March 17 , 1967 , " Purple Haze " was released in the UK as the first single on Track Records . Another Hendrix composition , the R & B @-@ influenced " 51st Anniversary " was included as the B @-@ side . Paul McCartney , who was an early Hendrix supporter , gave the record an enthusiastic pre @-@ release review in Melody Maker . The single entered the charts at number 39 on Record Mirror and at number 43 on Melody Maker . It peaked at number three and spent 14 weeks on the chart . During March 1967 , several performances of " Purple Haze " were filmed to promote the song and used for television programs , such as Beat @-@ Club , Dee Time , and Top of the Pops . Live performances were also broadcast on German NDR and BBC Radio 's Saturday Club . 
 For the American single , Reprise Records paired the song with " The Wind Cries Mary " . It was released on June 19 , 1967 , the day following the Experience 's performance at the Monterey Pop Festival . The single entered the Billboard Hot 100 pop chart on August 26 , where it spent eight weeks and reached number 65 . " Purple Haze " was included as the opening track on the American release of Are You Experienced on August 23 , 1967 . Because of the song 's airplay on underground FM radio , the album became more popular than Hendrix 's singles . 
 One of Hendrix 's most popular songs , " Purple Haze " appears on numerous compilation albums . Some of these include Smash Hits , The Essential Jimi Hendrix , The Singles Album , Kiss the Sky , <unk> : 1967 – 1970 , The Ultimate Experience , Experience Hendrix : The Best of Jimi Hendrix , Voodoo Child : The Jimi Hendrix Collection , and The Singles Collection . An alternative version recorded at the same time , but with different vocal and guitar overdubs , is the first song on The Jimi Hendrix Experience 2000 box set . Live recordings of " Purple Haze " as performed by each of the different Hendrix lineups have been released . These include Live at Monterey ( the Experience ) , Live at Woodstock ( Gypsy Sun and Rainbows ) , Live at the Fillmore East ( Band of Gypsys ) , and Live at Berkeley ( the Cry of Love touring group ) . Additional live recordings with the Experience appear on Winterland ( 2011 Billboard number 49 album ) and Miami Pop Festival ( 2013 Billboard number 39 album ) . 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 In March 2005 , Q magazine ranked " Purple Haze " at number one in its list of the " 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks Ever ! " The song placed at number two on Rolling Stone magazine 's " 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " list , which noted that the song " unveiled a new guitar language charged with spiritual hunger and the poetry possible in electricity and studio technology . " It also appears at number 17 on the magazine 's " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " list , with the comment that " it launched not one but two revolutions : late @-@ <unk> psychedelia and the unprecedented genius of Jimi Hendrix . " In 1995 , " Purple Haze " was included as one of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . NPR named the song to its list of the " 100 Most Important American Musical Works of the 20th Century " in 2000 . In 2008 , it was given a Grammy Hall of Fame Award , which " honor [ s ] recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance " . 
 Many musicians have recorded their interpretations of the song , making it one of Hendrix 's most covered songs . Dion DiMucci included an acoustic version with strings on his 1968 comeback album Dion . Released as a single in 1969 , it appeared at number 63 on the Billboard Hot 100 , which was two positions higher than Hendrix ' single in 1967 . Also with a new arrangement , the Cure recorded it for the various artist 's Stone Free : A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix in 1993 . Their rendition reached number two on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks alternative rock chart . " Purple Haze " has achieved an unusual level of interest among classical musicians . The Meridian Arts Ensemble , the Hampton String Quartet , and Nigel Kennedy have recorded their interpretations and the Kronos Quartet often play it as an encore . 
 = Killer whale = 
 The killer whale or orca ( Orcinus orca ) is a toothed whale belonging to the oceanic dolphin family , of which it is the largest member . Killer whales are found in all oceans , from Arctic and Antarctic regions to tropical seas . Killer whales have a diverse diet , although individual populations often specialize in particular types of prey . Some feed exclusively on fish , while others hunt marine mammals such as seals and dolphins . They have been known to attack baleen whale calves , and even adult whales . Killer whales are apex predators , as there is no animal which preys on them . 
 Killer whales are highly social ; some populations are composed of matrilineal family groups ( pods ) which are the most stable of any animal species . Their sophisticated hunting techniques and vocal behaviours , which are often specific to a particular group and passed across generations , have been described as manifestations of animal culture . 
 The IUCN ( International Union for the Conservation of Nature ) currently assesses the orca 's conservation status as data deficient because of the likelihood that two or more killer whale types are separate species . Some local populations are considered threatened or endangered due to prey depletion , habitat loss , pollution ( by PCBs ) , capture for marine mammal parks , and conflicts with human fisheries . In late 2005 , the Southern Resident Killer Whales , the population that inhabits British Columbia and Washington state waters , were placed on the U.S. Endangered Species list . 
 Wild killer whales are not considered a threat to humans , but there have been cases of captive orcas killing or injuring their handlers at marine theme parks . Killer whales feature strongly in the mythologies of indigenous cultures , with their reputation ranging from being the souls of humans to merciless killers . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 Orcinus orca is the only recognized extant species in the genus Orcinus , one of many animal species originally described by Linnaeus in 1758 in Systema Naturae . Konrad Gessner wrote the first scientific description of a killer whale in his " Fish book " of 1558 , based on examination of a dead stranded animal in the Bay of Greifswald that had attracted a great deal of local interest . 
 The killer whale is one of 35 species in the oceanic dolphin family , which first appeared about 11 million years ago . The killer whale lineage probably branched off shortly thereafter . Although it has morphological similarities with the pygmy killer whale , the false killer whale and the pilot whales , a study of cytochrome b gene sequences by Richard LeDuc indicated that its closest extant relatives are the <unk> dolphins of the genus <unk> . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 English @-@ speaking scientists most often use the term " killer whale " , although the term " orca " is increasingly used . Killer whale advocates point out it has a long heritage . Indeed , the genus name Orcinus means " of the kingdom of the dead " , or " belonging to Orcus " . Ancient Romans originally applied orca ( plural <unk> ) to these animals , possibly borrowing it from the Greek <unk> , which referred ( among other things ) to a whale species . Since the 1960s , " orca " has steadily grown in popularity ; both names are now used . The term " orca " is euphemistically preferred by some to avoid the negative connotations of " killer " , and because , being part of the family Delphinidae , the species is more closely related to other dolphins than to whales . 
 According to some authors , the name killer whale is a mistranslation of the 18th century Spanish name <unk> de <unk> which means literally whale killer . Basque whalers would have given it such name after observing pods of orcas hunting baleen whales . 
 They are sometimes referred to as " blackfish " , a name also used for other whale species . " Grampus " is a former name for the species , but is now seldom used . This meaning of " <unk> " should not be confused with the genus Grampus , whose only member is Risso 's dolphin . 
 = = = Types = = = 
 The three to five types of killer whales may be distinct enough to be considered different races , subspecies , or possibly even species ( see Species problem ) . The IUCN reported in 2008 , " The taxonomy of this genus is clearly in need of review , and it is likely that O. orca will be split into a number of different species or at least subspecies over the next few years . " Although large variation in the ecological distinctiveness of different killer whale groups complicate simple differentiation into types , research off the west coast of Canada and the United States in the 1970s and 1980s identified the following three types : 
 Resident : These are the most commonly sighted of the three populations in the coastal waters of the northeast Pacific . Residents ' diets consist primarily of fish and sometimes squid , and they live in complex and cohesive family groups called pods . Female residents characteristically have rounded dorsal fin tips that terminate in a sharp corner . They visit the same areas consistently . British Columbia and Washington resident populations are amongst the most intensively studied marine mammals anywhere in the world . Researchers have identified and named over 300 killer whales over the past 30 years . 
 Transient : The diets of these whales consist almost exclusively of marine mammals . Transients generally travel in small groups , usually of two to six animals , and have less persistent family bonds than residents . Transients vocalize in less variable and less complex dialects . Female transients are characterized by more triangular and pointed dorsal fins than those of residents . The gray or white area around the dorsal fin , known as the " saddle patch " , often contains some black colouring in residents . However , the saddle patches of transients are solid and uniformly gray . Transients roam widely along the coast ; some individuals have been sighted in both southern Alaska and California . Transients are also referred to as Bigg 's killer whale in honor of <unk> Michael Bigg . The term has become increasingly common and may eventually replace the transient label . 
 Offshore : A third population of killer whales in the northeast Pacific was discovered in 1988 , when a humpback whale researcher observed them in open water . As their name suggests , they travel far from shore and feed primarily on schooling fish . However , because they have large , scarred and nicked dorsal fins resembling those of mammal @-@ hunting transients , it may be that they also eat mammals and sharks . They have mostly been encountered off the west coast of Vancouver Island and near Haida Gwaii . <unk> typically congregate in groups of 20 – 75 , with occasional sightings of larger groups of up to 200 . Currently , little is known about their habits , but they are genetically distinct from residents and transients . <unk> appear to be smaller than the others , and females are characterized by dorsal fin tips that are continuously rounded . 
 Transients and residents live in the same areas , but avoid each other . The name " transient " originated from the belief that these killer whales were outcasts from larger resident pods . Researchers later discovered transients are not born into resident pods . The evolutionary split between the two groups is believed to have begun two million years ago . Genetic data indicate the types have not interbred for up to 10 @,@ 000 years . 
 Other populations have not been as well studied , although specialized fish and mammal eating killer whales have been distinguished elsewhere . In addition , separate populations of " generalist " ( <unk> and mammal @-@ eating ) and " specialist " ( mammal @-@ eating ) killer whales have been identified off northwestern Europe . As with residents and transients , the lifestyle of these whales appears to reflect their diet ; fish @-@ eating killer whales in Alaska and Norway have resident @-@ like social structures , while mammal @-@ eating killer whales in Argentina and the Crozet Islands behave more like transients . 
 Three types have been documented in the Antarctic . Two dwarf species , named Orcinus nanus and Orcinus glacialis , were described during the 1980s by Soviet researchers , but most cetacean researchers are skeptical about their status , and linking these directly to the types described below is difficult . 
 Type A looks like a " typical " killer whale , a large , black and white form with a medium @-@ sized white eye patch , living in open water and feeding mostly on minke whales . 
 Type B is smaller than type A. It has a large white eye patch . Most of the dark parts of its body are medium gray instead of black , although it has a dark gray patch called a " dorsal cape " stretching back from its forehead to just behind its dorsal fin . The white areas are stained slightly yellow . It feeds mostly on seals . 
 Type C is the smallest type and lives in larger groups than the others . Its eye patch is distinctively slanted forwards , rather than parallel to the body axis . Like type B , it is primarily white and medium gray , with a dark gray dorsal cape and yellow @-@ tinged patches . Its only observed prey is the Antarctic cod . 
 Type D was identified based on photographs of a 1955 mass stranding in New Zealand and six at @-@ sea sightings since 2004 . The first video record of this type in life happened between the Kerguelen and Crozet Islands in 2014 . It is immediately recognizable by its extremely small white eye patch , narrower and shorter than usual dorsal fin , bulbous head ( similar to a pilot whale ) , and smaller teeth . Its geographic range appears to be circumglobal in subantarctic waters between latitudes 40 ° S and 60 ° S. And although nothing is known about the type D diet , it is suspected to include fish because groups have been photographed around longline vessels , where they reportedly prey on Patagonian toothfish ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Types B and C live close to the ice pack , and diatoms in these waters may be responsible for the yellowish colouring of both types . Mitochondrial DNA sequences support the theory that these are recently diverged separate species . More recently , complete mitochondrial sequencing indicates the two Antarctic groups that eat seals and fish should be recognized as distinct species , as should the North Pacific transients , leaving the others as subspecies pending additional data . Advanced methods that sequenced the entire mitochondrial genome revealed systematic differences in DNA between different populations . 
 Mammal @-@ eating killer whales were long thought likely to be closely related to other mammal @-@ eating killer whales from different regions , but genetic testing refuted this hypothesis . 
 The identified seven ecotypes in isolated ecological niches . Of three orca ecotypes in the Antarctic , one preys on minke whales , the second on seals and penguins and the third on fish . Another ecotype lives in the eastern North Atlantic , while the three Northeast Pacific ecotypes are labeled the transient , resident and offshore populations , as discussed above . The research supported a proposal to reclassify the Antarctic <unk> and fish @-@ eating populations and the North Pacific transients as a distinct species , leaving the remaining ecotypes as subspecies . The first split in the orca population , between the North Pacific transients and the rest , occurred an estimated 700 @,@ 000 years ago . Such a designation would mean that each new species becomes subject to separate conservation assessments . 
 = = Appearance and morphology = = 
 A typical killer whale distinctively bears a black back , white chest and sides , and a white patch above and behind the eye . Calves are born with a yellowish or orange tint , which fades to white . It has a heavy and robust body with a large dorsal fin up to 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) tall . Behind the fin , it has a dark grey " saddle patch " across the back . Antarctic killer whales may have pale grey to nearly white backs . Adult killer whales are very distinctive and are not usually confused with any other sea creature . When seen from a distance , juveniles can be confused with other cetacean species , such as the false killer whale or Risso 's dolphin . The killer whale 's teeth are very strong and its jaws exert a powerful grip ; the upper teeth fall into the gaps between the lower teeth when the mouth is closed . The front teeth are inclined slightly forward and outward , thus allowing the killer whale to withstand powerful jerking movements from its prey while the middle and back teeth hold it firmly in place . 
 Killer whales are the largest extant members of the dolphin family . Males typically range from 6 to 8 metres ( 20 to 26 ft ) long and weigh in excess of 6 tonnes ( 5 @.@ 9 long tons ; 6 @.@ 6 short tons ) . Females are smaller , generally ranging from 5 to 7 m ( 16 to 23 ft ) and weighing about 3 to 4 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 long tons ; 3 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . The largest male killer whale on record was 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft ) , weighing 10 tonnes ( 9 @.@ 8 long tons ; 11 short tons ) , while the largest female was 8 @.@ 5 m ( 28 ft ) , weighing 7 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 7 @.@ 4 long tons ; 8 @.@ 3 short tons ) . Calves at birth weigh about 180 kg ( 400 lb ) and are about 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long . The killer whale 's large size and strength make it among the fastest marine mammals , able to reach speeds in excess of 56 km / h ( 30 kn ) . The skeleton of the killer whale is of the typical <unk> structure , but is more robust . Its integument , unlike that of most other dolphin species , is characterised by a well @-@ developed dermal layer with a dense network of fascicles of collagen fibers . 
 Killer whale pectoral fins , analogous to forelimbs , are large and rounded , resembling paddles . Males have significantly larger pectoral fins than females . At about 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) the male 's dorsal fin is more than twice the size of the female 's and is more of a triangular shape — a tall , elongated isosceles triangle — whereas hers is shorter and more curved . Males and females also have different patterns of black and white skin in their genital areas . Sexual dimorphism is also apparent in the skull ; adult males have longer lower jaws than females , and have larger occipital crests . 
 An individual killer whale can often be identified from its dorsal fin and saddle patch . Variations such as nicks , scratches , and tears on the dorsal fin and the pattern of white or grey in the saddle patch are unique . Published directories contain identifying photographs and names for hundreds of North Pacific animals . Photographic identification has enabled the local population of killer whales to be counted each year rather than estimated , and has enabled great insight into lifecycles and social structures . 
 Occasionally a killer whale is white ; they have been spotted in the northern Bering Sea and around St. Lawrence Island , and near the Russian coast . In February 2008 , a white killer whale was photographed 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) off Kanaga Volcano in the Aleutian Islands . In 2010 , the Far East Russia Orca Project ( <unk> ) , co @-@ founded and co @-@ directed by Alexander M. <unk> and Erich Hoyt , filmed an adult male nicknamed Iceberg . 
 Killer whales have good eyesight above and below the water , excellent hearing , and a good sense of touch . They have exceptionally sophisticated echolocation abilities , detecting the location and characteristics of prey and other objects in their environments by emitting clicks and listening for echoes , as do other members of the dolphin family . 
 The mean body temperature of the orca is 36 to 38 ° C ( 97 to 100 ° F ) . Like most marine mammals , orcas have a layer of insulating blubber ranging from 7 @.@ 6 to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick beneath its skin . 
 The heart beats at a rate of about 60 beats / min when the orca is at the surface , dropping to 30 beats / min when submerged . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Female killer whales begin to mature at around the age of 10 ( reaching peak fertility around 20 ) , which consists of periods of polyestrous cycling with <unk> periods of between three and 16 months . Females can often breed until age 40 , after which comes a rapid decrease in fertility . Orcas are not the only animals to go through menopause and live for decades after they have finished breeding . The lifespans of wild females average 50 years , with a maximum of 90 years . An exception is Granny ( J2 ) , who is the oldest known orca , estimated to be 103 years old . 
 To avoid inbreeding , males mate with females from other pods . Gestation varies from 15 to 18 months . Mothers calve , with usually a single offspring , about once every five years . In resident pods , births occur at any time of year , although winter is the most common . Mortality is extremely high during the first seven months of life , when 37 – 50 % of all calves die . Weaning begins at about 12 months and completes by the age of two . According to observations in several regions , all male and female pod members participate in the care of the young . 
 Males sexually mature at the age of 15 , but do not typically reproduce until age 21 . Wild males live around 29 years on average , with a maximum of about 60 years . One male , known as Old Tom , was reportedly spotted every winter between the 1840s and 1930 off New South Wales , Australia . This would have made him up to 90 years old . Examination of his teeth indicated he died around age 35 , but this method of age determination is now believed to be inaccurate for older animals . One male known to researchers in the Pacific Northwest ( identified as J1 ) was estimated to have been 59 years old when he died in 2010 . 
 Captive killer whale lifespans are typically significantly shorter , usually less than 25 years ; however , numerous individuals are alive in their 30s , and a few have reached their 40s . Killer whales are unique among cetaceans , as their heads become relatively shorter as they age , i.e. , the orca 's caudal section <unk> more @-@ so relative to its head . 
 = = Range and habitat = = 
 Killer whales are found in all oceans and most seas . Due to their enormous range , numbers , and density , distributional estimates are difficult to compare , but they clearly prefer higher latitudes and coastal areas over pelagic environments . 
 Systematic surveys indicate the highest densities of killer whales ( > 0 @.@ 40 individuals per 100 km ² ) in the northeast Atlantic around the Norwegian coast , in the north Pacific along the Aleutian Islands , the Gulf of Alaska and in the Southern Ocean off much of the coast of Antarctica . They are considered " common " ( 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 40 individuals per 100 km ² ) in the eastern Pacific along the coasts of British Columbia , Washington and Oregon , in the North Atlantic Ocean around Iceland and the Faroe Islands . High densities have also been reported but not quantified in the western North Pacific around the Sea of Japan ( in very limited areas and more abundant on the side of Primorsky Krai ) , Shiretoko Peninsula and off Kushiro ( Resident and Transient groups began colonizing in these areas possibly after in 2000s ) , Sea of Okhotsk , Kuril Islands , Kamchatka and the Commander Islands and in the Southern Hemisphere off the coasts of South Australia , off the coast of northern to southern Brazil and the tip of southern Africa . They are reported as seasonally common in the Canadian Arctic , including Baffin Bay between Greenland and Nunavut , and around Tasmania and Macquarie Island . The northwest Atlantic population of at least 67 individuals ranges from Labrador and Newfoundland to New England with sightings to Cape Cod and Long Island . 
 Information for offshore regions and tropical waters is more scarce , but widespread , if not frequent , sightings indicate the killer whale can survive in most water temperatures . They have been sighted , for example , in the Mediterranean , the Arabian Sea , the Gulf of Mexico and the Indian Ocean around the Seychelles . In the Mediterranean , killer whales are considered " visitors " with the exception of one small population which lives in the Strait of Gibraltar . Except for northeastern basins from Black Sea , records have been among almost entire basin including Aegean and Levantine basins such as off Israel . A distinct population may also exist in Papua New Guinea . Distributions and abundances in other <unk> waters are very unclear , only with sightings time to time have been reported , such as off Phuket and Mergui Archipelago . 
 Population structure in mid to lower latitudes of the North Pacific is unclear especially in coastal waters . Large concentrations are known to occur north of the Northern Mariana Islands and in the Gulf of Sendai , and repeated sightings are reported off Bali , the east coast of Taiwan , Ryukyu Islands , Izu Islands , in Tsushima Strait , and Izu Peninsula . The modern status of the species along coastal mainland China and its vicinity is unknown . Recorded sightings have been made from almost the entire shoreline ; from Bohai and the Yellow Sea in the north to the Zhoushan Islands in the east and the Vietnam coast in the south . 
 In the Antarctic , killer whales range up to the edge of the pack ice and are believed to venture into the denser pack ice , finding open leads much like beluga whales in the Arctic . However , killer whales are merely seasonal visitors to Arctic waters , and do not approach the pack ice in the summer . With the rapid Arctic sea ice decline in the Hudson Strait , their range now extends deep into the northwest Atlantic . Occasionally , killer whales swim into freshwater rivers . They have been documented 100 mi ( 160 km ) up the Columbia River in the United States . They have also been found in the Fraser River in Canada and the Horikawa River in Japan . 
 Migration patterns are poorly understood . Each summer , the same individuals appear off the coasts of British Columbia and Washington . Despite decades of research , where these animals go for the rest of the year remains unknown . Transient pods have been sighted from southern Alaska to central California . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 Worldwide population estimates are uncertain , but recent consensus suggests an absolute minimum of 50 @,@ 000 . Local estimates include roughly 25 @,@ 000 in the Antarctic , 8 @,@ 500 in the tropical Pacific , 2 @,@ 250 – 2 @,@ 700 off the cooler northeast Pacific and 500 – 1 @,@ 500 off Norway . Japan 's Fisheries Agency estimated 2 @,@ 321 killer whales were in the seas around Japan . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 Killer whales are apex predators , meaning that they themselves have no natural predators . They are sometimes called the wolves of the sea , because they hunt in groups like wolf packs . Killer whales hunt varied prey including fish , cephalopods , mammals , sea birds and sea turtles . However , different populations or species tend to specialize and some can have a dramatic impact on certain prey species . Those that feed on mammals may not even recognize fish as food . This specialization in diet and hunting is another reason to suggest that the orca is in fact several species , as discussed above . 
 = = = Fish = = = 
 Fish @-@ eating killer whales prey on around 30 species of fish . Some populations in the Norwegian and Greenland sea specialize in herring and follow that fish 's autumnal migration to the Norwegian coast . Salmon account for 96 % of northeast Pacific residents ' diet . About 65 % of them are large , fatty Chinook . Chum salmon are also eaten , but smaller sockeye and pink salmon are not a significant food item . Depletion of specific prey species in an area is , therefore , cause for concern for local populations , despite the high diversity of prey . On average , a killer whale eats 227 kilograms ( 500 lb ) each day . While salmon are usually hunted by an individual or a small group of individuals , herring are often caught using carousel feeding ; the killer whales force the herring into a tight ball by releasing bursts of bubbles or flashing their white undersides . They then slap the ball with their tail flukes , either stunning or killing up to 15 fish at a time . The herring are then eaten one at a time . Carousel feeding has only been documented in the Norwegian killer whale population and with some oceanic dolphin species . 
 In New Zealand , sharks and rays appear to be important prey ; species taken include eagle rays , long @-@ tail and short @-@ tail stingrays , common threshers , smooth hammerheads , blue sharks and shortfin mako sharks . With sharks , orcas may herd them to the surface and strike them with their tail flukes , while bottom @-@ dwelling rays are cornered , pinned to the ground and taken to the surface . Killer whales can induce tonic immobility in sharks and rays by holding them upside down , rendering them helpless and incapable of injuring the whale . Some sharks suffocate within about 15 minutes while the whale holds them still , because these sharks need to move to breathe . In one incident filmed near the Farallon Islands in October 1997 , a 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 3 @-@ metre ( 15 – 17 ft ) female killed a 3 – 4 @-@ metre ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) great white shark , apparently after swimming with it upside @-@ down in her mouth and inducing tonic immobility in it . She and another pod member ate the shark 's liver and allowed the rest of the carcass to sink . In February 2015 , a pod of orcas was recorded to have killed a white shark off South Australia . Interspecific competition between the two species is probable in regions where dietary preferences overlap . In July 1992 , two killer whales attacked , killed and fed on an 8 @-@ metre ( 26 ft ) long whale shark , Rhincodon typus , in the waters off Bahia de los Angeles in Baja California . 
 = = = Mammals = = = 
 Killer whales are very sophisticated and effective predators of marine mammals . Thirty @-@ two cetacean species have been recorded as prey , from observing orcas ' feeding activity , examining the stomach contents of dead orcas , and seeing scars on the bodies of surviving prey animals . Groups even attack larger cetaceans such as minke whales , gray whales , and rarely sperm whales or blue whales . 
 Hunting large whales usually takes several hours . Killer whales generally choose to attack young or weak animals ; however , a group of five or more may attack a healthy adult . When hunting a young whale , a group chases it and its mother until they wear out . Eventually , they separate the pair and surround the calf , preventing it from surfacing to breathe , drowning it . Pods of female sperm whales sometimes protect themselves by forming a protective circle around their calves with their flukes facing outwards , using them to repel the attackers . Rarely , large killer whale pods can overwhelm even adult female sperm whales . Adult bull sperm whales , which are large , powerful and aggressive when threatened , and fully grown adult blue whales , which are possibly too large to overwhelm , are not believed to be prey for killer whales . 
 Prior to the advent of industrial whaling , great whales may have been the major food source for killer whales . The introduction of modern whaling techniques may have aided killer whales by the sound of exploding harpoons indicating availability of prey to scavenge , and compressed air inflation of whale carcasses causing them to float , thus exposing them to scavenging . However , the toll on great whale populations by unfettered whaling had possibly reduced their availability as prey for killer whales , and caused them to expand their consumption of smaller marine mammals , thus contributing to their decline as well . 
 Predation by orcas on whale calves in high productivity , high latitude areas has been hypothesised to be the reason for great whale migrations to low productivity tropical waters , to reduce the risk of attacks on the highly vulnerable calves due to lower density of orcas in these waters . 
 Other marine mammal prey species include nearly 20 species of seal , sea lion and fur seal . Walruses and sea otters are less frequently taken . Often , to avoid injury , killer whales disable their prey before killing and eating it . This may involve throwing it in the air , slapping it with their tails , ramming it , or breaching and landing on it . Sea lions are killed by head @-@ butting or after a stunning blow from a tail fluke . In the Aleutian Islands , a decline in sea otter populations in the 1990s was controversially attributed by some scientists to killer whale predation , although with no direct evidence . The decline of sea otters followed a decline in harbour seal and Steller sea lion populations , the killer whale 's preferred prey , which in turn may be substitutes for their original prey , now decimated by industrial whaling . 
 In steeply banked beaches off <unk> Valdés , Argentina , and the Crozet Islands , killer whales feed on South American sea lions and southern elephant seals in shallow water , even beaching temporarily to grab prey before wriggling back to the sea . <unk> , usually fatal to cetaceans , is not an instinctive behaviour , and can require years of practice for the young . Killer whales can then release the animal near juvenile whales , allowing the younger whales to practice the difficult capture technique on the now @-@ weakened prey . " Wave @-@ hunting " killer whales spy @-@ hop to locate Weddell seals , crabeater seals , leopard seals , and penguins resting on ice floes , and then swim in groups to create waves that wash over the floe . This washes the prey into the water , where other killer whales lie in wait . 
 Killer whales have also been observed preying on terrestrial mammals , such as deer swimming between islands off the northwest coast of North America . Killer whale cannibalism has also been reported based on analysis of stomach contents , but this is likely to be the result of scavenging remains dumped by whalers . One killer whale was also attacked by its companions after being shot . Although resident killer whales have never been observed to eat other marine mammals , they occasionally harass and kill porpoises and seals for no apparent reason . 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Killer whales in many areas may prey on cormorants and gulls . A captive killer whale at <unk> discovered it could regurgitate fish onto the surface , attracting sea gulls , and then eat the birds . Four others then learned to copy the behaviour . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Day @-@ to @-@ day killer whale behaviour generally consists of foraging , travelling , resting and socializing . Killer whales engage in frequent behaviour at the surface such as breaching ( jumping completely out of the water ) and tail @-@ slapping . These activities may have a variety of purposes , such as courtship , communication , dislodging parasites , or play . <unk> , a behaviour in which a whale holds its head above water , helps the animal view its surroundings . 
 Resident killer whales swim with porpoises , other dolphins , seals , and sea lions , which are common prey for transient killer whales . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 Killer whales are notable for their complex societies . Only elephants and higher primates , such as humans , live in comparably complex social structures . Due to orcas ' complex social bonds and society , many marine experts have concerns about how humane it is to keep these animals in captive situations . 
 Resident killer whales in the eastern North Pacific have a particularly complex and stable social grouping system . Unlike any other mammal species whose social structure is known , residents live with their mothers for their entire lives . These family groups are based on matrilines consisting of the eldest female ( matriarch ) and her sons and daughters , and the descendants of her daughters , etc . The average size of a matriline is 5 @.@ 5 animals . Because females can reach age 90 , as many as four generations travel together . These matrilineal groups are highly stable . Individuals separate for only a few hours at a time , to mate or forage . With one exception , the killer whale named Luna , no permanent separation of an individual from a resident matriline has been recorded . 
 Closely related matrilines form loose aggregations called pods , usually consisting of one to four matrilines . Unlike matrilines , pods may separate for weeks or months at a time . DNA testing indicates resident males nearly always mate with females from other <unk> , the next level of resident social structure , are composed of pods with similar dialects , and common but older maternal heritage . Clan ranges overlap , mingling pods from different clans . The final association layer , perhaps more arbitrarily defined than the familial groupings , is called the community , and is defined as a set of clans that regularly commingle . Clans within a community do not share vocal patterns . 
 Transient pods are smaller than resident pods , typically consisting of an adult female and one or two of her offspring . Males typically maintain stronger relationships with their mothers than other females . These bonds can extend well into adulthood . Unlike residents , extended or permanent separation of transient offspring from natal matrilines is common , with juveniles and adults of both sexes participating . Some males become " rovers " and do not form long @-@ term associations , occasionally joining groups that contain reproductive females . As in resident clans , transient community members share an acoustic repertoire , although regional differences in vocalizations have been noted . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 Like all cetaceans , killer whales depend heavily on underwater sound for orientation , feeding , and communication . They produce three categories of sounds : clicks , whistles , and pulsed calls . Clicks are believed to be used primarily for navigation and discriminating prey and other objects in the surrounding environment , but are also commonly heard during social interactions . 
 Northeast Pacific resident groups tend to be much more vocal than transient groups in the same waters . Residents feed primarily on Chinook and chum salmon , species that are insensitive to killer whale calls ( inferred from the <unk> of Atlantic salmon ) . In contrast , the marine mammal prey of transients hear well underwater at the frequencies used in killer whale calls . As such , transients are typically silent , probably to avoid alerting their mammalian prey . They sometimes use a single click ( called a cryptic click ) rather than the long train of clicks observed in other populations . Residents are only silent when resting . 
 All members of a resident pod use similar calls , known collectively as a dialect . Dialects are composed of specific numbers and types of discrete , repetitive calls . They are complex and stable over time . Call patterns and structure are distinctive within matrilines . Newborns produce calls similar to their mothers , but have a more limited repertoire . Individuals likely learn their dialect through contact with their mother and other pod members . For instance , family @-@ specific calls have been observed more frequently in the days following a calf 's birth , which may help the calf learn them . Dialects are probably an important means of maintaining group identity and cohesiveness . Similarity in dialects likely reflects the degree of relatedness between pods , with variation building over time . When pods meet , dominant call types decrease and subset call types increase . The use of both call types is called <unk> . The increased subset call types may be the distinguishing factor between pods and inter @-@ pod relations . 
 Dialects of killer whales not only distinguish them between pods , but also between types . Resident dialects contain seven to 17 ( mean = 11 ) distinctive call types . All members of the North American west coast transient community express the same basic dialect , although minor regional variation in call types is evident . Preliminary research indicates offshore killer whales have group @-@ specific dialects unlike those of residents and transients . 
 The vocalizations of killer whales in other parts of the world have also been studied . Norwegian and Icelandic herring @-@ eating orcas appear to have different vocalizations for activities like hunting and traveling . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Killer whales have the second @-@ heaviest brains among marine mammals ( after sperm whales , which have the largest brain of any animal ) . They can be trained in captivity and are often described as intelligent , although defining and measuring " intelligence " is difficult in a species whose environment and behavioural strategies are very different from those of humans . 
 Killer whales imitate others , and seem to deliberately teach skills to their kin . Off the Crozet Islands , mothers push their calves onto the beach , waiting to pull the youngster back if needed . 
 People who have interacted closely with killer whales offer numerous anecdotes demonstrating the whales ' curiosity , playfulness , and ability to solve problems . Alaskan killer whales have not only learned how to steal fish from longlines , but have also overcome a variety of techniques designed to stop them , such as the use of <unk> lines as decoys . Once , fishermen placed their boats several miles apart , taking turns retrieving small amounts of their catch , in the hope that the whales would not have enough time to move between boats to steal the catch as it was being retrieved . A researcher described what happened next : 
 It worked really well for a while . Then the whales split into two groups . It didn 't even take them an hour to figure it out . They were so thrilled when they figured out what was going on , that we were playing games . They were breaching by the boats . 
 In other anecdotes , researchers describe incidents in which wild killer whales playfully tease humans by repeatedly moving objects the humans are trying to reach , or suddenly start to toss around a chunk of ice after a human throws a snowball . 
 The killer whale 's use of dialects and the passing of other learned behaviours from generation to generation have been described as a form of animal culture . 
 The complex and stable vocal and behavioural cultures of sympatric groups of killer whales ( Orcinus orca ) appear to have no parallel outside humans and represent an independent evolution of cultural faculties . 
 ( Two species or populations are considered sympatric when they exist in the same geographic area and thus regularly encounter one another . ) 
 = = Conservation = = 
 In 2008 , the IUCN ( International Union for Conservation of Nature ) changed its assessment of the killer whale 's conservation status from conservation dependent to data deficient , recognizing that one or more killer whale types may actually be separate , endangered species . Depletion of prey species , pollution , large @-@ scale oil spills , and habitat disturbance caused by noise and conflicts with boats are currently the most significant worldwide threats . 
 Like other animals at the highest trophic levels , the killer whale is particularly at risk of poisoning from bioaccumulation of toxins , including polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) . European harbour seals have problems in reproductive and immune functions associated with high levels of PCBs and related contaminants , and a survey off the Washington coast found PCB levels in killer whales were higher than levels that had caused health problems in harbour seals . Blubber samples in the Norwegian Arctic show higher levels of PCBs , pesticides and brominated flame @-@ retardants than in polar bears . When food is scarce , killer whales metabolize blubber for energy , which increases pollutant concentrations in their blood . 
 In the Pacific Northwest , wild salmon stocks , a main resident food source , have declined dramatically in recent years . On the west coast of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands , seal and sea lion populations have also substantially declined . 
 In 2005 , the United States government listed the southern resident community as an endangered population under the Endangered Species Act . This community comprises three pods which live mostly in the Georgia and Haro Straits and Puget Sound in British Columbia and Washington . They do not breed outside of their community , which was once estimated at around 200 animals and later shrank to around 90 . In October 2008 , the annual survey revealed seven were missing and presumed dead , reducing the count to 83 . This is potentially the largest decline in the population in the past ten years . These deaths can be attributed to declines in Chinook salmon . 
 Scientist Ken Balcomb has extensively studied killer whales since 1976 ; he is the research biologist responsible for discovering U.S. Navy sonar may harm killer whales . He studied killer whales from the Center for Whale Research , located in Friday Harbor , Washington . He was also able to study killer whales from " his home porch perched above Puget Sound , where the animals hunt and play in summer months " . In May 2003 , Balcomb ( along with other whale watchers near the Puget Sound coastline ) noticed uncharacteristic behaviour displayed by the killer whales . The whales seemed " agitated and were moving haphazardly , attempting to lift their heads free of the water " to escape the sound of the sonars . " Balcomb confirmed at the time that strange underwater pinging noises detected with underwater microphones were sonar . The sound originated from a U.S. Navy frigate 12 miles ( 19 kilometers ) distant , Balcomb said . " The impact of sonar waves on killer whales is potentially life @-@ threatening . Three years prior to Balcomb 's discovery , research in the Bahamas showed 14 beaked whales washed up on the shore . These whales were beached on the day U.S. Navy destroyers were activated into sonar exercise . Of the 14 whales beached , six of them died . These six dead whales were studied , and CAT scans of the two of the whale heads showed hemorrhaging around the brain and the ears , which is consistent with decompression sickness . 
 Another conservation concern was made public in September 2008 when the Canadian government decided it was not necessary to enforce further protections ( including the Species at Risk Act in place to protect endangered animals along their habitats ) for killer whales aside from the laws already in place . In response to this decision , six environmental groups sued the federal government , claiming killer whales were facing many threats on the British Columbia Coast and the federal government did nothing to protect them from these threats . A legal and scientific nonprofit organization , <unk> , led the lawsuit and represented the David Suzuki Foundation , Environmental Defence , Greenpeace Canada , International Fund for Animal Welfare , the Raincoast Conservation Foundation , and the Wilderness Committee . Many scientists involved in this lawsuit , including Bill Wareham , a marine scientist with the David Suzuki Foundation , noted increased boat traffic , water toxic wastes , and low salmon population as major threats , putting approximately 87 killer whales on the British Columbia Coast in danger . 
 Underwater noise from shipping , drilling , and other human activities is a significant concern in some key killer whale habitats , including Johnstone Strait and Haro Strait . In the mid @-@ 1990s , loud underwater noises from salmon farms were used to deter seals . Killer whales also avoided the surrounding waters . High @-@ intensity sonar used by the Navy disturbs killer whales along with other marine mammals . Killer whales are popular with whale watchers , which may stress the whales and alter their behaviour , particularly if boats approach too closely or block their lines of travel . 
 The Exxon Valdez oil spill adversely affected killer whales in Prince William Sound and Alaska 's Kenai <unk> region . Eleven members ( about half ) of one resident pod disappeared in the following year . The spill damaged salmon and other prey populations , which in turn damaged local killer whales . By 2009 , scientists estimated the <unk> transient population ( considered part of a larger population of 346 transients ) , numbered only seven individuals and had not reproduced since the spill . This population is expected to die out . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Indigenous cultures = = = 
 The indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast feature killer whales throughout their art , history , spirituality and religion . The Haida regarded killer whales as the most powerful animals in the ocean , and their mythology tells of killer whales living in houses and towns under the sea . According to these myths , they took on human form when submerged , and humans who drowned went to live with them . For the Kwakwaka 'wakw , the killer whale was regarded as the ruler of the undersea world , with sea lions for slaves and dolphins for warriors . In Nuu @-@ chah @-@ nulth and Kwakwaka 'wakw mythology , killer whales may embody the souls of deceased chiefs . The Tlingit of southeastern Alaska regarded the killer whale as custodian of the sea and a benefactor of humans . 
 The Maritime Archaic people of Newfoundland also had great respect for killer whales , as evidenced by stone carvings found in a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old burial at the Port au Choix Archaeological Site . 
 In the tales and beliefs of the Siberian Yupik people , killer whales are said to appear as wolves in winter , and wolves as killer whales in summer . Killer whales are believed to assist their hunters in driving walrus . Reverence is expressed in several forms : the boat represents the animal , and a wooden carving hung from the hunter 's belt . Small sacrifices such as tobacco are strewn into the sea for them . Killer whales were believed to have helped the hunters even when in wolf guise , by forcing reindeer to allow themselves to be killed . 
 = = = " Killer " stereotype = = = 
 In Western cultures , killer whales were historically feared as dangerous , savage predators . The first written description of a killer whale was given by Pliny the Elder circa AD 70 , who wrote , " Orcas ( the appearance of which no image can express , other than an enormous mass of savage flesh with teeth ) are the enemy of [ other whales ] ... they charge and pierce them like warships ramming . " 
 Of the very few confirmed attacks on humans by wild killer whales , none have been fatal . In one instance , killer whales tried to tip ice floes on which a dog team and photographer of the Terra Nova Expedition was standing . The sled dogs ' barking is speculated to have sounded enough like seal calls to trigger the killer whale 's hunting curiosity . In the 1970s , a surfer in California was bitten , and in 2005 , a boy in Alaska who was splashing in a region frequented by harbor seals was bumped by a killer whale that apparently misidentified him as prey . Unlike wild killer whales , captive killer whales are reported to have made nearly two dozen attacks on humans since the 1970s , some of which have been fatal . 
 Competition with fishermen also led to killer whales being regarded as pests . In the waters of the Pacific Northwest and Iceland , the shooting of killer whales was accepted and even encouraged by governments . As an indication of the intensity of shooting that occurred until fairly recently , about 25 % of the killer whales captured in Puget Sound for aquaria through 1970 bore bullet scars . The U.S. Navy claimed to have deliberately killed hundreds of killer whales in Icelandic waters in 1956 with machine @-@ guns , rockets , and depth charges . 
 = = = Modern Western attitudes = = = 
 Western attitudes towards killer whales have changed dramatically in recent decades . In the mid @-@ 1960s and early 1970s , killer whales came to much greater public and scientific awareness , starting with the first live @-@ capture and display of a killer whale known as Moby Doll , a resident harpooned off <unk> Island in 1964 . So little was known at the time , it was nearly two months before the whale 's keepers discovered what food ( fish ) it was willing to eat . To the surprise of those who saw him , Moby Doll was a docile , nonaggressive whale that made no attempts to attack humans . 
 Between 1964 and 1976 , 50 killer whales from the Pacific Northwest were captured for display in aquaria , and public interest in the animals grew . In the 1970s , research pioneered by Michael Bigg led to the discovery of the species ' complex social structure , its use of vocal communication , and its extraordinarily stable mother – offspring bonds . Through photo @-@ identification techniques , individuals were named and tracked over decades . 
 Bigg 's techniques also revealed the Pacific Northwest population was in the low hundreds rather than the thousands that had been previously assumed . The southern resident community alone had lost 48 of its members to captivity ; by 1976 , only 80 remained . In the Pacific Northwest , the species that had unthinkingly been targeted became a cultural icon within a few decades . 
 The public 's growing appreciation also led to growing opposition to whale – keeping in aquaria . Only one whale has been taken in North American waters since 1976 . In recent years , the extent of the public 's interest in killer whales has manifested itself in several high @-@ profile efforts surrounding individuals . Following the success of the 1993 film Free Willy , the movie 's captive star Keiko was returned to the coast of his native Iceland in 1998 . The director of the International Marine Mammal Project for the Earth Island Institute , David Phillips , led the efforts to return Keiko to the Iceland waters . In 2002 the orphan Springer was discovered in Puget Sound , Washington . She became the first whale to be successfully reintegrated into a wild pod after human intervention , crystallizing decades of research into the vocal behaviour and social structure of the region 's killer whales . The saving of Springer raised hopes that another young killer whale named Luna , which had become separated from his pod , could be returned to it . However , his case was marked by controversy about whether and how to intervene , and in 2006 , Luna was killed by a boat propeller . 
 = = = Whaling = = = 
 The earlier of known records of commercial hunting of killer whales date to the 18th century in Japan . During the 19th and early 20th centuries , the global whaling industry caught immense numbers of baleen and sperm whales , but largely ignored killer whales because of their limited amounts of recoverable oil , their smaller populations , and the difficulty of taking them . Once the stocks of larger species were depleted , killer whales were targeted by commercial whalers in the mid @-@ 20th century . Between 1954 and 1997 , Japan took 1 @,@ 178 killer whales ( although the Ministry of the Environment claims that there had been domestic catches of about 1 @,@ 600 whales between late 1940s to 1960s ) and Norway took 987 . Over 3 @,@ 000 killer whales were taken by Soviet whalers , including an Antarctic catch of 916 in 1979 – 80 alone , prompting the International Whaling Commission to recommend a ban on commercial hunting of the species pending further research . ( Compare with the situation on land , Commercial hunting . ) Today , no country carries out a substantial hunt , although Indonesia and Greenland permit small subsistence hunts ( see Aboriginal whaling ) . Other than commercial hunts , killer whales were hunted along Japanese coasts out of public concern for potential conflicts with fisheries . Such cases include a semi @-@ resident male @-@ female pair in Akashi Strait and <unk> being killed in the Seto Inland Sea in 1957 , the killing of five whales from a pod of 11 members that swam into Tokyo Bay in 1970 , and a catch record in southern Taiwan in the 1990s . 
 = = = = Cooperation with humans = = = = 
 Killer whales have helped humans hunting other whales . One well @-@ known example was the killer whales of Eden , Australia , including the male known as Old Tom . Whalers more often considered them a nuisance , however , as orcas would gather to scavenge meat from the whalers ' catch . Some populations , such as in Alaska 's Prince William Sound , may have been reduced significantly by whalers shooting them in retaliation . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 The killer whale 's intelligence , trainability , striking appearance , playfulness in captivity and sheer size have made it a popular exhibit at aquaria and aquatic theme parks . From 1976 to 1997 , 55 whales were taken from the wild in Iceland , 19 from Japan , and three from Argentina . These figures exclude animals that died during capture . Live captures fell dramatically in the 1990s , and by 1999 , about 40 % of the 48 animals on display in the world were captive @-@ born . 
 Organizations such as World Animal Protection and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society campaign against the practice of keeping them in captivity . In captivity , they often develop pathologies , such as the dorsal fin collapse seen in 60 – 90 % of captive males . Captives have vastly reduced life expectancies , on average only living into their 20s . In the wild , females who survive infancy live 46 years on average , and up to 70 – 80 years in rare cases . Wild males who survive infancy live 31 years on average , and up to 50 – 60 years . Captivity usually bears little resemblance to wild habitat , and captive whales ' social groups are foreign to those found in the wild . Critics claim captive life is stressful due to these factors and the requirement to perform circus tricks that are not part of wild killer whale behaviour , see above . Wild killer whales may travel up to 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) in a day , and critics say the animals are too big and intelligent to be suitable for captivity . Captives occasionally act aggressively towards themselves , their <unk> , or humans , which critics say is a result of stress . Between 1991 and 2010 , the bull orca known as Tilikum was involved in the death of three people , and was featured in the critically acclaimed 2013 film , Blackfish . Tilikum has lived at SeaWorld since 1992 . 
 A 2015 study coauthored by staff at SeaWorld and the Minnesota Zoo indicates that there is no significant difference in survivorship between free @-@ ranging and captive killer whales . The authors speculate about the future utility of studying captive populations for the purposes of understanding orca biology and the implications of such research of captive animals in the overall health of both wild and marine park populations . The study has been criticised by Dr Trevor Willis , senior lecture in marine biology at the University of Portsmouth , who stated that the study is misleading , " clearly wrong " and indicative of " poor practice " . He said that this is the case because it compares swimming pools to the wild ocean and the extrapolates the survival rates of calves to life expectancy in adulthood . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Orcinus orca on Wikimedia Commons . 
 = James Tod = 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Tod ( 20 March 1782 – 18 November 1835 ) was an English @-@ born officer of the British East India Company and an Oriental scholar . He combined his official role and his amateur interests to create a series of works about the history and geography of India , and in particular the area then known as Rajputana that corresponds to the present day state of Rajasthan , and which Tod referred to as Rajas 'han . 
 Tod was born in London and educated in Scotland . He joined the East India Company as a military officer and travelled to India in 1799 as a cadet in the Bengal Army . He rose quickly in rank , eventually becoming captain of an escort for an envoy in a Sindian royal court . After the Third Anglo @-@ Maratha War , during which Tod was involved in the intelligence department , he was appointed Political Agent for some areas of Rajputana . His task was to help unify the region under the control of the East India Company . During this period Tod conducted most of the research that he would later publish . Tod was initially successful in his official role , but his methods were questioned by other members of the East India Company . Over time , his work was restricted and his areas of oversight were significantly curtailed . In 1823 , owing to declining health and reputation , Tod resigned his post as Political Agent and returned to England . 
 Back home in England , Tod published a number of academic works about Indian history and geography , most notably Annals and Antiquities of Rajas 'han , based on materials collected during his travels . He retired from the military in 1826 , and married Julia Clutterbuck that same year . He died in 1835 , aged 53 . 
 Tod 's major works have been criticised as containing significant inaccuracies and bias , but he is highly regarded in some areas of India , particularly in communities whose ancestors he praised . His accounts of the Rajputs and of India in general had a significant effect on British views of the area for many years . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Tod was born in Islington , London , on 20 March 1782 . He was the second son for his parents , James and Mary ( née Heatly ) , both of whom came from families of " high standing " , according to his major biographer , the historian Jason Freitag . He was educated in Scotland , whence his ancestors came , although precisely where he was schooled is unknown . Those ancestors included people who had fought with the King of Scots , Robert the Bruce ; he took pride in this fact and had an acute sense of what he perceived to be the chivalric values of those times . 
 As with many people of Scots descent who sought adventure and success at that time , Tod joined the British East India Company and initially spent some time studying at the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich . He left England for India in 1799 and in doing so followed in the footsteps of various other members of his family , including his father , although Tod senior had not been in the Company but had instead owned an indigo plantation at Mirzapur . The young Tod journeyed as a cadet in the Bengal Army , appointment to which position was at the time reliant upon patronage . He was appointed lieutenant in May 1800 and in 1805 was able to arrange his posting as a member of the escort to a family friend who had been appointed as Envoy and Resident to a Sindian royal court . By 1813 he had achieved promotion to the rank of captain and was commanding the escort . 
 Rather than being situated permanently in one place , the royal court was moved around the kingdom . Tod undertook various topographical and geological studies as it travelled from one area to another , using his training as an engineer and employing other people to do much of the field work . These studies culminated in 1815 with the production of a map which he presented to the Governor @-@ General , the Marquis of Hastings . This map of " Central India " ( his phrase ) became of strategic importance to the British as they were soon to fight the Third Anglo @-@ Maratha War . During that war , which ran from 1817 to 1818 , Tod acted as a superintendent of the intelligence department and was able to draw on other aspects of regional knowledge which he had acquired while moving around with the court . He also drew up various strategies for the military campaign . 
 In 1818 he was appointed Political Agent for various states of western Rajputana , in the northwest of India , where the British East India Company had come to amicable arrangements with the Rajput rulers in order to exert indirect control over the area . The anonymous author of the introduction to Tod 's posthumously published book , Travels in Western India , says that 
 Clothed with this ample authority , he applied himself to the arduous task of endeavouring to repair the ravages of foreign invaders who still lingered in some of the fortresses , to heal the deeper wounds inflicted by intestine feuds , and to reconstruct the framework of society in the disorganised states of Rajas 'han . 
 Tod continued his surveying work in this physically @-@ challenging , arid and mountainous area . His responsibilities were extended quickly : initially involving himself with the regions of Mewar , Kota , <unk> and Bundi , he soon added Marwar to his portfolio and in 1821 was also given responsibility for Jaisalmer . These areas were considered a strategic buffer zone against Russian advances from the north which , it was feared , might result in a move into India via the Khyber Pass . Tod believed that to achieve cohesion it was necessary that the Rajput states should contain only Rajput people , with all others being expelled . This would assist in achieving stability in the areas , thus limiting the likelihood of the inhabitants being influenced by outside forces . According to Ramya Sreenivasan , a researcher of religion and caste in early modern Rajasthan and of colonialism , Tod 's " transfers of territory between various chiefs and princes helped to create territorially consolidated states and ' <unk> ' political hierarchies . " His successes were plentiful and the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography notes that Tod was 
 so successful in his efforts to restore peace and confidence that within less than a year some 300 deserted towns and villages were <unk> , trade revived , and , in spite of the abolition of transit duties and the reduction of frontier customs , the state revenue had reached an unprecedented amount . During the next five years Tod earned the respect of the chiefs and people , and was able to rescue more than one princely family , including that of the <unk> of Udaipur , from the destitution to which they had been reduced by Maratha raiders . 
 Tod was not , however , universally respected in the East India Company . His immediate superior , David Ochterlony , was unsettled by Tod 's rapid rise and frequent failure to consult with him . One Rajput prince objected to Tod 's close involvement in the affairs of his state and succeeded in persuading the authorities to remove Marwar from Tod 's area of influence . In 1821 his favouritism towards one party in a princely dispute , contrary to the orders given to him , gave rise to a severe reprimand and a formal restriction of his ability to operate without consulting Ochterlony , as well as the removal of Kota from his charge . Jaisalmer was then taken out of his sphere of influence in 1822 , as official concerns grew regarding his sympathy for the Rajput princes . This and other losses of status , such as the reduction in the size of his escort , caused him to believe that his personal reputation and ability to work successfully in Mewar , by now the one area still left to him , was too diminished to be acceptable . He resigned his role as Political Agent in Mewar later that year , citing ill health . Reginald Heber , the Bishop of Calcutta , commented that 
 His misfortune was that , in consequence of favouring native princes so much , the government of Calcutta were led to suspect him of corruption , and consequently to narrow his powers and associate other officers with him in his trust , till he was disgusted and resigned his place . They are now satisfied , I believe , that their suspicions were groundless . 
 In February 1823 , Tod left India for England , having first travelled to Bombay by a circuitous route for his own pleasure . 
 During the last years of his life Tod talked about India at functions in Paris and elsewhere across Europe . He also became a member of the newly established Royal Asiatic Society in London , for whom he acted for some time as librarian . He suffered an apoplectic fit in 1825 as a consequence of overwork , and retired from his military career in the following year , soon after he had been promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel . His marriage to Julia Clutterbuck ( daughter of Henry Clutterbuck ) in 1826 produced three children – Grant Heatly Tod @-@ Heatly , Edward H. M. Tod and Mary Augusta Tod – but his health , which had been poor for much of his life , was declining . Having lived at <unk> , Croydon , from October 1828 , Tod and his family moved to London three years later . He spent much of the last year of his life abroad in an attempt to cure a chest complaint and died on 18 November 1835 soon after his return to England from Italy . The cause of death was an apoplectic fit sustained on the day of his wedding anniversary , although he survived for a further 27 hours . He had moved into a house in Regent 's Park earlier in that year . 
 = = Worldview = = 
 According to Theodore <unk> , whose fields of study include historiography and British imperial history , Tod saw the Rajputs as " natural allies of the British in their struggles against the Mughal and Maratha states " . Norbert Peabody , an anthropologist and historian , has gone further , arguing that " maintaining the active support of groups , like the Rajputs for example , was not only important in meeting the threat of indigenous rivals but also in countering the imperial aspirations of other European powers . " He stated that some of Tod 's thoughts were " implicated in [ British ] colonial policy toward western India for over a century . " 
 Tod favoured the then @-@ fashionable concept of Romantic nationalism . Influenced by this , he thought that each princely state should be inhabited by only one community and his policies were designed to expel Marathas , Pindaris and other groups from Rajput territories . It also influenced his instigation of treaties that were intended to redraw the territorial boundaries of the various states . The geographical and political boundaries before his time had in some cases been blurred , primarily due to local arrangements based on common kinship , and he wanted a more evident delineation of the entities , He was successful in both of these endeavours . 
 Tod was unsuccessful in implementing another of his ideas , which was also based on the ideology of Romantic nationalism . He believed that the replacement of Maratha rule with that of the British had resulted in the Rajputs merely swapping the onerous overlordship of one government for that of another . Although he was one of the architects of indirect rule , in which the princes looked after domestic affairs but paid tribute to the British for protection in foreign affairs , he was also a critic of it . He saw the system as one that prevented achievement of true nationhood , and therefore , as Peabody describes , " utterly subversive to the stated goal of preserving them as viable entities . " Tod wrote in 1829 that the system of indirect rule had a tendency to " national degradation " of the Rajput territories and that this undermined them because 
 Who will dare to urge that a government , which cannot support its internal rule without restriction , can be national ? That without power <unk> and unrestrained by exterior council or espionage , it can maintain its self @-@ respect ? This first of feelings these treaties utterly annihilate . Can we suppose such <unk> allies are to be depended upon in emergencies ? Or , if allowed to retain a spark of their ancient moral inheritance , that it will not be kindled into a flame against us when opportunity offers ? 
 There was a political aspect to his views : if the British recast themselves as overseers seeking to re @-@ establish lost Rajput nations , then this would at once smooth the relationship between those two parties and distinguish the threatening , <unk> Marathas from the paternal , nation @-@ creating British . It was an argument that had been deployed by others in the European arena , including in relation to the way in which Britain portrayed the imperialism of Napoleonic France as <unk> those countries which it conquered , whereas ( it was claimed ) British imperialism freed people ; William Bentinck , a soldier and statesmen who later in life served as Governor @-@ General of India , noted in 1811 that " Bonaparte made kings ; England makes nations " . However , his arguments in favour of granting sovereignty to the Rajputs failed to achieve that end , although the frontispiece to volume one of his Annals did contain a plea to the then English King George IV to reinstate the " former independence " of the Rajputs . 
 While he viewed the Muslim Mughals as despotic and the Marathas as predatory , Tod saw the Rajput social systems as being similar to the feudal system of medieval Europe , and their traditions of recounting history through the generations as similar to the clan poets of the Scottish Highlanders . There was , he felt , a system of checks and balances between the ruling princes and their vassal lords , a tendency for feuds and other rivalries , and often a serf @-@ like peasantry . The Rajputs were , in his opinion , on the same developmental trajectory that nations such as Britain had followed . His ingenious use of these viewpoints later enabled him to promote in his books the notion that there was a shared experience between the people of Britain and this community in a distant , relatively unexplored area of the empire . He speculated that there was a common ancestor shared by the Rajputs and Europeans somewhere deep in prehistory and that this might be proven by comparison of the commonality in their history of ideas , such as myth and legend . In this he shared a contemporary aspiration to prove that all communities across the world had a common origin . There was another appeal inherent in a feudal system , and it was not unique to Tod : the historian Thomas R. Metcalf has said that 
 In an age of industrialism and individualism , of social upheaval and laissez @-@ faire , marked by what were perceived as the horrors of continental revolution and the rationalist excesses of <unk> , the Middle Ages stood forth as a metaphor for <unk> ideals of social order and proper conduct ... [ T ] he medievalists looked to the ideals of chivalry , such as heroism , honour and generosity , to transcend the selfish calculation of pleasure and pain , and recreate a harmonious and stable society . 
 Above all , the chivalric ideal viewed character as more worthy of admiration than wealth or intellect , and this appealed to the old landed classes at home as well as to many who worked for the Indian Civil Service . 
 In the 1880s , Alfred Comyn Lyall , an administrator of the British Raj who also studied history , revisited Tod 's classification and asserted that the Rajput society was in fact tribal , based on kinship rather than feudal vassalage . He had previously generally agreed with Tod , who acknowledged claims that blood @-@ ties played some sort of role in the relationship between princes and vassals in many states . In shifting the emphasis from a feudal to a tribal basis , Lyall was able to deny the possibility that the Rajput kingdoms might gain sovereignty . If Rajput society was not feudal , then it was not on the same trajectory that European nations had followed , thereby forestalling any need to consider that they might evolve into sovereign states . There was thus no need for Britain to consider itself to be illegitimately governing them . 
 Tod 's enthusiasm for bardic poetry reflected the works of Sir Walter Scott on Scottish subjects , which had a considerable influence both on British literary society and , bearing in mind Tod 's Scottish ancestry , on Tod himself . Tod reconstructed Rajput history on the basis of the ancient texts and folklore of the Rajputs , although not everyone – for example , the polymath James Mill – accepted the historical validity of the native works . Tod also used philological techniques to reconstruct areas of Rajput history that were not even known to the Rajputs themselves , by drawing on works such as the religious texts known as Puranas . 
 = = Publications = = 
 <unk> says that Tod " developed an interest in triangulating local culture , politics and history alongside his maps " , and Metcalf believes that Tod " ordered [ the Rajputs ' ] past as well as their present " while working in India . During his time in Rajputana , Tod was able to collect materials for his Annals and Antiquities of Rajas 'han , which detailed the contemporary geography and history of Rajputana and Central India along with the history of the Rajput clans who ruled most of the area at that time . Described by historian Crispin Bates as " a romantic historical and anecdotal account " and by David Arnold , another historian , as a " travel narrative " by " one of India 's most influential Romantic writers " , the work was published in two volumes , in 1829 and 1832 , and included illustrations and engravings by notable artists such as the <unk> , Louis <unk> and either Edward or William <unk> . He had to finance publication himself : sales of works on history had been moribund for some time and his name was not particularly familiar either at home or abroad . Original copies are now scarce , but they have been reprinted in many editions . The version published in 1920 , which was edited by the orientalist and folklorist William Crooke , is significantly editorialised . 
 Freitag has argued that the Annals " is first and foremost a story of the heroes of Rajasthan ... plotted in a certain way – there are villains , glorious acts of bravery , and a chivalric code to uphold " . So dominant did Tod 's work become in the popular and academic mind that they largely replaced the older accounts upon which Tod based much of his content , notably the <unk> <unk> and the <unk> ri <unk> . Kumar Singh , of the Anthropological Survey of India , has explained that the Annals were primarily based on " bardic accounts and personal encounters " and that they " glorified and romanticised the Rajput rulers and their country " but ignored other communities . 
 One aspect of history that Tod studied in his Annals was the genealogy of the <unk> <unk> ( 36 royal races ) , for the purpose of which he took advice on linguistic issues from a panel of pandits , including a Jain guru called Yati <unk> . He said that he was " desirous of epitomising the chronicles of the martial races of Central and Western India " and that this necessitated study of their genealogy . The sources for this were Puranas held by the Rana of Udaipur . 
 Tod also submitted <unk> papers to the Royal Asiatic Society 's Transactions series . He was interested in numismatics as well , and he discovered the first specimens of Bactrian and Indo @-@ Greek coins from the Hellenistic period following the conquests of Alexander the Great , which were described in his books . These ancient kingdoms had been largely forgotten or considered semi @-@ legendary , but Tod 's findings confirmed the long @-@ term Greek presence in Afghanistan and Punjab . Similar coins have been found in large quantities since his death . 
 In addition to these writings , he produced a paper on the politics of Western India that was appended to the report of the House of Commons committee on Indian affairs , 1833 . He had also taken notes on his journey to Bombay and collated them for another book , Travels in Western India . That book was published posthumously in 1839 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Criticism of the Annals came soon after publication . The anonymous author of the introduction to his posthumously published Travels states that 
 The only portions of this great work which have experienced anything like censure are those of a speculative character , namely , the curious Dissertation on the Feudal System of the <unk> , and the passages wherein the Author shows too visible a leaning towards hypotheses identifying persons , as well as customs , manners , and superstitions , in the East and the West , often on the slender basis of etymological affinities . 
 Further criticism followed . Tod was an officer of the British imperial system , at that time the world 's dominant power . Working in India , he attracted the attention of local rulers who were keen to tell their own tales of defiance against the Mughal empire . He heard what they told him but knew little of what they omitted . He was a soldier writing about a caste renowned for its martial abilities , and he was aided in his writings by the very people whom he was documenting . He had been interested in Rajput history prior to coming into contact with them in an official capacity , as administrator of the region in which they lived . These factors , says Freitag , contribute to why the Annals were " manifestly biased " . Freitag argues that critics of Tod 's literary output can be split into two groups : those who concentrate on his errors of fact and those who concentrate on his failures of interpretation . 
 Tod relied heavily on existing Indian texts for his historical information and most of these are today considered unreliable . Crooke 's introduction to Tod 's 1920 edition of the Annals recorded that the old Indian texts recorded " the facts , not as they really occurred , but as the writer and his contemporaries supposed that they occurred . " Crooke also says that Tod 's " knowledge of ethnology was imperfect , and he was unable to reject the local chronicles of the Rajputs . " More recently , Robin Donkin , a historian and geographer , has argued that , with one exception , " there are no native literary works with a developed sense of chronology , or indeed much sense of place , before the thirteenth century " , and that researchers must rely on the accounts of travellers from outside the country . 
 Tod 's work relating to the genealogy of the <unk> <unk> was criticised as early as 1872 , when an anonymous reviewer in the Calcutta Review said that 
 It seems a pity that Tod 's classification of 36 royal races should be accepted as anything but a purely ornamental arrangement , founded as it was on lists differing considerably both in the numbers and names of the tribes included in it , and containing at least two tribes , the Jats and <unk> , with whom the Rajputs do not even generally intermarry . 
 Other examples of dubious interpretations made by Tod include his assertions regarding the ancestry of the <unk> Rajput clan when , even today , there is insufficient evidence to prove his point . He also mistook Rana Kumbha , a ruler of Mewar in the fifteenth century , as being the husband of the princess @-@ saint Mira Bai and misrepresented the story of the queen Padmini . The founder of the Archaeological Survey of India , Alexander Cunningham , writing in 1885 , noted that Tod had made " a whole bundle of mistakes " in relation to the dating of the Battle of <unk> , and Crooke notes in his introduction to the 1920 edition that Tod 's " excursions into philology are the diversions of a clever man , not of a trained scholar , but interested in the subject as an amateur . " Michael Meister , an architectural historian and professor of South Asia Studies , has commented that Tod had a " general reputation for inaccuracy ... among Indologists by late in the nineteenth century " , although the opinion of those Indologists sometimes prevented them from appreciating some of the useful aspects in his work . That reputation persists , with one modern writer , V. S. Srivastava of Rajasthan 's Department of Archaeology and Museums , commenting that his works " are erroneous and misleading at places and they are to be used with caution as a part of sober history " . In its time , Tod 's work was influential even among officials of the government , although it was never formally recognised as authoritative . Andrea Major , who is a cultural and colonial historian , has commented on a specific example , that of the tradition of sati ( ritual immolation of a widow ) : 
 The overly romanticised image of Rajasthan , and of the Rajput sati , that Tod presented came to be extremely influential in shaping British understanding of the rite 's Rajput context . Though Tod does make a point of denouncing sati as a cruel and barbarous custom , his words are belied by his treatment of the subject in the rest of the Annals . ... Tod 's image of the Rajput sati as the heroic equivalent of the Rajput warrior was one that caught the public imagination and which exhibited surprising longevity . 
 The romantic nationalism that Tod espoused was used by Indian nationalist writers , especially those from the 1850s , as they sought to resist British control of the country . Works such as <unk> Tagore 's Sarojini ba Chittor Akrama and <unk> Ghosh 's Ananda Raho retold Tod 's vision of the Rajputs in a manner to further their cause . Other works which drew their story from Tod 's works include Padmini <unk> ( 1858 ) by <unk> Banerjee and Krishna Kumari ( 1861 ) by Michael Madhusudan Dutt . 
 In modern @-@ day India , he is still revered by those whose ancestors he documented in good light . In 1997 , the Maharana Mewar Charitable Foundation instituted an award named after Tod and intended it to be given to modern non @-@ Indian writers who exemplified Tod 's understanding of the area and its people . In other recognition of his work in Mewar Province , a village has been named <unk> , and it has been claimed that Tod was in fact a Rajput as an outcome of the process of karma and rebirth . Freitag describes the opinion of the Rajput people 
 Tod , here , is not about history as such , but is a repository for " truth " and " splendor " ... The danger , therefore , is that the old received wisdom – evident and expressed in the work of people like Tod – will not be challenged at all , but will become much more deeply ingrained . 
 Furthermore , Freitag points out that " the information age has also anointed Tod as the spokesman for Rajasthan , and the glories of India in general , as attested by the prominent quotations from him that appear in tourism related websites . " 
 = = Works = = 
 Published works by James Tod include : 
 Tod , James ( 1824 ) . " Translation of a Sanscrit Inscription , Relative to the Last Hindu King of Delhi , with Comments <unk> " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 1 ( 1 ) : 133 – 154 . 
 Tod , James ( 1826 ) . " Comments on an Inscription upon Marble , at <unk> ; And Three Grants Inscribed on Copper , Found at <unk> " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 1 ( 2 ) : 207 – 229 . 
 Tod , James ( 1826 ) . " An Account of Greek , Parthian , and Hindu Medals , Found in India " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 1 ( 2 ) : 313 – 342 . 
 Tod , James ( 1829 ) . " On the Religious Establishments of Mewar " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 2 ( 1 ) : 270 – 325 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Tod , James ( 1829 ) . " Remarks on Certain Sculptures in the Cave Temples of Ellora " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 2 ( 1 ) : 328 – 339 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Tod , James ( 1829 ) . Annals and Antiquities of Rajast 'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India , Volume 1 . London : Smith , Elder . 
 Tod , James ( 1830 ) . " Observations on a Gold Ring of Hindu Fabrication found at Montrose in Scotland " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 2 ( 2 ) : 559 – 571 . 
 Tod , James ( 1831 ) . " Comparison of the Hindu and Theban Hercules , illustrated by an ancient Hindu Intaglio " . Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( London : Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ) 3 ( 1 ) : 139 – 159 . 
 Tod , James ( 1832 ) . Annals and Antiquities of Rajast 'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India , Volume 2 . London : Smith , Elder . 
 Tod , James ( 1839 ) . Travels in Western India . London : W. H. Allen . 
 = = = Later editions = = = 
 Tod , James ( 1920 ) . Crooke , William , ed . Annals and Antiquities of Rajast 'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India 1 . London : Humphrey Milford / Oxford University Press . 
 Tod , James ( 1920 ) . Crooke , William , ed . Annals and Antiquities of Rajast 'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India 2 . London : Humphrey Milford / Oxford University Press . 
 Tod , James ( 1920 ) . Crooke , William , ed . Annals and Antiquities of Rajast 'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India 3 . London : Humphrey Milford / Oxford University Press . 
 = Connecticut @-@ class battleship = 
 The Connecticut @-@ class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were the penultimate class of the type built for the United States Navy . The class comprised six ships : Connecticut , Louisiana , Vermont , Kansas , Minnesota , and New Hampshire , which were built between 1903 and 1908 . The ships were armed with a mixed offensive battery of 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) , 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) , and 7 @-@ inch ( 180 mm ) guns . This arrangement was rendered obsolete by the advent of all @-@ big @-@ gun battleships like the British HMS Dreadnought , which was completed before most of the Connecticuts entered service . 
 Nevertheless , the ships had active careers . The first five ships took part in the cruise of the Great White Fleet in 1907 – 1909 — New Hampshire had not entered service . From 1909 onward , they served as the workhorses of the US Atlantic Fleet , conducting training exercises and showing the flag in Europe and Central America . As unrest broke out in several Central American countries in the 1910s , the ships became involved in police actions in the region . The most significant was the American intervention in the Mexican Revolution during the occupation of Veracruz in April 1914 . 
 During the American participation in World War I , the Connecticut @-@ class ships were used to train sailors for an expanding wartime fleet . In late 1918 , they began to escort convoys to Europe , and in September that year , Minnesota was badly damaged by a mine laid by a German U @-@ boat . After the war , they were used to bring American soldiers back from France and later as training ships . The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty , which mandated major reductions in naval weapons , cut the ships ' careers short . Within two years , all six ships had been sold for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 The United States ' victory in the Spanish – American War in 1898 before had a dramatic impact on battleship design , as the question of the role of the fleet — namely , whether it should be focused on coastal defense or high seas operations — had been solved . The fleet 's ability to conduct offensive operations overseas showed the necessity of a powerful fleet of battleships . As a result , the US Congress was willing to authorize much larger ships . Design work on what would become the Connecticut class began in 1901 . The Secretary of the Navy submitted a request for a new battleship design on 6 March to the Board on Construction . Among the issues considered was the composition and placement of the secondary battery . The preceding design , the Virginia class , placed some of its secondary guns in fixed turrets atop the main battery turrets as a way to save weight . The Board disliked the arrangement , as some members argued that guns in casemates could be fired faster . Additionally , the Virginias had mounted a mixed secondary battery of 6 in ( 152 mm ) and 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns ; the Bureau of Ordnance ( BuOrd ) had recently introduced a quick @-@ firing 7 in ( 178 mm ) gun , which was more powerful than the 6 in and fired faster than the 8 in . 
 The initial version of the Connecticut design , proposed by BuOrd , featured a secondary battery of twenty @-@ four 7 in guns with the same number of 3 in ( 76 mm ) guns for defense against torpedo boats . The armor layout was more comprehensive but thinner , and displacement rose to 15 @,@ 560 long tons ( 15 @,@ 810 t ) . BuOrd determined that a longer and finer hull shape , coupled with a small increase in engine power , would maintain the standard speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . The Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) proposed a ship more closely based on the Virginias , with the same two @-@ story turrets and mixed 6- and 8 @-@ inch secondary battery , on a displacement of 15 @,@ 860 long tons ( 16 @,@ 110 t ) . This design featured only eight 3 in guns , which was deemed wholly insufficient to defend the ship from small craft . 
 In November , the Board agreed to a compromise design that incorporated a secondary battery of eight 8 in guns in four twin turrets amidships and twelve 7 in guns in casemates . The decision to retain the 8 in guns was made in large part due to American experiences in the Spanish – American War three years before . US Navy officers had been impressed with the performance of the gun at the Battle of Santiago de Cuba ; despite scoring only 13 hits out of 309 shells fired , the gun had a flat trajectory and good range for its size . Armor protection was improved over the BuOrd design , with a thicker armored belt and casemate protection , albeit at the expense of thinner armor covering the barbettes that supported the gun turrets . The designers reasoned that since the barbettes were behind the belt and a transverse bulkhead , weight could be saved by reducing the level of direct protection . 
 The last four ships , starting with Vermont , received slightly improved armor protection , with the last vessel — New Hampshire — having further improvements . As a result , they are sometimes referred to as the Vermont class . The six Connecticut @-@ class ships were the most powerful pre @-@ dreadnought type battleship built by the US Navy , and they compared well with contemporary foreign designs . They were nevertheless rendered obsolescent almost immediately due to the advent of the " all @-@ big @-@ gun " battleship epitomized by the British HMS Dreadnought . Two follow @-@ on ships , the Mississippi class , were built at the same time to a design based on the Connecticuts but significantly reduced in size . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The Connecticut @-@ class ships were 450 feet ( 140 m ) long at the waterline and 456 ft 4 in ( 139 @.@ 09 m ) long overall . They had a beam of 76 ft 10 in ( 23 @.@ 42 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 6 in ( 7 @.@ 47 m ) . Freeboard forward was 20 ft 6 in ( 6 @.@ 25 m ) . They displaced 16 @,@ 000 long tons ( 16 @,@ 000 t ) as designed and up to 17 @,@ 666 long tons ( 17 @,@ 949 t ) at full load . The ships had a flush deck , and they were better sea boats than preceding designs , many of which had poor stability . The Connecticut class had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 62 feet ( 1 @.@ 41 m ) . As built , the ships were fitted with two heavy military masts , but these were quickly replaced by lattice masts in 1909 . They had a crew of 42 officers and 785 men . 
 The ships were powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines , with steam provided by twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The engines were rated at 16 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 300 kW ) and generated a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boilers were trunked into three closely spaced funnels amidships . The first five ships were equipped with eight 100 @-@ kilowatt ( 130 hp ) electricity generators , while New Hampshire had four of these generators and two 200 kW ( 270 hp ) units . All of the ships had a combined output of 800 kW ( 1 @,@ 100 hp ) ; this was the highest output in any American warship then built . Steering was controlled with a single rudder . The ships ' turning radius was 620 yards ( 570 m ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 On trials , the ships exceeded their design speed slightly , with Minnesota being the fastest , at 18 @.@ 85 knots ( 34 @.@ 91 km / h ; 21 @.@ 69 mph ) . The ships carried 900 long tons ( 910 t ) of coal normally , but additional spaces could be used for coal bunkers , with storage capacity ranging between 2 @,@ 249 to 2 @,@ 405 long tons ( 2 @,@ 285 to 2 @,@ 444 t ) for each ship . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , the ships could steam for 6 @,@ 620 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 260 km ; 7 @,@ 620 mi ) , though New Hampshire 's engines were more efficient , allowing her to steam for 7 @,@ 590 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 060 km ; 8 @,@ 730 mi ) at the same speed . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 inch / 45 Mark 5 guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft , as was typical for battleships of the period . The guns fired a 870 @-@ pound ( 390 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 feet per second ( 820 m / s ) . The turrets were Mark VI mounts , which allowed for reloading at all angles of elevation . These mounts could elevate to 20 degrees and depress to -5 degrees . Each gun was supplied with sixty shells . New Hampshire 's magazines were rearranged compared to her sisters , which allowed for her to carry 20 percent more 12- and 7 @-@ inch shells , though under normal conditions she carried the same load . 
 The secondary battery consisted of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) / 45 guns and twelve 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) / 45 guns ; this mixed battery proved to be problematic , as shell splashes from the two types could not be distinguished . The 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in four twin Mark XII turrets amidships and the 7 @-@ inch guns were placed in casemates in the hull . The 8 @-@ inch guns were the Mark VI type , and they fired 260 lb ( 120 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 750 ft / s ( 840 m / s ) . The 7 @-@ inch Mark I guns fired a 165 lb ( 75 kg ) shell at 2 @,@ 700 ft / s . These guns were later removed during World War I and converted for use on tracked gun carriages in France . The outfit per gun was 100 shells for both types . 
 For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , they carried twenty 3 @-@ inch / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and twelve 3 @-@ pounder guns . They also carried four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , the Connecticut class carried four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in their hulls on the broadside . Each ship carried a total of 16 torpedoes . They were initially equipped with the Mark I Bliss @-@ Leavitt design , but these were quickly replaced with Mark II , designed in 1905 . The Mark II carried a 207 pounds ( 94 kg ) warhead and had a range of 3 @,@ 500 yards ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) at a speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The first two ships ' main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the machinery spaces and reduced to 9 in ( 229 mm ) abreast of the main battery turrets . This portion of the belt was 200 ft ( 61 m ) long and 9 feet 3 inches ( 3 m ) wide . On either end of the ship , the belt then thinned , first to 7 in , then to 5 in ( 127 mm ) and finally to 4 in ( 102 mm ) at the bow and stern . The last four ships ' belts were reduced to 9 in between the main battery . The armored deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick amidships , where it was partially protected by the belt and casemate armor . It had 3 in thick sloped sides , which connected to the bottom edge of the belt . The deck was increased to 3 in forward and aft , where it was directly exposed to shellfire , also with 3 in thick sloped sides . New Hampshire 's belt was slightly shortened to permit a thicker deck over the magazines . Each ship 's conning tower had 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick sides and a 2 in ( 51 mm ) thick roof . 
 The main battery gun turrets had 11 in thick faces , with 9 in thick sides and 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) thick roofs . The supporting barbettes had the 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating , reduced to 6 in ( 152 mm ) . The secondary turrets had 6 @.@ 5 in ( 165 mm ) of frontal armor , with 6 in on the sides and 2 in on the roofs . Their barbettes were given 6 in of armor plating on the outboard sides and 4 in inboard . The casemates for the 7 in guns were 7 in thick and below the gun ports , the casemates reduced slightly to 6 in . For the last four ships , the savings in weight gained by reducing the thickness of the belt were used to increase the lower casement armor to 7 in . Those for the 3 in guns were 2 in thick . The 7 in guns were divided by splinter bulkheads that were 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 to 64 mm ) thick to prevent one shell hit from disabling multiple guns . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All six ships of the class served with the Atlantic Fleet for the duration of their careers . The first five ships took part in the cruise of the Great White Fleet in 1907 – 09 . The fleet left Hampton Roads on 16 December 1907 and steamed south , around South America and back north to the US west coast . The ships then crossed the Pacific and stopped in Australia , the Philippines , and Japan before continuing on through the Indian Ocean . They transited the Suez Canal and toured the Mediterranean before crossing the Atlantic , arriving bank in Hampton Roads on 22 February 1909 . New Hampshire , which had not been completed in time to take part in the journey , met the fleet there during a naval review with President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 The ships then began a peacetime training routine off the east coast of the United States and the Caribbean , including gunnery training off the Virginia Capes , training cruises in the Atlantic , and winter exercises in Cuban waters . In late 1909 , all six ships crossed the Atlantic to visit British and French ports . Louisiana and Kansas made another trip to Europe in early 1911 . As political unrest began to erupt in several Central American countries in the 1910s , the ships became increasingly active in the region . All six ships became involved in the Mexican Revolution , including the occupation of Veracruz in April 1914 ; Vermont and New Hampshire were among the ships that contributed landing parties to the initial occupation of the city . Several men from the two ships were awarded the Medal of Honor during the action . 
 In July 1914 , World War I broke out in Europe ; the United States remained neutral for the first three years of the war . Tensions with Germany came to a head in early 1917 following the German unrestricted submarine warfare campaign , which sank several American merchant ships in European waters . On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany . The Connecticut @-@ class ships initially were used for training gunners and engine room personnel that would be necessary for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . In June 1918 , New Hampshire and Louisiana were involved in a serious gunnery accident , where gunners aboard the former accidentally hit the latter , killing one and injuring several other men . The following month , Louisiana was used to test Arthur Pollen 's Argo Clock , the first fire control system to use an analog computer to calculate firing solutions . 
 From late 1918 , the ships were used to escort convoys part @-@ way across the Atlantic . In late September , Minnesota struck a naval mine laid by the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 117 , causing serious damage that kept her out of service for five months . Convoy duty was cut short by the German surrender in November ; thereafter , the Connecticuts were used to ferry American soldiers back from the battlefields of France . This work was completed by mid @-@ 1919 . The ships briefly operated as training ships in the early 1920s , though under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , they were all sold for scrap by 1924 and broken up . 
 = Delaware Route 9 = 
 Delaware Route 9 ( DE 9 ) is a 58 @.@ 18 @-@ mile ( 93 @.@ 63 km ) state highway that connects DE 1 at the Dover Air Force Base in Kent County to DE 2 in the city of Wilmington in New Castle County . DE 9 is a designated scenic highway known as the Delaware 's Bayshore Byway south of New Castle , running through mostly rural areas to the west of the Delaware Bay and the Delaware River as a two @-@ lane undivided road . Between New Castle and Wilmington , DE 9 is a four @-@ lane road that runs through urban and suburban areas . DE 9 passes through several cities and towns including Little Creek , Leipsic , Port Penn , Delaware City , and New Castle . DE 9 has a suffixed route , DE 9A , that provides access to the Port of Wilmington . In addition , it has a truck route , DE 9 Truck , located to the south of New Castle . 
 DE 9 was first designated by 1936 to run from US 113 ( now DE 1 ) southeast of Dover north to US 13 in Smyrna , following its current alignment to Leipsic and Smyrna @-@ Leipsic Road to Smyrna . In the 1950s , the road was extended to US 13 Alt . ( now US 13 ) in Wilmington , in which it was rerouted at Leipsic to follow its current alignment to Wilmington . DE 9 was extended further north to DE 2 by the 1970s . The route was rerouted to bypass downtown New Castle in the 1980s . The intersection with DE 1 was reconstructed into an interchange in 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Dover Air Force Base to Delaware City = = = 
 DE 9 begins at an interchange with DE 1 just south of the toll road terminus at the south end of Dover Air Force Base near Dover in Kent County . Past DE 1 , the route heads north @-@ northeast on two @-@ lane undivided Bayside Drive . DE 9 soon reaches an intersection with Kitts Hummock Road , which leads east to the John Dickinson Plantation and the community of Kitts Hummock on the Delaware Bay . Following this , the route passes between the runways of Dover Air Force Base to the west and fields to the east . Along this stretch , an access road leads west to the Air Mobility Command Museum on the base grounds . After the air base , the road continues north through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes to the west of the Little Creek Wildlife Area . 
 DE 9 crosses the marshy Little River and enters the town of Little Creek , where it becomes Main Street and is lined with residences . The route comes to an intersection with the eastern terminus of DE 8 as it leaves Little Creek and becomes Bayside Drive again . The road continues northwest through farmland with some trees and homes , passing to the southwest of Octagonal Schoolhouse before heading through the community of <unk> Corner . Past this intersection , the route runs southwest of Chandelle Estates Airport . DE 9 curves to the north and enters the town of Leipsic . At this point , the route turns northwest onto Denny Street and runs past homes and businesses , curving north to intersect the eastern terminus of DE 42 . 
 DE 9 heads into marshland and crosses the Leipsic River on a high @-@ level bridge , leaving Leipsic . Here , the road becomes Smyrna @-@ Leipsic Road and enters agricultural areas with some woods and homes . Smyrna @-@ Leipsic Road curves to the northwest and the route continues north on Hay Point Landing Road , running to the west of the Bombay Hook National Wildlife Refuge , where the Allee House is located . DE 9 comes to an intersection with DE 6 as it passes through the Woodland Beach Wildlife Area , turning to the northwest as it heads through a mix of woods and marshland . The road continues to a high @-@ level bridge over the Smyrna River . 
 Upon crossing the Smyrna River , DE 9 enters New Castle County and becomes Fleming Landing Road , passing through agricultural areas with some woods to the west of the Cedar Swamp Wildlife Area . The road runs to the north before curving northwest again . The route turns west onto Taylors Bridge Road and crosses the marshy Blackbird Creek . DE 9 curves to the north @-@ northwest and passes through more rural areas with some residential subdivisions to the west . The route heads to the northwest before turning northeast onto Thomas Corner Road in Mathews Corners , with DE 299 continuing northwest on Taylors Bridge Road . 
 DE 9 runs between farmland to the north and housing developments to the south prior to turning north onto Silver Run Road . The road curves northeast through agricultural areas before entering marshland and crossing the Appoquinimink River . After this , the route turns north to remain on Silver Run Road and passes through areas of farms , woods , and wetlands in the Augustine Wildlife Area a short distance to the west of the Delaware River . DE 9 turns east onto Bayview Road before turning north onto St. Augustine Road and following the west bank of the Delaware River . The road reaches the community of Port Penn , where it is lined with homes . In Port Penn , the route turns west onto Market Street before turning north onto Delaware City Port Penn Road near the Port Penn Interpretive Center . 
 Upon leaving Port Penn , DE 9 heads through marshland with some fields and woods within the Augustine Wildlife Area . The route rises onto the Reedy Point Bridge , which carries it over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal . After crossing over the canal , the road crosses over Fort DuPont State Park , curving northwest and passing to the southwest of Fort DuPont and the Governor Bacon Health Center . DE 9 continues into Delaware City and becomes 5th Street , crossing the Delaware City Channel on a drawbridge . Past the drawbridge , the road heads through residential areas of the city . 
 = = = Delaware City to Wilmington = = = 
 Upon leaving Delaware City , DE 9 continues west as Wrangle Hill Road , passing between the Delaware City Refinery to the north and farm fields to the south . The route turns north onto River Road to head into the oil refinery complex , with DE 72 continuing west on Wrangle Hill Road . Within the oil refinery , the road crosses Norfolk Southern 's Reybold Running Track railroad line . DE 9 leaves the industrial area upon crossing marshy Red Lion Creek and continues into a mix of fields , woods , and marshland , with DE 9 Truck heading northwest on Hamburg Road . At this point , the route turns to the northeast and passes between Ommelanden Park to the west and the Ommelanden Hunter Training Center to the east before running between residential subdivisions to the west and the northern training grounds for the Delaware National Guard to the east . DE 9 passes through wooded areas with some homes before continuing into industrial areas and crossing a railroad spur . The road continues into marshland immediately to the northwest of the Delaware River before entering New Castle . 
 At this point , DE 9 becomes West 7th Street and passes and industrial development . The route turns north @-@ northwest onto Washington Street and crosses Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary railroad line , heading into residential areas . DE 9 comes to an intersection with the southern terminus of DE 141 and the eastern terminus of DE 273 , at which point DE 9 Truck returns to the route by way of DE 273 . Here , DE 9 turns east onto Delaware Street and is signed concurrent with DE 273 , even though this portion of road is officially not DE 273 . The road carries one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes . The route narrows back to two lanes and crosses the New Castle Industrial Track Trail before it heads across the Norfolk Southern line again , at which point it turns east @-@ northeast onto Ferry Cut Off Street near the New Castle Historic District . The road passes homes and businesses before intersecting East 6th Street , where DE 273 signage ends . 
 Here , DE 9 turns northeast onto East 6th Street , crossing a marshy creek and widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway . The route curves north and becomes Wilmington Road , passing through commercial areas . The road crosses the Norfolk Southern New Castle Secondary again and runs through suburban residential neighborhoods and businesses , leaving New Castle . DE 9 becomes New Castle Avenue and passes to the west of Veterans Memorial Park before it comes to an interchange with I @-@ 295 / US 40 a short distance to the west of the Delaware Memorial Bridge . After the Rogers Road intersection , DE 9 becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road that continues through industrial and residential areas , crossing under I @-@ 495 . The road briefly becoming a divided highway again and intersects the southern terminus of DE 9A , which heads east to provide access to I @-@ 495 and the Port of Wilmington . 
 After DE 9A , DE 9 enters Wilmington and heads through urban areas as an undivided road , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Shellpot Branch before intersecting the northbound direction of US 13 . At this point , DE 9 splits into a one @-@ way pair with the northbound direction becoming concurrent with northbound US 13 on one @-@ way New Castle Avenue and the southbound direction following southbound US 13 on South Heald Street , briefly turning east along with northbound US 13 on D Street at the south end of the one @-@ way pair . The one @-@ way pair , which carries two lanes in each direction , passes rowhomes and businesses , with New Castle Avenue merging onto South Heald Street . Here , US 13 / DE 9 continue north @-@ northeast on four @-@ lane undivided South Heald Street , coming to an intersection with the northern terminus of DE 9A . 
 Following this , the road becomes East 4th Street and heads north @-@ northwest across the Christina River on a drawbridge . US 13 / DE 9 curves northwest and passes under Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line , at which point northbound US 13 splits from the road by turning northeast on North Church Street . A block later , the concurrency between DE 9 and southbound US 13 ends at the point where southbound US 13 joins the road from North Spruce Street . DE 9 continues northwest through residential and commercial areas as a four @-@ lane undivided road , entering downtown Wilmington . Here , it intersects US 13 Bus . , which is routed on the one @-@ way pair of North Walnut Street northbound and North King Street southbound . In between these two streets , the road runs to the south of the New Castle County Court House . 
 Upon crossing North Market Street , the route becomes West 4th Street and passes to the north of the Wilmington Campus of Delaware Technical Community College . DE 9 continues into residential areas and crosses under I @-@ 95 / US 202 , with access to that road provided by northbound North Adams Street and southbound North Jackson Street . Past this , the road heads through more of the city before reaching the Little Italy neighborhood . Here , DE 9 intersects the eastbound direction of DE 2 ( North Lincoln Street ) before coming to its northern terminus at the westbound direction of DE 2 ( North Union Street ) . 
 Much of DE 9 is designated as part of the Delaware Byways system . From the southern terminus north to New Castle , DE 9 is designated as the Delaware 's Bayshore Byway ( formerly Route 9 Coastal Heritage Byway ) , a road that is noted for following the Delaware River and Delaware Bay shoreline . The sections of the route between DE 299 east of Odessa and 7th Street southwest of New Castle , Wilmington Road north of New Castle and A Street in Wilmington , and along 4th Street in Wilmington between Swedes Landing Road and US 13 Bus. and Market and West streets are part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway . DE 9 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 19 @,@ 064 vehicles at the intersection between East 6th Street and New Castle Avenue in New Castle to a low of 258 vehicles at the intersection with Cedar Swamp Road in southeastern New Castle County . The portion of DE 9 concurrent with DE 273 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 The section of the present route between New Castle and Wilmington was constructed as the New Castle and Wilmington Turnpike , a private turnpike , in 1813 . What would become DE 9 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . Four years later , the road between Leipsic and Smyrna was upgraded to a state highway . In addition , the current alignment of DE 9 around Taylors Bridge and between Delaware City and Wilmington was paved . In 1931 , what would become DE 9 was upgraded to a state highway between Bay Road and Little Creek and between Port Penn and Delaware City . A year later , the road became a state highway between Delaware City and Wilmington . By this time , what would become DE 9 between Little Creek and Leipsic was upgraded to a state highway . 
 DE 9 was designated to run from US 113 ( now DE 1 ) west of Kitts Hummock north to US 13 in Smyrna by 1936 , following its current alignment to Leipsic and Smyrna @-@ Leipsic Road to Smyrna . By 1942 , what is now DE 9 between the Taylors Bridge area and Port Penn was paved . In 1956 , New Castle Avenue was widened to a four @-@ lane divided highway between Landers Lane and Rogers Corner . 
 DE 9 was extended north to US 13 Alt . ( now US 13 ) in Wilmington by 1959 , being rerouted off Smyrna @-@ Leipsic Road to follow its current alignment to New Castle , passing through that city on 6th Street before continuing along its current alignment to Wilmington . At this point , the entire route was paved . The current Reedy Point Bridge carrying DE 9 over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal was completed in 1968 . By 1971 , DE 9 was extended north to its current terminus at DE 2 . DE 9 was realigned to bypass New Castle by 1984 by following Washington Street and DE 273 . The intersection at the southern terminus with DE 1 was rebuilt into an interchange in 2009 . 
 The Delaware State Highway Department recommended that DE 9 along the Delaware Bay and Delaware River be designated a scenic highway as far back as 1965 . In 2007 , the Route 9 Coastal Heritage Byway was nominated and designated as a Delaware Scenic and Historic Highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Bannered and suffixed routes = = 
 = = = DE 9A = = = 
 Delaware Route 9A ( DE 9A ) is a two- to four @-@ lane road in Wilmington , Delaware that serves as the primary access route to the Port of Wilmington as well as provide access to I @-@ 495 . The official designation of the route runs 0 @.@ 78 miles ( 1 @.@ 26 km ) along Terminal Avenue between DE 9 and the Port of Wilmington , interchanging with I @-@ 495 . Signage has the route continuing north along Christiana Avenue to an intersection with US 13 and DE 9 for a total length of 2 @.@ 0 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . Christiana Avenue originally became a state highway by 1924 becoming a part of US 40 that connected to a ferry across the Delaware River to Penns Grove , New Jersey in 1926 . US 40 was removed from this road by 1931 and it later became part of DE 48 by 1936 . DE 48 was subsequently removed by 1952 following the discontinuance of the ferry in 1949 . DE 9A was designated by 1971 . 
 = = = DE 9 Truck = = = 
 Delaware Route 9 Truck ( DE 9 Truck ) is a truck bypass of a stretch of DE 9 south of New Castle . It heads northwest from DE 9 on two @-@ lane undivided Hamburg Road , passing through farmland with some development . In Tybouts Corner , the truck route turns northeast to join US 13 on the four @-@ lane divided South Dupont Highway . The road passes through farmland with some residential and commercial development . Farther north , the road heads into business areas , passing under Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary railroad line before intersecting US 40 in State Road . At this point , US 40 joins US 13 and DE 9 Truck , with the road widening to eight lanes . In Hares Corner , DE 9 Truck turns east to follow DE 273 on two @-@ lane undivided Frenchtown Road , heading east between business parks to the south and farm fields to the north . DE 9 Truck ends along with DE 273 at an intersection with DE 9 and the southern terminus of DE 141 west of New Castle . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Philip the Arab and Christianity = 
 Philip the Arab was one of the few 3rd @-@ century Roman emperors sympathetic to Christians , although his relationship with Christianity is obscure and controversial . Philip was born in Auranitis , an Arab district east of the Sea of Galilee . The urban and Hellenized centers of the region were Christianized in the early years of the 3rd century via major Christian centers at Bosra and Edessa ; there is little evidence of Christian presence in the small villages of the region in this period , such as Philip 's birthplace at Philippopolis . Philip served as praetorian prefect , commander of the Praetorian Guard , from 242 ; he was made emperor in 244 . In 249 , after a brief civil war , he died at the hands of his successor , Decius . 
 During the late 3rd century and into the 4th , it was held by some churchmen that Philip had been the first Christian emperor ; he was described as such in Jerome 's Chronicon ( Chronicle ) , which was well known during the Middle Ages , and in Orosius ' highly popular Historia Adversus Paganos ( History Against the Pagans ) . Most scholars hold that these and other early accounts ultimately derive from Eusebius of Caesarea 's Historia Ecclesiastica ( Ecclesiastical History ) . 
 The most important section of Eusebius ' Historia on Philip 's religious beliefs describes the emperor 's visit to a church on Easter Eve when he was denied entry by the presiding bishop until he confessed his sins . The account is paralleled by Chrysostom 's homily , which celebrates Saint Babylas , Bishop of Antioch , for denying a sinful emperor entry to his church ; and quotations of Leontius in the Chronicon Paschale which describe Philip seeking penitence from Babylas for the sin of murdering his predecessor . Given the parallels between the accounts , most scholars believe that Eusebius , Chrysostom , and Leontius are referring to the same event ( or legend ) . 
 With the growth of scholarly criticism in the 17th and 18th centuries , fewer historians believed Philip to be a Christian . Historians had become increasingly aware of secular texts , which did not describe Philip as a Christian — and which , indeed , recorded him participating as pontifex maximus ( chief priest ) over the millennial Secular Games in 248 . Modern scholars are divided on the issue . Some , like Hans Pohlsander and Ernst Stein , argue that the ecclesiastic narratives are ambiguous , based on oral rumor , and do not vouch for a Christian Philip ; others , like John York , Irfan Shahîd , and Warwick Ball , argue that the ecclesiastic narratives are clear and dependable enough that Philip can be described as a Christian ; still others , like Glen Bowersock , argue that the sources are strong enough to describe Philip as a man interested in and sympathetic to Christianity , but not strong enough to call him a Christian . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Biography of Philip the Arab = = = 
 Philip was born in a village in Auranitis , part of the district of Trachonitis , east of the Sea of Galilee in Palestine . Philip renamed the village Philippopolis ( the modern al @-@ <unk> ' , Syria ) during his reign as emperor . He was one of only three Easterners to be made emperor before the decisive separation of East and West in 395 . ( The other two were Elagabalus and Alexander Severus ) . Even among Easterners Philip was atypical , as he was an Arab , not a Greek . His father was Julius Marinus ; nothing besides his name is known , but the name indicates that he held Roman citizenship and that he must have been prominent in his community . 
 The early details of Philip 's career are obscure , but his brother , Gaius Julius Priscus , was made praetorian prefect under Emperor Gordian III ( r . 238 – 44 ) . If a fragmentary inscription ( <unk> <unk> <unk> 1331 ) refers to Priscus , he would have moved through several equestrian offices ( that is , administrative positions open to a member of the equestrian order ) during Gordian 's reign . In the spring of 242 , Philip himself was made praetorian prefect , most likely with the help of his brother . Following a failed campaign against Persia in the winter of 243 – 44 , Gordian died in camp . Rumors that Philip had murdered him were taken up by the senatorial opposition of the later 3rd century , and survive in the Latin histories and <unk> of the period . Philip was acclaimed emperor , and was secure in that title by late winter 244 . Philip made his brother rector Orientis , an executive position with extraordinary powers , including command of the armies in the Eastern provinces . Philip began his reign by negotiating a peaceful end to his predecessor 's war against Persia . In 248 , Philip called the Secular Games to celebrate the 1000 @-@ year anniversary of the founding of Rome . 
 In the Near East , Philip 's brother Priscus ' tax collection methods provoked the revolt of <unk> . At the same time , <unk> started a rebellion in the Rhenish provinces . He faced a third rebellion in 248 when the legions he had used in successful campaigns against the Carpi on the Danubian frontier revolted and proclaimed an officer named <unk> emperor . All three rebellions were suppressed quickly . In 249 , to restore order after the defeat of <unk> , Philip gave Senator Decius , a native of the region , command of the Danubian armies . In late spring 249 , the armies proclaimed Decius emperor . The civil war that followed ended in a battle outside Verona . Decius emerged victorious , and Philip either died or was assassinated . When news of Philip 's death reached Rome , the Praetorian Guard murdered his son and successor Marcus Julius Severus Philippus . 
 = = = = Christianity and Philip 's early life and career = = = = 
 No account or allusion to Philip 's presumed conversion to Christianity survives . The Byzantinist and Arabist Irfan Shahîd , who argues in favor of Philip 's Christianity in Rome and the Arabs , assumes that he had been a Christian before becoming emperor . He argues , therefore , that there is no need to explain the absence of evidence for Philip 's conversion in contemporary Christian literature . Trachonitis , equidistant from Antioch in the north and Bosra in the south , and sited on a road connecting the two , could have been Christianized from either direction . Even if he was not himself Christian , Philip would probably have been familiar with Christians in his hometown as well as Bosra and other nearby settlements . Hans Pohlsander , a classicist and historian arguing against accounts of Philip 's Christianity , allows that Philip " may have been curious about a religion which had its origins in an area so close to his place of birth . As an eastern provincial rather than an Italian , he may not have been so intense in his commitment to the traditional Roman religion that he could not keep an open mind on other religions . " He also accepts that Philippopolis probably contained a Christian congregation during Philip 's childhood . For the scholar of religion Frank <unk> , however , the absence of evidence for the early Christianization of Philippopolis makes Shahîd 's assumption that Philip was Christian from early childhood unmerited . 
 If Philip had been a Christian during his military service , he would have not been a particularly unusual figure for his era — although membership in the army was prohibited by certain churchmen , and would have required participation in rites some Christians found sacrilegious , it was not uncommon among the Christian laity . The position of an emperor , however , was more explicitly pagan — emperors were expected to officiate over public rites and lead the religious ceremonies of the army . Christian scripture contains explicit prohibitions on this sort of behavior , such as the First Commandment : " You shall have no other gods before me " . Whatever the prohibitions , people raised on the " more tolerant Christianity of the camp " would have been able to justify participation in pagan ritual to themselves . We know that these people exist : the historical record includes Christian army officers , who would have been regularly guilty of idolatry , and the military martyrs of the late 3rd century . Their ritual sacrifice excluded them from certain parts of the Christian community ( ecclesiastical writers tended to ignore them , for example ) but these people nonetheless believed themselves to be Christian and were recognized by others as Christians . 
 = = = Christianity in Auranitis = = = 
 Thanks to its proximity to the first Christian communities of Palestine , Provincia Arabia , of which Philippopolis was a part , was among the first regions to convert to Christianity . By the time of Philip 's birth , the region had been extensively Christianized , especially in the north and in Hellenized settlements like those of Auranitis . The region is known to have had a fully developed synodal system ( in which bishops from the dioceses in the region met to discuss Church affairs ) by the mid @-@ 3rd century . The region sent six bishops to the Council of Nicaea in 325 , and Eusebius ' Onomasticon , a gazetteer of Biblical place @-@ names , records a wholly Christian village called <unk> , or <unk> , near Madaba . Outside of the cities , however , there is less evidence of Christianization . Before the 5th century there is little evidence of the faith , and many villages remained unconverted in the 6th . Philippopolis , which was a small village for most of this period , does not have a Christian inscription that can be dated earlier than 552 . It is not known when the village established a <unk> , but it must have been sometime before 451 , when it sent a bishop to the Council of Chalcedon . 
 Christian beliefs were present in the region 's Arab community since about AD 200 , when Abgar VIII , an ethnic Arab and king of the Roman client state Osroene , converted to Christianity . The religion was propagated from Abgar 's capital at Edessa until its destruction in 244 . By the mid @-@ 3rd century , the city of Bosra had a Christian bishop , Beryllos . Beryllos offers an early example of the heretical beliefs Hellenic Christians imputed to the Arabs as a race : Beryllos believed that Christ did not exist before he was made flesh at the Incarnation . According to Eusebius of Caesarea , his views were condemned as heresy following debate at a local synod . The debate was most likely conducted in Greek , a language in common use among the well @-@ Hellenized cities of the region . 
 = = = Christianity in the mid @-@ 3rd century = = = 
 The 3rd century was the age in which the initiative for persecution shifted from the masses to the Imperial office . In the 1st and 2nd centuries , persecutions were carried out under the authority of local government officials . Septimius Severus ( r . 193 – 211 ) and Maximin ( r . 235 – 38 ) are alleged to have issued general rescripts against the religion and targeted its clergy , but the evidence for their acts is obscure and contested . There is no evidence that Philip effected any changes to the Christians ' legal status . Pogroms against the Christians in Alexandria took place while Philip was still emperor . There is no evidence that Philip punished , participated in or assisted the pogrom . 
 No historian contests that Philip 's successor Decius ( r . 249 – 51 ) , called a general persecution against the Church , and most would list it as the first . Decius was anxious to secure himself in the imperial office . Before mid @-@ December 249 , Decius issued an edict demanding that all Romans , throughout the empire , make a show of sacrifice to the gods . <unk> were signed in Fayum in June and July 250 as demonstrations of this sacrifice . If the persecutions of Maximin and Septimius Severus are dismissed as fiction , Decius ' edict was without precedent . If the Christians were believed to be Philip 's friends ( as Dionysius of Alexandria presents them ) , however , it might help explain Decius ' motivations . 
 = = In Greek ecclesiastical writing = = 
 The ancient traditions regarding Philip 's Christianity can be divided into three categories : the Eusebian , or Caesarean ; the Antiochene ; and the Latin . The Eusebian tradition consists of Eusebius , bishop of Caesarea 's Historia Ecclesiastica and the documents excerpted and cited therein , including the letters of Origen and Dionysius , bishop of Alexandria . The Antiochene tradition consists of the John Chrysostom 's homily de S. <unk> and Leontius , bishop of Antioch 's entries in the Chronicon Paschale . Most scholars hold that these accounts ultimately derive from Eusebius of Caesarea 's Historia Ecclesiastica ( Ecclesiastical History ) , but some , like Irfan Shahîd , posit that Antioch had an independent oral tradition . 
 = = = Eusebius = = = 
 The most significant author to discuss Philip the Arab and Christianity is Eusebius , who served as bishop of Caesarea in Roman Palestine from ca . 314 to his death in 339 . Eusebius ' major work is the Historia Ecclesiastica , written in several editions dating from ca . 300 to 325 . The Historia is not an attempt at a full history of the Church in the classical style , but rather a collection of facts addressing six topics in Christian history from the Apostolic times to the late 3rd century : ( 1 ) lists of bishops of major sees ; ( 2 ) Christian teachers and their writings ; ( 3 ) heresies ; ( 4 ) the tribulations of the Jews ; ( 5 ) the persecutions of Christians by pagan authorities ; and ( 6 ) the martyrs . His Vita Constantini , written between Constantine 's death in 337 and Eusebius ' own death in 339 , is a combination of eulogistic encomium and continuation of the Historia ( the two separate documents were combined and distributed by Eusebius ' successor in the see of Caesarea , Acacius ) . 
 Five references in Eusebius ' Historia Ecclesiastica speak to Philip 's Christianity ; three directly , two by implication . At 6 @.@ 34 , he describes Philip visiting a church on Easter Eve and being denied entry by the presiding bishop because he had not yet confessed his sins . The bishop goes unnamed . At 6 @.@ 36 @.@ 3 , he writes of letters from the Christian theologian Origen to Philip and to Philip 's wife , Marcia <unk> Severa . At 6 @.@ 39 , Eusebius writes that Decius persecuted Christians because he hated Philip . The remaining two references are quotations or paraphrases of Dionysius , bishop of Alexandria , a contemporary of Philip ( he held the patriarchate from 247 to 265 ) . At 6 @.@ 41 @.@ 9 , Dionysius contrasts the tolerant Philip 's rule with the intolerant Decius ' . At 7 @.@ 10 @.@ 3 , Dionysius implies that Alexander Severus ( emperor from 222 to 235 ) and Philip were both openly Christian . 
 = = = = Philip 's visit to the church = = = = 
 = = = = = Text , sources , and interpretation = = = = = 
 Most arguments regarding Philip 's Christianity hinge on Eusebius ' account of the emperor 's visit to a church at 6 @.@ 34 . In the words of the 17th @-@ century ecclesiastical historian Louis @-@ Sébastien Le Nain de Tillemont , it is the " la <unk> action en <unk> on <unk> qu 'il <unk> <unk> l <unk> " , the " only action in which we know him to have honored the Church " . 
 In Shahîd 's reconstruction , this event took place at Antioch on 13 April 244 , while the emperor was on his way back to Rome from the Persian front . The 12th @-@ century Byzantine historian Zonaras repeats the story . 
 Eusebius introduces his account of Philip 's visit with the words κατέχει λόγος ' ( <unk> logos ) . The precise meaning of these words in modern European languages has been contested . Ernst Stein , in an account challenging the veracity of Eusebius ' narrative , translated the phrase as " gerüchte " , or " rumor " ; the scholar John Gregg translated it as " the saying goes " . Other renderings are possible , however ; modern English translations of the Historia Ecclesiastica have " it is recorded " or " it is reported " , as in the translation quoted above . The historian Robin Lane Fox , who translates logos as " story " or " rumor " in scare quotes , emphasizes that Eusebius draws a distinction between his " story " about Philip and the other material in the passage . 
 The <unk> issue involved is the nature of Eusebius ' source ; where " gerüchte " suggests hearsay ( Frend explains that Eusebius ' κατέχει λόγος ' " usually means mere suggestion " ) , " it is recorded " suggests documentation . Given that Eusebius ' major sources for 3rd @-@ century history were written records , Shahîd contends that the typical translation misrepresents the original text . His source here is probably one of the two letters from Origen to Philip and Marcia <unk> Severa , Philip 's wife , mentioned at 6 @.@ 36 @.@ 3 . Shahîd argues that an oral source is unlikely given that Eusebius composed his Historia in Caesarea and not Antioch ; but others , like Stein and theologian Arthur Cushman <unk> , editor and translator of the Historia for the Select Library of Nicene and Post @-@ Nicene Fathers , contend nonetheless that the story has an oral source . 
 Shahîd 's position is reinforced by C. H. Roberts and A. N. Sherwin @-@ White , who reviewed his Rome and the Arabs before publication . That is , that the proper interpretation of κατέχει λόγος is as a reference to a written account . Roberts notes that <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , " being a Christian " ) was probably an editorial insertion by Eusebius , and not included in the logos he relates in the passage . Shahîd takes this as an indication that Eusebius did indeed vouch for Philip 's Christianity . Roberts suggested that κατέχει λόγος might be translated as " there is a wide @-@ spread report " , but added that a broader study of Eusebius ' use of the expression elsewhere would be useful . Sherwin @-@ White points out Eusebius ' use of the phrase in his passage on the Thundering Legion ( at Historia Ecclesiastica 5 @.@ 5 ) , where it represents a reference to written sources . 
 However , because Eusebius nowhere categorically asserts that he has read the letters ( he only says that he has compiled them ) and as moderns are disinclined to take him at his word , some , like Pohlsander , posit that Eusebius did not get the tale from the letters , and drew it instead from oral rumors . Whatever the case , the wording of the passage shows that Eusebius is unenthusiastic about his subject and skeptical of its significance . Jerome and the Latin Christian authors following him do not share his caution . 
 = = = = = Contexts and parallels = = = = = 
 For many scholars , the scene at 6 @.@ 34 seems to anticipate and parallel the confrontation between Theodosius and Ambrose in 390 ; Erasmus used the two situations as parallel <unk> in a letter written to Francis I in 1523 . That later event has been taken as evidence against Philip 's Christianity . Even in the later 4th century , in a society that had already been significantly Christianized , the argument goes , Theodosius ' humiliation had shocked the sensibilities of the aristocratic elite . It is therefore inconceivable that 3rd century aristocrats , members of a society that had experienced only partial Christianization , would accept such self @-@ abasement from their emperors . Shahîd contests this parallel , and argues that Philip 's scene was far less humiliating than Theodosius ' : it did not take place against the same background ( Theodosius had massacred seven thousand <unk> some months before ) , no one was excommunicated ( Theodosius was excommunicated for eight months ) , and it did not involve the same dramatic and humiliating dialogue between emperor and bishop . Philip made a quick repentance at a small church on his way back to Rome from the Persian front , a stark contrast to the grandeur of Theodosius ' confrontation with Ambrose . 
 Other scholars , such as ecclesiastical historian H. M. <unk> , explain Philip 's alleged visit to the church as evidence of simple " curiosity " . That he was excluded from services is not surprising : as a " heathen " in official conduct , and , as an unbaptized man , it would have been unusual if he had been admitted . Shahîd rejects idle curiosity as an explanation , arguing that 3rd @-@ century churches were too nondescript to attract much undue attention . That Philip was unbaptized is nowhere proven or stated , and , even if true , it would do little to explain the scene : Constantine participated in Christian services despite postponing baptism to the end of his life — and participation in services without baptism was not unusual for Christians of either period . 
 = = = = Dionysius , bishop of Alexandria = = = = 
 At 6 @.@ 41 , Eusebius quotes a letter from Dionysius , bishop of Alexandria , to Fabius , bishop of Antioch , on the persecution at Alexandria under Decius . He begins ( at 6 @.@ 41 @.@ 1 ) by describing the pogroms which began a year before Decius ' decree of 250 ; that is , in 249 , under Philip . At 6 @.@ 41 @.@ 9 , Dionysius narrates the transition from Philip to Decius . 
 At 7 @.@ 10 @.@ 3 , Eusebius quotes a letter from Dionysius to the otherwise @-@ unknown <unk> on the early years of Valerian 's ( r . 253 – 260 ) rule . In this period the emperor implicitly tolerated Christianity ; Eusebius would contrast his early reputation with his later policy of persecution . 
 Dionysius is quoted saying that Valerian was so friendly to Christians that he outdid " those who were said to be openly Christians " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , tr . Shahîd ) . Most scholars , Shahîd and Stein included , understand this as a reference to Severus Alexander and Philip . Because the reference is to a plurality of emperors , implying that Severus Alexander and Philip were both Christians , Stein dismissed the passage as entirely without evidentiary value . Shahîd , however , contends that genuine information can be extracted from the spurious whole , and that , while the reference to Severus Alexander is hyperbole , the reference to Philip is not . He explains the reference to Severus Alexander as a Christian as an exaggeration of what was actually only an interest in the Christian religion . Shahîd references a passage in the often @-@ dubious Historia Augusta 's biography of the emperor , which states that Alexander had statues of Abraham , Christ , and Orpheus in his private chapel , and that he prayed to them each morning . He also <unk> the letters sent from Origen to Alexander 's mother Mamaea ( Eusebius , Historia Ecclesiastica 6 @.@ 21 , 6 @.@ 28 ) to explain Dionysius ' comment . 
 = = = = Origen 's letters = = = = 
 Origen 's letters do not survive . However , most scholars believe that the letters that circulated in the era of Eusebius and Jerome were genuine . It is also reasonable that Origen , a man with close contacts in the Christian Arab community , would have taken a particular interest in the first Arab emperor . The scholar K. J. Neumann argued that , since Origen would have known the faith of the imperial couple , he must have written about it in the letters listed at 6 @.@ 36 @.@ 3 . Since Eusebius read these letters , and does not mention that the emperor was Christian ( Neumann understands the passage at 6 @.@ 34 to reflect Eusebius ' disbelief in Philip 's Christianity ) , we must conclude that Philip was not Christian , and was neither baptized nor made catechumen . Against Neumann , Shahîd argues that , if Eusebius had found anything in the letters to disprove Philip 's Christianity , he would have clearly outlined it in this passage — as the biographer of Constantine , it would have been in his interest to undermine any other claimants to the title " first Christian emperor " . Moreover , this segment of the Historia is a catalog of Origen 's works and correspondence ; the contents of the letters are irrelevant . 
 = = = = Views on the Arabs = = = = 
 Eusebius ' understanding of the Arab peoples is informed by his reading of the Bible and his knowledge of the history of imperial Rome . He does not appear to have personally known any Arabs . In his Chronicon , all the Arabs that appear — save for one reference to Ishmael — figure in the political history of the first three centuries of the Christian era . To Eusebius , the Saracens of the 4th century are direct @-@ line descendants of the biblical Ishmaelites , descendants of the handmaid , Hagar , and the patriarch , Abraham . They are thus outcasts , beyond God 's Covenant with the favored son of Abraham , Isaac . The twin images of the <unk> and the Saracen — outcasts and <unk> , raiders of the frontiers — reinforce each other and give Eusebius ' portrait of the Arab nation an unhappy color . He may have been reluctant to associate the first Christian emperor with a people of such unfortunate ancestry . 
 In his Historia , Eusebius does not identify either Philip or Abgar V of Edessa ( whom he incorrectly presumed to be the first Christian prince ; he does not mention Abgar VIII , who was actually the first Christian prince ) , as Arabs . He does , however , identify Herod the Great as an Arab , thus tarring the Arab nation with the Massacre of the Innocents and the attempted murder of Christ himself . The Christianity of Provincia Arabia in the 3rd century also earns some brief notices : the heresy of Beryllos , bishop of Bostra , and his correction by Origen ( 6 @.@ 33 ) ; the heretical opinions concerning the soul held by a group of Arabs until corrected by Origen ( 6 @.@ 37 ) ; and the heresy of <unk> ( 6 @.@ 38 ) . Eusebius ' account of Philip appears amidst these Arab heresies ( at 6 @.@ 34 , 6 @.@ 36 , and 6 @.@ 39 ) , although , again — and in spite of the fact that Philip so often took on the epithet " the Arab " , in antiquity as today — he never identifies him as an Arab . The image of the Arabs as heretics would persist in later ecclesiastical historians ( like Epiphanius of Salamis ) . Shahîd , relating these facts , nonetheless concludes that " Eusebius cannot be accused in the account he gave of the Arabs and their place in the history of Christianity . " The fact that he downplayed the role of Philip and Abgar in the establishment of Christianity as a state religion is understandable , given his desire to prop up Constantine 's reputation . 
 = = = = Views on Constantine = = = = 
 In Shahîd 's judgment , the imprecision and <unk> tone of Eusebius ' passage at 6 @.@ 34 is the major cause of the lack of scholarly consensus on Philip 's Christianity . To Shahîd , Eusebius ' wording choice is a reflection of his own lack of enthusiasm for Philip 's Christianity , which is in turn a reflection of the special position Constantine held in his regards and in his written work . A number of scholars , following E. Schwartz , believe the later editions of Eusebius ' Historia to have been extensively revised to adapt to the deterioration of Licinius in the public memory ( and official damnatio memoriae ) after Constantine deposed and executed him in 324 – 25 . Passages of the Historia incompatible with Licinius ' denigration were suppressed , and an account of the last years of his life was replaced with a summary of the Council of Nicaea . Shahîd suggests that , in addition to these anti @-@ <unk> deletions , Eusebius also edited out favorable notices on Philip to better glorify Constantine 's achievement . 
 In 335 , Eusebius wrote and delivered his Laudes Constantini , a panegyric on the thirtieth anniversary of the emperor 's reign ; his Vita Constantini , written over the next two years , has the same laudatory tone . The ecclesiastical historian , who framed his chronology on the reigns of emperors and related the entries in his history to each emperor 's reign , understood Constantine 's accession as something miraculous , especially as it came immediately after the Great Persecution . The final edition of his Historia has its climax in Constantine 's reign , the ultimate " triumph of Christianity " . Shahîd argues , it was therefore in his authorial interest to obscure the details of Philip , the first Christian emperor ; hence , because of Eusebius ' skill in narrative and deception , modern historians give Constantine that title . 
 Shahîd further argues that the facts of Philip 's alleged Christianity would also discourage Eusebius from celebrating that emperor . Firstly , Philip lacks an exciting conversion narrative ; secondly , his religion was private , unlike Constantine 's very public patronage of the faith ; and , thirdly , his reign only lasted five years , not long enough to enact much amelioration of the Christians ' condition . In Shahîd 's view , the insignificance of his reign to the progress of Christianity , Eusebius ' subject , combined with Eusebius ' role as Constantine 's panegyrist , explain the tone and content of his account . 
 = = = = Vita Constantini = = = = 
 F. H. Daniel , in Philip 's entry in the Smith – Wace Dictionary of Christian Biography , cites a passage of Eusebius ' Vita Constantini as his first piece of evidence against Philip 's alleged Christianity . In the passage , Eusebius names Constantine as ( in the words of the dictionary ) " the first Christian emperor " . 
 Shahîd describes this passage as a mere flourish from Eusebius the panegyrist , " carried away by enthusiasm and whose statements must be construed as rhetorical exaggeration " ; he does not take it as serious evidence against Eusebius ' earlier accounts in the Historia , where he never refers to Constantine as the first Christian emperor . For Shahîd , the passage also represents the last stage in Eusebius ' evolving portrait of the pair of emperors , Philip and Constantine : in the early 300s , in his Chronicon , he had nearly called Philip the first Christian emperor ; in the 320s , during the revision of the Historia and the Chronicon , he turned wary and skeptical ; in the late 330s , he could confidently assert that Constantine was the sole Christian emperor . John York argues that , in writing this passage , Eusebius was cowed by the anti @-@ <unk> propaganda of the Constantinian era : as an ancestor of the emperor 's last enemy , Philip could not receive the special distinction of the title " first Christian emperor " — Constantine had claimed it for himself . Perhaps , Shahîd observes , it is not coincidental that Eusebius would paint the Arabs in uncomplimentary terms ( as idolaters and practitioners of human sacrifice ) in his Laudes Constantini of 335 . 
 = = = Chrysostom and Leontius = = = 
 John Chrysostom , deacon at Antioch from 381 , was made priest in 386 . As a special distinction , his bishop , Flavian , decided that he should preach in the city 's principal church . Chrysostom 's contribution to the literature on Philip and Christianity is a homily on Babylas , a martyr @-@ bishop who died in 253 , during the Decian persecution . The treatise was composed about 382 , when John was a deacon , and forms part of Chrysostom 's corpus of panegyrics . Chrysostom 's Babylas confronts an emperor ; and , since Chrysostom is more interested in the bishop than his opponent , the emperor goes unnamed . He has since been identified with Philip . 
 Leontius was bishop of Antioch from 348 to 357 . He is quoted in the Chronicon Paschale , or Paschal Chronicle , a universal chronicle of history based on the <unk> cycle , as an authority on the martyrdom of Babylas . The quotation describes Philip seeking penitence from Babylas for the sin of murdering his predecessor . 
 Chrysostom and Leontius both lived in Antioch , the site of Philip 's alleged humiliation and repentance , and wrote in the mid @-@ 4th century , one hundred years after the event took place . Shahîd takes this , along with the fact that Babylas is not named in Eusebius ' account , as evidence of an independent local tradition . This tradition would have been perhaps partially oral in nature , and far removed from the written accounts in Eusebius ' library at Caesarea . Many other historians trace Chrysostom and Leontius ' accounts back to Eusebius : Hans Pohlsander counts Chrysostom and Leontius ' accounts as later accretions to Eusebius original account , dependent on his Historia for their legendary core ; John Gregg holds that this dependent relationship is most probable ; and Stein claims all three Greeks as contributors to the same gerüchte . 
 = = In Latin ecclesiastical writing = = 
 The Latin tradition consists of three authors writing in the later 4th and early 5th centuries — Jerome , Orosius , and Vincent of Lérins . The tradition is represented in Jerome 's Liber de viris inlustribus and Chronicon , Orosius ' Historiarum <unk> Paganos , and Vincent of Lérins ' <unk> Primum . Most scholars hold that all of these accounts ultimately derive from Eusebius of Caesarea 's Historia . These authors follow the Greek tradition , and probably takes all of their information from Eusebius , Eusebius ' sources , or Jerome . These authors are more forceful in their claims than Eusebius , as demonstrated by their use of primus , or " first " , as in " first Christian emperor " , when referring to Philip . Jerome is the most important , both since he is the earliest of the three , and because , as the editor and translator of Eusebius ' Chronicon ( Chronicle ) , he is closest to Eusebius . 
 = = = Jerome = = = 
 Eusebius ' first version of the Chronicon was written in 303 , and his second in the mid @-@ 320s ; Jerome 's revision , translation and continuation dates to 380 . The original Greek is lost ; it is largely through Jerome 's Latin and through an Armenian translation unrelated to Jerome that the substance of the original survives . Eusebius ' original did cover Philip 's rule — Jerome 's continuation of the Chronicon only covers the period from 325 to 378 — but the sections regarding Philip 's Christianity do not survive in the Armenian translation . In the Armenian , all references to Arabs are omitted . Philip 's celebration of the millennium is preserved , while his supposed Christianity is only implied in the entry on Decius ' persecution . Jerome 's Chronicon is , therefore , the nearest we can get to Eusebius ' early statements on Philip 's Christianity . That Jerome calls Philip primus in the Chronicon thus admits of two interpretations : either he found it in Eusebius , or he added it independently , based on other sources available to him . Shahîd argues that , while the text would offer a strong case for Philip 's Christianity either way , the former interpretation is more plausible . Shahîd believes that primus appeared in Eusebius first version of the Chronicon , but may have been edited out for the second version — by the mid 320s , Eusebius had become Constantine 's panegyrist , and was understandably loath to praise his subject 's ignoble predecessors . 
 In his Liber de viris inlustribus , written twelve years later , in 392 , Jerome mentions Philip in his chapter on Origen . 
 The passage contains two important features : first , the statement that the letters of Origen to Philip and his family were still extant in Jerome 's time ; and second , a strong affirmation of Philip 's Christianity . The sentence also contains the false reference to Philip 's mother ( matrem ) as the recipient of a letter from Origen — it was actually Philip 's wife who received it . Jerome probably confused her with Alexander Severus ' mother <unk> . Bowersock characterizes the whole passage as a " confused copy " of Eusebius ' evidence . Shahîd understands " quae usque hodie extant " to mean that Jerome had read the letters ; that he refers to Philip as primus would thus mean that he either found positive evidence for Philip 's Christianity in them or , at least , that he found nothing to disprove it . 
 Jerome otherwise had a dim view of the Arabs . His prejudices were those of a native Roman . Born in <unk> ( in modern Croatia or Slovenia ) , near Aquileia , and educated in Rome , Jerome was a lover of Latin , Italy , and the city of Rome . In about 374 , he found himself accused in a dream while in Antioch on the way to Palestine : " <unk> es , non Christianus " , " you are a Ciceronian , not a Christian " . In one of his letters , written while he was staying in the desert of Chalcis , he tells of the joy he had when he discovered that his correspondents had written a letter to him in Latin . All he had to hear during the day were the " barbarous " languages of the natives ( that is , Syriac and Arabic ) . From this evidence , Shahîd concludes that Jerome would not honor the memory of an Arab emperor without a strong rationale . 
 = = = Orosius and the Origo Constantini Imperatoris = = = 
 To Orosius , Constantine was the first Christian Roman emperor , except for Philip ( he was the " primus <unk> Christianus , <unk> <unk> " ) . He probably took this judgment from Jerome — he had met the author in Bethlehem in 415 , while on assignment from Augustine of Hippo . Although his judgment is thus not independent of Jerome , Shahîd contends that it is nonetheless valuable since Orosius did not have a bias towards either emperor . It presents Philip in the role Christian history merited : as precursor to Constantine . Because Orosius ' Historiae <unk> paganos served as the standard manual of universal history during the middle ages , his judgment on this matter was inherited , and generally accepted , by medieval European writers . 
 Orosius ' wording is echoed by the Origo Constantini Imperatoris , an anonymous work usually dated to the late 4th century . " Constantine was also the first Christian emperor , with the exception of Philippus , who seemed to me to have become a Christian merely in order that the one @-@ thousandth year of Rome might be dedicated to Christ rather than to pagan idols . " ( " Item Constantinus imperator primus Christianus , <unk> <unk> , qui Christianus <unk> ad hoc tantum <unk> <unk> mihi <unk> est , ut <unk> <unk> annus Christo <unk> quam <unk> <unk> " , tr . J.C. Rolfe ) The scholar Samuel N. C. Lieu holds that this passage is a later interpolation , designed to give the work 's pagan core a Christian gloss . According to Lieu , this passage , along with others , was probably taken from Orosius ' history and inserted into the Origo Constantini during the reign of Constantine III ( r . 417 – 21 ) , a period that witnessed substantial anti @-@ pagan polemic . Shahîd argues that , since the author of the Origo Constantini was a biographer of Constantine , and not a historian of the 3rd and 4th centuries , his reference to Philip is unnecessary . The conflicting claims of Philip and Constantine to primacy may have been at issue at the turn of the 5th century , when the Origo Constantini and Historia <unk> paganos were written . 
 = = = Vincent of Lérins = = = 
 In the chapter on Origen in Vincent of Lérins ' <unk> primum , Vincent writes : " <unk> ad <unk> <unk> , qui primus <unk> principum Christianus fuit , Christiani <unk> <unk> <unk> . " ; " with the authority which [ Origen ] assumed as a Christian Teacher , he wrote to the Emperor Philip , the first Roman prince that was a Christian . " Vincent thus unites the commentary on Origen 's letters with Philip 's Christianity , as Jerome had done . It is possible that he was only following Jerome in so doing , but Shahîd argues that his note that the letters were written " Christiani <unk> <unk> " implies that he has read the letters . Additionally , the variance between his wording and Jerome 's ( Vincent refers to Philip as a princeps , not a rex , and he calls the letters <unk> , not <unk> ) , speaks for Vincent 's independence of Jerome . 
 = = In Zosimus and other secular writing = = 
 Zosimus , a pagan writing at the turn of the 6th century , wrote a work titled the Historia Nova ( New History ) . Its detailed sections cover the period from the 3rd century AD to 410 . Zosimus , like all secular historians in his era , addressed himself to the governing class of the later Roman empire : officers , bureaucrats , and the landed aristocracy . There was relatively little overlap between the reading audience of secular histories and the ecclesiastical histories of Eusebius and his successors . For most of the period it covers , the Historia is the most valuable — and sometimes the only — available source . Zosimus ' history was written as a polemic , with the aim of establishing that barbarism and Christianity were the essential causes of the decline of the Roman state . Because of these themes , the Historia Nova is considered the first history of what moderns would call Rome 's " decline and fall " . Although skilled in literary rhetoric , Zosimus was a poor historian . He confuses dates and persons , is ignorant of geography , and treats his sources with naive simplicity . For the 3rd century , Zosimus follows Eunapius of Sardis and Olympiodorus of Thebes in Egypt . Since Eunapius ' history began in 272 , where the Chronicle of another historian , Dexippus , ended , Zosimus probably used Dexippus ' Chronicle , and perhaps his histories of the German wars between 250 and 270 . Dexippus , however , was as poor a historian as Zosimus . The surviving fragments of his work show an uncritical author , without strong sources , who prefers rhetoric to fact . ( The secular sources for this period are all quite weak . ) Zosimus , like all ancient secular historians of the era , says nothing of Philip 's alleged Christianity . 
 Zosimus had no great respect for Philip , and offers an unfavorable judgment on his reign . Nonetheless , he offers a curiously detailed narrative of his reign . He devotes five sections of his Historia Nova to the emperor ( 1 @.@ 18 – 22 ) — more than Alexander Severus , who only gets half a section ( 1 @.@ 8 ) . He even reverts to Philip in the midst of a discussion of the Peace of Jovian ( 363 ) two books later ( at 3 @.@ 32 ) , taking the opportunity to recall Philip 's own " disgraceful " peace with the Persians . In Shahîd 's judgment , Zosimus makes this editorial decision to emphasize his central theme — the decline and " <unk> " of Rome . Zosimus ' views on the latter phenomenon reflect his racial prejudice , and his account of Philip carries anti @-@ Semitic overtones . In Zosimus ' view , Philip was a barbarian operating at the highest levels of power . The unsavory character of Philip is contrasted with his ethnically Roman predecessor , Gordian ( who Philip helped overthrow ) , and his Roman successor , Decius , who wins glowing praise from the historian . 
 As he disliked both Arabs and Christians , some scholars , such as Bowersock , have taken Zosimus ' silence on the matter as strong evidence against Philip 's alleged Christianity . Others , like historian Warwick Ball , view Zosimus ' evident distaste for Philip as noteworthy , and suggest that Zosimus ' anti @-@ Christian polemic is indirect in his writing on the emperor . Shahîd construes Zosimus ' silence as an argument for Philip 's Christianity . Zosimus , he argues , would never have shown such distaste for a pagan . Septimius Severus was a " barbarian " , an African born at Leptis Magna whose mother tongue was Phoenician and whose wife , Julia Domna , was a provincial from Emesa . But Severus gets a good press from Zosimus ( 1 @.@ 8 ) . Nor would Philip 's assistance in the execution of Gordian be enough : the 3rd century was hardly a stranger to such bloodshed and treachery . Zosimus ' hostility begins to makes sense , Shahîd contends , once we assume that he was aware of the tradition that viewed Philip as the first Christian emperor ( and perhaps even accepted it ) . And it becomes perfectly clear once we understand the importance Zosimus attributes to the Secular Games , and the schematic incongruity he would behold when a Christian emperor was presiding over them . 
 In 248 , Philip held Secular Games ( <unk> <unk> ) to celebrate the thousandth anniversary of Rome 's legendary founding by Romulus . It is presumed that he would have officiated over the games in his capacity as pontifex maximus , chief priest of the state cults . Allard accepts that he made no public notice of his private religion , and that he ran the games as a " prince <unk> " , a " pagan prince " . Pohlsander cites a number of early Christian theologians in support of his contention that " Christians generally condemned ' games ' of any kind . " Tertullian 's de <unk> , <unk> 's treatise of the same name ( which does not survive ) , and Cyprian 's disapproving comments in his ad <unk> are offered as examples . The later followers of Jerome , however , like Orosius and Bede , mention Philip 's games approvingly — Orosius even claims that Philip did not sacrifice during the games . Pohlsander concedes that public games continued under Christian emperors throughout the 4th century ( they were eventually outlawed in 404 under Honorius ) . 
 Zosimus provides the lengthiest account of the games ( at Historia Nova 2 @.@ 1 – 7 ) , but does not mention Philip . The games had a starring role in Zosimus ' scheme of Roman history . To him , the fortune of the empire was intimately related to the practice of the traditional civic rites . Any emperor who revived or supported those rites — Augustus , Claudius , Domitian , Septimius Severus — earns Zosimus ' credit , while the emperor who ended them , Constantine I , earns his condemnation . All the misfortune of the 4th century can be directly attributed to Constantine 's discontinuation of the old rites . In this context , Shahîd argues , Zosimus ' silence on Philip 's Christianity and Philip 's involvement in the games makes sense . First , it would have given lie to his thesis on that the practice of the traditional rites guaranteed the fortunes of empire , since the period following the games was hardly a happy one ( and this argument remains valid even if both Philip 's Christianity and Zosimus ' awareness of the tradition is denied ) . And second , it would have dulled his attack on Constantine by disentangling the potent alignment between imperial disaster , Christianity , and the traditional cult . The last emperor to celebrate the games was also the first emperor to embrace Christianity . The incongruity of this fact proved too much for the historian to handle , so he ignored it . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Because of the continuing popularity of Jerome 's Chronicon and Orosius ' Historia , the medieval writers who wrote about Philip called him the first Christian emperor . The Chronica Gallica of 452 , Prosper of Aquitaine ( d. ca . 455 ) , Cassiodorus ( d. ca . 585 ) , Jordanes ( fl . 551 ) , Isidore of Seville ( d . 636 ) , and Bede ( d . 735 ) all follow Jerome on this point . One early medieval historian writing at the eve of the millennium , the Lombard <unk> <unk> , held that Philip had confessed to Fabian , Bishop of Rome , instead of Babylas . 
 By the late 17th century , when Tillemont wrote his Histoire des <unk> , it was no longer possible to make the argument that Philip was a Christian " <unk> <unk> " , " without difficulty " . And when Jean @-@ Baptiste Louis <unk> wrote his L 'Histoire des <unk> des <unk> , <unk> 'à Constantin in 1749 , he affirmed the contrary , that Philip was not a Christian at all : " ... it is easy to judge what degree of credit ought to be given to this story of his penance ; which , besides , is not fully and exactly related by any ancient author . To make out an account of it any way tolerable , they have been obliged to patch several evidences together , and to supply and alter the one by the other . The shortest and safest course is not to admit of a perplexed and ill supported narrative . We have no great temptation to torture history in order to claim such a Christian . " 
 Edward Gibbon , in the first volume of his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire ( 1776 ) , would take the same position : " The public and even partial favour of Philip towards the sectaries of the new religion , and his constant reverence for the ministers of the church , gave some colour to the suspicion , which prevailed in his own times , that the emperor himself was become a convert to the faith ; and afforded some grounds for a fable which was afterwards invented , that he had been purified by confession and penance from the guilt contracted by the murder of his innocent predecessor . " And the fable has — " as usual " — " been embellished " . To Gibbon , the matter is " curious , rather than important " , and the man he credits with disposing of it , Friedrich <unk> ( d . 1649 ) , is said to have shown " much superfluous learning " in the task . 
 French historians of the 19th and 20th century were more favorable to the notion . Paul Allard , in his Histoire des persecutions pendant la premiere <unk> du troisième <unk> ( 1881 ) ; René <unk> , in his chapter " <unk> " in the Dictionnaire d 'Histoire et de Géographie <unk> ; Henri Grégoire , in Les <unk> dans l <unk> <unk> ( 1964 ) ; and Jean Daniélou and Henri @-@ <unk> Marrou , in The Christian Centuries 1 : The First Six Hundred Years ( English tr . , 1964 ) , all strongly supported the notion . English and German scholars were less likely to accept it . Ecclesiastical historians of the 19th century , like John Mason Neale , B. J. Kidd , and H. M. <unk> , gave the notion some credence , but less than their full support . Critical historians , like Ernst Stein , Karl Johannes Neumann , and John Gregg , denied it entirely . 
 In the late 20th century , a small number of articles and book chapters discussed the matter . John York 's " The Image of Philip the Arab " ( 1972 ) argued that the literary material on Philip 's reign was deeply biased against the emperor . York attempted to correct the narrative , and rehabilitate Philip 's reputation . He held that Eusebius ' logos was derived from an oral tradition originating in Antioch , and that Origen 's letters cannot have definitively proven Philip 's Christianity , since ( he follows Jerome 's Liber de viris inlustribus 54 here ) those letters were addressed to Philip 's son . Because of this fact , York declared that Philip 's Christianity was only " probable " , not certain . H. Crouzel 's " Le <unk> de l 'empereur Philippe l <unk> " ( 1975 ) argued that the Antiochene tradition , as represented by Chrysostom and Leontius , was independent of Eusebius , and that Eusebius was , likewise , ignorant of it . The sources of Eusebius ' logos were instead Origen 's letters to Philip and Severa . Crouzel is not entirely certain on this point ; it is only " très probable " , " very probable " . In spite of Crouzel 's arguments , Pierre <unk> 's <unk> ( 1977 ) was very skeptical of accounts of Philip 's Christianity , and Hans Pohlsander 's " Philip the Arab and Christianity " ( 1980 ) , <unk> Philip 's commitment to traditional civic religion as evidence , denied all accounts of Philip 's Christianity . 
 In a lengthy chapter of his 1984 book Rome and the Arabs , Irfan Shahîd argued that Philip deserved the title of " First Christian Emperor " . The chapter is divided into five parts : ( 1 ) a brief listing of the sources ; ( 2 ) a lengthy address to Ernst Stein 's arguments against accounts of Philip 's Christianity ; ( 3 ) an explanation of Eusebius ' caution and dissimulation ; ( 4 ) an exposition of the Latin authors ' accounts of Philip 's Christianity ; and ( 5 ) Eusebius ' relationship with the unnamed bishop in his passage , Babylas , and Babylas ' importance in ecclesiastical history . He follows the main body of the chapter with an appendix addressing the articles by York , Crouzel , and Pohlsander , " Philip the Arab and Christianity " , and noting the judgments of the scholars who reviewed his draft . 
 Currently , there is no consensus on the issue of Philip 's Christianity . Timothy Barnes , who reviewed Shahîd 's chapters on " The First Christian Emperor " and " Eusebius and the Arabs " in 1979 , would only say that Eusebius " [ presents ] Philip as a Christian " , in his Constantine and Eusebius ( 1981 ) . Warwick Ball , author of Rome and the East : The transformation of an empire ( 2000 ) , argued in favor of Philip 's Christianity . David Potter , author of The Roman Empire at Bay ( 2004 ) , treated the matter dismissively : accounts of Philip 's Christianity were simply " bogus " , Potter wrote , and works that accepted them should be treated with less respect on that count alone . Some scholars , like Glen Bowersock , took a middle route . Bowersock , reviewing Shahîd 's Rome and the Arabs for the Classical Review in 1986 , wrote : " I doubt many will be convinced by the extreme position that [ Shahîd ] has taken , but his arguments do offer some basis for believing that Philip was seriously interested in the religion " . He reiterated that view in his Roman Arabia ( 1980 , 3rd rev. ed . 1994 ) . 
 For the French <unk> Gilbert <unk> , Philip 's Christianity is a legend - albeit a very old one - that intended , in a Late Roman / Early Byzantine context , to foster the idea of a Roman Empire that was Christian almost from the beginning , thereby melding Roman Imperial ideology and <unk> , and therefore offering a base for other later legends showing Roman emperors , beginning with Augustus , to be aware and / or sympathetic to Christian revelation , forming a legendary corpus that was brought together during the 6th century by the chronicler John Malalas . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 = 2011 Michigan Wolverines football team = 
 The 2011 Michigan Wolverines football team , sometimes known as Team 132 in reference to the 132 @-@ year tradition of the Michigan football program , was an American football team that represented the University of Michigan during the 2011 NCAA Division I FBS football season . 
 Under first @-@ year head coach Brady Hoke , Michigan compiled a record of 11 – 2 and finished in second place in the newly formed Legends Division of the Big Ten Conference . Hoke , hired in January 2011 following the firing of previous head coach Rich Rodriguez , was named Big Ten Coach of the Year by both the media and the coaches and was a finalist for national coach of the year honors . Highlights of Michigan 's 2011 season included a 35 – 31 victory over Notre Dame in the first night game ever played at Michigan Stadium , a 45 – 17 victory over Nebraska in the Cornhuskers ' first year in the Big Ten , and the first victory over arch @-@ rival Ohio State since 2003 . Michigan 's season ended with a 23 – 20 overtime victory against Virginia Tech in the 2012 Sugar Bowl . 
 Under first @-@ year defensive coordinator Greg Mattison , Michigan 's defense went from being ranked 107th in scoring defense in 2010 ( 35 @.@ 2 points per game ) to being ranked sixth ( 17 @.@ 38 points per game ) in 2011 . The team 's leaders on defense included senior nose tackle Mike Martin , who started 29 consecutive games for Michigan , and safety Jordan Kovacs , who was a quarterfinalist for the Lott Trophy and a semifinalist for the Burlsworth Trophy . Mattison was selected as one of five finalists for the 2011 Broyles Award , awarded to the best assistant coach in college football . 
 On offense , Michigan had two players , Denard Robinson and Fitzgerald Toussaint , rush for 1 @,@ 000 yards each for the first time since 1975 . Robinson led the Big Ten in total offense per game for the second year in a row and also led the Wolverines in scoring with 96 points . Place @-@ kicker Brendan Gibbons was the team 's second leading scorer with 93 points having converted 13 of 17 field goal attempts and 54 of 55 extra points . Senior David Molk won the Rimington Trophy as the best center in college football and also became Michigan 's first consensus All @-@ American since 2007 . Junior Hemingway was the team 's leading receiver with 699 receiving yards and led the conference in yards per reception ( 20 @.@ 6 ) for the second year in a row . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 In 2010 , Michigan became bowl eligible for the first time since 2007 and faced the Mississippi State Bulldogs in the Gator Bowl , which Michigan lost 52 – 14 . The 2010 Wolverines finished the season ranked eighth nationally in total offense with <unk> Denard Robinson setting several individual records . However , the defensive unit finished 110th in total defense . 
 On January 4 , 2011 , after Michigan 's loss in the Gator Bowl , and following a 15 – 22 record in three seasons under head coach Rich Rodriguez , athletic director David Brandon announced that Rodriguez had been fired and a national search was underway to select a new head coach . Brady Hoke was hired as Michigan 's new head coach on January 11 . Hoke 's hiring triggered speculation that Denard Robinson would transfer , as it was believed that Hoke would run a pro @-@ style offense with Michigan 's new offensive coordinator Al Borges , but Robinson announced one day after Hoke 's hiring that he would return to Michigan for the 2011 season . On defense , Michigan hired defensive coordinator Greg Mattison from the Baltimore Ravens . Mattison had previously been the defensive coordinator for Michigan 's 1995 and 1996 teams . Following Hoke 's hiring , the team was dubbed " Team 132 " in recognition of the 132 seasons of Michigan football . 
 During the first eight months of 2011 , seven Michigan players announced plans to transfer to other schools . The first to go was backup quarterback Tate Forcier who announced on January 22 that he was leaving the team , having previously been declared academically ineligible for the Gator Bowl . The other departures were ( 1 ) starting safety Ray <unk> , who cited personal reasons for transferring to Pittsburgh , ( 2 ) cornerback Cullen Christian who also transferred to Pittsburgh , ( 3 ) wide receiver D.J. Williamson , ( 4 ) incoming offensive guard Tony Posada , ( 5 ) wide receiver Je 'Ron Stokes who transferred to Bowling Green , and ( 6 ) incoming tight end Chris Barnett . 
 On August 7 , 2011 , Hoke announced that wide receiver Darryl Stonum ( the team 's second leading receiver in 2010 ) was suspended and would be redshirted due to drunken driving related violations . Additionally , due to an unspecified team rules violations , punter Will Hagerup ( who had been suspended for one game in 2010 ) was suspended for the first four games , while wide receiver Terrence Robinson was suspended for the first game . 
 On August 28 , 2011 , the team named tight end Kevin Koger , defensive tackle Mike Martin , and center David Molk as its co @-@ captains for the 2011 season . Michigan returned 17 of 22 starters from the 2010 team — ten on offense and seven on defense . In addition to <unk> , Michigan was forced to replace starters offensive guard Stephen Schilling , linebacker Jonas Mouton , cornerback James Rogers , and defensive Greg Banks , as well as back @-@ up linebacker Obi Ezeh , who was a former starter for the Wolverines . Other 2010 Wolverines in NFL training camps included Martell Webb and Perry Dorrestein . A total of 26 former Wolverine student @-@ athletes were on opening day 53 @-@ man NFL active rosters . 
 Six Michigan players were listed on preseason watch lists : ( 1 ) Denard Robinson for the Walter Camp Award ( best college player ) , Maxwell Award ( best offensive player ) , and Davey O 'Brien Award ( best quarterback ) , Paul Hornung Award ( most versatile player ) , and Manning Award ( best quarterback ) , ( 2 ) Mike Martin for the Bednarik Trophy ( best defensive player ) , Outland Trophy ( best interior lineman ) , and Lombardi Award ( best lineman ) , ( 3 ) David Molk for the Outland Trophy , Lombardi Award , and Rimington Trophy ( best center ) , ( 4 ) Kevin Koger for the John Mackey Award ( best tight end ) , ( 5 ) Roy Roundtree for the Fred Biletnikoff Award ( best wide receiver ) , and ( 6 ) Ryan Van Bergen for the Ted Hendricks Award ( best defensive end ) . 
 = = Recruiting = = 
 = = = Position key = = = 
 = = = Recruits = = = 
 Michigan 's recruiting class was ranked No. 27 by Scout and No. 21 by Rivals . It was not ranked by ESPN . The program received 20 letters of intent on National Signing Day , February 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 Michigan began the season unranked in the Top 25 of both the AP Poll and the Coaches ' Poll , but by midseason had risen to # 10 in the Coaches ' Poll and # 11 in the AP Poll . After its loss to Michigan State , Michigan fell to # 17 in the Coaches ' Poll and # 18 in the AP Poll . Michigan rose to # 13 in the AP and Coaches ' Polls and # 15 in the BCS Poll before its game against Iowa , falling after the loss to # 22 in the AP Poll , # 21 in the Coaches ' Poll , and # 24 in the BCS Poll . Michigan finished the regular season ranked # 12 in the Coaches ' Poll , and # 13 in the AP and BCS Polls . Following its win over Virginia Tech in the Sugar Bowl , Michigan ended the season ranked # 9 in the Coaches ' Poll and # 12 in the AP Poll . 
 Source : ESPN.com : 2011 NCAA Football Rankings 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The schedule was as follows : 
 = = Radio = = 
 On August 8 , 2011 , the University of Michigan announced a five @-@ year extension of its contract with CBS Radio . Detroit 's <unk> became the new flagship station . All games were broadcast by radio on the Michigan Wolverines Football Network and on Sirius XM Satellite Radio . The radio announcers were Frank Beckmann ( play @-@ by @-@ play ) , Jim Brandstatter ( color commentary ) , and Doug Karsch ( sideline reports ) . 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = vs. Western Michigan = = = 
 In the opening game of the season , Michigan hosted the Western Michigan Broncos . When the teams last met in 2009 , the Wolverines won 31 – 7 . 
 In a game shortened by lightning , Michigan defeated Western Michigan 34 – 10 . Western Michigan scored the only points of the first quarter with a one @-@ yard touchdown run by <unk> Scriven . Michigan answered with three consecutive touchdowns in the second quarter : a one @-@ yard run by Fitzgerald Toussaint , a 94 @-@ yard interception return by Brandon Herron ( the longest interception return for a touchdown in Michigan program history ) , and a two @-@ yard touchdown run by Toussaint . Following Michigan 's third touchdown , the extra point attempt was blocked . The Broncos scored their final points of the game on a 36 @-@ yard field goal by John Potter just before halftime . In the third quarter , Herron returned a fumble 29 yards for a touchdown , and Michael Shaw scored on a 44 @-@ yard touchdown run ( the longest touchdown run of his career ) . After two rain delays in the third quarter , the game was stopped due to lightning in the area and Michigan was awarded the win . The temperature on the field at kickoff was over 137 ° F , and by the end of the game it had dropped to 84 ° F , a difference of 53 ° F. This was the first Michigan football game to be ended due to weather before all 60 minutes were played and the second game in Michigan Stadium history that featured a weather delay ( the first coming in a 2006 game against Central Michigan ) . 
 Jordan Kovacs and Brandon Herron led the defense . <unk> forced the fumble that was returned for a touchdown , had two quarterback sacks and ten tackles , and was named the Lott Trophy 's IMPACT Player of the Week . Herron became the first Michigan player to post two defensive touchdowns and the first since Tom Harmon to have two return touchdowns of any kind in a game . In recognition of his efforts , Herron was named Big Ten Defensive Player of the Week , Walter Camp National Defensive Player of the Week , National Defensive Performer of Week 1 and National Linebacker Performer of the Week by College Football Performance Awards ( <unk> ) , and Big Ten Defensive Player of the Week by College Sports Madness . He was also nominated for Defensive Performance of the Year by Intersport . 
 The NCAA originally determined that it would not count player and team statistics for the game , because three quarters had not been completed . At the end of November 2011 , the NCAA reversed the decision and determined that statistics from the game would be counted . 
 = = = vs. Notre Dame = = = 
 Following its opener against Western Michigan , Michigan renewed its rivalry with the Notre Dame Fighting Irish . In the first night game in Michigan Stadium history , both teams wore " throwback @-@ style " jerseys . Michigan 's jerseys did not entirely match any worn in team history ; however , they incorporated " design elements from different eras of Michigan football . " During the previous meeting , Denard Robinson set a school record for total yardage in a single game at 502 yards , as Michigan defeated Notre Dame 28 – 24 in a wild affair . Due to the significance of the game , ESPN announced on August 5 that College GameDay would be held in Ann Arbor for the first time since November 17 , 2007 , when Michigan hosted Ohio State , which was Michigan head coach Lloyd Carr 's final regular season game before he retired . At the game , 1991 Heisman Trophy winner Desmond Howard was honored in recognition of his recent induction into the College Football Hall of Fame . A 1991 consensus All @-@ American , Howard became the first receiver in history to lead the Big Ten Conference in scoring , and he set or tied five NCAA records and 12 single @-@ season Michigan records during his senior year . Charles Woodson was also honored . A C @-@ 47 conducted the pre @-@ game flyover and two <unk> from the 101st Airborne Division entered the stadium at halftime . 
 Michigan came back from a 17 @-@ point deficit to defeat Notre Dame 35 – 31 , scoring the winning touchdown with two seconds remaining . Notre Dame started the scoring with two consecutive touchdowns in the first quarter , with the first coming from a seven @-@ yard catch by Theo Riddick , and the second from a four @-@ yard run by Cierre Wood . Michigan 's only points of the first half came on a 43 @-@ yard reception by Junior Hemingway in the second quarter . Notre Dame answered with a 38 @-@ yard field goal by David <unk> just before halftime to extend its lead to ten points . The score at halftime was 17 – 7 in favor of Notre Dame . The only points of the third quarter were when Notre Dame 's T. J. Jones caught a 15 @-@ yard touchdown pass . In the fourth quarter Michigan rallied from behind , scoring three consecutive touchdowns : first a one @-@ yard run by Denard Robinson after Stephen Hopkins fumbled at the goal line , then a 47 @-@ yard catch by Jeremy Gallon , then a 21 @-@ yard catch by Vincent Smith to give them their first lead of the game . Notre Dame responded almost immediately , as Theo Riddick scored his second touchdown of the game less than a minute later on a 29 @-@ yard catch . Michigan received the ball on its 20 @-@ yard line with 30 seconds remaining , and drove 80 yards in 28 seconds with Roy Roundtree scoring the game @-@ winning touchdown with two seconds left in the game . 
 Michigan 's 17 @-@ point comeback against Notre Dame tied for the third @-@ biggest comeback in Michigan history and tied for the second @-@ biggest comeback at Michigan Stadium . The game 's announced crowd of 114 @,@ 804 set the all @-@ time attendance record for a football game — college or NFL — and broke the Michigan Stadium attendance record . The previous Michigan Stadium record was 113 @,@ 411 spectators , established at the 2010 " Big Chill at the Big House " ice hockey game . In recognition of his performance during the game , the Big Ten named Denard Robinson its Offensive Player of the Week , while the Davey O 'Brien Award named him its Quarterback of the Week . He was also named Rivals.com 's Big Ten and National Player of the Week and won the Capital One Cup Impact Performance of the Week . The team was recognized as the <unk> Fiesta Bowl National Team of Week . 
 = = = vs. Eastern Michigan = = = 
 In the third week of the season , Michigan hosted the Eastern Michigan Eagles . Michigan won the previous meeting between the two schools in 2009 by a 45 – 17 score . 
 Michigan defeated Eastern Michigan 31 – 3 . In the first quarter , Eastern Michigan sustained five drives into Michigan territory , but their drives stalled on a fumble , an interception , and a stop by the Michigan defense on fourth down from the one @-@ yard line . On the first play of the second quarter , the Eagles took a 3 – 0 lead on a 21 @-@ yard field goal by Kody Fulkerson . Michigan did not score until the 9 : 28 mark in the second quarter with a nine @-@ yard touchdown pass from Denard Robinson to Kevin Koger . The Wolverines added to the lead later in the second quarter on an 11 @-@ yard touchdown run by Robinson giving Michigan a 14 – 3 lead at halftime . In the third quarter , Michigan added two more touchdowns on a one @-@ yard touchdown run by Fitzgerald Toussaint and a 19 @-@ yard touchdown catch by Drew Dileo . The final points of the game came on a 21 @-@ yard field goal by Brendan Gibbons in the fourth quarter . 
 In holding Eastern Michigan to three points , Michigan put in its best performance in scoring defense since a 38 – 0 shutout of Notre Dame on September 15 , 2007 . The defense also held the Eagles to 29 passing yards – the lowest total for a Michigan opponent since Rice recorded 15 passing yards in 1999 . Denard Robinson rushed for 198 yards . Robinson 's 52 @-@ yard run early in the second quarter was his longest to that point of the season , later eclipsed by a 53 @-@ yard run against San Diego State . After Robinson completed seven of 18 passes with an interception , the Associated Press called it " another lackluster passing performance . " Vincent Smith also contributed 118 rushing yards rushing on nine carries . The Wolverines improved to 10 – 0 in the all @-@ time series against Eastern Michigan . 
 = = = vs. San Diego State = = = 
 In its final game of non @-@ conference play , Michigan hosted the San Diego State Aztecs . This meeting was the first between the two schools since 2004 , and came nine months after Brady Hoke left San Diego State for Michigan . During the previous meeting , Michigan escaped a potential upset by San Diego State , winning 24 – 21 . 
 Michigan defeated San Diego State 28 – 7 . Denard Robinson scored all three touchdowns in the first half : a five @-@ yard run and then a 53 @-@ yard run in the first quarter , and then in the second quarter on a one @-@ yard run . In the third quarter , San Diego State scored its only points of the game with a 16 @-@ yard catch by Colin Lockett following a fumble by Michigan 's Stephen Hopkins . In the fourth quarter , Michigan sealed its victory with a seven @-@ yard touchdown run by Vincent Smith . 
 Robinson carried the ball 21 times for 200 yards and three touchdowns and also passed for 93 yards . It was Robinson 's third career 200 @-@ yard rushing game and matched his career best for rushing touchdowns . Robinson became one of only three Wolverines players to register three or more 200 @-@ yard rushing games in program history . Mike Hart ( 2004 – 07 ) holds the record with five , while Ron Johnson ( 1966 – 68 ) also has three . Robinson passed Illinois ' Isiah Williams to move into the second spot among the Big Ten Conference 's career leaders in rushing yards by a quarterback . Robinson earned Big Ten Conference Co @-@ Offensive Player of the Week recognition . 
 = = = vs. Minnesota = = = 
 In its first game of the Big Ten season , Michigan hosted the Minnesota Golden Gophers for the Little Brown Jug . Michigan won the previous meeting between the two schools in 2008 29 – 6 . 
 Michigan dominated in all aspects of the game and defeated Minnesota 58 – 0 . In the first quarter Vincent Smith ran in a three @-@ yard touchdown , which was followed by a Denard Robinson nine @-@ yard touchdown run . In the second quarter Drew Dileo caught a 17 @-@ yard pass from Vincent Smith , which was followed by a Vincent Smith 28 @-@ yard touchdown reception , his second touchdown of the game . Michigan 's next scoring play came on a 25 @-@ yard field goal by Brendan Gibbons . Just before halftime , Kevin Koger caught an 18 @-@ yard pass for a touchdown . After the break , Fitzgerald <unk> rushed for a one @-@ yard touchdown . Next came two more field goals from Gibbons : first from 32 yards , then in the fourth quarter from 38 yards . Michigan scored its final points when Courtney Avery picked up a Minnesota fumble and ran it back 83 yards for a touchdown . 
 The game was Michigan 's first shutout of a Big Ten opponent since a 20 – 0 win at Penn State on October 6 , 2001 , and its first shutout of any opponent since a 38 – 0 win against Notre Dame on September 15 , 2007 . The 58 – 0 win over the Golden Gophers was Michigan 's largest margin of victory over Minnesota in the series ' history . The previous best was 51 ( 58 – 7 ) in 1993 . The game also marked Michigan 's largest margin of victory over any opponent since a 69 – 0 victory over Northwestern in October 1975 . ( Michigan also defeated Indiana by an identical 58 – 0 score in October 2000 . ) Vincent Smith became the first running back in FBS to pass for a touchdown and have touchdowns rushing and receiving since C.J. Spiller on November 14 , 2009 , against North Carolina State . He is the fifth Big Ten player to do so since 1996 and the first since Mike Kafka , who accomplished the feat for Northwestern on September 19 , 2009 . Michigan outgained Minnesota 580 to 177 . Minnesota 's total yardage was the lowest allowed by Michigan since the game against Minnesota in 2008 . Michigan rushed for 363 yards of offense , its third straight game of rushing for more than 300 yards . This is the first time this has occurred since the 1987 season . 
 = = = at Northwestern = = = 
 After the battle for the Little Brown Jug , Michigan traveled to Evanston , Illinois , for the first time since 2007 to play the Northwestern Wildcats . During the previous meeting between the schools in 2008 , Northwestern won 21 – 14 . 
 Michigan scored 28 unanswered points to erase a ten @-@ point deficit and defeat Northwestern 42 – 24 . Michigan scored first on a nine @-@ yard reception by Steve <unk> . Northwestern replied with a 15 @-@ yard touchdown run by Kain Colter , and then took the lead on a seven @-@ yard run by <unk> Green . In the second quarter , Michigan 's Jeremy Gallon caught a 25 @-@ yard touchdown reception . The Wildcats responded with a two @-@ yard touchdown run by Adonis Smith , and scored their final points of the game with a 20 @-@ yard field goal by Jeff <unk> . Michigan dominated the second half with four unanswered touchdowns . In the third quarter , Denard Robinson scored on a two @-@ yard run , then Devin Gardner scored on a one @-@ yard run . In the fourth quarter , Michael Shaw scored on a two @-@ yard run , and Denard Robinson capped the victory with a five @-@ yard run . 
 Michigan 's 541 yard offensive performance was the second straight week the offense gained more than 500 yards of offense , and was the second highest total of the season , only beaten by the previous week 's total of 581 yards against Minnesota . Denard Robinson 's 337 yards of passing were one yard shy of his career high ; he threw for 338 yards against Notre Dame on Sept . 10 , 2011 . Michigan started a season 6 – 0 for the first time since 2006 . Jordan Kovacs had two solo tackles for a loss , both on fourth down . Brady Hoke 's 6 – 0 start was the first 6 – 0 start by a first @-@ year Michigan coach since Bennie Oosterbaan did so in 1948 . 
 = = = at Michigan State = = = 
 After its game against Northwestern , Michigan traveled to East Lansing to battle their in @-@ state rival , the Michigan State Spartans , for the Paul Bunyan Trophy . Michigan was searching for its first win against Michigan State since 2007 . Michigan State won the previous meeting 34 – 17 . The Wolverines wore legacy road uniforms for the game with Michigan State , which were the road version of the uniform worn against Notre Dame . It was the first time that Michigan wore all white road uniforms since the 1976 Orange Bowl against Oklahoma . Michigan State also wore special alternate uniforms colored dark green , bronze and black . 
 Michigan State continued its recent dominance over Michigan , winning 28 – 14 . The first half was relatively quiet , with each team only scoring one touchdown in the first quarter . Michigan 's Denard Robinson ran in one from 15 yards out , with Michigan State responding with a one @-@ yard touchdown run by Edwin Baker . After halftime , State 's Kirk Cousins threw a 10 @-@ yard touchdown pass to <unk> Martin to take the lead . The Spartans added more points with another touchdown catch by Martin , this one from 13 yards out . In the fourth quarter , Michigan scored their only points of the second half with a 34 @-@ yard touchdown catch and run by Roy Roundtree . State sealed their victory with a 39 @-@ yard interception return touchdown by Isaiah Lewis , handing Michigan their first loss of the season . 
 The game was Michigan 's first against a ranked opponent in the 2011 season . Michigan 's record against Michigan State in the overall series dropped to 68 – 35 – 2 , while its record in games involving the Paul Bunyan Trophy dropped to 35 – 23 – 2 . Denard Robinson 's passing performance put him over 4 @,@ 000 yards in his career , the 10th Michigan quarterback to do so , and his rushing performance moved him past Tim Biakabutuka for 10th place . Punter Will Hagerup placed four of his seven punts inside Michigan State 's 20 @-@ yard line , and three of those inside the 15 @-@ yard line . The victory was Michigan State 's fourth in a row against Michigan , the first time Michigan State had done this since a streak between 1959 and 1962 . 
 = = = vs. Purdue = = = 
 Following its trip to East Lansing and its bye week , Michigan hosted the Purdue Boilermakers for its homecoming game . During the previous meeting between the two schools , Michigan defeated Purdue 27 – 16 in a turnover filled game caused by heavy rain . The game ball was delivered via jet pack , as Michigan 's homecoming theme for the year was space . 
 Michigan defeated Purdue 36 – 14 . Purdue scored its only points of the first half when Caleb <unk> threw a 48 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Gary Bush . Michigan dominated the game following the Purdue score . The Wolverines responded to Purdue 's touchdown with a touchdown of their own , a two @-@ yard run by Denard Robinson , which was its fifth consecutive opening drive touchdown . In the second quarter , Michigan scored a safety when Mike Martin tackled Caleb <unk> in the end zone . A few minutes later , Michigan 's Brendan Gibbons kicked a 37 @-@ yard field goal . Michigan added more points with a two @-@ yard touchdown run by Fitzgerald Toussaint . The final score of the first half was a 22 @-@ yard Michigan field goal with no time left on the clock . After the intermission , Michigan scored the only points of the third quarter when Fitzgerald Toussaint scored his second touchdown of the game , this time on a 59 @-@ yard rush . The teams traded scores in the final quarter . First Michigan 's Michael Shaw ran in a touchdown from 37 yards out , which was followed by Purdue 's Robert Marve throwing a 19 @-@ yard touchdown pass to O.J. Ross . With the win , Michigan 's record against Purdue improved to 43 – 14 . 
 Junior quarterback Denard Robinson completed 9 @-@ of @-@ 14 passes for 170 yards and carried the ball 15 times for 63 yards and a touchdown . He scored his 29th career rushing touchdown on a two @-@ yard run midway through the first quarter . Robinson moved to ninth place among Michigan 's all @-@ time leaders in the category , where he is tied with Butch Woolfolk ( 1978 – 81 ) . Robinson has scored at least one rushing touchdown in seven straight games . Fitzgerald Toussaint recorded career highs in carries ( 20 ) and rushing yards ( 170 ) and matched a career best with two rushing touchdowns . Toussaint 's second touchdown — a 59 @-@ yard rush in the third quarter — was the longest rush for a touchdown of his career , but missed his overall career long by two yards ( 61 yards vs. Bowling Green , September 25 , 2010 ) . The Apollo 15 flight crew , which consisted of all Michigan graduates , was honored during the first quarter . 
 = = = at Iowa = = = 
 For its ninth game , Michigan traveled to Iowa City to meet the Iowa Hawkeyes . Iowa won the 2010 game , 38 – 28 . 
 Iowa defeated Michigan 24 – 16 after Michigan was unable to score a touchdown from the three @-@ yard line at the end of the game . Iowa scored first with a four @-@ yard touchdown run by Marcus Coker . Michigan responded with a five @-@ yard touchdown catch by Fitzgerald Toussaint , their only points of the first half ; however , the extra point was botched due to a bad snap . In the second quarter , Iowa 's Brad Herman caught a one @-@ yard pass from James Vandenberg for a touchdown . Iowa 's Mike Meyer then kicked a 42 @-@ yard field goal to add to the Hawkeyes ' lead . After halftime , Michigan 's Brendan Gibbons scored the only points of the 3rd quarter with a 32 @-@ yard field goal . Iowa then scored its only points of the second half when Marcus Coker scored his second touchdown of the day , this time with a 13 @-@ yard rush . Michigan responded with a seven @-@ yard touchdown catch by Kevin Koger . 
 Junior Hemingway had 64 yards on five catches to pass Adrian Arrington and take over 20th place with 1 @,@ 453 career yards . Fitzgerald Toussaint made his first career touchdown reception on just the third catch of his career . Denard Robinson moved to ninth place all @-@ time on the Michigan career rushing yards list , with his then total of 2 @,@ 933 yards surpassing Gordon Bell 's total of 2 @,@ 900 yards . 
 = = = at Illinois = = = 
 Following its trip to Iowa , Michigan played on the road for the second consecutive week against the Illinois Fighting Illini . In 2010 , the Wolverines and Illini had played in the highest combined scoring game in Michigan Stadium history , with Michigan prevailing 67 – 65 in triple overtime . 
 Michigan dominated the game , defeating Illinois 31 – 14 . Michigan scored two touchdowns in the first half . Fitzgerald Toussaint ran for 121 yards in the first quarter , including a 65 @-@ yard run on the second play of the game to set up a nine @-@ yard touchdown run by Denard Robinson . In the second quarter , Robinson scored his second rushing touchdown of the game on a two @-@ yard run . Michigan lost another scoring opportunity in the second quarter after tight end Kevin Koger gained 40 yards on a pass from Robinson . Robinson ran for an apparent touchdown from the eight @-@ yard line , but the call was reversed when replay officials ruled that Robinson had stepped out of bounds at the two @-@ yard line . On fourth down from the one @-@ yard line , Robinson was stopped after a low snap slowed his momentum . A fumble by Robinson ended another drive , and Brendan Gibbons missed a 38 @-@ yard field goal with one minute left in the half . Michigan 's defense held Illinois to 30 total yards in the first half . In the third quarter , Gibbons kicked a 27 @-@ yard field goal , but Illinois responded with a touchdown on a one @-@ yard run by Nathan Scheelhaase . Denard Robinson left the game in the third quarter after sustaining a blow to his wrist . In the fourth quarter , J.T. Floyd intercepted a Scheelhaase pass and returned it 43 yards into Illinois territory . Shortly thereafter , backup quarterback Devin Gardner threw a 27 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Martavious Odoms to put Michigan ahead 24 – 7 . Illinois closed the gap to 24 – 14 on an 18 @-@ play drive capped by a one @-@ yard touchdown run by Jason Ford . After the touchdown , the Illini attempted an onside kick , but Michigan recovered , and Toussaint ran 27 yards for Michigan 's fourth and final touchdown . 
 Michigan 's defense forced three turnovers , sacked the Illinois quarterback four times , and held Illinois ' offense to 37 rushing yards on 33 attempts for an average of 1 @.@ 1 yards per carry . Mike Martin led the defense with nine tackles . After the game , Michigan 's defensive coordinator Greg Mattison became emotional as he told reporters : " That was a Michigan defense . ... Nobody knows what went on inside of these guys and for them to stick together and to play like they played tonight , and like they have tried in every game , it says a lot about them . " Defensive end Ryan Van Bergen , who recorded 2 @.@ 5 sacks , three tackles for loss and seven tackles overall , was named the Big Ten 's Co @-@ Defensive Player of the Week . Toussaint 's 65 @-@ yard touchdown run and his total of 192 rushing yards were career highs . 
 = = = vs. Nebraska = = = 
 In the penultimate game of the 2011 regular season , Michigan hosted the Nebraska Cornhuskers , competing in their first season as a member of the Big Ten Conference and appearing in Michigan Stadium for the first time since 1962 . The teams had last met in the 2005 Alamo Bowl , which Nebraska won 32 – 28 . In celebration of Military Appreciation Day , Michigan held a card stunt and had a flyover of four F @-@ 16 fighter jets prior to kickoff , and the Wolverines wore American flag patches on their jerseys . Michigan also honored former head coach Lloyd Carr at the game . 
 Michigan dominated Nebraska , winning 45 – 17 . Michigan took an early lead when Jeremy Gallon caught a six @-@ yard touchdown pass and then added three more points when Brendan Gibbons kicked a 42 @-@ yard field goal . Late in the first quarter , Nebraska narrowed the gap when Brandon <unk> caught a 54 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Taylor Martinez . In the second quarter , each team scored once . The Cornhuskers ' Brett Maher kicked a 51 @-@ yard field goal , and Denard Robinson responded with a 14 @-@ yard touchdown run . Michigan led 17 – 10 at halftime . At the start of the third quarter , Nebraska 's Kenny Bell fumbled while returning the opening kickoff , and Michigan recovered the ball . The turnover led to a one @-@ yard touchdown run by Denard Robinson . Fitzgerald Toussaint also scored on a one @-@ yard touchdown run in the third quarter . Later in the third quarter , Nebraska closed the gap to 31 – 17 on a three @-@ yard touchdown run by Ameer Abdullah . Josh Furman also blocked a punt in the third quarter , the first punt block by Michigan since 2009 . In the fourth quarter , Michigan outscored Nebraska 14 – 0 with a 38 @-@ yard touchdown catch by Martavious Odoms and a 31 @-@ yard run by Toussaint . 
 Michigan 's defense held Nebraska to three successful conversions on 13 third downs . The Wolverines ran 80 plays in the game and maintained possession for 41 minutes and 13 seconds during the 60 minutes of play . Denard Robinson was honored for the sixth time in his career as the Big Ten 's Offensive Player of the Week , having run for two touchdowns , passed for two more , and accounted for 263 yard of total offense ( 180 passing yards and 83 rushing yards ) , more than the entire Nebraska team . Michigan improved to 4 – 2 – 1 in its all @-@ time series against Nebraska . 
 = = = vs. Ohio State = = = 
 The Wolverines completed the regular season at home with the 108th Michigan – Ohio State rivalry game against the Ohio State Buckeyes . Ohio State won the 2010 game 37 – 7 , but later vacated the win as part of its self @-@ imposed sanctions after it was discovered that five players had received improper benefits and had played while ineligible . This was the first time the schools met with both having head coaches in their first season since 1929 , when Harry Kipke became the head coach at Michigan and Sam <unk> became the head coach at Ohio State . 
 Michigan defeated Ohio State for the first time in eight years , winning 40 – 34 . Ohio State took the lead in the first quarter when Corey Brown caught a 54 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Braxton Miller . Michigan tied it up when Denard Robinson ran 41 yards for a touchdown and took the lead when Ohio State 's Mike Adams committed a holding penalty in the end zone for a safety . Michigan extended its lead to 16 – 7 when Junior Hemingway caught a 26 @-@ yard pass for a touchdown . In the second quarter , Ohio State 's Drew Basil completed a 45 @-@ yard field goal , and the Buckeyes took a 17 – 16 lead when Braxton Miller ran 19 yards for a touchdown . Michigan regained the lead on a six @-@ yard touchdown run by Denard Robinson . Ohio State responded with a 43 @-@ yard touchdown pass to <unk> Posey and led 24 – 23 at halftime . In the third quarter , Martavious Odoms scored for Michigan on a 20 @-@ yard touchdown pass . After a muffed punt by Michigan 's Will Hagerup at the end of the third quarter , Drew Basil kicked a 21 @-@ yard field goal early in the fourth quarter . Michigan responded with a four @-@ yard touchdown catch by Kevin Koger , and Daniel Herron ran for an Ohio State touchdown from four yards out . Michigan scored the final points of the game on a career @-@ long 43 @-@ yard field goal by Brendan Gibbons . The Wolverines sealed the victory when Courtney Avery intercepted a Braxton Miller pass with 39 seconds remaining . 
 Denard Robinson completed 14 of 17 passes for 167 yards and three touchdowns and rushed for 170 yards and two touchdowns . He became the first Michigan player in the modern era to score two rushing and two passing touchdowns in the consecutive games . Fitzgerald Toussaint also rushed for 120 yards to pass the 1 @,@ 000 yard mark , giving the Wolverines a duo of 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard rushers for the first time since 1975 when Gordon Bell and Rob Lytle accomplished the feat . The Wolverines improved to 58 @-@ 44 @-@ 6 in the all @-@ time series against the Buckeyes . With the victory , Michigan also concluded its first undefeated season at home since 2006 , along with its first ever eight win season at home . Brady Hoke became the second Michigan head coach to win 10 games in his first season , with the first being Fielding Yost . 
 = = = vs. Virginia Tech = = = 
