 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The reception of the Arbiter as a playable character in Halo 2 was mixed ; O 'Connor described the Arbiter as the most controversial character Bungie had ever created . The character was described as a " brilliant stroke of a game design " because it provided an unexpected story line but also offered the player new options by allowing stealth gameplay . Several publications enjoyed the added dimension to the Covenant by having the Arbiter as a playable character . 
 Alternatively , publications like GameSpot thought that while the Arbiter and Covenant side added " newfound complexity to the story " , it distracted the player from Earth 's fate ; a panel of Halo 2 reviewers argued that though the decision to humanize the Covenant by the introduction of the Arbiter was welcome , the execution in @-@ game was lacking . The missions where the player controls the Arbiter were described as " anything but easy " and occasionally " boring " , due to the lack of human weapons to balance the gameplay . A review performed by Computer and Video Games described the time that the player controls the character as " [ those ] crap bits when you play as an alien Arbiter " and listed this as one of Halo 2 's flaws . Reviewer Jarno Kokko said that while he did not personally dislike playing as the character , the idea of " people disliking the concept of playing on the other side in a game that is supposed to be the ' Master Chief blows up some alien scum ' show " was a plausible complaint . Among some fans , the character was reviled . 
 The reception of the Arbiter 's elimination as a main playable character in Halo 3 was similarly mixed . Hilary Goldstein of IGN decided the change took away the " intriguing side @-@ story of the Arbiter and his Elites " , in the process reducing the character 's role to that of " a dude with a weird mandible and a cool sword " . Likewise , Steve West of Cinemablend.com stated that the one important event in the game for the Arbiter would be lost on anyone for whom Halo 3 was their first game in the series . IGN 's reviewer took issue with the poor artificial intelligence ( AI ) of allies in the game , and singled out the Arbiter in particular ; " The Arbiter makes me question why the Elites were ever feared in the original Halo , " Hilary Goldstein said . Describing the AI of the character , Goldstein felt players could " enjoy watching your supposed equal getting shot in the face repeatedly and generally making himself utterly useless . What is the point of sticking you with an AI compatriot if all he 's good at is respawning ? " The New York Times ' Charles Herold found that in comparison to Halo 2 , where the character played a central role , the Arbiter in Halo 3 was " extraneous " . On the opposite end of the spectrum were reviewers like G4tv , who argued that the Arbiter was more likeable , not to mention more useful , as an AI sidekick instead of the main player . In a list of the top alien characters in video games , MSNBC placed the Arbiter at the number two ranking . 
 Halo Wars 's cinematics and voice acting were widely lauded , although one reviewer wrote that the characters were stereotypical and unlikeable . Dakota Grabowski of <unk> considered the Arbiter the most confusing character in the game 's story . Conversely , GamePro listed the Arbiter as one of the five best things about the game , saying that while it was a different character than the Arbiter seen in Halo 2 and Halo 3 , he was " like an alien Jack Bauer amped up on drugs " . 
 Despite the resistance to the character , Bungie staff defended the character 's introduction . " I 'd much rather experiment and do something surprising , and not have everybody appreciate it , than just turn the crank and do another alien war movie with a space marine , " said Halo 2 design lead Jaime Griesemer . Community lead Brian Jarrard attributed some of the fan backlash to a discord between the game 's marketing and the actual gameplay . " I think , even more so than playing as the Arbiter , the thing that people were disappointed with and angry about is that they were promised this experience , through the marketing , of being really backs against the wall , Earth 's under siege , we 're going to do all we can to save our home planet ... In reality , the game only had two missions that actually did that . " Referring to Halo 2 's cliffhanger ending , Griesemer said , " I think if we 'd been able to finish that last couple of missions and get you properly back on Earth , a lot of the reaction would have been placated . " 
 = Invasion ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Invasion " is the fifth episode of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 107th episode overall . It was written by Mark Wilding and directed by Tony Phelan . The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on October 15 , 2009 . In the episode , the physicians of Seattle Grace Hospital must learn to co @-@ operate with new Mercy West residents , who do not act in a kind manner to them . Other storylines include Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) ' s father returning to the hospital to condemn her homosexuality , and Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) putting her career into jeopardy after administering the wrong treatment to a patient . 
 The episode was Heigl 's last appearance before her five @-@ episode hiatus to film a movie . It is set in a fictional hospital in Seattle , Washington . Héctor Elizondo returned as a guest star , while Jesse Williams , Sarah Drew , Robert Baker , and Nora Zehetner made their first appearances . " Invasion " received generally positive reviews , with critics praising Drew 's , Jessica Capshaw 's , Ellen Pompeo 's , and Sandra Oh 's performances . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 13 @.@ 79 million Americans , garnered a 5 @.@ 0 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic and ranked third for the night in terms of viewership . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The hospital receives several surgical residents from Mercy West as they enter Seattle Grace , a repercussion of the recent merger . Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) is recovering from her liver transplantation surgery , after donating a portion of it to her father . In the residents ' lounge , Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) tries to explain to Mercy West resident Dr. Reed Adamson ( Nora Zehetner ) that she should not use a certain locker , due to it formerly belonging to the deceased Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) . Adamson ignores her wishes , and uses the locker , leading Stevens to threatening to fight her . Shortly thereafter , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) and Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) are working in the emergency room , when Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) embarrasses Yang by taking Mercy West resident Dr. Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) ' side in a disagreement . Despite her mindset that all Mercy West residents would act in the manner of Adamson , Stevens develops a friendship with Dr. Charles Percy ( Robert Baker ) . After months of the two not speaking , Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) ' s father , Carlos ( Héctor Elizondo ) , shows up to the hospital with a priest , trying to condemn Torres for her concurrence in homosexuality . 
 Under the supervision of Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Lexie works with Mercy West resident Dr. April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) on a burglar , and the two get in several disagreements , leading Lexie to steal her diary . Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) and Adamson continuously argue over the course of treatment for a patient , leading the patient 's daughter to yell at them in disbelief . Angry about the revelation that Percy ( who later <unk> saying that they can be friends outside the hospital , but not inside ) was using her , Stevens accidentally administers the wrong dialysis to a patient , making her an unviable candidate for the kidney transplant she was scheduled to receive . After arguing over surgical cases for the entirety of the day , Yang comes to the realization that she needs a cardiothoracic surgeon to work at the hospital . After being mistreated by Kepner , Lexie begins to mock her about what is written in her diary , thus ruining her emotionally , but subsequently apologizes . Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , Torres ' girlfriend , talks to Carlos , and convinces him to accept his daughter 's sexuality . Having found out about Stevens ' mistake , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) reprimands her reports her to the chief of surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) . Webber asks Stevens to come into her office , and he fires her from the staff , noting that Hunt , Shepherd , and Karev had concerns with her coming back to work so early . Stevens departs , writing Karev a Dear John letter , causing him to cry in front of Meredith and Yang . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Mark Wilding and directed by Tony Phelan . Jenny Barak edited the episode 's music and Donald Lee Harris served as production designer . Eric Dane ( Dr. Mark Sloan ) was absent from the episode . Featured music included The Myrmidon 's " Clap " , <unk> 's " I Want You Now " , and Greg Laswell 's remake of " Your Ghost " . " Invasion " was the last episode Heigl appeared in , before her five @-@ episode hiatus to film the romantic comedy Life As We Know It . 
 Wilding called the guest stars " a blast to work with " . He deemed the theme of the episode " invasion " , adding that all the character 's lives were being invaded . In the episode , Stevens makes a mistake , following a disagreement with Percy . Wilding commented that Stevens was originally seeking friendship with Percy , because he reminded her of O 'Malley . At the conclusion of the episode , Torres ultimately reunites with her father Carlos . Wilding offered his insight on this and the overall episode : 
 " Shonda came up with the idea of Mr. Torres showing up with the family priest . I immediately said YES because anytime I can see Hector Elizondo on my TV screen , I 'm all for it . In the scene where he 's quoting the Bible at Callie , he really is afraid he 's going to lose her . He 's desperate , yanking out those index cards like her very life depends on it . It was Hector 's idea to use the cards . He didn 't think his character would know that stuff of the top of his head , which is how I originally wrote it . And he was right . And it worked beautifully . And that final scene when he and Callie are outside the hospital and he 's asking her if she 'll still get married , still have kids … I really , really liked that scene . And I really , really liked their whole story . All told , I thought the episode came out pretty well . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 " Invasion " was first broadcast on October 15 , 2009 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company . The episode was viewed by a total of 13 @.@ 79 million Americans , down 0 @.@ 34 % from the previous episode " Tainted Obligation " , which garnered 14 @.@ 13 million viewers . In terms of viewership , " Invasion " ranked third for the night , just behind CBS 's juggernauts CSI and The Mentalist . The episode did not win in viewership , but its 5 @.@ 0 / 13 Nielsen rating ranked first in its 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot and the entire night , for both the rating and share percentages of the key 18 – 49 demographic , beating out CSI , The Mentalist , Private Practice , and The Office . Although its rating won for the night , it was a decrease from the previous episode , which garnered a 5 @.@ 4 / 14 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews among television critics . The Los Angeles Times ' Carina MacKenzie 's review of the episode was largely positive , though she called it " immature " of the episode 's writers to have the characters in constant battle with one another , and deemed the Mercy West resident 's orange scrubs unnecessary . MacKenzie highly praised the characterization of Kepner , in addition to Capshaw 's performance , commenting : " Jessica Capshaw has an incredible ability to take even the most melodramatic of Grey 's [ Anatomy ] speeches and deliver them with a subtlety and an honesty that makes them come off as sincere instead of overwrought . " MacKenzie concluded that Karev , Yang , and Meredith had appropriate reactions to Stevens ' departure . 
 Michael Pascua of The Huffington Post praised the scene in which Yang broke down to Meredith , noting the exceptional chemistry between them . Pascua was positive of the storyline between Torres , Carlos , and Robbins , writing that it was nice to see an emphasis on the gay storyline . Adam Bryant of TV Guide wrote that Baker 's character " seems like the only decent guy in the bunch " , though PopSugar asserted that Williams ' character " proves to be most likable of the new doctors " . 
 = Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock = 
 Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock ( initially referred to as Guitar Hero 6 or Guitar Hero VI ) is a music video game developed by Neversoft and published by Activision . It was the sixth main entry in the Guitar Hero series , and was released in September 2010 for PlayStation 3 , Wii ( ported by Vicarious Visions ) , and Xbox 360 . Similar to previous entries in the franchise , it is geared towards playing in a four @-@ person band experience , including lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . The game is available as a standalone title , allowing players to use existing compatible instrument controllers , and as a bundle that provides these controllers . 
 Warriors of Rock shares core gameplay elements with its predecessors , but introduced a new story mode in which the player must recruit eight characters — each with a unique ability that modifies the mechanics of the game — to help defeat an antagonist known as " The Beast " . The storyline also incorporated Rush 's seven @-@ part " 2112 " , as well as " Sudden Death " , a new song performed by Megadeth to serve as its culmination . Warriors of Rock carried over core gameplay and multiplayer functionality introduced by Guitar Hero 5 , including per @-@ song bonus challenges , and the ability to use power @-@ ups from the story mode in standard gameplay . 
 Warriors of Rock received mixed reviews from gaming journalists : while critics felt that Warriors of Rock would appeal best to long @-@ time fans of the Guitar Hero franchise , some felt that the overall soundtrack was weaker than that of past installments due to its lack of focus and use of lesser @-@ known songs and artists . The game 's " Quest Mode " was met with a similarly mixed reaction , with some critics considering it a notable change over the career modes of previous Guitar Hero games and praising certain highlights , such as the " 2112 " segment , but criticizing the pacing of the storyline and how its songs were organized . 
 Sales of Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock were weaker than those of Guitar Hero 5 , with combined sales of the game and DJ Hero 2 through the end of 2010 being 63 % lower than the sales of Guitar Hero 5 , DJ Hero and Band Hero through the end of 2009 . Initial shipments of Warriors of Rock were also bundled with a copy of Soundgarden 's compilation album Telephantasm ; based on its distribution with copies of the game , Telephantasm became the first album to receive a Platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America based on distribution alongside a video game . As a result of the underwhelming sales , also credited to the oversaturation of the music game market , the Guitar Hero franchise was ultimately shuttered until the 2015 unveiling of a reboot , Guitar Hero Live . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with previous games in the series , Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock is a rhythm game , allowing up to four people play in a band on vocals , lead and bass / rhythm guitar , and drums , to use special instrument controllers to simulate the playing of rock music . In general , the goal for each player is to match scrolling note gems that correspond to that instrument 's part in the given song to score points ; the guitar and bass player must hold down the appropriate colored buttons on the controller and then use the strum bar as the notes pass over a marked zone ; the drummer must strike the matching drum pads on the controller when the notes pass , and the vocalist must match the relative pitch of the song 's lyrics as guided by phrase markers . Successfully striking notes earns points and boosts the player 's performance meter ; missing notes will cause this meter to drop . When playing by one 's self , if the performance meter should empty , the song will end and require the player to restart it ; when playing in a band , the remaining band members must play well enough for a limited time to " revive " a player that has fallen out due to an empty performance meter , or else the whole band will fail the song . Prior to the start of a song , each player can select one of five difficulty levels : Beginner , Easy , Medium , Hard , and Expert , with a sixth difficulty of Expert + available to some songs on the drums which introduces a double bass pedal . Harder difficulties have characters with high note densities and more difficult playing techniques ; each player can select their own difficulty to play . 
 For guitar and bass players , the players are given the opportunity to play single notes or chords , both as single notes or sustained , during which the players must continue to hold down the fret button ( s ) for the extent of the sustain . Some charts provide the ability to hold down one sustained note via its fret button while strumming additional notes . Warriors of Rock also provides simulated hammer @-@ ons and pull @-@ offs , where , after striking one note , specifically marked notes can be played by fingering the correct buttons but without strumming . There are also note portions of some songs where notes appear semi @-@ transparent relative to normal notes ; these notes , introduced in Guitar Hero World Tour , can be played simply by tapping the correct buttons on the controller without strumming or using a touch @-@ sensitive " slider bar " below the fret buttons , if the player is using a World Tour controller . Bass players can play open chords by strumming without holding any fret buttons . Warriors of Rock introduces sustained open chords for bass players , although unlike other sustainable notes , does not require you to hold down the button required to execute the note initially . Drum players , when using velocity @-@ sensitive drum kits , may be presented with both ghosted notes or notes with a shield icon over them ; these represents drum notes that should be struck softer or harder than normal , respectively , to score more points . Drum players can also attach a second bass drum pedal , necessary for certain songs in the " Expert + " difficulty . 
 If the player successfully matches a number of consecutive notes correctly , they boost their individual scoring multiplier up to a maximum 4x value ; missing a note will reset to the multiplier back to 1x . Throughout each song 's respective charts for the instruments are special highlighted phrases ; completing all the notes in this phrase , and for guitar / bass players , using the whammy bar on marked sustained notes , fills part of a Star Power meter . When this meter is at least half full , the player can activate Star Power by performing special actions on their controllers : either tilting the guitar controller upward briefly or pressing the Star Power activation button for guitar and bass ; striking two pads simultaneously on the drums ; and either double tapping the microphone or pressing one of the buttons on the game console 's regular controllers for vocals . When Star Power is activated , the overall band scoring multiplier is increased for a limited time until the Star Power meter is drained . After completing a song , the band is awarded a number of stars based on the overall score ; in normal modes for Warriors of Rock , up to six stars can be earned ; the final being achievable only through zero misses and zero extra strums . 
 A major addition in Warriors of Rock is the use of special powers that come from special " warrior " forms of pre @-@ defined characters that are unlocked through the game 's Quest mode . These powers alter certain aspects of the core gameplay ; one character allows for the Star Power multiplier to boost up to six times instead of just double , while another earns the player a star for maintaining a scoring multiplier above a certain target for a length of time . When these powers are active , the players can earn well beyond five stars on a score either due to higher scoring opportunities or stars rewarded by the power , with a maximum of 40 stars available for each song . 
 = = = Game modes = = = 
 As with previous iterations of Guitar Hero , Warriors of Rock provides a career mode called " Quest Mode " that progresses through each of the on @-@ disc songs . Quest Mode is centered on a story @-@ telling element narrated by Gene Simmons , where the player must help save the Demigod of Rock from a mechanized creature called the Beast . To do this , the player must recruit eight characters for the battle against the Beast , each of whom have a unique power that affects gameplay . To recruit a character , the player must perform a number of songs that represent that character 's musical genre within a stylistic venue ; for example , the first character , the mohawk @-@ wearing Johnny Napalm , has a number of punk songs available , and uses the now @-@ defunct CBGB Club in New York City as his venue . After the player earns a minimum number of stars for that character , that character is transformed into a " warrior " , boosting their unique power , and is recruited into the player 's band . 
 Mid @-@ way through the Quest , the players will encounter the legendary ax @-@ guitar that belongs to the Demigod ; this section is highlighted by playing through the full seven @-@ part " 2112 " by Rush . Rush 's members , Geddy Lee , Neil Peart , and Alex Lifeson , narrate this section based on the story outlined in the liner notes of the 2112 album . The " 2112 " section also takes place in special venues inspired by the " 2112 " song , including the cave where the ax @-@ guitar is found , and one highlighting the iconic Starman image . After recruiting all eight characters , the player must divide the characters into two bands to " fight " against the Beast as to earn a maximum number of stars from each band 's combined powers in order to power the ax @-@ guitar and allow the Demigod to finish the Beast himself . This last battle is set to a new song , " Sudden Death " by Megadeth ( which would later appear in their album Thirteen , released the following year ) and written by their front @-@ man Dave Mustaine specifically for the conclusion of the game , and contains portions that he believed were " the most difficult parts " he has written in his life . When the player has completed the battle with the Beast , they have the opportunity to return to the previous venues , now with all eight powers active simultaneously , and attempt to achieve 40 @-@ star performances for each song in the game , as well as a comparatively difficult set of songs with the Demigod himself . 
 Video game journalists have noted thematic similarities between the story details of Warriors of Rock and Brütal Legend , an action video game with a world based on heavy metal , developed by Tim Schafer and Double Fine Productions which Activision , at one point , would have published but later dropped the rights . Project lead Brian Bright commented that their inspiration for the game 's story was the covers of metal albums , the same material that led to the world of Brütal Legend . 
 In the game 's Quickplay + mode , players can play any song on @-@ disc or from their downloadable content library . Each song has 13 different achievements to be completed . Twelve are similar to the Challenges introduced in Guitar Hero 5 , such as getting a high score , maintain a long note streak , or accumulating an amount of Star Power , and each has 3 levels ( gold , platinum , and diamond ) that translate to 1 to 3 additional stars once reached . If the player has unlocked the Warrior character powers in the Quest mode , they can enable these powers to try to get up to a maximum of 20 stars ( 21 for successfully completing the song without missing a note or hitting notes that aren 't there ) on each song for the thirteenth challenge . As the player earns stars in this mode , they will advance in rank and gain additional unlockable features such as alternate outfits or guitars and additional venue selections . Party mode introduced in Guitar Hero 5 is also available , where the game will automatically play songs like a jukebox , and allow for players to drop @-@ in or drop @-@ out at any time . The competitive modes introduced in Guitar Hero 5 are also carried over into Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , and are expanded to include band @-@ vs @-@ band variants . 
 The Wii version improves the " Roadie " game version introduced in Guitar Hero 5 . In this mode , up to four additional players with their own Nintendo DS wirelessly connected to the Wii ( the " Roadies " ) can assist the other players using instrument controllers . The Roadies can create setlists from the DS , or engage in gameplay through " spells " that improve the performance of the player they are assigned to . Alternatively , in Roadie Battle mode , the Roadies can attempt to distract another player while at the same time removing the distractions placed on their player by another Roadie . Warriors of Rock includes an improved version of a song creation tool , allowing players to share their songs using the online " GHTunes " services . Improvements include the ability to lay down note tracks directly while playing one of the instrument controllers and a larger number of guitar , bass , and drum samples to use . The player can use the built @-@ on GH Studio to create their own music , save for vocals , to share with others on the GH Tracks service , either by laying down tracks one note at a time , or by jamming along to a pre @-@ defined beat . Players can create their own customized rocker to use in Quickplay + or online modes through the character creator , or use either the regular form or the Warrior version of the eight on @-@ disc characters . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 There are no caricatures of real @-@ life musicians in the game due to ongoing legal issues with the likenesses of musician celebrities in Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero . As such , only eight fictional guitarists are featured in the game ; more specifically , four men and four women . Each one has a special power that helps the player improve their score . In Quest Mode , the characters must obtain a certain number of " power stars " in order to transform into their warrior state , whereupon their power is upgraded into a " + " state which either boosts the effect or adds bonus effects . 
 = = = = Johnny Napalm = = = = 
 Johnny Napalm 's power is called " Speed Freak . " The effects of this power keep the multiplier at a minimum of double points . Additionally , maintaining a multiplier of triple points or higher will earn the player up to 2 power stars . Once Johnny has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into his warrior form , a hobgoblin , his power is upgraded to " Speed Freak + . " With this upgrade , the multiplier increases after hitting 5 notes in a row rather than 10 . Additionally , the amount of power stars that the player can earn by maintaining a multiplier of triple points or higher is increased to 5 . 
 = = = = Echo Tesla = = = = 
 Echo Tesla 's power is called " Star Power Generator . " The effects of this power fill the star power gauge by 5 % after hitting 10 notes in a row . Once Echo has obtained the necessary amount of power stars and has transformed into her warrior form , a cyborg , her power is upgraded to " Star Power Generator + . " With this upgrade , hitting 10 notes in a row fills the star power gauge by 10 % rather than 5 % . 
 = = = = Judy Nails = = = = 
 Judy Nails ' power is called " Crowd Hyper . " With it , the rock meter starts in the green section rather than the yellow section . Also , hitting notes while the rock meter is at the maximum , or " overflowing " the rock meter , will grant the player up to 2 power stars . Once Judy has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into her warrior form , a demon , her power is upgraded to " Crowd Hyper + . " With this upgrade , the rock meter starts at the maximum , and overflowing the rock meter now grants up to 5 power stars . 
 = = = = Austin Tejas = = = = 
 Austin Tejas ' power is called " Star Power Amplifier . " With it , successfully completing a star power sequence fills the star power gauge by 50 % rather than 25 % , allowing the player to use star power instantly . Once Austin has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into his warrior form , a headless horseman , his power is upgraded to " Star Power Amplifier + . " With this upgrade , successfully completing a star power sequence fills the star power gauge to the maximum . 
 = = = = Pandora = = = = 
 Pandora 's power is called " Star Power Nova . " With it , star power triples the player 's multiplier rather than doubling it . Once Pandora has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into her warrior form , an elf , her power is upgraded to " Star Power Nova + . " With this upgrade , star power now <unk> the player 's multiplier . 
 = = = = Lars Ümlaüt = = = = 
 Lars Ümlaüt 's power is called " Multiplier Extender . " The effects of this power increase the multiplier 's maximum from quadruple points to quintuple points . Once Lars has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into his warrior form , a half human , half boar hybrid , his power is upgraded to " Multiplier Extender + . " With this upgrade , the multiplier 's maximum increases from quintuple points to sextuple points . 
 = = = = Casey Lynch = = = = 
 Casey Lynch 's power is called " Streak Guardian . " With this power , the player 's note streak is protected by a shield that keeps the player 's note streak from resetting should they miss a note ; the shield refills quickly . Additionally , maintaining high note streaks will grant the player up to 2 power stars . Once Casey has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into her warrior form , a half human , half snake hybrid , her power is upgraded to " Streak Guardian + . " With this upgrade , the player is given 2 shields rather than 1 , and maintaining high note streaks grants up to 5 power stars . 
 = = = = Axel Steel = = = = 
 Axel Steel 's power is called " <unk> . " With this power , the player can earn up to 2 ankhs that will revive the player with the rock meter in the yellow section should they fail the song . Additionally , any ankhs left over after the song is complete are converted into 1 power star each . Once Axel has obtained enough power stars and has transformed into his warrior form , a mummy , his power is upgraded to " <unk> + . " With this upgrade , the maximum number of ankhs the player can earn is increased to 5 . 
 = = = = The Demigod of Rock = = = = 
 Once the player has defeated " the Beast , " the player unlocks the Demigod of Rock as a playable character . The Demigod of Rock 's power is called " All Powerful . " This power uses all 8 of the warriors ' powers at once . 
 = = Development = = 
 After weak sales in 2009 of several titles in the Guitar Hero series , Activision proceeded to make several changes with their internal development teams . The company dissolved RedOctane , bringing in some of the staff directly into Activision . Activision further shuttered Neversoft 's Guitar Hero division , pending the completion of Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , with further development in the series to be created by some former Neversoft members and Vicarious Visions . Brian Bright , former Neversoft member and current project lead , noted that part of the poor sales of Guitar Hero in 2009 was a result of a loss of focus with Guitar Hero 5 , stating that " we were trying to please everyone out there and I think in the end you end up not pleasing any one person a lot " . With Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , Bright wanted to bring the game back to please the fans of the earlier Guitar Hero games , specifically the highly successful Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . To that end , the team developed a soundtrack " more focused on rock ' n ' roll " than the variety of genres within Guitar Hero 5 . The songs are more guitar @-@ centric , as proven to be the most popular instrument choice based on Guitar Hero 5 . Bright noted they used player statistics from previous games to shape Warriors of Rock ; for example , according to Bright , within a month of release , 40 % of the players of Guitar Hero 5 were playing on Expert mode , and felt this was the audience they needed to cater to . Bright also stated that the aim of Warriors of Rock was to create a game with " its own identity " from both previous Guitar Hero titles and other rhythm games ; " Rather than go head @-@ to @-@ head with our own games and our competitors , we decided we wanted to make something different . " 
 Part of creating the new identity for Warriors of Rock was by creating the game 's Quest mode . Activision contacted Gene Simmons , who initially thought the company was asking for a KISS song to be included in the game . Instead , when Simmons learned they wanted him to be the narrator and the voice of the Demigod , he became very interested in the project feeling that the Demigod character had elements of his own stage personality in it . Activision also approached the members of Rush for inclusion of " 2112 " , and the group provided inspiration and feedback on the Rush @-@ themed venues that " 2112 " is played in within the game . The developers also approached Dave Mustaine of Megadeth to write the music for the game 's final boss battle . The Quest mode also gave Activision the opportunity to explore the characters that have been in the series since its inception but otherwise only used as player avatar . The developers were able to expand on these existing designs and gave each one a unique venue and setlist throughout the campaign . 
 A new guitar controller was developed for the game to help with " shredding " and an art style to match the changes made in the game 's visuals . The guitar hardware has been significantly redesigned to locate most of the base electronics and wireless controls into the main fretboard of the unit , containing the colored fret buttons , strum and whammy bar , and other controls for interacting with the game console . As such , this allows the body of the guitar to be <unk> with custom designs , allowing players to personalize the control to their wishes ; one design will be exclusive to those that pre @-@ order the game through GameStop . The new guitar controller remains backwards compatible with previous games . Within North America , the new drum kit is also sold individually or in bundles with Warriors of Rock . The kit had previously been packed with Band Hero in the United Kingdom and with the Wii version of Band Hero in North America , but otherwise was not sold separately . The drum kit is MIDI @-@ enabled with a detachable " drum brain " allowing other drum kits to be used instead with the game , while the game 's kit can be used with any MIDI @-@ capable music editing system . The music video for Soundgarden 's " Black Rain " , is animated by Titmouse , Inc . , the same studio that performs the in @-@ game animations for Guitar Hero as well as Metalocalypse , and includes images of a young man playing Guitar Hero using the new guitar controller introduced in Warriors of Rock . 
 A demo for the game was released on Xbox Live on September 7 , 2010 , and features four songs : " Children of the Grave " by Black Sabbath , " No Way Back " by Foo Fighters , " Ghost " by Slash featuring Ian Astbury , and " Bloodlines " by Dethklok . On release , some players reported getting faulty discs , which Activision stated they will replace . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 There are 93 songs on disc for Warriors of Rock . According to Bright , all the songs have been selected to fit within a narrow set of music genres , " punk , alternative rock , and classic rock " , to avoid dilution of the game 's focus . Bright noted that " there 's still range and still a lot of variety in this game " to avoid alienating long @-@ time fans of the series in general . The developers also looked at various song structures and considered if they would be fun to play ; Bright said that a good song for the game " would have a memorable riff but not feel repetitive " and " would be a good amount of chord changes and , ideally , a fun guitar solo to add to the challenge " . Two songs , Alice Cooper 's " No More Mr. Nice Guy " and The Runaways ' " Cherry Bomb " , have been specifically re @-@ recorded for use in Warriors of Rock . Megadeth 's " Sudden Death " was specifically written as the final song within Warriors of Rock 's setlist ; its polyrhythms and difficult passes make it one of the toughest songs to beat . " Sudden Death " was nominated , but did not win , for " Best Metal Performance " for the 53rd Grammy Awards ; this , along with the song " Baba <unk> " from Civilization IV and " Video Games Live " , represents the first time a song composed for a video game has earned a Grammy nomination , with " Baba <unk> " continuing to win its award . 
 Warriors of Rock supported additional songs through downloadable content that players can purchase on their respective console storefronts . All previous downloadable content that worked with Guitar Hero 5 , including previous content from Guitar Hero World Tour , Guitar Hero : Smash Hits , and Band Hero , will work in Warriors of Rock . More than 500 tracks were available to players at launch . In addition , 39 songs from Guitar Hero : Metallica were importable into Warriors of Rock upon the game 's release . In February 2011 , Activision decided to shutter their Guitar Hero development , and initially stated that no further downloadable content will be forthcoming . Due to " continued support " from their fanbase , Activision has since decided it will continue to release downloadable content for Warriors of Rock through at least March and April 2011 with packs that were in the works prior to the closure of Guitar Hero . 
 Initial shipments of the game were also bundled with a copy of the Soundgarden compilation album Telephantasm ; its new song " Black Rain " was included among the playable songs included on Warriors of Rock , while the remaining eleven tracks on the album were made available as downloadable content . Because of the album 's inclusion with over one million shipped copies of Warriors of Rock , the Recording Industry Association of America certified Telephantasm as a platinum record ; it is considered the first time such a distinction has been made based on " non @-@ returnable units from a music label to a gaming company " according to Soundgarden 's promotional group . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock received mixed to positive reviews from gaming critics . Most critics acknowledged that Warriors of Rock was an attempt to distance itself from its competitor , the Rock Band series , and a return to the Guitar Hero series ' roots . However , in the attempt to redefine the series , some critics thought Warriors of Rock failed to recapture the experience of playing the earlier Guitar Hero games . Arthur Gies of IGN felt the game was " aimless " , leaving him to question " why Warriors of Rock is here " . Tyler Cocke of 1UP.com commented that Warriors of Rock " seems to have forgotten that music games are supposed to be all about having a good time " . Ben <unk> of Ars Technica considered that Warriors of Rock keeps the series " treading water " and lacks " any real upward movement " , and may have been a step back with how relaxed the game 's timing windows have become compared to early Guitar Hero games . Others note that the game can be enjoyable , but only to those that are fans of the series , and is not well @-@ suited to new or casual players . G4 's Abbie Heppe found the game " does an exceptional job of catering to the hardcore audience " but warns the casual fan that may not enjoy the setlist to simply " move along " . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer postulated if Guitar Hero may have jumped the shark with the " often stupid and frequently silly " gameplay and visuals , but was still entertained in playing through the game . 
 Quest mode , considered the game 's largest change , has mixed reception . The use of " 2112 " as a centerpiece in the Quest mode was praised by critics ; Johnny Minkley of Eurogamer said that the concept is " pitch @-@ perfect " for Warriors of Rock and was " a clever and enjoyable break from the typically rigid career structure " . Cocke noted that the " 2112 " section feels like " nice fanservice " and its length and complexity would not be fun for players uninterested in Rush , while Helgeson felt that the " awkward recitation " by the band members were unnecessary . Other aspects of Quest mode were found to be less enjoyable . Gene Simmons 's voice @-@ over narration was found " stilted and awkward " . While the story carried similar heavy metal themes as Brutal Legend , very few of the songs within the game are from that genre ; to Cocke , this felt " like a desperate attempt to gain credibility with too many crowds , but it ends up spreading itself too thin " . The Globe and Mail 's Chad Sapieha felt that the Quest mode " simply disguised [ the series ' ] aging career mode " , with the characters ' powers being " hardly satisfying " and only a means to " artificially inflate one 's score " . After the player has completed the " 2112 " setpiece , the rest of the Quest mode was disappointing ; Minkley compared the second half of this mode as a " disengaging slog to level up the remaining four characters " . Gies felt the " rigid and often frustrating " Quest mode led to playing the songs in an order that was " all over the place in terms of tone , difficulty , and most importantly , fun " . Some reviewers felt the improved Quickplay + mode to be the highlight of the game ; Heppe noted that the mode " probably seems too basic to be the star of the game , but it really shines " while Minkley considered that it " offer [ ed ] a far stronger reason to replay than the embryonic Quest Mode manages " . Gies ' review of the Wii version noted that the Roadie Battles mode exclusive to the Wii version was enjoyable and " helps the Wii version of the game to stand tall " to the high @-@ definition console version . 
 Reviewers found the soundtrack to lack the focus that Activision claims it has , and that the series may have exhausted a number of good guitar songs in its previous iterations . Gies stated that the game soundtrack " may be the most uneven collection in any of the main Guitar Hero titles " , citing problems with " a surplus of tracks that seem out of place " , " too many songs that are just boring to play " , and " a number of synth heavy songs that are nevertheless shoehorned " into the game . Official Xbox Magazine UK stated that the setlist " feels at times uninspired , incongruous and uninteresting " . Helgeson felt the setlist was " a mixed bag " , with a strong and balanced set of songs in the early tiers of Quest mode , while the latter , more difficult songs were " terrible and felt like a chore " to complete . Roger Hargreaves of The Metro commented that " with so many of the more iconic rock songs having already been used in previous Guitar Hero and Rock Band games developers are forced to use ever more obscure songs and / or acts " . Heppe also considered the lack of iconic song , noting the setlist " seems like the same bands we always see in [ Guitar Hero ] , just their 3rd tier hits " . On the other hand , USA Today 's Mike Snider claimed that the game 's soundtrack " gave [ him ] a reason to blast music on [ his ] stereo " , and besides providing well @-@ known songs and bands , introduced him to new bands . 
 Initial sales of Warriors of Rock were below estimates . NPD Group reported 86 @,@ 000 units sold in the United States across all platforms for the last five days of September during which it was available . This figure fell below the initial sales of the previous games , such as 1 @.@ 5 million and 500 @,@ 000 units in first @-@ week sales for Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock and Guitar Hero World Tour , respectively . Combined sales in North America of Warriors of Rock and DJ Hero 2 were below one million in 2010 , 63 % below the total sales of Guitar Hero 5 , DJ Hero , and Band Hero in 2009 . Weak sales of Warriors of Rock , in part , led to Activision shuttering its Guitar Hero business unit in February 2011 and cancelling a planned 2011 sequel . As a result of the closure , no further downloadable content was created following the February 2011 packs . 
 = Tom Pryce = 
 Thomas <unk> Pryce ( 11 June 1949 – 5 March 1977 ) was a British racing driver from Wales , famous for winning the Brands Hatch Race of Champions , a non @-@ championship Formula One race , in 1975 and for the circumstances surrounding his death . Pryce is the only Welsh driver to have won a Formula One race and is also the only Welshman to lead a Formula One World Championship Grand Prix : two laps of the 1975 British Grand Prix . 
 Pryce started his career in Formula One with the small Token team , making his only start for them at the 1974 Belgian Grand Prix . Shortly after an impressive performance at the Formula Three support race for the 1974 Monaco Grand Prix , Pryce joined the Shadow team and scored his first points in Germany in only his fourth race . Pryce later claimed two podium finishes , his first in Austria in 1975 and the second in Brazil a year later . Pryce was considered by his team as a great wet @-@ weather driver . During the practice session for the 1977 South African Grand Prix , run in wet conditions , Pryce was faster than everyone , including world champion drivers Niki Lauda and James Hunt . During the race , he collided at high speed with a safety marshal , Frederik Jansen van Vuuren , and both men were killed . A memorial to Pryce was unveiled in 2009 in his home town of Ruthin . 
 = = Personal and early life = = 
 Tom Pryce was born on 11 June 1949 in Ruthin , Denbighshire , to Jack and Gwyneth Pryce . Jack had served in the Royal Air Force as a tail @-@ gunner on a Lancaster bomber before joining the local police force . Gwyneth was a district nurse . Pryce 's older brother , David , died at the age of three leaving Tom an only child for much of the time he was growing up , although his parents did foster a young girl called Sandra for a while . Pryce , known to his friends as <unk> , attended <unk> Catholic Primary School , Denbighshire . The family later moved to <unk> , <unk> , due to Jack 's job . 
 Pryce took an interest in cars while driving a baker 's van at the age of 10 , before informing his parents that he wanted to be a racing driver . During an interview with Alan Henry in 1975 , he stated that he had wanted to become a pilot , but thought he was not intelligent enough . Like many future Formula One drivers , Pryce had a childhood racing hero . In his case it was Lotus 's Scottish driver Jim Clark . Pryce 's mother recalled that he was very upset when Clark died at the Hockenheimring in April 1968 . His father noted that " he was very upset when Jochen Rindt was killed , too " . After he left school at 16 , Pryce 's mother insisted that he take an apprenticeship as a tractor mechanic at <unk> Technical College , giving him " something to fall back on " , as she put it , if his career as a racing driver was unsuccessful . 
 In 1975 Pryce married Fenella , more commonly known as Nella , whom he met at a disco in Otford , Kent in 1973 . Following the death of her husband , Nella went on to run an antiques store in Fulham , London with Janet Brise , the widow of Tony Brise , who died in a plane crash in 1975 with fellow racing driver , Graham Hill and later moved to France . 
 = = Helmet design = = 
 Tom Pryce 's helmet design was , in comparison to later drivers ' , simple and restrained . His helmet was plain white all over until 1970 . At that year 's race at Castle Combe , his father asked Pryce to make his helmet stand out more so that he could easily identify him in a pack of cars . Pryce added five black vertical lines to his helmet , placed just above his visor . From that time the only change to this design was the addition of a Welsh flag to the side of his helmet in 1974 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Formula One = = = 
 = = = = 1969 – 1971 : Early years = = = = 
 Pryce 's first steps into motor racing came at the Mallory Park circuit in Leicestershire when he was 20 . Pryce was put through his paces by Trevor Taylor , an ex @-@ Team Lotus driver and old team mate of Pryce 's childhood hero Clark . He later became a star in the Formula 5000 series . From there , Pryce went on to compete in the Daily Express Crusader Championship , a series run by Motor Racing Stables for racing school pupils using Lotus 51 Formula Ford cars . Races alternated between the Brands Hatch and Silverstone circuits ; Pryce made his début at the former . " The races were £ 35 a time . But I sold my Mini and my parents offered all the help and encouragement I could wish for " Pryce recalled to Alan Henry . 
 The prize for the overall winner of the series was a Formula Ford Lola <unk> worth £ 1 @,@ 500 . The series was decided at the last round , held at Silverstone , the day before the 1970 Formula One International Trophy . Pryce qualified on the third row for the race , which was held in rain . Jack Pryce remembered that his son was rubbing his hands in delight : " he always loved racing in the rain " . The early part of the race was led by a driver called Chris Smith but then heavy rain started and Pryce was able to catch up with Smith and overtake him before winning by a comfortable margin . He was given his Lola by Sir Max Aitken . 
 Pryce took his new car to Brands Hatch , where he was allowed to house it in one of the old stables at the bottom of the paddock . Pryce soon abandoned his farming career and moved to a guest house in West <unk> , near the Brands Hatch circuit . Pryce continued to make a name for himself during 1971 , entering a new twin @-@ seater Sportscar category called Formula F100 , which he won with what was described by motorsports author David Tremayne as " embarrassing ease " . He then moved up to Formula Super Vee , driving the then @-@ choice Royale <unk> , for Team Rumsey Investments , and soon made his Formula Three début for the same manufacturer at Brands Hatch . 
 = = = = 1972 – 73 : Lower formulae = = = = 
 In that race at Brands Hatch , Pryce took an <unk> Royale <unk> to first place in the Formula Three support race for the 1972 Formula One Race of Champions against many established Formula Three drivers such as Roger Williamson , Jochen Mass and James Hunt . So large was Pryce 's advantage at the end of the race , many of the other teams voiced an opinion that Pryce 's car had run the race underweight ; it turned out that the circuit 's weighbridge certificate had expired and everyone 's cars had been underweight . Pryce retired from the leading group in the following two rounds at Oulton Park and Zandvoort , and then during practice for the support race of the 1972 Monaco Grand Prix his car came to a stop at Casino Square after a wire had come loose . He had exited his car to correct the problem when Peter Lamplough lost control of his car and struck the Royale <unk> . Pryce was knocked into a shop window and broke a leg . 
 The Welshman was back in action two weeks after his incident in Monaco . Pryce also ran in the Formula <unk> series , winning the series by a comfortable margin , " I won just about every race I went in for " Pryce recalled . A run with Royale 's Formula Atlantic works team was also in store for Pryce during 1972 , where he took pole position for the final three rounds of the championship and won the final round at Brands Hatch . 
 He continued racing in Formula Atlantic in 1973 , winning three races . Royale soon had plans to enter Formula Two , such was the Welshman 's talent . The ambition to run in the Formula Two championship was planned to be financially fuelled by a Liechtenstein driver , Manfred <unk> . These plans only resulted in one of Royale 's F2 cars being built before the project was scrapped and Bob King , the head of Royale , left the company . 
 Following an invitation to test one of his cars , Pryce found himself racing in the Formula Two series with Ron Dennis 's Rondel Racing outfit . His best result for the team came at the Norisring where he was leading the race until a brake failure meant he had to give up first place to team mate Tim <unk> . At the end of 1973 , Pryce won the <unk> award for his efforts during the year . Jack Pryce recalled that his son did not want to win the award , as he thought it was " a jinx on a driver 's career " . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 = = = = 1974 : Token = = = = 
 At the age of 25 , Pryce graduated to Formula One , the highest category of circuit racing defined by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , motorsport 's world governing body , joining the newly formed Token Racing team . The team was created by Tony <unk> and Ken Grob after the original Token team closed down in 1973 due to a lack of financial backing which had led to the end of the previous Rondel Racing outfit . Pryce was given the seat thanks to his backing from Titan Properties , and what David Tremayne described as " evident promise " . Pryce made his début for the team at the BRDC International Trophy , a non @-@ championship Formula One event held at Silverstone , but lack of an airbox and an engine cover , along with his shortage of experience in the car , made him the slowest driver of the 16 competitors during qualifying : 26 seconds slower than James Hunt 's Hesketh in pole position . The Welshman retired 15 laps into the race with a gear linkage problem . Pryce 's World Championship début came at the 1974 Belgian Grand Prix , where he qualified in 20th place , 3 seconds slower than the fastest time set by Clay Regazzoni . Once again , he failed to finish , completing 66 laps before retiring after a collision with Jody Scheckter 's Tyrrell . 
 Pryce was refused entry to the 1974 Monaco Formula One Grand Prix , as he was deemed " inexperienced " . Instead , he took part in the supporting Formula Three race , driving for <unk> Racing , in a March 743 , which he won by 20 @.@ 8 seconds . 
 = = = = 1974 – 77 : Shadow = = = = 
 1974 
 Following his impressive drive in Monaco , and a short spell in Formula Two , Pryce was signed by Shadow as replacement for Brian Redman , who had in turn replaced Peter Revson . Pryce made his début for the team in the 1974 Dutch Grand Prix . He qualified in 11th position , less than 0 @.@ 4 seconds slower than his team mate , Jean @-@ Pierre Jarier , who was in his second full season of Formula One competition . Pryce retired on the first lap of the race after a collision with James Hunt at the first corner broke his Shadow <unk> 's rear suspension . Pryce qualified third in his second Grand Prix for the team , in France , 0 @.@ 32 seconds slower than Niki Lauda 's pole position time but nearly half a second quicker than Jarier . Once again , Pryce 's race ended at the first corner , when minor contact with Carlos Reutemann 's Brabham deflected Pryce 's Shadow into the path of James Hunt . The second collision between the two British drivers in as many races eliminated them both . Later in the season , Pryce received 100 bottles of champagne for finishing fastest in the practice session for the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch . He went on to qualify on the fourth row of the starting grid . 
 Pryce scored the first point of his career in the 1974 German Grand Prix at the challenging Nürburgring circuit . After finishing 6th from 11th on the grid , he then qualified in 16th for the next Grand Prix in Austria , but spun off on lap 22 , ending his race . He qualified in 22nd place for the Italian Grand Prix , and finished 12 places higher . His season ended miserably , with an engine failure in Canada , and the Shadow severely off the pace in Watkins Glen . At the end of the season Pryce was equal 18th in the Drivers ' Championship with Graham Hill and Vittorio Brambilla . 
 1975 
 At the start of the 1975 season , Pryce 's future was subject to much speculation . Rumour linked him with a drive at Lotus , the team run by Colin Chapman , who had been keeping an eye on Pryce 's progress throughout 1973 and 1974 . At the time , Lotus was experiencing financial difficulties and reports suggested that Shadow and Lotus would swap Pryce and Swede Ronnie Peterson . The trade was viewed as a good acquisition for both teams , as Pryce was considered a driver of the same ability as Peterson , but would cost Lotus less , while Peterson could attract sponsorship to the relatively new Shadow team . The deal never materialised , although Shadow team manager Alan Rees claims that it came very close to being completed . 
 Pryce 's Shadow team mate , Jean @-@ Pierre Jarier , out @-@ qualified him in the early part of the 1975 season , as the French driver had the new Shadow DN5 car , while Pryce was in the older <unk> . It was not until the third round , the South African Grand Prix , that Pryce was able to use a DN5 . The team 's fourth race of the season was the non @-@ championship Race of Champions held at Brands Hatch . Pryce qualified on pole position and , following a poor start , passed Peterson and Jacky Ickx before closing an eight @-@ second gap to race leader Jody Scheckter , whose engine failed while Pryce harried him , letting Pryce through to become the first Welshman to win a Formula One race . Pryce showed other signs of promise during the season , most notably in Monaco and Silverstone where he qualified on the front row of the grid , the latter being in pole position . Pryce also achieved his first World Championship podium finish , in extremely wet conditions at the Austrian Grand Prix and finished in the points four more times . The highest of those came in Germany where he finished fourth , despite the fact that while he was running second behind Carlos Reutemann fuel had been leaking into the cockpit of his DN5 during the final laps around the very long Nürburgring , reportedly " searing his skin and almost blinding him with fumes " . The Welshman later received the Prix Rouge et Blanc Jo <unk> award , named after the Swiss Formula One driver , for this achievement . 
 At the end of December 1975 , Pryce and Dave Richards , future head of the <unk> motorsports engineering company , entered a Lancia Stratos in the Tour of <unk> , a rally event contested by many established rallying names . Pryce needed little persuasion to team up for the one @-@ off event on home soil with Richards , both of whom were from Ruthin . Pryce crashed into a bridge 10 miles ( 16 km ) into the first stage , but still competed in the afternoon stages after his car was rebuilt . 
 1976 
 Once the 1976 Formula One World Championship season got under way Pryce instantly added a second podium finish to his tally , at the first round in Brazil . This came at the expense of continuing team mate Jarier , who was caught out by oil on the track from James Hunt 's McLaren . Both Shadows enjoyed reasonable competitiveness during the next two races at Kyalami and Long Beach . Changes in car regulations , meaning that teams had to lower their <unk> and mount the cars ' rear wings further forward , along with revised Goodyear tyres , meant the Shadow <unk> lost much of its competitiveness ; Pryce still achieved a second points scoring finish of the season in Britain . The new Shadow DN8 was not introduced until the twelfth round at Zandvoort , where Pryce qualified the new car in third , and finished the race only one place lower in fourth : it was the last points scoring finish of his career . The Welshman finished his last full season 12th in the Drivers ' Championship with 10 points , 59 points behind World Champion James Hunt . 
 1977 
 Jarier left Shadow before the start of the 1977 Formula One season , for ATS , and was replaced by Italian Renzo Zorzi . Zorzi was later rated by Jackie Oliver , part of the managerial team at Shadow , as " the worst driver we [ the Shadow team ] ever had " . The new signing brought in sponsorship from Italy , easing Shadow 's financial position . Pryce started the first race of the year in Argentina in ninth place and stayed with the leading group until a gear linkage failure on the 45th lap of the 52 lap race . Following a long pit stop to fix the fault , he was not classified . Pryce qualified 12th for the second round in Brazil , but on lap 34 retired from the race , while running in second place , as the result of an engine failure . 
 = = Death = = 
 Tom Pryce began his final race weekend , the 1977 South African Grand Prix at Kyalami , by setting the fastest time in the Wednesday practice session , held in wet weather . Pryce posted a time of 1 minute 31 @.@ 57 seconds with the next best , the eventual 1977 World Champion Niki Lauda , a full second slower . The weather dried up prior to the Thursday session , and he slipped back down the grid to fifteenth place , almost two seconds slower than James Hunt 's pole position time . 
 Pryce made a poor start to the Grand Prix in his DN8 and by the end of the first lap was in last place . Pryce started to climb back up the field during the next couple of laps , overtaking Brett <unk> and team mate Renzo Zorzi on lap two , and Alex Ribeiro and Boy <unk> the following lap . By lap 18 Pryce had moved from 22nd to 13th place . 
 On lap 22 , Zorzi pulled off to the left side of the main straight , just after the brow of a hill and a bridge over the track . He was having problems with his fuel metering unit , and fuel was pumping directly onto the engine , which then caught fire . Zorzi did not immediately get out of his car as he could not disconnect the oxygen pipe from his helmet . 
 The situation caused two marshals from the pit wall on the opposite side of the track to intervene . The first marshal to cross the track was a 25 @-@ year @-@ old panel beater named William ( Bill ) . The second was 19 @-@ year @-@ old Frederik " <unk> " Jansen van Vuuren , who was carrying a 40 @-@ pound ( 18 kg ) fire extinguisher . George Witt , the chief pit marshal for the race , said that the policy of the circuit was that in cases of fire , two marshals must attend and a further two act as back @-@ up in case the first pair 's extinguishers were not effective enough . Witt also recalled that both marshals crossed the track without prior permission . The former narrowly made it across the track , but the latter did not . As the two men started to run across the track , the cars driven by Hans @-@ Joachim Stuck and Pryce came over the brow of a rise in the track . 
 Pryce was directly behind Stuck 's car along the main straight , Stuck saw Jansen van Vuuren and moved to the right to avoid both marshals , missing Bill by what Tremayne calls " millimetres " . From his position Pryce could not see Jansen van Vuuren and was unable to react as quickly as Stuck had done . He struck the teenage marshal at approximately 270 km / h ( 170 mph ) . Jansen van Vuuren was thrown into the air and landed in front of Zorzi and Bill . He died on impact , and his body was badly mutilated by Pryce 's car . The fire extinguisher he had been carrying smashed into Pryce 's head , before striking the Shadow 's roll hoop . The force of the impact was such that the extinguisher was thrown up and over the adjacent grandstand . It landed in the car park to the rear of the stand , where it hit a parked car and jammed its door shut . 
 The impact with the fire extinguisher wrenched Pryce 's helmet upward sharply . Death was almost certainly instantaneous . Pryce 's Shadow DN8 , now with its driver dead at the wheel , continued at speed down the main straight towards the first corner , called <unk> . The car left the track to the right , scraping the metal barriers , hitting an entrance for emergency vehicles , and veering back onto the track . It then hit Jacques Laffite 's Ligier , sending both Pryce and Laffite head @-@ on into the barriers . Jansen van Vuuren 's injuries were so extensive that , initially , his body was identified only after the race director had summoned all of the race marshals and he was not among them . 
 The eventual race winner was Austrian Niki Lauda , his first win since his near fatal accident during the 1976 German Grand Prix . At first he announced it was the greatest victory of his career , but when told on the victory podium of Pryce 's death , he said that " there was no joy after that " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Pryce 's death , and its horrific nature , were met with great grief from all those who knew him during his career , especially his wife Nella , his parents Jack and Gwyneth and the Shadow team . His body was buried at St Bartholomew 's Church in Otford , near Sevenoaks , Kent , the same church where he and Nella were married two years earlier . 
 Pryce 's performances in a Formula One car earned him much respect amongst the F1 paddock . David Tremayne named his son after the Welshman . The Tom Pryce Award , also known as the Tom Pryce Trophy , was instigated , and is given annually to Welsh personalities who have made an outstanding contribution to motoring or transport . 
 During its re @-@ design the Anglesey Circuit in North Wales named the Tom Pryce Straight after a request from Ruthin Town Council . A trust was established in 2006 to create a memorial to Pryce in Ruthin . A local artist was commissioned by Ruthin Town Council in 2008 to design an 8 @-@ by @-@ 4 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 by 1 @.@ 2 m ) plaque and in February 2009 , an auction of Formula One pit passes to fund its manufacture was announced . The memorial was unveiled on 11 June 2009 , on what would have been Pryce 's 60th birthday . 
 = = Complete Formula One World Championship results = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) 
 = 2000 German Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 German Grand Prix ( formally the LXII Großer Mobil 1 Preis von Deutschland ) was a Formula One motor race held on 30 July 2000 at the Hockenheimring near Hockenheim , Germany . It was the eleventh round of the 2000 Formula One season and the 62nd German Grand Prix . The 45 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Rubens Barrichello after starting from 18th position . Mika Häkkinen finished second for the McLaren team with teammate David Coulthard third . 
 Coulthard started from pole position alongside Michael Schumacher . Coulthard 's teammate Häkkinen began from third . At the first corner Michael Schumacher moved to the left and Giancarlo Fisichella collided with him and both drivers retired . Häkkinen took the lead of the race which he held until an intruder penetrated circuit limits on lap 25 causing drivers to make pit stops under safety car conditions . Barrichello , meanwhile , had gained thirteen positions to run fifth until the first safety car period . Häkkinen retook the lead after Coulthard pitted on lap 27 . Barrichello stayed out on dry slick tyres , taking the lead which he held to clinch the first victory of his Formula One career . 
 Barrichello 's victory was considered popular amongst the Formula One paddock as it came after a setback during his career . The race result meant Häkkinen and Coulthard were tied for second place but the points advantage to Michael Schumacher was reduced to two points . Barrichello remained a further eight points behind the McLaren drivers . In the Constructors ' Championship McLaren reduced Ferrari 's lead to four points , who were 80 points ahead of Williams with six races of the season remaining . The track intruder , named as 47 @-@ year @-@ old Frenchman Robert Sehli , later apologised for his actions . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors were , McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought four different tyre types to the race : two dry compounds , the soft and the medium , and two wet @-@ weather compounds , the intermediate and full wet . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 56 points , ahead of David Coulthard on 50 points and Mika Häkkinen on 48 points . Rubens Barrichello was fourth with 36 points whilst Giancarlo Fisichella was fifth with 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship Ferrari were leading with 92 points , McLaren and Williams with 88 points and 19 points were second and third respectively , whilst Benetton with 18 points and BAR with 12 points contended with fourth place . Ferrari and McLaren had so far dominated the championship winning ten out of the ten previous races . Championship competitors Barrichello and Fisichella had each gained second @-@ place finishes , whilst Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had achieved third place podium finishes . 
 Following the Austrian Grand Prix on 16 July , the teams conducted testing sessions at three circuits from July 18 – 21 to prepare for the Grand Prix . McLaren , Benetton , Jordan , Jaguar , Sauber and BAR went to Silverstone over three days . Olivier Panis , McLaren 's test driver , set the fastest time on the first day of testing . Jaguar test driver Luciano Burti crashed at Stowe corner where his car 's suspension , front and rear wings , and sidepod were damaged . The resulting incident caused a brief halt to testing and Jaguar shipped a spare car for the next day 's testing . Panis remained fastest on the second day . Trulli damaged his suspension and rear wing , resulting in repairs which limited his team 's testing time . Burti suffered another incident when he lost his right rear wheel . Fisichella topped the third and final day 's running . Ferrari test driver Luca Badoer spent four days at the Fiorano Circuit where he concentrated on testing engine and aerodynamic development whilst Michael Schumacher did practice starts and component testing on the fourth day . 
 Jaguar 's Eddie Irvine was passed fit in the days leading up to the race . He arrived at the previous race ill with a suspected bout of appendicitis and withdrew at the end of the Friday practice sessions . He was replaced by Burti . Irvine later travelled to a hospital in London where he was diagnosed with a swollen intestine . Irvine said he felt ready to race again : " I 'm looking forward to Hockenheim . I have been keeping tabs on the team 's Silverstone test this week and we 're all encouraged by what has been achieved . " 
 Jordan 's new car , the EJ10B , was also introduced that weekend ; the team had used their primary 2000 car , the <unk> , for the previous ten races . Originally due to be introduced at the previous race in Austria , the car was required to undergo Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) safety tests on its bodywork and Jordan wanted to develop more spare parts for the EJ10B , delaying the car 's race début . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday sessions were held in dry and cloudy conditions , becoming damp during the day , resulting in the track surface becoming slippery . Michael Schumacher set the first session 's fastest time with a lap of 1 : 43 @.@ 532 , almost six @-@ tenths of a second faster than Häkkinen . Barrichello was just off Häkkinen 's pace with Coulthard setting the fourth fastest time . Frentzen and BAR driver Ricardo Zonta followed in fifth and sixth positions respectively . Fisichella , Mika Salo , Ralf Schumacher and Herbert completed the top ten fastest drivers in the session . Williams driver Jenson Button crashed into the pit lane at the end of the barriers and lost his front wing . In the second practice session , Michael Schumacher did not manage to improve his lap time but was still quickest . Frentzen was running quicker and was second fastest . The two McLaren drivers were running slower — Häkkinen in third and Coulthard fifth – although both drivers were undertaking race set @-@ up and brake performance testing . They were separated by Barrichello . Trulli was sixth fastest , ahead of Zonta . Villeneuve , Fisichella and Salo followed in the top ten . 
 The Saturday morning sessions were held in damp weather conditions with intermittent rain . Häkkinen set the third session 's fastest time , a 1 : 44 @.@ 144 , one @-@ tenth of a second quicker than Pedro de la Rosa . Coulthard was third fastest , ahead of Frentzen and Salo . Trulli , Barrichello , Michael Schumacher , Villeneuve and Fisichella rounded out the top ten fastest drivers . In the final practice session , Häkkinen set the fastest time of the day , a 1 : 41 @.@ 658 ; Coulthard finished with the third @-@ fastest time . The Ferrari drivers were again quick — Michael Schumacher in second and Barrichello in fourth . Frentzen slipped to fifth , with Fisichella sixth fastest and was happy with his car 's feel . Button was seventh fastest , in front of Salo . Villeneuve and Trulli completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . Fisichella 's car suffered an engine failure in the closing seconds of the session and a crash by Michael Schumacher after the session concluded meant that the German was forced to use his team 's spare car for qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in damp weather conditions with intermittent rain . The air temperature ranged between 19 – 20 ° C ( 66 – 68 ° F ) with the track temperature between 20 – 26 ° C ( 68 – 79 ° F ) . Coulthard achieved his second pole position of the season , his first at the Hockenheimring , with a time of 1 : 45 @.@ 697 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Michael Schumacher who was 1 @.@ 3 seconds slower than Coulthard . Fisichella qualified third , though he was happy with his performance despite using his team 's T @-@ car after suffering a spin on his first run . He was later fined $ 5 @,@ 000 for not placing his car at the pit @-@ lane weighbridge . Häkkinen qualified fourth , three hundredths of a second slower than Fisichella . Häkkinen later admitted that he was cautious about going off the race track due to the weather <unk> de la Rosa qualified fifth giving Arrows their best qualifying performance of the season . Trulli and Wurz were satisfied with their sixth and seventh place qualifying positions . Herbert in the quicker of the two Jaguars took eighth . Villeneuve secured ninth using his team 's spare car after spinning on track which disrupted Frentzen 's running . Irvine rounded out the top ten . Verstappen had problems starting his engine , resulting in a lack of qualifying laps but managed to clinch eleventh . Zonta qualified twelfth having used a new engine and could not set a faster lap time after being blocked by Jean Alesi . He was ahead of Alesi 's teammate Nick Heidfeld . Ralf Schumacher qualified in 14th , quicker than teammate Button in 16th . They were separated by Salo . Frentzen spent the majority of qualifying 107 % outside of the pole sitters time but took 17th ; his first quick time was disallowed after cutting the chicane to set a faster lap and to run in clean air . Barrichello used his teammate 's car after his developed oil @-@ leak issues and qualified 18th . Sauber 's Pedro Diniz took 19th , in front of Alesi in 20th . The Minardi drivers qualified at the back of the grid ; Gastón Mazzacane in 21st and Marc Gené in 22nd . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( GMT + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . David Coulthard maintained his good performance from qualifying by setting the fastest time , a 1 : 44 @.@ 065 ; Häkkinen was second in the other McLaren <unk> de la Rosa and Michael Schumacher completed the top four . The session was disrupted by incidents as Coulthard and de la Rosa struck the barriers — both incidents required marshals to collect debris — whilst Villeneuve and Verstappen collided going into the circuit 's first chicane . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions for the start of the race was dry , but became damp and wet as the race progressed . The air temperature was 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) and the track temperature ranged from 21 – 25 ° C ( 70 – 77 ° F ) . During the parade lap Button 's engine did not start and he was forced to start from the back of the grid . Häkkinen <unk> faster than teammate Coulthard and Michael Schumacher off the line , getting ahead of both drivers going into the first corner . Michael Schumacher moved to his left with Fisichella hitting him from behind and both drivers went off into the turn 1 barriers . Barrichello made the best start in the field , moving from 18th to 10th place at the end of the first lap . At the completition of the first lap , Häkkinen led from Coulthard , Trulli , de la Rosa , Irvine , Herbert , Verstappen , Villeneuve , Zonta , Barrichello , Ralf Schumacher , Wurz , Heidfeld , Salo , Diniz , Frentzen , Gené , Alesi , Button and Mazzacane . 
 Häkkinen began to maintain his lead from teammate Coulthard . On lap two Herbert moved into fifth position after Irvine dropped to seventh place when Verstappen overtook him . Further down the field Barrichello continued to gain positions when he passed both BAR drivers for eighth . The McLaren drivers managed to maintain a gap to Trulli who set the fastest lap of the race , 1 : 46 @.@ 321 . Irvine lost a further position to Barrichello on lap three , as Frentzen claimed 14th from Diniz . On lap four , Frentzen made up a further position by passing Heidfeld for 13th . On the same lap Verstappen locked up his tyres to avoid a collision with Herbert . This allowed Barrichello to pass Verstappen for sixth position in the run up to the Clark chicane on lap five . Herbert lost fifth position to Barrichello on lap six with Frentzen continuing to move up the field by passing Ralf Schumacher and Wurz for eleventh . Barrichello began setting consecutive fastest laps as he closed the gap to de la Rosa . Zonta lost 10th position when he was passed by Frentzen on lap seven . On the next lap , Verstappen suffered a worrying moment when half of his engine cover was shed from its chassis . Frentzen managed to gain a further four positions in the next four laps . 
 Further down , Ralf Schumacher took Zonta for eleventh place and Diniz passed teammate Salo for 14th position . Barrichello caught de la Rosa by lap twelve and passed him to take fourth and started to come under pressure from Frentzen . Herbert pulled over to the side of the track with gearbox problems on lap 13 . Barrichello passed Trulli for third position at the second corner two laps later . Barrichello became the first driver to make a pit stop by coming in on lap 17 . Frentzen made his pit stop one lap later and re @-@ joined in sixth place . By lap 20 , Häkkinen had a lead of 1 @.@ 4 seconds over Coulthard , who in turn was almost 22 seconds ahead of <unk> de la Rosa was a further 2 @.@ 1 seconds behind the Jordan driver , and was being caught by Barrichello in fifth who set a new fastest lap , a 1 : 44 @.@ 300 . Villeneuve overtook Irvine to claim eighth place on lap 22 . 
 On lap 25 , a man appeared beside the barriers of the circuit on the straight heading towards turn 2 . He ran across the track to avoid being caught by marshals . The incident prompted the deployment of the safety car . Teams immediately brought their drivers into the pit lane to take advantage of the scenario with Trulli and de la Rosa the first to make pit stops . McLaren called in Häkkinen to the pit lane on lap 27 and Coulthard remained out on worn tyres . The Scot pitted on the following lap and emerged in sixth place . On the same lap , the man was caught and escorted off the circuit . Racing resumed on lap 29 when the safety car pulled into the pit lane . Trulli immediately came under pressure from Barrichello and withstood the Brazilian 's attempts to pass him . Ralf Schumacher spun at turn 3 on lap thirty and Verstappen was forced wide in avoidance . Later on Alesi collided with Diniz and struck the barriers , having lost his car 's two left wheels . The safety car was once again deployed as carbon fibre was scattered across the grass . 
 The safety car was withdrawn at the end of lap 31 and the race got underway again with Häkkinen in the lead . Wurz , meanwhile , immediately pulled off the circuit with a gearbox failure with Salo almost colliding with the Benetton . Light rain began to fall on lap 33 . Button pitted on the following lap and his Williams pit crew changed his dry tyres to wets . Gené became the race 's seventh retirement with a failed engine . All drivers , apart from Barrichello , Coulthard , Frentzen and Zonta , pitted for wet tyres . Villeneuve spun after minor contact with teammate Zonta but managed to continue . Trulli was issued with a 10 second stop @-@ go penalty on lap 37 because he was caught overtaking Barrichello under yellow flags . He took the penalty immediately and rejoined in 11th . Zonta was also issued with a penalty but spun into the tyre wall at turn 12 and retired . Coulthard became the final driver to have pitted on the 38th lap and rejoined in fifth . Button then passed de la Rosa for sixth place . 
 At the completition of lap 39 , with the pit stops completed , the running order was Barrichello , Häkkinen , Frentzen , Salo , Coulthard , Button , de la Rosa , Verstappen , Ralf Schumacher , Villeneuve , Trulli , Heidfeld , Mazzacane and Irvine . Frentzen retired with a gearbox failure on lap 40 as Coulthard moved into third after passing Salo . Heidfeld became the final retirement of the race with an alternator failure on lap 40 . Three laps later Button caught Salo and overtook him to clinch fourth position . It began to rain more heavily by lap 44 whilst Barrichello opened a gap to 11 @.@ 5 seconds , and won the race after 45 laps to secure the first victory of his Formula One career in a time of 1 ' 25 : 34 @.@ 418 , at an average speed of 133 @.@ 807 miles per hour ( 215 @.@ 341 km / h ) . Häkkinen finished second in his McLaren 7 @.@ 4 seconds behind Barrichello , with teammate Coulthard third . Button clinched his best result of the 2000 season with fourth , ahead of Salo in fifth and de la Rosa rounded out the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Ralf Schumacher , Villeneuve , Trulli , Irvine and Mazzacane filled the next five positions , with Heidfeld the last of the classified runners despite his alternator failure . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Barrichello 's maiden Formula One victory was very popular amongst spectators and team personnel , because it came after a set back earlier in his career , not least a serious accident during practice for the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix that left him unconscious . Barrichello dedicated his victory to fellow Brazilian and three @-@ time World Champion Ayrton Senna who had helped him during the early phase of his career . He also revealed that it was his decision to stay out on dry tyres as he believed he would have an advantage on the straights and the chicanes , although he flat @-@ spotted a tyre in the closing stages of the Grand Prix which reduced his visibility . Häkkinen said that he felt " in control " during the first phase of the event , although he admitted that he was conservative on the wet tyres and could have secured victory on dry tyres . Coulthard revealed that he utilised tactics performed by Michael Schumacher at the start after he sought clarification on the rules regarding such manoeuvres . He additionally commented that he was unable to talk to his team via radio in the forest sections which caused him to stay out for an additional lap when Häkkinen pitted . 
 Button was delighted with his then career best finish of fourth position and praised his team for the timing to the switch to wet @-@ weather tyres . Salo described his race as " hard " because of him opting to have a high downforce set @-@ up meaning he was slower than his rivals on the straights . Additionally he revealed that towards the end of the race , he did not have oil in his engine with temperatures continuously <unk> de la Rosa scored points for the second time in the season , having taken fifth at the European Grand <unk> de la Rosa thought that the Grand Prix was " strange " though he was happy with the effort of his team . Michael Schumacher , who retired on the first lap , after Fisichella collided with him , accused the Benetton driver of causing the incident . " I am out of the race not because of David ( Coulthard ) but because of Fisichella . " he said . Fisichella however said that he was maintaining his racing line and believed that drivers should choose their preferred racing line before he described his Grand Prix as a " waste " . 
 The majority of media attention , however , was focussed on the intruder who penetrated the circuit 's barriers on lap 25 . He was revealed to be man named Robert Sehli , a 47 year old from France who worked for Mercedes @-@ Benz in a production factory at Le Mans . He also had three children . Sehli informed the press that he was protesting against his dismissal from his job after 22 years on health grounds . Additional information revealed that he planned to protest 15 seconds before the start of the formation lap but was prevented by marshals who dragged him off the circuit . Sehli had attempted to organise something similar at the French Grand Prix before the FIA Photographers ' Delegate stopped him in the pit lane 10 laps before the race ended . He was released on a $ 945 ( DM 2 @,@ 000 ) bail the Monday after the German Grand Prix . Retired Formula One driver Hans @-@ Joachim Stuck said that Sehli had " succeeded in avenging himself on Mercedes . " Ferrari technical director Ross Brawn said that Sehli 's actions were " very , very dangerous " and that similar intrusions " should never be allowed to happen again . " However the Vice @-@ President of Mercedes @-@ Benz Motorsport Norbert Haug criticised the police 's approach towards Sehli calling it a " scandal " . The Hockenheimring track owners Hockenheimring GmbH announced that it filed a <unk> charge on Sehli . He was later awarded compensation from Mercedes @-@ Benz and apologised for the track invasion . On December 16 Sehli won a court case against Mercedes @-@ Benz who were ordered to pay <unk> for " dismissing him without any conclusive reasons " . He was however fined £ 600 by Hockenheimring GmbH for breaching circuit limits . 
 The race result meant that Michael Schumacher 's lead in the World Drivers ' Championship was reduced to two points . Häkkinen 's second finish place finish resulted in him moving into second place , tied on points with teammate Coulthard . Both drivers were eight points ahead of race winner Barrichello . Despite not finishing Fisichella maintained fifth place with 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship McLaren 's strong result reduced Ferrari 's lead to four points . Williams , with 22 points , increased the gap to their rivals Benetton to four points , whilst BAR maintained fifth place on 12 points , with six races of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Lakselv Airport , Banak = 
 Lakselv Airport , Banak ( Norwegian : Lakselv lufthavn , Banak ; IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is an international airport located at Banak , 1 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Lakselv , in the municipality of Porsanger , Finnmark county , Norway . Co @-@ located with the military Station Group Banak , the airport is owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor . The airport is also branded as North Cape Airport , although the North Cape is 180 kilometers ( 110 mi ) away . The runway is 2 @,@ 788 meters ( 9 @,@ 147 ft ) long and aligned nearly north – south . The airport is served by Widerøe with flights to Tromsø and Alta , and seasonally by Norwegian Air Shuttle to Oslo , in addition to international charter services . The airport had 71 @,@ 763 passengers in 2012 . In addition to serving Porsanger , the airport 's catchment area includes Karasjok and <unk> . 
 The airfield was constructed with triangular runways in 1938 . It was taken over by the Luftwaffe in 1940 , who expanded it and laid down two wooden runways . It was taken over by the <unk> in 1945 , but abandoned in 1952 . It opened in 1963 and was largely funded by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) . Scandinavian Airlines operated out of the airport to the other primary airports in Finnmark and to Tromsø and Oslo . The runway was extended in 1968 . From 1990 , flights were taken over by SAS Commuter and the direct flights to Oslo were halted . From the mid @-@ 1990s there have been occasional charter flights out of Banak . Widerøe took over SAS ' services in 2002 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First airport = = = 
 An airport at Lakselv was first proposed out of military considerations . Despite a Norwegian neutrality policy , there was a fear that Norway could be occupied by foreign powers to take advantage of the country 's strategic position . The military therefore wanted to construct airfields throughout the country to increase the air force 's mobility . Especially Finnmark was regarded as a key location , given the increased Soviet militarization on the Kola Peninsula . Increased military funding was granted from 1937 , and the following year , a triangular runway was built at Banak . 
 During the German occupation of Norway during World War II , Banak was taken over by the Luftwaffe . They were planning an attack on the Soviet Union from Finnmark and decided to designate Banak as their main air base in Northern Norway . By September 1940 , the main runway was extended to 1 @,@ 000 by 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 280 by 660 ft ) with a wooden surface . In addition , three hangars were built , allowing the air base to house bombers . The main function of the air station was to attack the Arctic convoys . By 1943 there were two parallel runways , both 1 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) long . The air station was blasted in October 1944 during Operation Nordlicht , the German retreat from Finnmark . 
 The Royal Norwegian Air Force took control over the airfield in 1945 and started reconstruction . In 1945 , the air force operated scheduled flights from Bardufoss Air Station via Banak to Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen ; at Bardufoss a corresponding flight was offered to Oslo . The service lasted only the one season . Later the runway was used to serve air ambulances . During the late 1940s , part of the wooden runway was removed and used for other construction projects . 
 Interest in Banak rose with the Czechoslovak coup d 'état of 1948 and fears of Soviet intervention in Norway . Finnmark , located on the Norway – Soviet Union border , became of particular interest for the military . Although specific plans were articulated , no construction was carried out . Norway 's entry into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) in 1949 had a dramatic effect on the military strategy and Banak . Norwegian authorities and NATO regarded Finnmark as a tripwire — it was to be sacrificed and delay attacking forces in case of a Soviet invasion . The airfield was closed in 1952 , but the runway remained , with a short section of an unmaintained wooden runway and otherwise consisting of a grass strip . It was occasionally used by small aircraft . 
 = = = Re @-@ establishment = = = 
 Interest from military leaders for an airport at Banak returned in 1955 . For the air force the main concern was that they could not reach the eastern @-@ most parts of Norway from Bodø Main Air Station . This resulted in several Soviet infringements of Norwegian air space . Alternative locations were considered , such as Kautokeino , were there had been built a radar . NATO supported a reconstruction of Banak , partially raised by increased focus on flanking maneuver strategies , and also to serve as a part of the nuclear program . NATO was ready to provide funding in 1957 , but by the Norwegian authorities wanted to delay its construction , citing lack of personnel to man the station and that it would not be usable in times of war . The government decided in 1957 to not allow nuclear warheads to be stored in Norway during peacetime , thus eliminating NATO 's strategic need for Banak . The airport was therefore removed from the investment program . 
 By 1959 the United States was concerned that the militarization of the Kola Peninsula would become the prime point of a Soviet attack on North America . A new discussion about location arose , with Alta and Kautokeino as the main alternatives . Banak was estimated to cost 4 @.@ 9 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , NOK 2 @.@ 8 million less than Alta , had better instrument landing and weather conditions and allowed a longer runway . The main advantage of Alta was that it would be better suited for civilian traffic . The government and Parliament approved construction of Banak in 1959 on condition that it receive NATO funding . Construction was estimated at NOK 8 @.@ 9 million , which would include a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ meter ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) runway , but lack of funding meant the airport would not meet all of NATO 's air base standards . The project was approved by NATO on 1 June 1960 and by Parliament on 5 August . 
 Construction was carried out simultaneously at Banak , Alta Airport and Kirkenes Airport , Høybuktmoen , which combined would give Finnmark three primary airports . All three airports opened on 4 May 1963 , while Tromsø Airport opened the following year . Services were at first operated by Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) . At first the airline used 56 @-@ passenger Convair CV @-@ 440 Metropolitan aircraft , which flew flights south to Oslo in combination with flights to Alta and Kirkenes — from 1964 also to Tromsø . The general route scheme of flying multi @-@ legged flights from Oslo to Finnmark would remain until 1990 . 
 = = = Operational history = = = 
 To allow increased military use of the air station , the airport received an upgrade in 1967 and 1968 costing NOK 17 @.@ 8 million . This included an extension of the runway with 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , a taxiway and various military hangars and structures . Following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 , Norway decided to further strengthen the Finnmark defenses , which among many measures included a further extension of the runway at Banak . From 7 April 1969 , SAS introduced the 85 @-@ passenger Douglas DC @-@ 9 @-@ 21 jetliner on the Finnmark service ; the last Metropolitan flew on 1 April 1970 . The 330 Squadron , which operates the Westland Sea King search and rescue helicopters , was established at Banak Air Station in 1973 . SAS ' traffic increased throughout the 1970s , resulting in SAS gradually increasing the frequency of its services , and later also using larger DC @-@ 9s . The McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 80 was first flown on the Finnmark route on 11 July 1986 . 
 SAS Commuter was established in 1988 and started operations in Northern Norway in May 1990 , making Alta its central hub for Finnmark . Lakselv Airport had been proposed by among others Finnmark County Council as the hub , but SAS and other found Alta better suited . For Banak this meant that the Oslo services were terminated and smaller Fokker 50 aircraft were flown to Alta and Tromsø , and passengers could continue to Oslo with direct flights from there . The runway was extended in 1992 and 1993 , including widening to 45 meters ( 148 ft ) and receiving new runway lighting . Lakselv Airport started using the brand " North Cape Airport " in 1996 , in an attempt to increase tourist traffic to the airport . Honningsvåg Airport , <unk> in Nordkapp was already using the name , but the latter had a short runway only suitable for regional aircraft , and Banak is the closest airport serving jetliners . The Civil Aviation Administration followed up by investing NOK 21 million expanding the terminal to allow international passengers and Stolt <unk> started export of fish via the airport . From 1997 , <unk> started charter services from Düsseldorf to Lakselv , and Condor operated flights from Barcelona . Finnair started in June 2001 a scheduled service from Lakselv via Rovaniemi to Helsinki three times a week . North Cape Golf Club , located immediately next to the airport , opened in 2001 . 
 All SAS Commuter services in Northern Norway were taken over by Widerøe in October 2002 . Norwegian Air Shuttle took over the routes to Alta and Tromsø from 1 April 2003 , but already by the start of operations announced they would retire their fleet of Fokker 50 aircraft , resign from short @-@ haul routes and become a low @-@ cost airline . Widerøe won the subsequent tender and started operating to Lakselv from 1 January 2004 . SAS Braathens introduced low @-@ frequency summer services from Oslo from 2006 , which was kept for three seasons . SAS cited too low ridership from foreign tourists as the reason for the closure . Widerøe took over SAS Ground Services ' operations at Banak in 2008 . Norwegian introduced a new summer seasonal route from Oslo to Lakselv from 2011 . Outgoing charter services started in 2012 to Burgas and Antalya . Scandinavian Airlines operated one charter flight from Tokyo and back in 2011 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Lakselv Airport is equipped with a cafe and a duty @-@ free shop . The airport is manned with customs and police during international flights . It is located three to five minutes from Lakselv and 74 kilometers ( 46 mi ) by road to Karasjok . Taxis and an airport bus are available ; there are 172 paid parking spaces . The runway is 2 @,@ 788 by 45 meters ( 9 @,@ 147 by 148 ft ) and aligned 17 – 35 ( roughly north – south ) . It is mostly asphalt , although parts are concrete . There is instrument landing system category I in both directions . In 2012 , the airport had 71 @,@ 763 passengers , 3 @,@ 699 aircraft movements and 330 tonnes of cargo . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Widerøe is the main airline operating at Banak , with daily flights to Alta and Tromsø using Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft . During the Weekdays , Norwegian Air Shuttle operates a twice @-@ weekly service to Oslo using their Boeing 737 aircraft . 
 = = Military = = 
 Station Group Banak , formerly Banak Air Station , comprises the airfield 's military activity . It is organizationally part of Bodø Main Air Station . The 330 Squadron has a detachment at Banak , which is responsible for operating the Westland Sea King for search and rescue missions in the Barents Sea . The air station is regularly visited by the General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon for use in the shooting range at <unk> . The Garrison of Porsanger is located close to Lakselv . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 12 June 1985 an F @-@ 16B with two people on board experienced control problems north of Banak . The pilot ejected and survived while an officer died . 
 On 23 March 1992 an F @-@ 16A lost power at 5 @,@ 500 meters altitude ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) . The pilot survived after aiming the aircraft at an unpopulated area and ejecting at an altitude of 1 @,@ 400 meters ( 4 @,@ 500 ft ) . 
 On 29 June 2005 an ICP Savannah micro aircraft crashed only a few minutes after its departure from Banak , with two flight instructors on board . Both instructors were killed in the accident . 
 = Warning ( Green Day album ) = 
 Warning ( stylized as Warning : ) is the sixth studio album by the American punk rock band Green Day , released on October 3 , 2000 , by Reprise Records . Building upon its predecessor , Nimrod ( 1997 ) , the album eschewed the band 's trademark punk rock sound and incorporated acoustic elements and pop and folk styles . Lyrically , the record contains more optimistic and inspirational themes in comparison with the band 's earlier releases . Warning was also Green Day 's first album since Kerplunk ( 1992 ) that was not produced by Rob Cavallo , although he did have a hand in its production and was credited as executive producer . 
 Despite mixed criticism towards the band 's stylistic change , the album received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who praised vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong 's songwriting . Although it peaked at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart , Warning represented the lowest commercial slump in Green Day 's career , being the band 's first album since signing to a major record label not to achieve multi @-@ platinum status . The album has nonetheless been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America and , as of December 2012 , has sold 1 @.@ 2 million copies . Warning was reissued on vinyl on July 14 , 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After taking a break from touring in promotion of the band 's fourth album Insomniac ( 1995 ) , Green Day recorded the more experimental Nimrod ( 1997 ) . The record , which delved into a more wide variety of genres including folk , ska , and surf rock , featured the unprecedented acoustic hit " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " . Vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong recalled that the song 's stylistic departure from the group 's earlier work made him anxious about the song 's release : " I was scared for that song to come out ... because it was such a vulnerable song , to put that song out and it was like which way will it end up going ? It was really exciting and it kind of sparked more in us as songwriters to expand on that . " 
 The band embarked on the Nimrod promotional tour , which largely featured more intimate shows with audiences of 1 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 000 people . By the end of the tour , the band noted that its audience had evolved . 924 Gilman Street , the punk club in the band 's hometown that had once banned Green Day after the group signed with a major label , booked bassist Mike Dirnt 's side project The <unk> for a show . Dirnt described the experience as " a wonderful piece of closure " . Punk rock music was no longer popular in the mainstream as rap metal acts such as Korn , Limp Bizkit , and Kid Rock were experiencing success . According to Studio 880 owner John <unk> , the band was " definitely at a very big crossroads . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 For Warning , Green Day initially opted to work with a producer other than Rob Cavallo , who had handled production of the band 's last three albums . The group selected Scott Litt , who had previously worked with Nirvana and R.E.M .. However , the band had disagreements with Litt over the album 's musical direction ; vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong recalled that " It just didn 't work out . He was really cool , but for that particular project , it just wasn 't the right chemistry . " The group subsequently brought Cavallo back in , but this time the band handled most of the production duties , with Cavallo instead serving as " executive producer " . During the album 's writing and early recording sessions , Armstrong repeatedly listened to Bob Dylan 's 1965 record Bringing It All Back Home , which had a major influence over both Warning 's musical experimentation and socially conscious lyrics . 
 The band began work on the album two years before entering the studio to record on April 1 , 2000 . During this period , the group members met five days a week to write new songs and rehearse old ones , with Tre Cool observing , " We 've been practicing and writing songs and playing them and playing them and writing new songs and playing them and playing them ... People think we 're off in Hawaii kicking back and shit , but we 're in Oakland playing our jams . " The album was recorded at Studio 880 in Oakland . Cool noted of the band 's work ethic in the studio , " We 're not really sprinting . We 're working at the same pace , but it 's a pretty fast pace for recording . We 're faster than every other band , pretty much . That 's what I 've been told . " With the record , the band aimed to construct a solid list of tracks where " each song could be its own album " . The group also made sure to make each song " well thought out and well placed " with regard to the album 's track listing . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 With Warning , the band experimented with more acoustic guitars , and strove for a " not sappy acoustic ... more aggressive , percussive acoustic " sound . Cool and bassist Mike Dirnt also emphasized " deeper " grooves on the record . The title track , a " densely produced blast of layered vocals [ and ] strummed acoustic guitars " , features a " circling bass riff " similar to that of " Picture Book " by The Kinks . " Waiting " , which has been categorized as a " retro @-@ pop lament " , is based on the riff from Petula Clark 's 1964 song " Downtown " . Its melody has also been compared to The Mamas & the Papas and the hook to Kiss . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly felt that " Misery " is " probably Billie Joe 's idea of a Brecht @-@ Weill pop operetta . " It features " mariachi brass " instrumentation , as well as strings , accordions , and acoustic guitar . The song 's five @-@ minute length has been called " an epic by Green Day standards " . The use of a harmonica on " Hold On " has been compared to The Beatles ' " Love Me Do " and " I Should Have Known Better . " " Macy 's Day Parade " contains elements of folk and pop . 
 The album features more positive and uplifting lyrics in comparison with Green Day 's earlier work . Cool noted that , " It 's got the sarcasm , it 's got the <unk> , but it 's got a little light at the end of the tunnel . " Warning also contains more explicitly political themes , as exemplified by tracks such as " Minority " . This was inspired by Armstrong 's fear that presidential nominee Al Gore was going to lose the 2000 U.S. presidential election and that " someone really conservative " would take office . He recalled , " We 've always tried to keep an ear to the ground and keep our eyes open to what 's going on ... that 's one reason why I was really taking my time writing songs to really [ make an impact ] . Instead of just writing an overly knee @-@ jerk reaction . " According to Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , the lyrics of " Minority " serve as " a reminder of the youthful mentality of Green Day 's early work " . " Misery " tells various stories in its verses , all of which end unhappily . The first verse centers on a girl named Virginia who was a " lot lizard " , a term for a prostitute who exchanges sex for money with truck drivers at interstate highway truck stops . " Blood , Sex and Booze " explores the subject of sadomasochism . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Warning peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 , remaining on the chart for 25 weeks and it sold 156 @,@ 000 copies on its first week according to Billboard . On December 1 , 2000 , the record was certified gold by Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the record reached the number two position and stayed on the chart for five weeks . On August 1 , 2001 , the album was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 100 @,@ 000 units . Warning also reached the top ten in multiple countries outside of North America , including Australia , Italy , and the United Kingdom . The album was later certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . As of December 20 , 2012 , Warning has sold 1 @.@ 2 million copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Warning received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 based on 19 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker perceived a maturity in the album 's lyrical content and called its music " as peppy as any Green Day have recorded " . Charlotte Robinson of PopMatters commended Billie Joe Armstrong 's lyrics and noted the band for embracing " the pop bent that has always been a part of their sound " . The A.V. Club 's Stephen Thompson stated " Green Day has never made a record so slick and musically mature " . Los Angeles Times writer Natalie Nichols wrote that the album " reveal [ s ] them shaking off the transitional aspects of 1997 's ' Nimrod ' to craft a more coherent , less aggressive but still rebellious collection that also draws on the even older pop traditions of Bob Dylan , the Beatles and the Who " . " Metal " Mike Saunders of The Village Voice viewed Warning as the band 's best work and compared its music to that of The Beatles ' Rubber Soul ( 1965 ) . In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A- rating , indicating " the kind of garden @-@ variety good record that is the great luxury of musical micromarketing and overproduction . Anyone open to its aesthetic will enjoy more than half its tracks " . Christgau noted " professionalism , craft , artistic growth " rather than maturity in Armstrong 's songwriting and elaborated on his change in musical direction , stating : 
 He 's abandoning the first person . He 's assuming fictional personas . And he 's creating for himself the voice of a thinking left @-@ liberal who ' want [ s ] to be the minority ' and cautions against caution <unk> voice that scolds rather than whines , a nice age @-@ appropriate shift . Crucially , his knack for simple punk tunes remains unchanged ; also crucially , these do fine at moderate tempos , and one even gives off a whiff of Brecht @-@ Weill . 
 By contrast , NME 's Andy Capper was ambivalent towards the band 's " less electric , more organic sound " and stated " Older . More Mature . ' Warning ' is the sound of a band losing its way " . Greg Kot of Rolling Stone wrote that Armstrong " can 't muster the same excitement for his more mature themes " and stated " Who wants to listen to songs of faith , hope and social commentary from what used to be snot @-@ core 's biggest @-@ selling band ? " . Adam Downer of Sputnikmusic gave it three out of five stars and commented that it " consists of instant classics like Minority and Macy 's Day Parade , but it also is filled with garbage songs as well " . Spin writer Jesse Berrett stated " these maturity moves buoy <unk> be @-@ <unk> ... Nor does everything in the stylistic grab bag fit " , but concluded by complimenting Armstrong 's " earnestly good @-@ hearted " lyrics and wrote that " this album is after ... evidence that even the <unk> deserve grace and the chance to age into warmth " . Q gave the album three out of five stars and described it as " Hugely likeable , terribly noisy and cute , as well as being jammed with proper pop songs " . Neal Weiss of Yahoo ! Music called the album " crafty pop @-@ rock " and stated " Some might wish Green Day never decided to grow up like this , but others might consider it a starting point to take the band seriously " . Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani perceived elements of folk and " pop sensibilities " , writing that the album " displays just how well Green Day can construct pop songs " . 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 Writing in 2009 with regard to Warning 's lackluster commercial performance , James Montgomery of MTV News called the record " unjustly overlooked " and applauded Armstrong 's " super strong " songwriting on the album . In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Rolling Stone journalist Michaelangelo Matos gave the album four out of five stars and wrote that the band " fully focus on the textures that have always differentiated their sturdy grooves and simple melodies " . Matos called the songs " speedy , neatly packaged reinterpretations of pop @-@ rock history , from the Beatles to Creedence Clearwater Revival to the Ramones themselves " . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine called it " gleeful , unabashed fun " and complimented Green Day for " embracing their fondness for pop and making the best damn album they 'd ever made " . Erlewine expressed that the band displays " melodic ingenuity and imaginative arrangements " and elaborated on its musical significance , stating " Warning may not be an innovative record per se , but it 's tremendously satisfying ; it finds the band at a peak of songcraft and performance , doing it all without a trace of self @-@ consciousness . It 's the first great pure pop album of the new millennium " . Dom Passantino of Stylus Magazine cited it as " the most influential album on the British pop landscape since 1996 ( Spice , naturally ) " , noting it as a significant influence on " the two biggest bands in the UK at the moment , and indeed for the past few years , Busted and McFly " . Passantino called Warning " a great album " and viewed that Green Day " seemed to be bored with their genre @-@ medium , but simultaneously knowledgeable that any attempt to boundary @-@ hop will end with them falling on their face " . 
 = = Promotion and impact = = 
 While Green Day was nearing completion of Warning , the band announced it would be performing on the 2000 Vans Warped Tour during the summer before the album 's October release . Although the group had been invited to perform on the tour before , the band was unable to do so due to scheduling conflicts . Because of Green Day 's new stylistic change displayed on Warning , the band was considered an unconventional choice for the tour . Jason White , guitarist for Armstrong 's side project Pinhead Gunpowder , was recruited to perform with the band to add " more power " to the group 's sound ; White observed that " Even I was like , ' Why are Green Day on the Warped Tour ? ' " . Fat Mike of NOFX recalled , " They were the biggest band on the tour but it wasn 't by far . Green Day weren 't super popular at that time . I think they did the Warped tour because they wanted to get popular again . " He also went on to call Warning " probably their worst album , I think . It 's what happens , the ups and downs . " However , Joel Madden of Good Charlotte , whose 2002 release The Young and the Hopeless outsold Warning , opined that " I was definitely aware that our record at the time sold more maybe than their record but I think we idolized them so much that it didn 't matter . We thought Warning was one of their best records . " 
 In January 2001 , Colin Merry of the English rock band Other Garden filed a breach of copyright lawsuit against Green Day , claiming that the album 's title track is a " reworked " version of his band 's 1992 song " Never Got the Chance " . Merry noted that despite both songs ' similarity to the riff of " Picture Book " by The Kinks , the similarity between " Warning " and " Never Got the Chance " was more " striking " . Green Day denied the accusations , and although Merry requested to halt all royalties from " Warning " , the lawsuit was later dropped . 
 Green Day also co @-@ headlined a " shared bill " with fellow Californian pop @-@ punk band Blink @-@ 182 on the Pop Disaster Tour from April to June 2002 . The two bands traded off headlining positions throughout the tour , as Blink @-@ 182 was experiencing higher record sales at the time , while Green Day had experienced mainstream success for a longer period of time . Armstrong explained Green Day 's desire to perform on the tour by stating , " We really wanted to be part of an event . We figured putting the two biggest pop punk bands on the planet together was definitely going to be an event . " In his book Nobody Likes You : Inside the Turbulent Life , Times and Music of Green Day , author Marc Spitz likened Blink @-@ 182 headlining a tour with Green Day to " Frank Sinatra , Jr. headlining over Frank Sinatra . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Billie Joe Armstrong , except where noted , all music composed by Green Day . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Warning adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Welcome to the Hellmouth = 
 " Welcome to the Hellmouth " is the series premiere of the supernatural drama television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . This episode and " The Harvest " were originally aired as a two @-@ part series premiere on The WB on March 10 , 1997 . The episode was written by the series creator and executive producer Joss Whedon , and directed by Charles Martin Smith . " Welcome to the Hellmouth " received a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 4 upon its original airing and received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The narrative follows Buffy Summers ( Sarah Michelle Gellar ) on her first day at a new school in a new town . She hopes to live as a normal teenager , but the duties and fate of the Slayer – to fight vampires , demons , witches and other supernatural beings – will not leave her alone ; the ancient vampire the Master ( Mark Metcalf ) threatens to break free , and Buffy must turn for help to her school librarian and Watcher Rupert Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) , her new classmates , Willow and Xander ( Alyson Hannigan and Nicholas Brendon ) , and a benevolent stranger named Angel ( David Boreanaz ) . 
 Joss Whedon developed Buffy the Vampire Slayer to invert the Hollywood formula of " the little blonde girl who goes into a dark alley and gets killed in every horror movie . " The series was created after the 1992 movie , Buffy the Vampire Slayer , in an attempt by Whedon to stay truer to his original ideas . Many scenes were filmed on location in Los Angeles , California . The high school used for external and some internal scenes in the series is Torrance High School , the same school used for the series Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series premiere begins at Sunnydale High School , where a boy ( played by Carmine Giovinazzo ) breaks into the school during the night with a seemingly reluctant girl ( Julie Benz ) , promising her mischief and therefore fun . Nervous and on edge , the girl says she thinks she heard something and fears someone is in the school , other than the two of them . The boy calls out but gets no response , leading him to say " it 's nothing " to the girl and assure her that they " are alone " . The girl says " ok , that 's good " , after which she turns to face the boy , revealing her facial morph into her true identity ; a vampire . She then bites the boy 's neck . She is later revealed to be Darla . 
 Buffy Summers ( Sarah Michelle Gellar ) has a nightmare the morning of her first day at school . Her mother , Joyce ( Kristine Sutherland ) , drives her to the school and encourages her to think positive . Inside the building , Principal Bob Flutie ( Ken Lerner ) tells her she will start with a clean slate . He reconsiders that after realizing that Buffy burned down her previous school 's gym . Buffy starts to explain that she did so because " it was full of <unk> ... " but she rapidly changes the end of her statement to " asbestos . " 
 Buffy exits the office and bumps into a female student , spilling the contents of her handbag on the floor . Xander Harris ( Nicholas Brendon ) sees this and helps Buffy <unk> , mainly to introduce himself to her , as it was earlier suggested that he is attracted to her . She leaves without her stake , which Xander pockets because he called out to her , but she had already walked away . In history class , Buffy is helped by popular girl Cordelia Chase ( Charisma Carpenter ) , who afterwards tests her " coolness factor , " skipping the written as Buffy had just moved to Sunnydale , California from Los Angeles . To Buffy 's horror , Cordelia humiliates an awkward Willow Rosenberg ( Alyson Hannigan ) at the water fountain . Inside the library , Rupert Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) places a book titled Vampyr in front of Buffy after recognizing who she is . A stunned Buffy makes a hasty exit . 
 Buffy , Willow , Jesse McNally ( Eric Balfour ) , and Xander meet during a break , and Xander returns the stake . Buffy claims it is standard self @-@ defense in Los Angeles . Cordelia appears and tells Buffy that gym is cancelled due to the " extreme dead guy " in one student 's gym locker . Buffy asks whether there were marks on the body , freaking out Cordelia . Buffy forces her way into the locker room , examines the body , and finds the characteristic puncture wounds of a vampire on the neck . Buffy returns to the library and confronts Giles , who informs her that he is her Watcher . Buffy refuses to accept her calling as a Slayer , since it had gotten her kicked out of her previous school and robbed her of a social life . After they leave the library , Xander emerges from behind the shelves , having overheard the strange conversation . 
 That night , en route to her first visit to The Bronze , the cool hangout in Sunnydale , Buffy meets a mysterious , handsome stranger ( David Boreanaz ) , who warns her that she is living on a Hellmouth that is about to open , and that " The Harvest " is coming . He also gives her a large silver cross pendant . In The Bronze , Buffy meets Willow and encourages her to seize the moment : " Because tomorrow you might be dead . " She finds Giles and tells him about the stranger . Giles tells her to learn to hone her skills to sense vampires anywhere . Buffy uses her fashion sense to pick out a vampire ( J. Patrick Lawlor ) in the club and is alarmed to see Willow leave with him . She loses them and is surprised by Cordelia , nearly staking her . Cordelia immediately calls her friends to tell them about it . While Buffy looks for Willow , Jesse chats up Darla at The Bronze . Buffy is stopped by Xander , whom she convinces to help search for Willow . 
 Meanwhile , under the streets of Sunnydale , The Master ( Mark Metcalf ) , an ancient and powerful vampire king , is woken by lesser vampires from a long sleep to prepare for the Harvest . He sends Luke ( Brian Thompson ) to fetch young blood . Willow 's new acquaintance takes her to a crypt in a cemetery , where they are joined by Darla and Jesse , whom she has bitten . Buffy and Xander arrive . Buffy kills Willow 's vampire . Xander and Willow help the weakened Jesse to flee . Luke takes Darla 's place in the fight so she can help catch the kids . Luke throws Buffy in a stone coffin and is about to move in for the kill . 
 = = Continuity = = 
 Angel speaks to Buffy as though he had never met her , but in the two @-@ part episode , " Becoming " reveals that he has fallen in love with Buffy from afar when her first Watcher reveals her destiny as a vampire slayer . Later , in the episode " Helpless , " Angel confessed that he has been in love with her before they are acquainted in this episode and followed her from Los Angeles since . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 Writer Joss Whedon says that " Rhonda the Immortal Waitress " was really the first incarnation of the Buffy concept , " just the idea of some woman who seems to be completely insignificant who turns out to be extraordinary " . This early , unproduced idea evolved into Buffy , an inversion of the Hollywood formula of " the little blonde girl who goes into a dark alley and gets killed in every horror movie " . Whedon wanted " to subvert that idea and create someone who was a hero " . He explained , " The very first mission statement of the show was the joy of female power : having it , using it , sharing it " . 
 The idea was first visited through Whedon 's script for the 1992 movie Buffy the Vampire Slayer , which featured Kristy Swanson in the title role . The director , Fran Rubel <unk> , saw it as a " pop culture comedy about what people think about vampires " . Whedon disagreed : " I had written this scary film about an empowered woman , and they turned it into a broad comedy . It was crushing . " 
 Several years later , Gail Berman , a Fox executive , approached Whedon to develop his Buffy concept into a television series . Whedon explained that " They said , ' Do you want to do a show ? ' And I thought , ' High school as a horror movie ' . And so the metaphor became the central concept behind Buffy , and that 's how I sold it . " The supernatural elements in the series stood as metaphors for personal anxieties associated with adolescence and young adulthood . Early in its development , the series was going to be simply titled Slayer . Whedon went on to write and partly fund a 25 @-@ minute non @-@ broadcast pilot that was shown to networks and eventually sold to the WB Network . Buffy the Vampire Slayer first aired on March 10 , 1997 , as a mid season replacement for the show Savannah on The WB network , and played a key role in the growth of the Warner Bros. television network in its early years . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode , being the series premiere , features the first usage of the theme song by pop punk band Nerf Herder . Parry <unk> , the band 's songwriter , guitarist , and admitted fan of the show explained that the band created the theme song after " fancy pants Hollywood " failed to write a theme song that the producers approved up . Eventually , " they [ the producers ] asked a bunch of local , small time bands who they could pay very little money to come up with some ideas and they liked our idea and they used it . And the rest is history ! " Several songs by the band Sprung Monkey play during the episode . When Buffy is deciding what to wear , the song " Saturated " is playing faintly in the background . At The Bronze , the band plays their songs " Believe " , " Swirl " , and " Things are Changing " . All of the songs featured in the episode can be found on their 1995 album Swirl . The score for the episode , as well as all first season entries , was created by Walter Murphy . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 Joss Whedon explained that several of the characters that appeared in the series were based on real life individuals . Cordelia , for instance , was modeled after a girl whom Whedon 's wife attended high school with . Xander was based on Whedon himself . Whedon hoped to include actor Eric Balfour in the title credits to shock viewers when his character dies . Unfortunately , the show could not afford the extra set of title credits at the time . However , Whedon 's wish was granted in the season six episode " Seeing Red " , with the character Tara Maclay . Brian Thompson , who plays the vampire Luke , returns to the series in season two as a different character , the Judge , in " Surprise " and " Innocence " . 
 In the original , non @-@ broadcast pilot , Willow was portrayed by Riff Regan . However , network executives requested that Regan be replaced . Willow 's character demanded that she be shy and unsure of herself , and the casting department encountered some difficulty finding actresses who could portray this effectively and still be likable . After seven auditions , Alyson Hannigan was eventually chosen for the role . She was chosen for being able to spin the character 's lines with a self @-@ effacing optimism ; she stated , " I didn 't want to do Willow as someone who 's feeling sorry for herself . Especially in the first season , she couldn 't talk to guys , and nobody liked her . I was like , ' I don 't want to play somebody who 's down on herself . " Whedon conceived the character as introverted , saying " I wanted Willow to have that kind of insanely colorful interior life that truly shy people have . And Alyson has that . She definitely has a loopiness I found creeping into the way Willow talked , which was great . To an extent , all the actors conform to the way I write the character , but it really stands out in Willow 's case . " 
 Nicholas Brendon , who had recently been fired from his job as a waiter and was struggling financially , was attracted to the pilot script for Buffy because of how much he had hated high school . Brendon recognized that Xander was based on Joss Whedon when he had attended high school , accounting for why Xander " gets all the good lines " . 
 Charisma Carpenter had originally planned to read for the role of Buffy , but was late for her audition and instead tried out for Cordelia . Although she had only fifteen minutes to prepare for the character , the producers were " really responsive " to Carpenter 's audition , and she left feeling confident she had got the part . After Carpenter 's audition , Gellar , who had been offered the role of Cordelia before Carpenter , was asked to come back and audition for the part of Buffy . Bianca Lawson originally won the role of Cordelia Chase , but turned it down due to other contractual obligations . Lawson would later be cast as vampire slayer Kendra in the show 's second season . Cordelia was originally intended to serve as a dramatic foil to Buffy , and to represent the characteristics of the less mature and shallower Buffy portrayed in the original film . 
 Julie Benz , who portrayed Darla , originally auditioned for the role of Buffy . However , Benz was later offered the minor role of Darla in the pilot episode . Although the character ( originally an unnamed minor vampire ) was supposed to die in the pilot , Whedon liked her performance so well that he named her and her character appeared in a few more episodes . Benz went on to portray Darla in several episodes of Buffy 's spin @-@ off television series , Angel . She later went on to say : 
 For me , I was a new actor to Los Angeles , didn ’ t know the TV business very well so I was just excited to work and play a vampire . I had no clue what I was going to do or how I was going to be scary . Until that is , they put the vampire makeup on me and I went into the trailer and smiled , which I thought was creepy . Joss always said he was intrigued that someone who looked like me and talked like me was like the scariest vampire ever . That ’ s what he wanted , my sweet voice and demeanour until all of a sudden I ’ m just this vicious vampire . " 
 Veteran character actor Mark Metcalf appeared in heavy prosthetic make @-@ up for the role of the Master , belying his iconic performance in the film National Lampoon 's Animal House ( 1978 ) as Douglas C. Neidermeyer . In 2011 , Metcalf recognized his role on Buffy as one of his favorites . Many actors auditioned for the part , but Whedon felt Metcalf played it with more complexity , bringing a " sly and kind of urbane " sensitivity and a charm to the villainy of the character . Kristine Sutherland was cast as Buffy 's mother Joyce . Sutherland , who disliked the horror genre , was not looking for acting jobs when her agent called her with the opportunity to play Joyce . Sutherland auditioned the same day as David Boreanaz , and was impressed with how naturally she felt at ease with the material in the scripts . Bob Flutie , Sunnydale High School 's principal , was originally played by Stephen Tobolowsky in the unaired pilot . Ken Lerner was cast as Flutie in the broadcast version . 
 Certain scenes , such as the argument between Giles and Buffy in the library , and Buffy 's first meeting with Angel , were re @-@ shot eight months after the first episode was recorded with both Whedon and Gellar feeling that Buffy was too angry in the original takes . Whedon subsequently teased Gellar that they were going to reshoot the scenes a third time . The high school used for external and some internal scenes in the series is Torrance High , the same school used for the series Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 = = = Vampire effects = = = 
 Joss Whedon created the idea of " vamp faces , " which was to have vampires ' human features distort to become more demonic . Whedon wanted normal high school students that the other characters could interact with normally , only to have them turn out be vampires , therefore creating a sense of paranoia . He also wanted the vampires to be " clearly monsters , " as to not make it seem like a high school girl was killing normal ( looking ) people . The vampires originally appeared " very white @-@ faced , very creepy , very ghoulish " . This was toned down in later episodes as the makeup was too time @-@ consuming . Whedon claims that people thought the white faces to be " funny looking " but personally found it creepier , comparing it to the monsters in zombie movies such as Day of the Dead and The Evil Dead . The character of the Master was designed to be in vamp face permanently to highlight his age and make him appear more animalistic ; make @-@ up artist John Vulich based the Master 's appearance on a bat , reasoning that the character has devolved to a more primal , demonic state over the years . It was decided that vampires and their clothes would turn to dust after they died . This was done for practical storytelling reasons , so the characters would not have to spend time cleaning up bodies . This episode introduced with the idea that vampires ' clothes would resemble the era in which they died , with Buffy identifying one by his dated outfit . Joss Whedon felt this concept was a " charming notion " but ultimately rejected it for the most part because he believed that , if every vampire in the show was dressed in old @-@ fashioned clothes , they would cease to be scary . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Welcome to the Hellmouth " first aired in the United States on March 10 , 1997 on The WB . On the original airing of this episode , The WB provided a teaser advertisement briefing the history of past Slayers . It revealed horrific events in towns that were halted when a particular woman arrived . This promotional teaser does not appear in syndication or on DVD . " Welcome to the Hellmouth " earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 4 , meaning that roughly 3 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . It was the 100th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 16 . 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club wrote that the episode was " a good introduction to the show , establishing the characters and the premise quickly and cleanly , before ending on a cliffhanger " . Murray , however , did note that it contained a " dialogue that sounds more faux @-@ clever than actually clever " and that there was " an overall flatness to the action / horror sequences " that would continue until the second season . John Levesque , writing for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , called the fledgling series " witty , intelligent and thoroughly entertaining " and dubbed it " the best thing I 've seen on The WB " . He praised the acting of Sarah Michelle Gellar , noting that she " plays Buffy to perfection " . Phil Kloer of The Atlanta Journal and the Atlanta Constitution called the show a " kicky little mix of camp comedy , high school hi @-@ jinks and monsters " and likened its plot to the Fox sci @-@ fi series The X @-@ Files and the Nickelodeon horror @-@ themed anthology series Are You Afraid of the Dark ? . He ultimately gave the episode a B. Nikki Stafford , in her book Bite Me ! , called the first episode " excellent " and complimented the strengths of the main cast as well as the show 's unique approach . She contrasted it with the earlier movie , noting that " the movie version [ ... ] was like Clueless , but near the end suddenly tried to be a serious film . The television show carries comedy , action , and drama simultaneously and features a far superior ensemble cast . " 
 = Parineeta ( 2005 film ) = 
 Parineeta ( The Married Woman ) is a 2005 Indian musical romantic drama film adaptation of the 1914 Bengali novella , Parineeta by Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay . Directed by debutant Pradeep Sarkar , it was based upon a screenplay by the film 's producer , Vidhu Vinod Chopra . The film featured Vidya Balan ( In her Bollywood Debut ) , Saif Ali Khan and Sanjay Dutt in the lead roles . Raima Sen plays the supporting role of Lolita 's chirpy cousin . Sabyasachi Chakrabarty plays the pivotal role of Shekhar 's father . Diya Mirza , with a cameo appearance as Shekhar 's fiancé and Rekha , with a cameo performance of a night club ( Moulin Rouge ) singer , are other notable performances . 
 Parineeta primarily revolves around the lead characters , Lolita and Shekhar . Since childhood , Shekhar and Lolita have been friends and slowly this friendship blossoms into love . A series of misunderstandings surface and they are separated with the conniving schemes of Shekhar 's father . The plot deepens with the arrival of Girish , who supports Lolita 's family . Eventually , Shekhar 's love defies his father 's greed and he seeks Lolita . 
 The film has several notable allusions to the Indian literature and cinema . Despite the pre @-@ release inhibitions , it received critical acclaim . It won the Filmfare Awards apart from several prominent awards . The director went on to win the National Award for Best First Film . Parineeta was showcased at prominent international film festivals . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story takes place in Kolkata . As the credits roll , scenes from erstwhile Calcutta are displayed along with the narrator 's ( Amitabh Bachchan ) introduction of the era . The narration focuses on the night of the marriage of Shekhar and Gayatri <unk> , a rich industrialist 's daughter . The audience is introduced to Naveen Roy as Shekhar 's father while we see Shekhar grooming himself for the occasion . While he is doing so , images of Lolita calling him by his name flash through his mind . Downstairs , musical celebrations begin as Shekhar meets Vasundhara , a widow from his neighbourhood , who is thankful to her son @-@ in @-@ law , Girish ( Sanjay Dutt ) , for supporting their family after the death of her husband , Gurcharan . Lolita , who is present there , playfully confronts Shekhar as to why he is being indifferent to her . Shekhar admonishes her for speaking so in spite of being married . 
 An angry Shekhar comes back home to play a favourite tune from the past on his piano . The flashback shows a young Shekhar playing Rabindranath Tagore ’ s tune on his piano while young Lolita and Koel are around . Lolita , with her parents having died in a car accident , lives with Gurcharan ’ s family . Koel is her cousin whereas Charu is her neighbour . As this scene flashes across Shekhar ’ s mind , he sings a song full of sadness and loss . As time flies , they grow up to become close friends . The rebellious and musically inclined Shekhar spends his days playing the music of Rabindranath Tagore or Elvis Presley and composing his own songs with Lolita rather than becoming part of his shrewd father 's business . Part of this rebellion involves resistance to meeting Gayatri <unk> , the beautiful but devious daughter of a wealthy industrialist , whom his father would like Shekhar to marry . Meanwhile , Girish , a steel tycoon from London , makes a dramatic entry into Charu ’ s house . Girish seems smitten by Lolita while Koel is by Girish . Shekhar is visibly jealous of Lolita ’ s close friendship with Girish . 
 One day , a shocked Lolita , who is employed at the Roy ’ s office , remembers a hotel project from Gurcharan ’ s ancestral haveli ( palatial house ) . On an earlier occasion , Gurcharan had borrowed money from Naveen Roy after putting his haveli on mortgage . She understands that if the money is not repaid in a few months , Naveen Roy would take over the property . She immediately thinks of asking Shekhar for monetary help . <unk> circumstances prevent this , and Girish , upon realising this , alleviates their problem by making Gurcharan his business partner . Gurcharan repays the debt and the turn of events prompts Shekhar to think why Lolita chose to ask Girish for money instead of him . On one auspicious night , Shekhar and Lolita exchange garlands and consummate their " marriage " unbeknownst to anyone else . 
 While Shekhar is off to Darjeeling on a business trip , Naveen Roy violently thunders at Lolita about the loss of his hotel project , embarrassing and humiliating her . Roy gets a wall built between his and Gurcharan ’ s house symbolising the end of their association . Gurcharan , unable to digest this , suffers a heart attack . Upon Shekhar ’ s return , Roy informs him of the ill @-@ health of his mother and Gurcharan and viciously adds a note of Lolita and Girish ’ s marriage . Shekhar is disgusted to hear of the marriage and in his anger he scowls at Lolita , humiliating her like his father . Meanwhile , Girish assists Gurcharan 's family and takes them to London for the heart treatment . Misunderstandings follow and upon the family ’ s return from London , Shekhar assumes that Girish and Lolita are married and agrees to marry Gayatri . The film returns to the night of Shekhar ’ s marriage when Girish hands him the ownership papers of Gurcharan ’ s haveli . He shocks Shekhar by telling him that he got married to Koel because Lolita denied his marriage proposal . As a conclusion , Shekhar confronts his father and symbolically breaks down the wall separating the two families . He then brings Lolita to his home as his bride much to the delight of his mother . 
 = = Main cast = = 
 Vidya Balan as Lolita . A woman of dignity with unflinching love for Shekhar . A lovely singer , who resigned to the circumstances , upholding her respect when she faces insult . 
 Saif Ali Khan as Shekhar Roy . Shows a balance of love for Lolita and jealousy towards Girish . He is a passionate musician . Towards the end has utter hatred for himself for transforming into such a cold and bitter person . 
 Sanjay Dutt as Girish . Simple and straightforward character who plays Lolita 's moral support with warmth and compassion . 
 Raima Sen as Koel . Lolita 's playful , mischievous and cheerful cousin who 's lively , peppy and lives through every moment . 
 Diya Mirza as Gayatri . Short but a devious character who longs for Shekhar with her charm and beauty . 
 Sabyasachi Chakrabarty as Naveen Roy . Cold at heart , a shrewd and a conniving businessman who even places human values and relationships below his greed for money . 
 Surinder Kaur as Rajeshwari . The mother of Shekhar who scornfully watches how badly her husband treats the neighbours and gets ill . 
 Tina Dutta as Teenage Lolita . 
 Supriya Shukla as Sunita . 
 <unk> Kamat as Ajit . 
 Rekha in a special appearance in song " Kaisi Paheli <unk> " . 
 George Baker as Sir William Eckhart . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = The key elements = = = 
 Before Parineeta , Pradeep Sarkar was a well @-@ known personality in the area of advertisements . With 17 years in mainstream advertising and 7 years of advertisement film @-@ making and commercial cinema , he completed about 1000 commercials and 15 music videos . Vidhu Vinod Chopra , the producer , took notice of his music videos and contacted Sarkar to direct some of the music videos of the film Mission Kashmir ( 2000 ) . After carving a niche in filming music videos , Sarkar gave the thought of filming Parineeta to Chopra . There began the making of the film . 
 About the film 's comparison with the novel , Chopra said in an interview that , as compared to its 1953 namesake film by Bimal Roy , the story was based in the year 1962 . He said that it took them one and a half years to script the film , with them adding new characters and emphasising under @-@ represented characters from the novel . In a separate interview , Chopra admitted that he was actively involved with the screenplay because the film was an adaptation of the novel . When speaking about cinematic adaptation , Chopra gave due credit to Sarkar , and Natarajan Subramaniam ( the film 's cinematographer ) , for providing the vintage visuals . Saif Ali Khan once said that the film was initially attempted to be made in a contemporary way . When the film 's crew did not find the depiction appealing , the filming began with the 60s look . 
 Chopra once cited an interesting anecdote about his belief in Sarkar 's film @-@ making abilities . He said that he never personally signed the cheques for the film 's expenditure . He transferred money into Sarkar 's bank account and the cheques were eventually signed by Sarkar and his spouse . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Chopra said in an interview that Saif Ali Khan and Vidya Balan were not the first choices for the lead roles in Parineeta . In fact Abhishek Bachchan was being cast as Shekhar and Saif Ali Khan as Girish . However Abhishek walked out of the project and Saif readily was accepted as a replacement . This fact was corroborated by Saif in an interview when he said that even though Sarkar had faith in his abilities , Chopra was not too keen on having him . 
 The choice of Vidya Balan came with Sarkar 's prior work experience with her in three music videos . Chopra said that Vidya was screen @-@ tested for six months and only then they were sure of her acting abilities . Saif once said that he was not convinced of Vidya 's abilities , since Parineeta was to be her first film . He instead hoped to work with established actresses like Aishwarya Rai or Rani Mukherjee . However , after seeing Vidya portray the character of Lalita , he was thoroughly appreciative of her performance . Getting an opportunity to debut with big names from the industry along with a lovely character to portray made Vidya accept the role of Lalita . 
 The choice of Sanjay Dutt was because of his versatility , said Chopra in an interview . He also said that the affable nature of Sanjay was a plus during film making . 
 Diya Mirza liked the script so well that she chose to play the role of the devious Gayatri in spite of it being a short role . Raima Sen had a similar story with her want to work with the duo of Chopra and Sarkar . The cameo of the veteran actress , Rekha was purely out of her interest in the song , " Kaisi Paheli <unk> " . 
 = = = Filming and music = = = 
 Since Sarkar knew the city of Kolkata very well , the film was primarily shot there . While most of the film was made in Kolkata , a small portion was shot in Darjeeling . 
 To re @-@ create the 60s era , lot of efforts were made by the producers . For instance , Chopra said that it cost them money and difficulty to procure the green coloured car which was driven by Shekhar in the film . Chopra confirmed the authenticity of the piano used in the song " Piyu Bole " , and of the toy train used in the song " <unk> Mazza " . About the look of the characters , Mirza said that the 60s look was well captured by the make @-@ up artist , <unk> . The song " Kaisi Paheli <unk> " was based on the tune to Louis Armstrong 's " A Kiss to Build a Dream on " . 
 Critics had high expectations from Parineeta 's music because of the award @-@ winning music that was provided in some of Chopra 's previous films , such as ( 1942 : A Love Story ( 1993 ) and Mission Kashmir ( 2000 ) ) . Shantanu Moitra , Parineeta 's music director composed hundreds of tunes before six of them got finalised after a year 's effort . After finalising the soundtrack , Chopra was appreciative of the musician 's abilities when he said that Moitra has the potential to become another R. D. Burman , a yesteryear Bollywood music director . 
 = = Cultural and cinematic allusions = = 
 Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay , the author of Parineeta , was a contemporary of Rabindranath Tagore ; both authors documented Bengali life and social issues at the turn of the century . The 2005 cinematic version of Parineeta pays homage to this relationship by referencing Satyajit Ray 's film Charulata , which itself is based upon Tagore 's noted novella , <unk> . Lalita ( Parineeta ) is dressed to resemble <unk> / Charulata ' s Charu ( Madhabi Mukherjee ) , particularly during the song " Soona Man Ka Aangan " , which incorporates Tagore 's song " Phoole Phoole Dhole Dhole . " In both Parineeta and Charulata , " Phoole Phoole Dhole Dhole " is sung while Lalita and Charu are each on a swing . The film continues the above connection by placing Saif Ali Khan on the same train used in the film Aradhana which featured his mother , Sharmila Tagore . 
 This film was the third one to bear resemblance to the novella , the other two being its 1953 namesake film and the 1976 film , <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box @-@ office and ratings = = = 
 Parineeta notched up Rs . 506 million in India at the end of 2005 . Its overseas success was notable as well with gross collections of Rs . 36 million in the United Kingdom , Rs . 35 million in North America , and Rs 15 million in the rest of the overseas . 
 = = = Reviews , critiques and controversies = = = 
 Before its release on 10 June 2005 , one preview wondered how the film would fare at the box office . Citing comparisons with the 1953 version , the preview suggested that debutant director , Sarkar 's inexperience in film @-@ making , the probable inability of debutant actress , Balan to portray Lalita 's character appropriately , suitable 1960s depiction by contemporary actors and musician , Shantanu Moitra 's until then unimpressive soundtracks , could be impediments to a successful adaptation . 
 Post @-@ release , the same critic said " Vidhu Vinod Chopra 's " Parineeta " – a remake of an old classic of the same name ... ( had ) the love story ( which ) was received well by the younger generation and it went on to become the biggest hit of the year . " It was generally well @-@ received by the critics , with one of them terming the film as " ... a beautiful story , beautifully told . It approximates what most of us expect , and increasingly yearn for , in vain , our cinematic experience . " A reviewer from About.com said that it is " contemporary retelling of ... ( an ) engaging and timeless tale rich with human emotion and universal drama " . The reviewer appreciates the film in most of the nuances of film making saying that this is " enhanced by a brilliant musical score , and accentuated by superb performances by Sanjay Dutt , Saif Ali Khan , Raima Sen , Diya Mirza and debutante Vidya Balan in the lead role of Lalita " . 3000 copies of the novella were sold within weeks of the film 's release , owing to the film 's good reception . 
 Derek Elley from Variety said " A character @-@ driven meller that 's a treat for the eyes , with performances to match , " Parineeta " is high @-@ end Bollywood near its best " . He also says that , " though the climax is still emotionally powerful , it comes over as overcooked . " A mixed review from Mid @-@ Day says " Pradeep Sarkar weaves the story like magic , especially in the first half ... excelling in the detailing ... the vintage look of the film ( that stood out ) with authentic costumes , props and the roads of Kolkata " . However , the review criticised the film 's climax terming it as amateur , thereby diluting the whole film 's impact . Another such review came from The Hindu which begins by saying " A simple enough story , but Sarkar tells it well , with some great shots of Shekhar and Lalita together . " The review eventually says " Except for the end ... where it is too much to bear . " 
 The issue of piracy cropped up when a news article published in The Indian Express exposed the dark side of the film market . Hardly into weeks of the film 's release , CDs were being sold at as low as Rs . 40 . Another blemish was that <unk> Dasgupta , a writer and close associate of Sarkar alleged that the film 's story had a striking resemblance to his parallel work on the novella . 
 = = Screenings = = 
 In 2005 , Parineeta 's cast got a red carpet walk when it was the " World Premiere Film " at the International Indian Film Awards ( IIFA ) weekend in Amsterdam . Owing to this European premiere , Sarkar said that the film had a great opening in the American and English box @-@ offices . The film was on the UK Top Ten films for four consecutive weeks . 
 The film was chosen among 15 debut works for the 2006 Berlin Film Festival . It received enthusiastic reception from the audience as it ran to packed houses to the Chopra 's surprise . Expecting an audience of about 100 Westerners , a critic visiting the festival was surprised to see the cinema hall full and people jostling for seats even on the steps . 
 At the 24th Annual Minneapolis @-@ St. Paul International Film Festival held in April 2006 , Parineeta was the only Indian mainstream cinema to feature among 135 films from 40 countries . 
 In 2006 , the film featured in the Palm Springs International Film Festival , 24th San Francisco International Asian American Film Festival , Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles , Helsinki Film Festival and the International Film Festival of Marrakech . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Apart from winning the National Award for the Best First Film Director , Parineeta won five Filmfare Awards . Best Art Direction to <unk> Mondal , Tanushree Sarkar and Pradeep Sarkar , Best Choreography to Howard <unk> , Best Debut to Vidya Balan , RD Burman Award to Shantanu Moitra and Best Sound Recording to Bishwadeep Chatterjee . It was also nominated for an additional nine awards , for the categories Best Film and Best Director , three for actors portraying Lalita , Shekhar and Girish and four nominations for the soundtrack . 
 The film also won a prominent awards in the form of two Star Screen Awards , three Zee Cine Awards among a notable awards . Apart from these , the film was nominated for an eclectic mix of awards . 
 2006 Filmfare Awards 
 Best Debut ( Female ) – Vidya Balan 
 Best Choreography – Howard Rosemeyer 
 Best Sound – Bishwadeep Chatterjee 
 Best Art Director – Pradeep Sarkar , Tanushree Sarkar 
 R D Burman Award – Shantanu Moitra 
 2006 Zee Cine Awards 
 Best Dialogue – Rekha Nigam , Vidhu Vinod Chopra 
 Best Costume Design – <unk> Ray <unk> 
 2006 Screen Awards 
 Best Playback Singer ( Female ) – Shreya Ghosal 
 Best Debut ( Female ) – Vidya Balan 
 2006 IIFA Awards 
 Best Screenplay – Vidhu Vinod Chopra & Pradeep Sarkar 
 Best Art Direction – Pradeep Sarkar , Tanushree Sarkar 
 Best Sound Recording – Bishwadeep Chatterjee 
 Best Costume Designing – <unk> Ray <unk> 
 Best Makeup – <unk> <unk> 
 = = DVD = = 
 The first version of the DVD version of Parineeta was released by UTV Motion Pictures on 30 October 2006 . It has subtitle options in English , Arabic , Spanish , German , Italian , Malay , and French . An additional disc includes interviews with the actors and a behind the scenes look at the making of the film . It is available in 16 : 9 Anamorphic widescreen , Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround , progressive 24 FPS , widescreen and NTSC format . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack to Parineeta was released by Tips Music in April 2005 to positive reviews . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Amagi = 
 Amagi ( <unk> ) was a Unryū @-@ class aircraft carrier built for the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War II . Named after Mount Amagi , and completed late in the war , she never embarked her complement of aircraft and spent the war in Japanese waters . The ship capsized in July 1945 after being hit multiple times during airstrikes by American carrier aircraft at Kure Naval Base . Amagi was refloated in 1946 and scrapped later that year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The last purpose @-@ built Japanese carrier construction during World War II was a group of vessels based on an improved Hiryū design , but with individual units differing in detail reflecting the changing circumstances as the conflict in the Pacific approached its conclusion . Amagi was ordered , under the provisional name of # 5001 , as part of the Kai @-@ Maru 5 Program of 1942 . This was a massive naval construction program intended to replace losses suffered at the Battle of Midway and focused on aircraft and aircraft carriers . The ship was one of 16 Unryū @-@ class aircraft carriers planned , although only three were completed before the end of the war . 
 Amagi had a length of 227 @.@ 35 meters ( 745 ft 11 in ) overall . She had a beam of 22 meters ( 72 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 73 meters ( 28 ft 8 in ) . She displaced 20 @,@ 450 metric tons ( 20 @,@ 130 long tons ) . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 595 officers and men . 
 The Unryū @-@ class carriers used the same turbines and boilers as used in the heavy cruiser Suzuya . These consisted of four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 152 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 113 @,@ 000 kW ) driving four shafts using steam provided by eight Kampon Type B water @-@ tube boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 34 knots ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) . Amagi carried 3 @,@ 670 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 610 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . She had two funnels on the starboard side , each angled below the horizontal . They were fitted with a water @-@ cooling system to reduce the turbulence caused by hot exhaust gases . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Amagi 's flight deck was 216 @.@ 9 meters ( 711 ft 7 in ) long and had a maximum width of 27 meters ( 88 ft 7 in ) . A small island was mounted well forward on the starboard side and contained the ship 's bridge and air operations control center . It was fitted with a small tripod mast that mounted one of the ship 's radar antennas . The ship was designed with two superimposed hangars that were served by two aircraft elevators , each 14 by 14 meters ( 46 by 46 ft ) ; the center elevator as used in Hiryū was deleted to simplify construction and reduce stress in the hull . The elevators had a maximum capacity of 7 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) and took 19 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . Amagi was fitted with hydraulically operated Type 3 arresting gear with nine cables . She also mounted three Type 3 crash barricades . No aircraft catapult was fitted . The ship mounted a retractable crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , just aft of the rear elevator . Amagi carried 397 @,@ 340 liters ( 87 @,@ 400 imp gal ; 104 @,@ 970 U.S. gal ) of aviation gasoline for her aircraft . 
 The ship 's air group was originally intended to consist of 12 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , plus three in storage , 27 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers , plus three in reserve , and 18 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers plus two in crates . Amagi 's hangars could not accommodate so many aircraft so eleven planes were planned to be permanently carried on the flight deck . In 1943 the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A7M " Sam " fighters ( + 2 in storage ) , 27 Yokosuka D4Y " Judy " dive bombers and six Nakajima C6N " Myrt " reconnaissance aircraft . Of these , the C6Ns were intended to be carried on the flight deck . When the ship commissioned in 1944 , neither the A7M nor the C6Ns were yet in service , so the air group was reconfigured to consist of 27 Zeros , 12 D4Ys , three of which were to be the reconnaissance version , and nine Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . By this time , however , the shortage of carrier @-@ qualified aircrew was such that they were ordered to operate from shore bases and Amagi never embarked her air group . 
 = = = Armor , armament and sensors = = = 
 Amagi 's waterline armored belt was 46 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) thick over her machinery spaces and 140 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) over her magazines . Her deck armor above the machinery was 25 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , but the armor above the magazines was 56 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in twin mounts on sponsons on the ship 's sides . Amagi was initially equipped with 16 triple 25 mm Type 96 and three single AA gun mounts , most on sponsons along the sides of the hull . By the end of the war , the ship mounted 22 triple and 23 single mounts . These guns were supplemented by six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . For defense against submarines , the carrier was fitted with six depth charge throwers and carried between six and ten depth charges for them . 
 Two Type 94 high @-@ angle fire @-@ control directors , one on each side of the ship , were fitted to control the Type 89 guns . Each director mounted a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder . Six Type 95 directors controlled the 25 mm guns and the rocket launchers . Early warning was provided by two Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radars . One of these was mounted on the top of the island while the other retracted into the port side of the flight deck , between the two elevators . In addition , Amagi had two smaller Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 air search radars , one mounted on the tripod mast on the island and the other on the aft starboard retractable radio mast . 
 = = Service = = 
 Amagi 's keel was laid down by Mitsubishi in Nagasaki , on 1 October 1942 . She was launched on 15 October 1943 and completed on 10 August 1944 . The ship was transferred among a number of ports on the Inland Sea until she arrived in Kure in February 1945 and was ordered to be camouflaged . Her intended air group , Air Group 601 , was committed to the Battle of Iwo Jima about that same time . Amagi was briefly refitted from 10 to 24 February . On 19 March , the ship was attacked by aircraft from Task Force 58 and lightly damaged by one bomb that struck the edge of the flight deck . On 13 April , the ship was permanently moored at an island in Kure harbor and extensively camouflaged . 
 This did not prevent the aircraft from Task Force 38 from locating and attacking the ship on 24 July . She was hit twice and near @-@ missed multiple times . A 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bomb detonated near the rear funnel , severely damaging it , but doing little other damage aside from blowing a small hole in the starboard hull . A 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) bomb penetrated the flight deck and detonated in the upper hangar , between the elevators . The explosion blew a 50 @-@ meter ( 160 ft ) section of a hangar wall overboard and the walls of the upper hangar deck were bulged and perforated multiple times . The flight deck between the elevators was bulged up and buckled for a length of 200 feet ( 61 @.@ 0 m ) and the forward elevator was dropped to the bottom of its shaft . It also blew a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) hole in the upper hangar deck . Fragments from the explosion penetrated into the bowels of the ship , penetrating bulkheads and decks below . Fragments from near @-@ misses penetrated the sides of the port hull and caused the forward bomb magazine , two boiler rooms , and the aft port engine room to flood . 
 The captain ordered the ship abandoned later in the day , and the carrier was still afloat in the evening , albeit with a slight list to port and down by the bow . Over the next couple of days , more compartments in the ship flooded and she settled on the bottom of the harbor . Another attack on 28 July hit her several more times and the resulting damage from those hits and more near @-@ misses to port caused the ship to list further to port . This gradually increased through the next day until Amagi capsized at 10 : 00 on the morning of 29 July with part of her flight deck falling overboard . The losses among the ship 's crew are unknown , but were supposedly light . 
 The ship was stricken from the Navy List on 30 November and salvage work began on 5 December . The holes in the ship 's hull had to be sealed to pump the water out and decrease her draft . The remains of her flight deck and upper hangar could not be made watertight and were removed using dynamite . <unk> were used to right the ship and she was refloated on 31 July 1946 . The salvage job was conducted by the Hitachi Zosen facility in Kure and they scrapped the ship afterward . The job was completed by 12 December 1947 . 
 = Finn M. W. Caspersen = 
 Finn Michael Westby Caspersen , Sr. ( October 27 , 1941 – September 7 , 2009 ) was an American financier and philanthropist . A graduate of Brown University and Harvard Law School , he followed his father , Olaus Caspersen , a Norwegian immigrant to the United States , as chairman and chief executive of Beneficial Corporation , one of the largest consumer finance companies in the United States . After an $ 8 @.@ 6 billion acquisition of Beneficial by Household International in 1998 , Caspersen ran Knickerbocker Management , a private financial firm overseeing the assets of trusts and foundations . 
 As a philanthropist , Caspersen donated tens of millions of dollars to the Peddie School , Brown , Harvard , and Drew University , while overseeing the Hodson Trust that benefitted four institutions in Maryland . He described education as his " particular love " and regarded it as " an investment in the future — an investment in human capital . " Buildings and endowed professorships have been named in his honor . Caspersen 's philanthropy extended to rowing and equestrian sports , and service to the United States Equestrian Team Foundation , Princeton National Rowing Association , and the National Rowing Foundation . 
 Caspersen was an influential donor to Republican candidates at both state and national level . In the 1980s , he was a major supporter of former New Jersey governor Thomas Kean . He served as a town commissioner in Jupiter Island , Florida , an exclusive upper @-@ class enclave , for four years , resigning a few weeks before his suicide in September 2009 . 
 News reports linked Caspersen with financial problems and accusations of alleged large @-@ scale tax evasion that were discovered in the course of federal investigations into offshore tax shelters managed by financial firms UBS and LGT Bank , and used by wealthy American clients . Near the end of his life , Caspersen was subjected to an IRS audit with a possible focus on alleged offshore accounts . An attorney for Caspersen ’ s estate claimed that in 2013 the IRS effectively exonerated Caspersen posthumously — with no penalties or fines for offshore accounts or anything else . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Finn Michael Westby Caspersen was born on October 27 , 1941 in New York City . He was one of two sons of Olaus Westby Caspersen ( 1896 – 1971 ) , a Norwegian immigrant , and Freda <unk> ( 1909 – 1991 ) , an American @-@ born Eastern European Jew thought to be of Russian or Polish descent . Olaus 's widowed mother and siblings had emigrated to the United States earlier , leaving Olaus in Norway to complete his education . Olaus came to the United States in 1912 at age 16 , settling in Weehawken , New Jersey . 
 Finn Caspersen 's mother , Freda , was a non @-@ practicing Jew , and his father thought that his sons needed a religious upbringing . Finn attended a congregational church near the family home in his youth . He later reflected that " being Protestant was important . There was a kind of anti @-@ Catholicism in the family . " The family moved to homes in Andover , New Jersey , and Venice , Florida . Caspersen frequently visited Norway as a child , vacationing there during summers after 1947 . 
 Caspersen attended private schools until the ninth grade . He attended the Peddie School , a private preparatory school in Hightstown , New Jersey , and was graduated in 1959 . Caspersen received a Bachelor of Arts ( B.A. ) degree from Brown University in 1963 and a law degree ( LL.B. ) from Harvard Law School in 1966 . 
 = = = Business career = = = 
 In 1972 , Caspersen joined the legal department at Beneficial Corporation , a large American consumer finance firm . Four years later , he was named the firm 's chief executive officer . Beneficial had been established in 1914 in Elizabeth , New Jersey , by Clarence Hodson . Caspersen 's father , Olaus , joined Beneficial in 1920 and served as Hodson 's secretary for several years . In 1929 , Hodson and Caspersen reorganized the firm as Beneficial Finance Corporation and transformed it into one of the largest consumer loan providers in the United States . Freda Caspersen was one of the company 's directors . 
 Under the younger Caspersen 's leadership , Beneficial expanded into credit finance and offered credit cards through its People 's Bank and Trust subsidiary . It purchased Parliament Leasing in 1977 , and First Texas Financial Corp. , a savings and loan firm , in 1978 . In 1977 , Beneficial entered the reinsurance business through subsidiaries , but these endeavors led to significant financial losses in the 1980s . Beneficial later downsized its reinsurance holdings and restructured to emphasize its second mortgage business . According to Charles " Sandy " Hance , former senior vice president and general counsel of Beneficial , Caspersen was a " pioneer in second mortgages , which later evolved into home equity loans " , and that he " saw this trend developing at a very early stage " . 
 Caspersen purchased Harbour Island in Tampa , Florida , from a Beneficial subsidiary in 1979 , and in 1983 began to re @-@ develop the island into an upscale residential and commercial development similar to the Inner Harbor in Baltimore , Maryland . Beneficial purchased the 177 @-@ acre man @-@ made island , formerly known as Seddon Island . Before it was developed , local newspapers described the Harbour Island as " an industrial wasteland inhabited by wild pigs " and the only structures as rusted railroad tracks and an unused phosphate facility . When the first phases were complete , the island opened with events hosted by former U.S. president Gerald Ford . After seven years of dwindling business , Beneficial converted the development into office space , and renamed it Knights Point in 1995 . 
 Caspersen ran Beneficial for 22 years before its 1998 acquisition by Household International for $ 8 @.@ 6 billion . At the time of the acquisition , Beneficial had 25 @,@ 000 employees and operated 1 @,@ 650 branch offices throughout the United States . Caspersen was paid $ 24 million in severance and other payments . His next business endeavor was Knickerbocker Management , which he founded in 1998 with a few partners . Knickerbocker , a private investment firm that oversaw approximately $ 1 billion in assets of trusts and foundations , had offices in Gladstone , New Jersey and Hobe Sound , Florida . 
 = = = Political activities = = = 
 Caspersen became an influential donor to state and federal Republican party candidates , including former New Jersey governors Thomas Kean and Christine Todd Whitman , and Kean 's son Thomas Kean Jr . , a state senator and candidate for United States Senator . Caspersen was a major supporter of Kean 's two campaigns for governor in 1981 and 1985 . When Kean was inaugurated in 1982 , Caspersen , an avid equestrian , dressed in period costume and drove the incoming governor and his wife , as well as outgoing governor Brendan Byrne , to an inauguration party in a four @-@ horse carriage . One writer described the scene as " something out of ' a Currier & Ives print ' " . In 1998 , Whitman appointed Caspersen to chair a 15 @-@ member advisory panel to recommend future development for Ellis Island , and to a public @-@ private partnership to foster business in the state . According to Vanity Fair contributor William D. Cohan , left @-@ wing magazine Mother Jones found that " Caspersen and his wife donated $ 602 @,@ 250 to political campaigns , making them the eighth @-@ largest political donors in the U.S. " during the 2000 election cycle . 
 In 2005 , Caspersen sought a seat on the town commission in Jupiter Island , Florida ; his platform focused on conservation , limiting development , and burying utility cables . He served a four @-@ year term , and ran unopposed for re @-@ election in 2009 . He surprised his fellow commission members and neighbors by suddenly resigning on August 4 , 2009 , claiming that he anticipated moving from the community . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 In 1967 , Caspersen married Barbara Warden Morris , the daughter of Samuel Wheeler Morris , Jr . ( 1918 – 1995 ) and Eleanor May Jones ( 1919 – 2011 ) , one of Philadelphia 's socially prominent Main Line families . They were married for 42 years . Caspersen met his wife when she was an undergraduate student at Wellesley College . She later obtained a masters and doctoral degree from Drew University , submitting a masters thesis on Henry David Thoreau 's Walden , and a doctoral dissertation on the works of Willa Cather . For several years , Barbara Caspersen has served on the university 's board of trustees and currently serves in an emeritus capacity . The <unk> had two homes in New Jersey — in Andover and Bernardsville in areas described as " in New Jersey horse country " , a 6 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot waterfront estate Westerly , Rhode Island , and a residence in Jupiter Island , Florida . The couple had four sons , Finn M. W. Caspersen Jr . , Erik M. W. Caspersen , Samuel M. W. Caspersen , and Andrew W. W. Caspersen . All four of his sons were graduated from Harvard Law School . Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning journalist and Harvard alumnus Daniel Golden , in a book criticizing the role of privilege and wealth at elite colleges , attributed their admission to the prestigious law school to their father 's generosity . Caspersen served as an officer in the United States Coast Guard . He was a member of the Knickerbocker Club , an exclusive , upper @-@ class , men @-@ only social club on New York City 's Upper East Side . 
 Caspersen was a talented equestrian in carriage driving , winning three national championships and representing the United States at three world championships . In 1985 , he won the four @-@ in @-@ hand carriage driving competition at the Royal Windsor Horse Show in the United Kingdom and later was an honorary lifetime officer of the show . According to Sports Illustrated , Caspersen , described as " portly and patrician , tall and splendidly erect , with a lot of beef in his jowls " recalled being asked by Queen Elizabeth II at the awards ceremony about his role in driving his team of <unk> : " I told her it was to lower the carriage 's center of gravity , ... She looked at my midriff and said I was well suited for the job . " 
 He was the father of Andrew Caspersen and three other sons . 
 = = = Death and aftermath = = = 
 Finn Caspersen died on September 7 , 2009 in the Shelter Harbor community of Westerly , Rhode Island , from an apparent gunshot wound to the head . The cause of death was ruled a suicide . A <unk> @-@ steel .38 @-@ calibre , five @-@ shot Smith & Wesson revolver belonging to Caspersen was found near his body . According to law enforcement sources investigating the suicide , Caspersen left a note stating that he " was tired , diminished and in constant pain , and that he did not want to be a burden to his loving family " . 
 Caspersen had been battling kidney cancer before his death , and reportedly pursued regular chemotherapy treatment . Several sources described his health as deteriorating and the cancer severe . Others indicated that his medical condition led to depression , describing an uncertainty that left him " sort of horrified about his medical outcome " . Bernard Davidoff , an internist from New Jersey apparently familiar with Caspersen 's medical care , advised police that Caspersen " suffered from severe depression and was taking antidepressant meds , heart meds , liver meds , kidney meds and diabetes meds " . It was also reported that medical issues and chemotherapy treatments " had severely hobbled him in recent years " . 
 A memorial service held on September 15 , 2009 at St. Peter 's Episcopal Church in Morristown , New Jersey , was attended by 900 friends and relatives . Caspersen was eulogized by former New Jersey governor and Drew University president Thomas Kean . 
 In the weeks after his death , reports emerged that Caspersen had listed his Westerly , Rhode Island , home for sale for $ 10 @.@ 9 million , was facing financial and legal difficulties . Caspersen had begun to step back from various philanthropic efforts and institutional boards at Harvard , Peddie , and the Hodson Trust . Eight days after his death in 2009 , a New York Times article cited an anonymous source , to report that Caspersen was being investigated by the Internal Revenue Service and was suspected of owing as much as $ 100 million in back taxes and fines , and facing possible imprisonment . The New York Times article reported that Caspersen was caught up in a broader federal investigation into tax havens and offshore bank accounts used by wealthy Americans to avoid paying taxes in Switzerland and Liechtenstein . It was reported that his name was turned over to federal investigators by Swiss banking giant UBS earlier in the year , and in connection to Liechtenstein Global Trust ( LGT ) , a private bank controlled by Liechtenstein ’ s royal family . 
 In 2015 an attorney for Caspersen ’ s estate stated Caspersen ’ s tax returns for 2005 @-@ 2008 had been audited , in an investigation that did not conclude until 2013 . The attorney , Denis Conlon , stated that the net result of the four @-@ year audit was a $ 7 @,@ 000 refund from the government for <unk> in one year , $ 14 @,@ 000 of additional tax due for another year ( in which Caspersen had over $ 2 @.@ 7 million of income ) , no refunds or additional taxes dues for the other two years , and no fines or penalties imposed for alleged offshore accounts or other conduct . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 = = = Equestrian and rowing = = = 
 Caspersen served as a board member , president , and chairman of the United States Equestrian Team from 1982 to 2002 . He was considered " the man who put American combined driving on the international map " . During his 20 @-@ year tenure , American riders and drivers earned 71 medals , including 25 gold , in the Olympics , World Championships , and Pan American Games . Caspersen helped the U.S. Equestrian Team establish a permanent home at Hamilton Farm , the former estate of U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady in Bedminster , New Jersey . The Hamilton Farm property was owned by Beneficial and was located next to the corporation 's headquarters . Beneficial deeded the property to the team at Caspersen 's urging . 
 Caspersen supported rowing , and was involved with the Princeton National Rowing Association ( <unk> ) and Princeton International Regatta Association ( PIRA ) . In 1998 , he provided funding to build a boathouse to benefit the rowing programs of Peddie and the nearby Lawrenceville School on the north shore of Mercer Lake in West Windsor , New Jersey . Located at the Mercer Lake Race Course — site of the 1988 , 1992 , 2004 and 2008 United States Olympic Rowing Team Trials — the facility is used for training , racing , camps , clinics and administration by Peddie , Lawrenceville , the Hun School , high schools in Mercer County , New Jersey , <unk> , the US National Team , and the Mercer Junior Rowing Club , as well as <unk> and PIRA . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Throughout his life , Caspersen was closely involved with the management of several universities and schools , serving on the directing boards of the Peddie School , Brown , and the Dean 's Advisory Board at Harvard Law School . In a 2008 interview , he stated that he believed education was " investment in the future — an investment in human capital . I 've been active in a range of other things , but education 's always been my particular love " . 
 Caspersen endowed two professorships at Harvard Law School — the Beneficial Professorship of Law , and the Finn M.W. Caspersen and Household International Professorship of Law . In 2003 , he was chairman of Harvard Law School 's capital campaign , which he helped jump @-@ start by pledging $ 30 million — the largest single donation in the school 's history . The campaign ultimately raised $ 476 @,@ 475 @,@ 707 . The law school honored Caspersen by naming a special collections room in its Library after him . In April 2012 , Harvard dedicated part of a 250 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot multipurpose construction project , which housed student organizations , journals , and social activities , to Caspersen , calling it the Caspersen Student Center . Critics attacked Harvard 's decision to name the facilities after Caspersen after his alleged tax evasion was made public . 
 Barbara Caspersen has served as trustee ( currently as an emeritus trustee ) of Drew University and as both chairwoman and vice @-@ chairwoman of the liberal arts college 's board . In 1999 , the <unk> provided a $ 5 million gift for expanding graduate education programs at Drew . In honor of their service to the university , Drew renamed its graduate school as the Caspersen School of Graduate Studies . The university 's Rose Memorial Library houses a collection of books , manuscripts , artifacts and papers of Nebraska @-@ born author Willa Cather ( 1873 – 1947 ) assembled from items given by several donors — including significant contributions by Caspersen and his wife . It is regarded as one of the best collection of Cather 's papers assembled in the United States . 
 Caspersen donated funds to build a four @-@ level annex , named in honor of his parents , to Brown University 's historic John Carter Brown Library , dedicated in 1991 . Caspersen also served as a trustee of the Peddie School starting in 1970 , and as the board 's chairman starting in 1976 . In 1998 , he and philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg each donated $ 10 million to the school . The Caspersen Campus Center , which opened in 1996 , and Caspersen History House , dedicated in 2006 , were named in his honor . 
 From 1976 until a few weeks before his death , Caspersen ran the Hodson Trust , established by Beneficial founder Clarence Hodson to award grants to four colleges in Maryland : Hood College , The Johns Hopkins University , St. John ’ s College , and Washington College . Under the first 25 years of Caspersen 's stewardship , the trust donated over $ 118 million to the four institutions . Caspersen was awarded honorary degrees for his service to education ; Washington College conferred an honorary Doctor of Humanities degree in 1981 and Hood College awarded Caspersen with an honorary Doctor of Laws degree in 1983 . 
 = Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors is a visual novel adventure game developed by Chunsoft . It was released in Japan in 2009 and in North America in 2010 for the Nintendo DS , with an iOS version following in 2013 in Japan and 2014 in the rest of the world . The game is the first installment in the Zero Escape series , and is the predecessor to the 2012 game Zero Escape : Virtue 's Last Reward . 
 The story follows Junpei , a college student who is abducted along with eight other people and forced to play the " Nonary Game , " which puts its participants in a life @-@ or @-@ death situation , to escape from a sinking cruise liner . The gameplay alternates between two types of sections : Escape sections , where the player completes puzzles in escape @-@ the @-@ room scenarios ; and Novel sections , where the player reads the game 's narrative and makes decisions that influence the story , making it branch into six different endings . The whole plot is not revealed in just one playthrough ; the player has to reach the one " true " ending to get all the information . 
 Development of the game began after Uchikoshi joined Chunsoft to write a visual novel for them that could reach a wider audience ; Uchikoshi suggested adding puzzle elements that are integrated with the game 's story . The inspiration for the story was the question of where inspiration comes from ; while researching it , Uchikoshi came across the biochemist Rupert Sheldrake 's theories , which became the main theme of the game . The music was composed by Shinji Hosoe , while the characters were designed by Kinu Nishimura . The localization was handled by Aksys Games ; they worked by the philosophy of keeping true to the spirit of the original Japanese version , opting for natural @-@ sounding English rather than following the original 's exact wording . 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors was positively received , with reviewers praising the story , writing and puzzles , but criticizing the game 's tone and how the player is required to re @-@ do the puzzles every time they play through the game . Reception of the game 's presentation was mixed . The Japanese release was a commercial failure , while the game sold better than expected for the genre in the United States . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors is a visual novel adventure game in which the player assumes the role of a man named Junpei . The gameplay is divided into two types of sections : Novel and Escape . In the Novel sections , the player progresses through the storyline and converses with non @-@ playable characters . These sections require little interaction from the player as they are spent reading the text that appears on the screen , which represents either dialogue between the various characters or the inner thoughts of Junpei . During Novel sections , the player will sometimes be presented with decision options that affect the course of the game . The decisions made result in one of six branching storylines , each with a unique ending . The whole plot is not revealed in just one playthrough ; the player needs to reach the " true " ending to get all the information behind the mystery . To reach this ending , the player needs to reach one specific ending beforehand . Some of the endings contain hints to how to reach further endings . 
 In between Novel sections are sixteen different Escape sections , which occur when the player finds themselves in a room from which they need to find the means of escape . These are presented from a first @-@ person perspective , with the player being able to move between different pre @-@ determined positions in each room . To escape , the player is tasked with finding various items and solving puzzles , reminiscent of escape @-@ the @-@ room games . At some points , the player may need to combine objects with each other to create the necessary tool to complete a puzzle . The puzzles include various brain teasers , such as baccarat and magic squares . An in @-@ game calculator is provided for math @-@ related problems , and the player can ask characters for hints if they find an Escape room too difficult . All Escape sections are self @-@ contained , with all items required to solve the puzzles being available within that section ; items are not carried over between Escape sections . After finishing an Escape section , it becomes available to replay from the game 's main menu . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters and setting = = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors features nine main characters , who are forced to participate in the Nonary Game by an unknown person named Zero . The characters adopt code names to protect their identities due to the stakes of the Nonary Game . The player @-@ controlled Junpei is joined by June , a nervous girl and an old friend of Junpei whom he knows as Akane ; Lotus , a self @-@ serving woman with unknown skills ; Seven , a large and muscular man ; Santa , a punk with a negative attitude ; Ace , an older and wiser man ; Snake , a blind man with a princely demeanor ; Clover , a girl prone to mood swings ; and the 9th Man , a fidgety individual . 
 The events of the game occur within a cruise ship , though all of the external doors and windows have been sealed , and many of the internal doors are locked . The game 's nine characters learn that they have been kidnapped and brought to the ship to play the Nonary Game , with the challenge to find the door marked with a " 9 " within nine hours before the ship sinks . To do this , they are forced to work in separate teams to make their way through the ship and solve puzzles to find this door . This is set in part by special locks on numbered doors that are based on digital roots ; each player has an bracelet with a different digit on it , and only groups of three to five with the total of their bracelet 's number with the same digital root as marked on the door can pass through . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 At the start of the game , Junpei wakes up in a cabin inside a cruise liner , wearing a bracelet displaying the number " 5 " . He escapes the room , and encounters eight people , including June . Zero announces over a loudspeaker that all nine are participants in the Nonary Game . Zero explains the rules , and states each carry an explosive in their stomach that will go off if they try to bypass the digital root door locks . The 9th Man still goes through a door by himself , and is killed . Fearing what harm might come to them , the group adopts code names , and splits up to explore the ship . The player has the option to select which group that Junpei travels with , which affects the story ; several choices lead to Junpei 's death . Through various choices , Junpei learns of a previous Nonary Game and the connections of the other characters through that , as well as studies about morphic resonance and stories of the Egyptian priestess Alice , who is frozen in ice @-@ 9 . 
 In one ending , Junpei learns that Zero was a participant of the first Nonary Game , and set up the second Nonary Game as revenge towards Ace . The surviving players confront Ace and learn he had manipulated the 9th Man to violate the rules and get himself killed in order to both cover his identity and gain access to the 9th Man 's bracelet . As they find the door with the 9 , Akane becomes weak . Santa watches over her while the others enter the door , leading to an incinerator , where Ace grabs Lotus and holds her at gunpoint . Discovering the incinerator is about to activate , Snake tackles Ace , and Lotus and Seven pull Junpei out of the incinerator before it goes off , consuming Snake and Ace . Junpei returns to Akane , finding her nearly dead . Zero says over the loudspeakers that the game 's loser has been determined ; Junpei acts defiant , but Zero clarifies that he is referring to himself . Junpei investigates a nearby room , and returns to find Akane and Santa have disappeared , after which he is knocked out by a gas grenade . 
 After this ending , the player can access the " true ending " , in which Junpei learns that the previous Nonary Game was run by Cradle Pharmaceutical , who kidnapped nine pairs of siblings and separated them onto the ocean @-@ bound Gigantic and a mock @-@ up in Building Q in the Nevada desert , to explore morphic fields ; the research anticipated that the stress of the game would activate the fields between siblings , allowing solutions solved by one to be sent via these fields to their counterpart at the other location . This research was to help Ace , the Cradle Pharmaceutical CEO , cure his prosopagnosia . The first Nonary Game went awry : Akane and her brother Santa had been placed at the same location instead of being separated , and Seven had discovered the kidnappings and rescued the children from the ship . Ace had grabbed Akane before they could escape , and forced her into the incinerator room where she faced a sudoku puzzle that she could not solve , and apparently died . 
 Junpei and the others reach the incinerator ; Akane disappears and Santa escapes with Ace hostage , trapping the others inside . It is then revealed that the portion of the game 's narrative portrayed on the bottom DS screen is presented from Akane 's point of view during the first Nonary Game . Through morphic fields , she connected to Junpei during the second Nonary Game , witnessing several possible futures and passing that information to Junpei to help him survive . Junpei then faces the same sudoku puzzle Akane did , and relays the solution back to Akane in the past , allowing her to escape with Seven and the other children . Junpei realizes that Akane was Zero and , with assistance from Santa , had recreated the game and all the events she had witnessed in order to ensure her survival . As they escape they discover that the game had taken place in Building Q the entire time , and that Akane and Santa have fled , leaving behind a car with Ace restrained in the trunk . In the game 's epilogue , they drive away hoping to catch up to them and , shortly after , pick up a hitchhiker whom Junpei recognizes as Alice . 
 = = Development = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors was developed by Chunsoft and directed by Kotaro Uchikoshi . Chunsoft had made successful visual novels in the past , but wanted to create a new type of visual novel that could be received by a wider audience ; they contacted Uchikoshi and asked him to write visual novels for them . He came up with the idea to include puzzles that are integrated within the story , and need to be solved in order for the player to make progress . 
 The inspiration for the story was the question " where do mankind 's inspirations come from ? " ; Uchikoshi researched it , and found the British biochemist Rupert Sheldrake 's theories of morphogenetic fields , which became the main theme of the game . The theory is similar to telepathy , which answers the question of how organisms are able to simultaneously communicate ideas to each other , without physical or social interaction . Uchikoshi used the theory to develop the concept of esper characters , which are able to either transmit or receive information from another individual . Because of the vital role of the number 9 in the plot , each of the characters was based off one of the nine personality types from the Enneagram of Personality . Another source of inspiration was the visual novel Banshee 's Last Cry , which , like Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors , begins with putting the characters in a state of discomfort . 
 Uchikoshi started writing the script by working on the ending first . From there , he would continue to work backwards , in order to not get confused when writing the plot . The game 's setting , with characters who are trapped and try to escape , was meant to embody two of humanity 's instinctive desires : the unconscious desire to return to one 's mother 's womb and shut oneself away , and the desire to escape and overcome one 's current condition . This was a theme Uchikoshi had used before , when writing the visual novel Ever 17 : The Out of Infinity . Among scrapped story elements were the use of hands as a major part of the story ; in the final stages of production , Uchikoshi 's higher @-@ ups did not accept this focus , forcing him to re @-@ write the story . The characters were originally supposed to be handcuffed to each other as they try to escape , but the idea was scrapped as it was seen as overused , with appearances in games such as Mahou Shoujo <unk> . 
 The Escape sequences were created to appeal to players ' instinctive desires : Uchikoshi wanted them to feel the instinctive pleasure that he described as " I found it ! " . For the puzzles , he would consider the details within the story , and the props and gimmicks found in the game ; after deciding on them , they were integrated with the puzzles . He also used puzzle websites as reference . He did not design the puzzles himself , instead leaving the puzzle direction to other staff , while checking it multiple times . 
 = = Release = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors was originally released in Japan by Spike on December 10 , 2009 , for the Nintendo DS . An American release followed on November 16 , 2010 . In the United States , a replica of the in @-@ game bracelets was included with pre @-@ orders at GameStop ; due to low pre @-@ orders , Aksys made these available on their website 's shop , both separately and bundled with the game . Upon release , Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors became the eleventh Nintendo DS game to be rated M by the ESRB . Coinciding with the release of the game 's sequel , Zero Escape : Virtue 's Last Reward , Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors got a reprint titled Zero Escape : Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors , with new box art featuring the Zero Escape brand . The game 's soundtrack was published by Super Sweep on December 23 , 2009 . A novelization of the game , titled <unk> <unk> 9 <unk> 9 Nin 9 no Tobira <unk> , was written by Kenji Kuroda and released by Kodansha in two volumes in 2010 : <unk> and Shita . 
 An iOS version of the game , 999 : The Novel , was developed by Spike Chunsoft as the second entry in their Smart Sound Novel series . It was released in Japan on May 29 , 2013 , and worldwide in English on March 17 , 2014 . This version lacks the Escape sections of the Nintendo DS version , and features high resolution graphics and an added flowchart that helps players keep track of which narrative paths they have experienced ; additionally , dialogue is presented through speech bubbles . In 2016 , Spike Chunsoft announced that they would port the game to other platforms , with added voice acting . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 The North American localization of the game was done by Aksys Games ; Chunsoft was introduced to them by Spike when looking for a company that could publish the game in North America . When Aksys evaluated the game , many at the company did not believe in it and turned it down ; as many of the people who evaluate games at Aksys do not speak Japanese , it was difficult for them to determine whether a game was good or not . In the end they decided to localize it , which was considered a big risk for the company . 
 The localization was done by the philosophy of keeping true to the spirit of the original Japanese , making dialogue sound like what a native speaker of English would say instead of strictly adhering the original 's exact wording . The localization editor , Ben Bateman , did this by looking at the writing from a wider view , line by line or scene by scene rather than word by word or sentence by sentence , and thinking about how to convey the same ideas in English . Most parts of the game that include a joke in the localization also have a joke in the Japanese version , but a different one ; Bateman did however try to make similar types of jokes , with similar contents and ideas . The game 's use of Japanese language puns led to problems , as many of them relied on Japanese dialects to function ; for these , Bateman replaced them with new puns in English . He was given mostly free rein in what he could change or add , as long as it did not disrupt the plot . 
 During the localization , Bateman had to keep track of the numerous plot points throughout the game , as the script had not been written in chronological order due to the numerous endings . <unk> the game took roughly two months . Another big challenge was getting the localization done in time : Nobara Nakayama , the game 's translator , worked on it for 30 days , and the editing process took two months . Because of this , Bateman had to do most of the work " on the fly " . Nakayama had started playing the game prior to starting work on the localization , but did not finish playing it until she was more than halfway through translating it ; after learning that the plot hinged on a Japanese pun , they had to halt the localization , discuss it with Uchikoshi , come up with a solution , and go through the whole game to make sure that it still made sense . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors holds a score of 82 / 100 at the review aggregator Metacritic , indicating generally favorable reviews . It was a commercial failure in Japan , with 27 @,@ 762 copies sold in 2009 and an additional 11 @,@ 891 in 2010 , reaching a total of 39 @,@ 653 copies sold . Meanwhile , American sales were described as being strong ; according to Uchikoshi , this was a surprise , as the visual novel genre was seen as being particular to Japan and unlikely to be accepted overseas . 
 The writing and narrative were well received by critics , with Andy Goergen of Nintendo World Report labeling it as " a strong argument for video games as a new medium of storytelling " . Reviewers at Famitsu called the story enigmatic and thrilling . Carolyn Petit at GameSpot felt that the lengthy Novel sections amplified the fear and tension throughout the game , while Heidi Kemps of GamesRadar compared them to " high @-@ quality thriller novels " . Jason Schreier of Wired criticized the prose for being inconsistent , but said that the use of the narrator was clever and unusual . Susan Arendt at The Escapist called the story multi @-@ layered and horrifying . Zach Kaplan at Nintendo Life liked the dialogue , but found the third @-@ person narration to be dull and slow , with out @-@ of @-@ place or clichéd metaphors and similes . Both Chris Schilling at Eurogamer and Lucas M. Thomas at IGN felt that the urgency portrayed in the game 's story sometimes was at odds with the tone or timing of the dialogue , such as lengthy conversations while trapped inside a freezer , or lighthearted dialogue and jokes . Thomas called the premise gripping , and said that the mythology , conspiracies and character backgrounds were engrossing . Tony Ponce at Destructoid said that the characters initially seemed like a " stock anime cast " , but that the player discovers more complexity in them after moving past first impressions . Kaplan felt that each character was well developed , fleshed out and unique , and could pass for real people . 
 A Famitsu writer said that they enjoyed solving puzzles , and that it gave them a sense of accomplishment ; similarly , Goergen , Petit , Schilling and Arendt called the puzzles satisfying to solve . Goergen found some puzzles to be cleverly done , but said that some were esoteric . Ponce and Petit liked that the puzzles never became " pixel hunts " , and how everything is visible as long as the player looks carefully ; because of this and the lack of red herrings , time limits and dead ends , Ponce found it to be better than other escape @-@ the @-@ room games . He applauded the large amount of content , saying that even someone only buying the game for the puzzles would be satisfied . Schilling and Thomas appreciated the puzzles , but found some solutions and hints to be too obvious or explanatory . Kemps found the puzzles excellently done and challenging , but disliked how difficult it was to reach the true ending . Kemps and Schreier appreciated how the puzzles felt logical , while they , along with Thomas and Arendt , criticized how the player has to re @-@ do puzzle sequences upon subsequent playthroughs . Goergen , Schreier , Thomas and Arendt all appreciated the fast @-@ forward function , as it made repeated playthroughs more bearable , but Thomas felt that it didn 't go far enough in speeding up the process . 
 Goergen found the sound design unmemorable , saying that the music does not add much and that players would be likely to mute the game after hearing the " beeping " sound effect used for dialogue for too long . Meanwhile , Ponce and Petit liked it : Ponce called the score " masterful " and said that it " gets under your skin at the right moments " , while Petit said that she appreciated the sound , which she called atmospheric and " [ sending ] shivers up your spine " . She was unimpressed with the environments , but said that they were clear and easy to look at . She liked the character portraits , calling them expressive and , paired with the dialogue , enough to make the player not care about the lack of voice acting . Ponce , too , felt that the game did not need voice acting . He felt that the way the game favored textual narration over animated cutscenes made it more immersive , allowing the player to imagine the scenes . Goergen said that the graphics were well done , but that they did not do much for the atmosphere . Kaplan called the presentation " awesome " , saying that it looked great and that the artwork stood on its own despite the simplicity of the animations , and that the soundtrack was " fantastic " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The game has won some awards : IGN awarded it the Best Story of 2010 award ; RPGFan gave it their award for Best Graphic Adventure of 2010 on a handheld system ; and Destructoid awarded it their Editor 's Choice Award . Bob Mackey at 1UP.com featured Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors on a list of " must @-@ play " Nintendo DS visual novels , citing its story , themes and " zany narrative experimentation " , and Jason Schreier at Kotaku included it on a list of " must @-@ play " visual novels worth playing even for people who do not like anime tropes . RPGFan included it on a list of " 30 Essential RPGs of 2010 @-@ 2015 " , calling it " one of the most engaging and thoughtful narratives [ they ] had ever seen in a video game . " 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors is the first game in the Zero Escape series , and was originally intended to be a stand @-@ alone game . The development for the sequel began after the first game got positive reviews . Zero Escape : Virtue 's Last Reward , the successor to Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors , was announced in August 2011 . Developed by Chunsoft for the Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita , the game was first released on February 16 , 2012 in Japan , and later that year in North America and Europe . Virtue 's Last Reward also follows a group of nine people , and focuses on game theory , specifically the prisoner 's dilemma . Zero Time Dilemma is set between the events of the previous two games , in a facility intended to test the logistics of a Mars colony and the psychology of the people living within it , and has morality as its main theme . 
 = Omarska camp = 
 The Omarska camp was a death camp run by Bosnian Serb forces in the mining town of Omarska , near Prijedor in northern Bosnia and Herzegovina , set up for Bosniak and Croat men and women during the Prijedor massacre . Functioning in the first months of the Bosnian War in 1992 , it was one of 677 alleged detention centers and camps set up throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war . While nominally an " investigation center " or " assembly point " for members of the Bosniak and Croatian population , Human Rights Watch classified Omarska as a concentration camp . 
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , located in The Hague , has found several individuals guilty of crimes against humanity perpetrated at Omarska . Murder , torture , rape , and abuse of prisoners was common . Around 6 @,@ 000 Bosniaks and Croats were held in appalling conditions at the camp for about five months in the spring and summer of 1992 , including 37 women . Hundreds died of starvation , punishment beatings and ill @-@ treatment . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Omarska was a predominantly Serb village in northwestern Bosnia , near the town of Prijedor . The camp in the village existed from about 25 May to about 21 August 1992 , when the Bosnian Serb military and police unlawfully segregated , detained and confined some of more than 7 @,@ 000 Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats captured in the ethnic cleansing of Prijedor . Bosnian Serb authorities termed it an " investigation center " and the detainees were accused of alleged paramilitary activities . 
 By the end of 1992 , the war would result in the death or forced departure of most of the Bosniak and Croat population of Prijedor municipality . About 7 @,@ 000 people went missing from a population of 25 @,@ 000 , and there are 145 mass graves and hundreds of individual graves in the extended region . There is conflicting information about how many people were killed at Omarska . According to survivors , usually about 30 and sometimes as many as 150 men were singled @-@ out and killed in the camp every night . The U.S. State Department and other governments believe that , at a minimum , hundreds of detainees , whose identities are known and unknown , did not survive ; many others were killed during the evacuation of the camps in the Prijedor area . 
 = = Prijedor massacre = = 
 A declaration on the takeover of Prijedor by Serb forces was prepared by Serbian Democratic Party ( SDS ) politicians and was repeatedly read out on Radio Prijedor the day after the takeover . Four @-@ hundred Bosnian Serb policemen were assigned to participate in the takeover , the objective of which was to seize the functions of the president of the municipality , the vice @-@ president of the municipality , the director of the post office , the chief of the police , etc . On the night of the 29 / 30 April 1992 , the takeover of power took place . Serb employees of the public security station and reserve police gathered in <unk> Polje , part of the town of Prijedor . The people there were given the task of taking over power in the municipality and were broadly divided into five groups . Each group of about twenty had a leader and each was ordered to gain control of certain buildings . One group was responsible for the Assembly building , one for the main police building , one for the courts , one for the bank and the last for the post @-@ office . The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) concluded that the takeover by the Serb politicians was an illegal coup d 'état , which was planned and coordinated long in advance with the ultimate aim of creating a pure Serbian municipality . These plans were never hidden and they were implemented in a coordinated action by the Serb police , army and politicians . One of the leading figures was <unk> <unk> , who came to play the dominant role in the political life of the municipality . 
 = = Camp = = 
 In May 1992 , intensive shelling and infantry attacks on Bosniak areas in the municipality caused the Bosniak survivors to flee their homes . The majority of them surrendered or were captured by Serb forces . As the Serb forces rounded up the Bosniak and Croat residents , they forced them to march in columns bound for one or another of the prison camps that the Serb authorities had established in the municipality . On about 25 May 1992 , about three weeks after the Serbs took control of the municipal government , and two days after the start of large scale military attacks on Bosniak population centers , Serb forces began taking prisoners to the Omarska camp . During the next several weeks , the Serbs continued to round up Bosniaks and Croats from Kozarac near Prijedor , and other places in the municipality and send them to the camps . Many Bosniak and Croat intellectuals and politicians were sent to Omarska . While virtually all of the prisoners were male , there were also 37 women detained in the camp , who served food and cleaned the walls of the torture rooms , and were repeatedly raped in the canteen ; bodies of five of them have been exhumed . 
 The Omarska mines complex was located about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from Prijedor . The first detainees were taken to the camp at some point between 26 and 30 May . The camp buildings were almost completely full and some of the detainees had to be held in the area between the two main buildings . That area was lit up by specially installed spot @-@ lights after the detainees arrived . Female detainees were held separately in the administrative building . According to the wartime documents of Serb authorities , there were a total of 3 @,@ 334 persons held in the camp from 27 May to 16 August 1992 ; 3 @,@ 197 were Bosniaks , 125 were Croats . 
 Within the area of the Omarska mining complex that was used for the camp , the camp authorities generally confined the prisoners in three different buildings : the administration building , where interrogations and killings took place ; the crammed hangar building ; the " white house " , where the inmates were tortured ; and on a cement courtyard area between the buildings known as the " pista " , an L @-@ shaped strip of concrete land in between , also a scene of torture and mass killings . There was another small building , known as the " red house " , where prisoners were sometimes taken in order to be summarily executed . With the arrival of the first detainees , permanent guard posts and anti @-@ personnel landmines were set up around the camp . The conditions in the camp were horrible . In the building known as the " white house " , the rooms were crowded with 45 people in a room no larger than 20 square metres ( 220 sq ft ) . The faces of the detainees were distorted and bloodstained and the walls were covered with blood . From the beginning , the detainees were beaten with fists , rifle butts and wooden and metal sticks . The guards mostly hit the heart and kidneys whenever they decided to beat someone to death . In the " garage " , between 150 and 160 people were " packed like sardines " and the heat was unbearable . For the first few days , the detainees were not allowed out and were given only a jerry can of water and some bread . Men would suffocate during the night and their bodies would be taken out the following morning . The room behind the restaurant was known as " <unk> ’ s Room " . The dimensions of this room were about 12 m × 15 m ( 39 ft × 49 ft ) and the average number of people detained there was 500 , most of whom were Bosniaks . The women in the camp slept in the interrogations rooms , which they would have to clean each day as the rooms were covered in blood and pieces of skin and hair . In the camp one could hear the moaning and wailing of people who were being beaten . 
 The detainees at Omarska had one meal a day . The food was usually spoiled and the process of getting the food , eating and returning the plate usually lasted around three minutes . Meals were often accompanied by beatings . The toilets were blocked and there was human waste everywhere . British journalist Ed Vulliamy testified that when he visited the camp , the detainees were in very poor physical condition . He witnessed them eating a bowl of soup and some bread and said that he had the impression they had not eaten in a long time ; they appeared terrified . According to Vulliamy , the detainees drank water from a river that was polluted with industrial waste and many suffered from constipation or dysentery . No criminal report was ever filed against persons detained in the Omarska camp , nor were the detainees apprised of any concrete charges against them . Apparently , there was no legitimate reason justifying these people ’ s detention . 
 Murder , torture , rape , and abuse of prisoners was common . Detainees were kept in inhumane conditions and an atmosphere of extreme psychological and physical violence pervaded the camp . The camp guards and frequent visitors who came to the camps used all types of weapons and instruments to beat and otherwise physically abuse the detainees . In particular , Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat political and civic leaders , intellectuals , the wealthy , and other non @-@ Serbs who were considered " extremists " or to have resisted the Bosnian Serbs were especially subjected to beatings and mistreatment which often resulted in death . 
 In addition , the Omarska and Keraterm camps also operated in a manner designed to discriminate and subjugate the non @-@ Serbs by inhumane acts and cruel treatment . These acts included the brutal living conditions imposed on the prisoners . There was a deliberate policy of overcrowding and lack of basic necessities of life , including inadequate food , polluted water , insufficient or non @-@ existent medical care and unhygienic and cramped conditions . The prisoners all suffered serious psychological and physical deterioration and were in a state of constant fear . Inmates were usually killed by shooting , beating or by the cutting of throats ; however , in one incident , prisoners were incinerated on a pyre of burning tires . The corpses were then transferred onto trucks by other inmates or using bulldozers . There were instances where prisoners were brought to dig the graves and did not return . The ICTY Trial Chamber in the <unk> case found on the basis of the evidence presented at trial , that " over 100 " prisoners were killed at the camp in late July 1992 . About 200 people from <unk> brought to the camp in July 1992 were held in the building known as the " white House " . In the early hours of 17 July , gunshots were heard that continued until dawn . Corpses were seen in front of the " white house " and camp guards were seen shooting rounds of ammunition into the bodies . A witness testified that " everyone was given an extra bullet that was shot in their heads " . About 180 bodies in total were loaded onto a truck and taken away . 
 The camp was closed immediately after a visit by foreign journalists in early August . On 6 or 7 August 1992 , the detainees at Omarska were divided into groups and transported in buses to different destinations . About 1 @,@ 500 people were transported on twenty buses . 
 = = = Death toll = = = 
 As part of the ethnic cleansing operations , the Omarska , Keraterm , Manjača , and Trnopolje camps helped the Crisis Committee of the Serbian District of Prijedor to reduce the non @-@ Serb population of Prijedor from more than 50 @,@ 000 in 1992 to little more than 3 @,@ 000 in 1995 , and even fewer subsequently . Precise calculations about the number who actually died in these camps are difficult to make . Newsweek reporter Roy Gutman claimed that US State Department officials , along with representatives of other Western governments , told him that 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 people , the vast majority of them non @-@ Serbs , perished at Omarska . Journalist Bill Berkeley puts the death toll at 2 @,@ 000 . A member of the United Nations ( UN ) Commission of Experts testified during the trial of Duško Tadić at the ICTY that their number was in the thousands , but she could not be precise , despite the fact that Serbian officials confirmed there were no large scale releases of prisoners sent there . A member of the Crisis Committee , Simo <unk> , who served as chief of police for Prijedor , has stated that there were 6 @,@ 000 " informative conversations " ( meaning interrogations ) in Omarska , Keraterm and Trnopolje , and that 1 @,@ 503 non @-@ Serbs were transferred from those three camps to Manjača , leaving 4 @,@ 497 unaccounted for according to Human Rights Watch . According to the Association of Camp <unk> of Prijedor 1992 , between May and August 1992 , around 6 @,@ 000 prisoners passed through Omarska , 700 of whom were killed . 
 = = International reaction = = 
 In early August 1992 , Vulliamy , Independent Television News ( ITN ) reporter Penny Marshall , and Channel 4 News reporter Ian Williams gained access to the Omarska camp . Their reporting served as one of the catalysts of a UN effort to investigate war crimes committed in the conflict . The camp was closed less than a month after its exposure caused international uproar . 
 = = = 1997 – 2000 controversy = = = 
 Between 1997 and 2000 , there was academic and media controversy regarding the events that took place in Omarska and Trnopolje in 1992 , due to claims of false reporting and " lies " . These allegations , promoted by the state @-@ controlled Radio Television of Serbia ( RTS ) and the British Living Marxism ( LM ) paper , prompted the ITN network to accuse the LM of libel ; ITN won the case in 2000 , effectively forcing the paper to close down . 
 = = Trials = = 
 The Republika Srpska officials responsible for running the camp have since been indicted and found guilty of crimes against humanity and war crimes . 
 Commanders of the camp , Miroslav <unk> , Dragoljub <unk> , <unk> Kos , and <unk> Radić , and a local taxi driver , Zoran Žigić were all found guilty of crimes against humanity . <unk> , <unk> , Kos and Radić were sentenced to five , six , seven and 20 years respectively ; Žigić was given the longest term of 25 years . 
 Željko <unk> was found guilty of crimes against humanity ( murder , imprisonment , torture , sexual violence , persecution , and other inhumane acts ) . He was the de facto commander of Omarska and perpetrated one instance of mistreatment . It was found that he was part of a joint criminal enterprise with the intent of promoting mistreatment and persecution of detainees in the camp . He was sentenced to 21 years of imprisonment . 
 Momčilo Gruban was found guilty of crimes against humanity ( murder , imprisonment , torture , sexual violence , persecution , and other inhumane acts ) . He had command responsibility for crimes committed at the camp and acted as part of a joint criminal enterprise . He was sentenced to 11 years imprisonment . 
 Duško Knežević was found guilty of crimes against humanity ( murder , torture , sexual violence , persecution , and other inhumane acts ) . He was found to have been directly involved in the crimes carried out in the Omarska and Keraterm camps . He was also found guilty under the theory of joint criminal enterprise for furthering the Omarska and Keraterm camps ’ systems of mistreatment and persecution of detainees . He was sentenced to 31 years imprisonment . 
 On 26 February 2007 , the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) presented its judgment in the Bosnian Genocide Case , in which it had examined atrocities committed in detention camps , including Omarska , in relation to Article II ( b ) of the Genocide Convention . The Court stated in its judgment : 
 Having carefully examined the evidence presented before it , and taken note of that presented to the ICTY , the Court considers that it has been established by fully conclusive evidence that members of the protected group were systematically victims of massive mistreatment , beatings , rape and torture causing serious bodily and mental harm during the conflict and , in particular , in the detention camps . The requirements of the material element , as defined by Article II ( b ) of the Convention are thus fulfilled . The Court finds , however , on the basis of evidence before it , that it has not been conclusively established that those atrocities , although they too may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity , were committed with the specific intent ( dolus <unk> ) to destroy the protected group , in whole or in part , required for a finding that genocide has been perpetrated . 
 = = Exhumations = = 
 In 2004 , a mass grave located a few hundred meters from the Omarska site was unearthed containing the remains of 456 persons from the camp . " There is no doubt whatsoever that there are hundreds of bodies as yet <unk> within the mine of Omarska and its vicinity " said Amor <unk> , president of the Bosnian government 's Commission for Tracing Missing Persons . The International Commission on Missing Persons ( <unk> ) has been active in advocating the exhumation and identification of their bodies from mass graves around the area ; with their help , a number of victims have been identified through DNA testing . 
 = = Memorial controversy = = 
 The Mittal Steel company purchased the Omarska mining complex and planned to resume extraction of iron ore from the site . Mittal Steel announced in Banja Luka on 1 December 2005 that the company would build and finance a memorial in the ' White House ' but the project was later abandoned . Many Bosnian Serbs believe there should not be a memorial , while many Bosniaks believe that construction should be postponed until all the victims are found and only if the entire mine — which is in use — be allocated for the memorial site . 
 By the time of the 20th anniversary of the camp 's closure proposals for a physical memorial to the camp 's existence had made no progress . ArcelorMittal said that it was prepared to meet the former inmates ' demands but the local authorities were ultimately responsible for granting permission . The Republika Srpska authorities considered that allowing camp survivors free access to the site and the construction of a memorial as originally agreed by ArcelorMittal would undermine reconciliation . " Prijedor 92 " president <unk> <unk> , stated that the campaign for a memorial would continue . 
 In July 2012 , ahead of the start of the 2012 London Olympic Games , survivors of the camp laid claim to the ArcelorMittal Orbit tower , the tallest structure in Britain , located in the Olympic Park beside the Olympic stadium , as the ' Omarska Memorial in Exile ' . The survivors allege that the Orbit is " tragically intertwined with the history of war crimes in Bosnia , as the bones of victims are mixed in with the iron ore " . ArcelorMittal denied that material from Omarska had been used in the Orbit 's construction . The company said that sensitive issues relating to the mine could not be addressed by ArcelorMittal on its own . Campaigners urged ArcelorMittal as the world 's largest steel producer to use its considerable influence to oppose the local politics of denial and play an active role in healing fractured communities that have made the company 's success possible . Susan <unk> of the Centre for Research Architecture at Goldsmiths ' College in London , observed that ArcelorMittal insistence on " not taking sides " in an area where persecution and injustice continued was not neutrality but taking a political position by default . 
 = Monsters ( 2010 film ) = 
 Monsters is a 2010 British science fiction monster film written and directed by Gareth Edwards in his feature film directorial debut . Edwards also served as the cinematographer , production designer , and visual effects artist . Monsters takes place years after a NASA probe crash in Mexico which led to the sudden appearance of giant tentacled monsters . It follows Andrew <unk> ( played by Scoot McNairy ) , an American photojournalist tasked with escorting his employer 's daughter Samantha <unk> ( played by Whitney Able ) back to the U.S. by crossing through Mexico 's " Infected Zone " where the creatures reside . 
 Edwards conceived the idea for the film after seeing fishermen attempt to bring a creature in with a net , and imagining a monster inside . He pitched the idea to Vertigo Films , who suggested he watch In Search of a Midnight Kiss , a low @-@ budget film starring Scoot McNairy . Edwards cast McNairy and Whitney Able in the lead roles . Principal photography lasted three weeks and had a production crew of six people . Filming took place in five countries , and many locations were used without permission . Most of the extras were people who were at these locations during filming and were persuaded to act in it ; all of their dialogue was improvised , and Edwards provided outlines of the primary plot points . 
 Monsters premiered at South by Southwest on 13 March 2010 . Hours later , Magnet Releasing acquired the rights to distribute it in North America . It had a limited release there , beginning on 29 October 2010 , followed by a theatrical release in the United Kingdom on 3 December 2010 . The film received generally positive reviews and was a box office success , grossing US $ 4 @.@ 2 million against a budget of less than $ 500 @,@ 000 . Monsters : Dark Continent , a sequel , was released in the UK on 1 May 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a NASA deep @-@ space probe ( sent to verify the existence of extraterrestrial life within the solar system ) crash lands in Mexico , extraterrestrial life forms spread throughout the Mexico – United States border region , leading to the quarantine of the northern half of Mexico . U.S. and Mexican troops battle to contain the creatures , and a wall stretching along the American border ostensibly keeps the U.S. protected . 
 American photojournalist Andrew <unk> ( Scoot McNairy ) receives a call from his employer , who tasks Andrew with finding his daughter , Samantha <unk> ( Whitney Able ) , and escorting her back to the U.S. Andrew locates Samantha in a Mexican hospital and the pair board a train , until learning the tracks ahead have been damaged . They discover that if they do not leave the country within a few days , sea and air travel will be blocked for six months . Andrew and Samantha decide to hitchhike their way to the coast . 
 Andrew buys Samantha an expensive ferry ticket for the next morning . After enjoying the local nightlife together , Andrew has sex with a local girl who steals their passports . Unable to board the ferry , Samantha is forced to barter her engagement ring for passage through the quarantine zone . 
 They travel by riverboat until being transferred to a group of armed escorts who are to lead them overland to the Mexico – US border . The convoy is attacked by the creatures . Andrew and Samantha escape , but none of the guards survive . Continuing on , they discover the bodies of dead travellers and bond at the top of an ancient pyramid in sight of the US border wall . By the time they reach the border , the creatures have broken through . They travel through a ghost town in Texas , find an abandoned gas station with power and call the army for help . 
 While waiting for help to arrive , they make phone calls to their respective families . A lone creature silently approaches the station . Hiding , Samantha observes several tentacles exploring the inside of the store , seemingly soaking up a television 's light . Samantha quickly unplugs the television and the creature loses interest . Another creature appears , and they communicate with one another and mate via light impulses . The creatures leave as the military arrives . Samantha and Andrew kiss before they are rushed into different vehicles . The chronological ending takes place at the beginning of the film , filmed in green night vision sight , when the military rescue team is attacked by a single creature . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 While attending university in 1996 , Edwards made a short monster movie set in suburbia . He initially wanted to expand on that idea , but after the release of War of the Worlds , he believed it was " not going to be special anymore " . Considering that the film would have to be low @-@ budget , Edwards decided to embrace the found footage style of The Blair Witch Project , and mix that element with his original concept . After learning about Cloverfield 's similar premise , he abandoned this idea and moved on to a concept where a " war [ is ] going on somewhere on the other side of the world , and no one cares " . 
 Edwards conceived the film while watching some fishermen struggling to haul in their net and imagining a monster inside of it . He had the idea to make a monster movie set " years after most other monster movies end , when people aren 't running and screaming , but life is going on " and " where a giant , dead sea monster is considered completely normal " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Edwards pitched his idea to Vertigo Films , where producer James Richardson asked him to watch In Search of a Midnight Kiss for an example of low @-@ budget filmmaking . It starred Scoot McNairy and had been made for $ 15 @,@ 000 . Edwards was impressed by McNairy but wanted a real couple to portray the lead characters . McNairy sent Edwards a picture of his then @-@ girlfriend , actress Whitney Able , who Edwards initially thought was " too good @-@ looking " . He changed his mind after meeting them and cast them both . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was written and directed by Gareth Edwards , while Allan <unk> and James Richardson of Vertigo Films served as producers . Edwards did not storyboard or script the film , but wrote a treatment of the story and outlines that detailed specifics points that needed to be hit in dialogue . The filming equipment cost approximately $ 15 @,@ 000 , and the production budget came in " way under " $ 500 @,@ 000 . The film was able to be made on such a low budget largely due to the production using consumer grade <unk> level equipment instead of professional paraphernalia . For instance , the film was shot using digital video cameras rather than the more expensive 35mm film and was edited on a laptop computer . Many of the locations in the film were used without permission , and most of the extras were people who were already at the locations . As the extras were non @-@ actors who were persuaded to be in the film , their actions were improvised . 
 The film was shot in Belize , Mexico , Guatemala , Costa Rica , and the United States over three weeks . For about 90 % of the principal photography , the crew consisted of seven people transported in one van : Edwards , Able , McNairy , sound operator Ian Maclagan , line producer Jim Spencer , Mexican fixer Verity Oswin , and a driver . 
 = = = Editing and effects = = = 
 Every night after shooting , editor Colin <unk> and his assistant Justin Hall would download the footage so the memory sticks could be cleared and ready for the next day . While new footage was being captured , the previously filmed footage was edited at the production team 's hotel . After filming concluded , the crew had over 100 hours of footage . The original cut was over four hours long but was trimmed to 94 minutes after eight months of editing . Edwards originally had the ending of the film both at the beginning and the end . He and the film 's producers disagreed about the placement , so he decided to put the chronological ending of the film at the beginning and end the film immediately after Andrew and Samantha kiss . 
 Edwards created the visual effects himself using off @-@ the @-@ shelf Adobe software , ZBrush , and Autodesk 3ds Max . He had five months to create all 250 visual effects shots , a process he undertook in his bedroom . He produced two shots a day until he reached the first creature shot , when " suddenly two months went by and [ he ] still hadn 't finished a single creature shot " ; Edwards stated that the creatures ' visual effects were the most challenging element of production . Due to time constraints , the sound effects had to be produced before the visual effects . 
 = = Release = = 
 Monsters premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival on 13 March 2010 . In May , the film was screened at the Cannes Film Market . It also screened as part of the 64th Edinburgh International Film Festival on 18 June 2010 , and screened twice at the Los Angeles Film Festival on 23 and 26 June . The film was first released in Russia on 30 September 2010 . Monsters later released in the United States on 29 October , in Canada on 5 November , and the United Kingdom on 3 December . In the weeks leading up to the UK release , a marketing campaign using social network Foursquare was announced . Vue Entertainment and Cineworld Cinemas set up ' infected locations ' which gave users access to exclusive Monsters content and the chance to win random on @-@ the @-@ spot prizes . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Hours after the film 's screening at South by Southwest , Magnet Releasing acquired the distribution rights in the United States . Tom Quinn , an executive at Magnet , stated that they " were blown away by Monsters " and were " thrilled to bring his vision to American audiences . " Shortly after , D Films acquired the rights to distribute the film in Canada . Monsters was released in 19 countries between September 2010 and December 2011 . It grossed $ 4 @.@ 2 million from worldwide ticket sales , earning over $ 1 million in the United Kingdom and Russia and over $ 100 @,@ 000 in Mexico , France , the United States , Australia , Germany , Spain , Poland , and Turkey . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 The film was released in the United Kingdom on 3 December 2010 . On its opening weekend , Monsters grossed $ 550 @,@ 110 in 164 theatres , averaging $ 3 @,@ 354 per theatre . The following weekend , the film dropped to 153 and grossed $ 244 @,@ 607 , a 55 @.@ 5 % decrease , averaging $ 1 @,@ 599 . Over its three subsequent weekends , the film grossed $ 99 @,@ 891 . The film concluded its five @-@ week run on 2 January 2011 ; the gross was $ 1 @,@ 442 @,@ 633 . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The film was released in North America on 29 October 2010 . On its opening weekend , Monsters grossed $ 20 @,@ 508 in three theatres , for an average of $ 6 @,@ 836 per theatre . The following weekend , the film screened in 13 theatres and grossed an additional $ 28 @,@ 590 . In its third weekend , the film expanded to 25 theatres and grossed $ 48 @,@ 680 , averaging $ 1 @,@ 947 per theatre . Over its six subsequent weekends , the film grossed an additional $ 60 @,@ 141 . On 26 December 2010 , the film concluded its nine @-@ week run with a gross of $ 237 @,@ 301 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Monsters received generally positive reviews from critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 72 % approval rating and an average rating of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 based on 147 reviews . The site 's consensus states : " It doesn 't quite live up to its intriguing premise , but Monsters is a surprising blend of alien @-@ invasion tropes , political themes , and relationship drama . " On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 based on reviews from critics , the film has a score of 63 based on 26 reviews , which is considered to be " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert awarded the film three and a half out of four stars , praising its focus on " characters , relationships , fear and mostly unseen menace " rather than its visual effects , as well as the acting . He also commended Edwards for " evoking ... awe and beauty " and for the creature designs . Peter Bradshaw , writing for The Guardian , gave it four stars out of five , described the film as a " terrifically exciting sci @-@ fi movie " and concluded that Edwards " channels the upriver nightmares of [ Werner ] Herzog and [ Francis Ford ] Coppola , with a strong streak of <unk> wonder at the sight of two aliens apparently dancing " . Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune was critical of the performances but praised the film 's " considerable , crafty virtues " , its premise , and its ending . Jeanette Catsoulis of The New York Times called the film " wondrously atmospheric " and " effortlessly compel [ ling ] " , and praised Edwards ' " beautiful , otherworldly " visual effects . Dan Jolin of Empire echoed the comparison to Herzog , opining that the film " exhibits the lyrical surrealism of [ his ] jungle excursions " . He also praised the visual effects , Edwards ' cinematography , and the " simmering " chemistry between McNairy and Able , concluding that the film was " both shoestring and sci @-@ fi filmmaking at its best " . Michael Rechtshaffen of the Associated Press praised Edwards for " add [ ing ] original touches to the genre " and for his production design . He criticized the " tentative " and " alienating " performances of McNairy and Able , but stated that " the overall picture still impresses " . Jennie Punter of The Globe and Mail disagreed , comparing the lead actors ' chemistry to Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy in Before Sunrise and praising the pacing . Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B + , also praising the performances of McNairy and Able and commending Edwards ' work . 
 Conversely , Ty Burr of the Boston Globe gave the film a mixed review , granting it two and a half stars out of five . Though he praised the score , he stated that it is " more fascinating for its ambitions than for what it accomplishes " and criticized the main characters for being " too shallow " and unengaging . Robert Abele of the Los Angeles Times criticized the " weak plot , forgettable dialogue and sloppy politics " and called the lead characters " empty @-@ headed blanks " . Amy Biancolli of the San Francisco Chronicle called McNairy and Able a " semi @-@ interesting " pair , but disliked the lack of monsters in the film , the dialogue , and the familiarity of the story . Michael O 'Sullivan of The Washington Post called the film " a less @-@ than @-@ compelling relationship drama " , criticizing it for being unoriginal and predictable , and that hiding the monsters made them less frightening . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 13th British Independent Film Awards , Monsters was nominated in six categories including Best Picture , Best Director for Edwards , and Best Actor for McNairy . The film won for Best Director , Best Technical Achievement , and Best Achievement in Production . At the 64th British Academy Film Awards , Edwards was nominated for Outstanding Debut by a British Director , but lost to Chris Morris for Four Lions . It won Best Independent Movie at the 2011 Scream Awards , and was nominated for Best Science Fiction Movie . The film also won Best International Film at the 37th Saturn Awards . The National Board of Review named the film one of the top ten independent films of 2010 , and it placed third on Moviefone 's Top 10 Sci @-@ Fi Movies of 2010 list . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel , Monsters : Dark Continent , started filming in March 2013 in Jordan and Detroit , with Tom Green directing and Jay Basu writing . Gareth Edwards and Scoot McNairy served as executive producers . Johnny Harris , Sam Keeley , and Joe Dempsie starred in the film . Originally scheduled to be released on 28 November 2014 , the film 's release date was then moved to 27 February 2015 , and was eventually released by Vertigo on 1 May 2015 . In contrast to Monsters , Monsters : Dark Continent was not well received by critics , with a 18 % score on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes based on 34 reviews . 
 = James Ferguson , Lord Pitfour = 
 James Ferguson , Lord Pitfour ( 1700 – 25 June 1777 ) was a Scottish advocate and second Laird of Pitfour , a large estate in Buchan . His flourishing law practice was sited opposite Parliament House in Edinburgh . He became Dean of the Faculty of Advocates in 1722 and was elevated to the bench , becoming Lord Pitfour , in 1764 . Pitfour was described as one of the greatest lawyers in the country . However , by the time he became a judge he was past his prime intellectually and thus did not make as much of an impact in that role . A Jacobite sympathiser , he is best known for his defence of rebels standing trial at Carlisle after the Jacobite risings . 
 Ferguson inherited the Pitfour estate on the death of his father , James Ferguson , 1st Laird of Pitfour . He purchased additional lands and expanded the estate , which became known as " the Blenheim of the North " . A staunch Episcopalian , he had a private Qualified Chapel built on the estate . He also established a small village and arranged for plantations of Douglas firs near the mansion house . 
 = = Ancestry and early life = = 
 Ferguson was born at Pitfour in 1700 shortly after his father , also named James , had purchased the estate . Ferguson 's father was the first Laird of Pitfour and previously had the honorific James Fergusson of Badifurrow . His mother was Ann Stuart . In 1733 Ferguson married Anne Murray ( 1708 – 1793 ) , a sister of Patrick Murray , 5th Lord <unk> and James Murray , a British army officer who became Governor of Quebec . They had three sons . The eldest , James ( 1736 – 1820 ) , became a politician ; Patrick ( 1744 – 1780 ) invented the Ferguson rifle , a breech @-@ loading flintlock weapon ; and the youngest , George ( 1748 – 1820 ) , became Lieutenant Governor of Tobago in 1779 . Ferguson also had three daughters : Ann , Elizabeth and Jane . 
 In his memoirs , John Ramsay of Ochtertyre described the first Laird was as " having been an adventurer in the South Sea " and that he " would have been a ruined man , but for his son 's exertions . " Wilson @-@ Smith interprets this to mean the first Laird had lost a great deal of money investing in the South Sea Company , but the expansive lands he procured generated sufficient revenue to continue payments on the debts until the situation was later fully remedied via the financial acumen of his son , Lord Pitfour . 
 = = Career = = 
 Ferguson studied at the Marischal College in Aberdeen from 1711 – 1715 . He then studied law at Edinburgh University before completing his education at Groningen and Utrecht . He became a member of the Faculty of Advocates on his return to Edinburgh in early 1722 . He was appointed as Vice @-@ Dean of the Faculty of Advocates in January 1759 and became Dean when Robert Dundas was elevated to Lord President of the Court of Session in June 1760 . 
 In 1764 the Earl of Mansfield successfully petitioned George III to allow Ferguson to be promoted to fill the vacant position of judge sitting in the Court of Session . Ferguson became a Senator of the College of Justice in June 1764 . This entitled him to thereafter be addressed as " Lord Pitfour " . 
 The law practice was at one point based in a substantial seven @-@ storey tenement house purchased by Ferguson at 333 High Street , Edinburgh , opposite Parliament House . The law practice occupied the four upper floors of the building ; shops were on the lower level . Pitfour 's legal services were in great demand and he was able to charge twice the fees of his associates . 
 His law practice had many influential clients , including Lord Braco and the sons of Lord Fraser of Lovat . Pitfour was one of 15 advocates acting in a case raised by Alexander Fraser against Lord Fraser claiming the <unk> to the Lovat estates . Eventually a compromise was reached ; Lovat retained the <unk> and Fraser gained a monetary sum instead . As the negotiations had taken many hours of legal deliberation over a three @-@ year period , the case proved very profitable for Pitfour . 
 Ferguson was a Jacobite . The records of the Spalding Club include a soldier 's letter which indicates it is likely Ferguson was willing to offer refuge to Jacobites who participated in the Battle of Culloden . Jacobite rebels captured from throughout Scotland were taken to stand trial at Carlisle Castle in 1746 . Ferguson and fellow advocate Alexander Lockhart argued in their defence . Prosecutors showed little mercy , calling for the rebels to be executed by hanging . Since the prosecution assumed anyone dressed in tartan was guilty , Ferguson and Lockhart had their servants dress in tartan and appear along with the other defendants . They called each other to the stand to testify as to the whereabouts of the servants and proved that , despite their tartan dress , the defendants could not have taken part in the rebellion . Many were found guilty , but the trick succeeded , as some of the accused were acquitted , including the Laird of <unk> , a kinsman of Ferguson . 
 The 1773 papers of George III contain details of Pitfour accompanying Lord Justice Clerk Thomas Miller on the Northern Circuit from the end of April until 20 May . Among the cases heard were the trial of a servant accused of murdering another servant on Skye , and the case of Edward Shaw McIntosh , a <unk> gentleman of rank who together with his brother and some of their servants was accused of several instances of housebreaking which had escalated to murder and highway robbery . Some of the gang was caught , but McIntosh remained an outlaw . 
 Lord Pitfour was widely admired and often dined with fellow lawyer and biographer James Boswell , who declared Pitfour to be one of the greatest Scottish lawyers . This was endorsed by the diarist John Ramsay of Ochtertyre ( 1736 – 1814 ) , who remarked that Pitfour was one of a small number of barristers who he found satisfying hear speak . Pitfour practised law in Edinburgh at the height of the Scottish Enlightenment and was a member of The Poker Club . 
 Lord Pitfour is described as being good humoured but of a " somewhat awkward manner " and small in stature . His voice was shrill and he had poor eyesight . He was shrewd , kind and sympathetic , which put him at odds with some of his colleagues on the bench . Serving at the same time as Lord <unk> , who had a reputation for handing down severe sentences , Pitfour was viewed as indecisive and too lenient . His desire to be fair and reach compromise had stood him in good stead as an advocate , but as a judge , these characteristics drew criticism from his contemporaries . Lord Kames was critical of him , maintaining that Pitfour did not want anyone to be hanged . Writing in 2008 , local historian Alex Buchan speculated that Pitfour 's hard life travelling around Scotland took too much of a toll on him , leading to a rapid decline in his health and ability . At 64 years of age at his appointment as a judge , he was likely too old to be effective . 
 = = Pitfour = = 
 Ferguson inherited the expansive Pitfour estate on the death of his father , the first Laird , in 1734 . The second Laird expanded the estate and continued the work that developed it into one of the largest and most lavish estates in Scotland . The estate was described by Charles McKean as " the Blenheim of Buchan " but it has also been referred to as " the Blenheim of the North " and " the Ascot of the North " . The village of Fetterangus was established by Pitfour just over a mile north of the mansion house in 1752 . 
 In 1766 , Lord Pitfour paid £ 15 @,@ 000 to add further land to the estate . The land had been forfeited to the crown and subsequently purchased by the York Buildings Company after George II instigated an attainder against George Keith , the final Earl Marischal , who was pardoned in 1761 . After the Earl Marischal returned to favour and the York Buildings Company suffered financial difficulties , he bought the land back for £ 31 @,@ 000 at an auction , to the delight of friends and others present . He displayed little interest in the property and sold it to Lord Pitfour . <unk> negotiations had taken place between Pitfour and the Earl Marischal to conclude the transaction , as the Earl Marischal did not want the details publicly known , fearing reproaches from his friends . The land , adjacent to the Pitfour property , incorporated St Fergus and Inverugie Castle , the former seat of the Earls Marischal . The 8 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 km2 ) was predominantly peat bogs , woods and uncultivated land . The addition of this extensive property made Pitfour the largest estate in the area , stretching over 30 @,@ 000 acres ( 120 km2 ) from Buchanhaven in Peterhead and along the course of the River Ugie to Maud . Pitfour had handled the Earl Marischal 's complex legal requirements over a lengthy period , but the purchase of the land led to ill feeling and insinuations against Pitfour of underhand dealing from other landowners . He never regained popularity in the area and subsequently spent less time at the estate . 
 Pitfour , an Episcopalian , had a small Qualified Chapel built on the estate at Waulkmill in 1766 . This large plain building could accommodate up to 500 parishioners . Saplinbrae , a house that was initially used as a coaching inn after its construction on Pitfour 's instruction in 1756 , was used as the minister 's manse . Douglas firs were planted near Saplinbrae and Deer Abbey from seed sent from Canada by Pitfour 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , General James Murray . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Lord Pitfour suffered from poor health in his later years , and he resigned from the judiciary in 1776 . Correspondence between Pitfour 's two brothers @-@ in @-@ law , Lord <unk> and General Murray , shortly after Pitfour died describes how " he had in a manner lost his senses " . After his death at <unk> in June 1777 , he was buried in a vault he had purchased two years previously in Greyfriars Kirkyard , Edinburgh . Lord Pitfour was succeeded by his eldest son , James . 
 = American Arts Commemorative Series medallions = 
 American Arts Commemorative Series medallions are a series of ten gold bullion medallions that were produced by the United States Mint from 1980 to 1984 . They were sold to compete with the South African Krugerrand and other bullion coins . 
 The series was proposed by North Carolina senator Jesse Helms after the United States Department of the Treasury began selling portions of the national stockpile of gold . Iowa Representative Jim Leach suggested that the medallions depict notable American artists . President Jimmy Carter signed the bill containing the authorizing legislation into law on November 10 , 1978 , despite objections from Treasury officials . 
 The medallions were initially sold through mail order ; purchasers were required to obtain the day 's price by telephone before ordering . Later , the Mint sold them through telemarketing . Mintage ceased after the ten different medallions approved by Congress were produced . All were struck at the West Point Bullion Depository . The series sold poorly , prompting critics to blame the involved process by which they were first marketed , and the fact that they were medallions rather than coins . 
 = = Background = = 
 On April 19 , 1978 , the United States Treasury Department announced that a portion of the national gold stockpile was to be auctioned through the General Services Administration ( GSA ) beginning on May 23 , 1978 , in the form of 400 troy ounces ( 12 kg ) bars . According to the Treasury , the sales were intended to " [ reduce ] the U.S. trade deficit , either by increasing the exports of gold or by reducing the imports of this commodity " , and to " further the U.S. desire to continue progress toward the elimination of the international monetary role of gold . " For reasons of bookkeeping , an entire bar was set as the minimum purchase , which placed the gold outside of the reach of most Americans . North Carolina senator Jesse Helms was critical of the plan , saying that he was " opposed to the sale of U.S. gold to foreign and international banks and gold dealers " and that medallions should be " produced in small size , suitable for sale to average citizens . " On the day of the Treasury announcement , Helms introduced the Gold Medallion Act of 1978 . The stated intent was to provide average consumers with affordable , small @-@ sized gold bullion to compete with the South African Krugerrand and other world bullion coins , which were becoming increasingly popular with American investors . 1 @.@ 6 million troy ounces ( 50 @,@ 000 kg ) ounces of gold had been imported into the United States in the form of Krugerrands in 1977 alone . In a hearing on August 25 , 1978 , before the United States Senate Committee on Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs , Helms said : 
 In the first year after enactment the bill would require that the first 1 @.@ 5 million ounces of gold sold be made into medallions . Under the stepped @-@ up rate of gold sales , that is only two months worth of gold . The amount is about equal to last year 's importation of foreign bullion coins , mostly Krugerrands from South Africa . 
 Helms went on to describe the characteristics of the proposed medallions , stating : 
 The one @-@ ounce medallion would have on one side the head of the statue of Freedom atop the Capitol , and it would be marked with the words , " One ounce fine gold , " and the word " freedom . " The reverse of the piece would be the Great Seal of the United States and the words " United States of America , " and the year in which it was produced . The half @-@ ounce medallion would have on one side some representation of the rights of individuals and the words " Human Rights , " and " One @-@ half ounce fine gold . " The reverse would be similar to the back side of the " Freedom " medallion , with the Great Seal . 
 Support for the medallions grew in Congress , prompting the <unk> of more legislation . Iowa representative Jim Leach proposed that the series feature designs honoring American artists . During the Committee on Banking , Housing and Urban Affairs hearing , Leach outlined the reasons for his proposal . He noted that the House Subcommittee on Historic Preservation received many suggestions of individuals worthy to appear on the dollar coin that had previously been proposed . Leach felt that a dollar coin was not a suitable way to commemorate the individuals , as it was impossible to honor such a large group on a coin whose design was likely to remain unchanged for a long period of time . He also noted that all United States coinage until then had depicted individuals whose principal contributions had been in government and politics rather than the arts . Leach described the specifics of his proposal , stating : 
 I am suggesting in H.R. 13567 that we honor 10 individuals who have been distinguished contributors to the arts — music , painting , writing , architecture and the theatre . Other fields might well be chosen , or other people than I have selected within the field of arts ; but the point I want to emphasize is this : while our coinage is and should be devoted to honoring those who have contributed to our political heritage , medals offer us an opportunity to honor those who have contributed to our cultural development , our economic achievements , our technological expertise , and other accomplishments which reflect the wide dimensions of our democratic society . 
 The subjects designated were painter Grant Wood , contralto singer Marian Anderson , authors Mark Twain and Willa Cather , musician Louis Armstrong , architect Frank Lloyd Wright , poet Robert Frost , sculptor Alexander Calder , actress Helen Hayes and author John Steinbeck . 
 Though the program received widespread support in Congress , Treasury officials opposed it . In a letter , Treasury secretary W. Michael Blumenthal wrote , " I do not believe the U.S. Government should permit the erroneous impression to be created that it cannot or will not take the necessary steps to combat inflation and that the public therefore needs to buy gold as a hedge against inflation . " Blumenthal also believed that if the government were to sanction the striking of gold medallions , the public would believe that the Treasury was actively encouraging investment in gold . Despite these objections , the bill was attached to the bank omnibus bill , which President Jimmy Carter signed into law on November 10 , 1978 . 
 = = Production and sale = = 
 The Treasury lacked money to put the medallions into production , so an appropriations bill was passed giving the department the necessary funding . The GSA was tasked with determining how best to market the new issues . The GSA proposed several sales plans , including the distribution of the medallions to a network of banks for sale to the public . This was rejected in favor of requiring purchasers to make a telephone call to learn the price of the medallions on the day of purchase , after which the purchaser was to go to a post office the same day to make payment . According to the legislation , the issues were to be " sold to the general public at a competitive price equal to the free market value of the gold contained therein plus the cost of manufacture , including labor , materials , dies , use of machinery , and overhead expenses including marketing costs . " 
 Production began in 1980 . Struck at the West Point Bullion Depository , the medallions contained 90 % gold , and were issued in two sizes : one containing one troy ounce ( 31 g ) of gold and one containing one half @-@ ounce ( 16 g ) of the metal . The first struck were those honoring Grant Wood on the one ounce medallion and Marian Anderson on the half @-@ ounce piece . Both were designed by United States Mint Chief Engraver Frank Gasparro . Sales were poor , and in September 1980 , the Mint announced that a private firm , commodity traders J. Aron and Company , would market the medallions . The new plan involved selling the medallions through a network of bullion dealers , banks , brokerage houses and coin dealers , a system similar to that South Africa used to distribute the Krugerrand in the US . In 1981 , the second year of production , the composition of the medallions was changed ; although the 90 % gold purity was retained , the balance was altered to include silver , which was added to change their appearance . That year 's medallions depicted Mark Twain and Willa Cather . These were designed by Matthew <unk> and <unk> Winter , respectively . These first four medallions bore no notation of their metallic content or country of origin . This was done to distinguish them from federal coinage . Beginning in 1982 , this information and small , toothlike designs , known as " denticles " , were added along the inner rim of the medallions , and reeding was added to the edge . That year 's issues depicted Louis Armstrong , as designed by John Mercanti , and Frank Lloyd Wright , designed by Edgar Steever . The following year 's medallions depicted Robert Frost and Alexander Calder . The former was designed by P. Fowler , while the latter was by Michael Iacocca . The final year of production saw the mintage of medallions with designs by John Mercanti honoring Helen Hayes and John Steinbeck . The Mint terminated the contract with J. Aron and Company in 1984 , opting instead to sell the medallions through a telemarketing program . In 1985 , Mint director Donna Pope announced that the medallions would be sold in another telemarketing operation in sets of five of either one each of the one ounce medallions or one each of the half @-@ ounce pieces , beginning in September of that year and ending on December 31 , or sooner if all sets sold . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In October 1980 , Luis Vigdor , assistant vice @-@ president for bullion and numismatic operations of <unk> , <unk> & Brookes , then one of the largest coin firms in the country , compared the medallions and the efforts to market them unfavorably to the South African Krugerrand . According to Vigdor , they were difficult to market due to their lack of notation of weight , fineness and country of origin . He also criticized the marketing , asserting that people were unlikely to buy gold at the post office , and that the medallions were advertised poorly . Vigdor contrasted the medallions ' marketing program with the widespread success of the Krugerrand and the vigorous attempts to market them around the world . Commenting on the poor sale of the medallions , assistant director of marketing for the Mint Francis Frere said in 1984 : " it just hasn 't worked . They 're not selling . We 've made a strong effort , but it 's not working . " 
 On February 12 , 1982 , following the poor sales of the medallions , the United States Gold Commission recommended the minting of a gold coin . Donald Regan , Secretary of the Treasury and chairman of the commission , later told reporters that a gold coin could be easier to sell than medallions , because the suggested coins " could be redeemable in dollars " . The Mint issued gold coins for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles and for the centennial of the Statue of Liberty in 1986 . Both issues were successful , and the Liberty piece sold out on advance sales . As the public was receptive to the gold coins , and President Ronald Reagan had banned the importation of Krugerrands in 1985 over South Africa 's apartheid policy , Congress authorized the American Gold Eagle gold bullion coin , which entered production as legal tender in 1986 . 
 = = Designs and sales figures = = 
 = Orchha Fort complex = 
 The Orchha Fort complex , which houses a large number of ancient monuments consisting of the fort , palaces , temple and other edifices , is located in the Orchha town in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh . The fort and other structures within it were built by the Bundela Rajputs starting from early 16th century by King Rudra Pratap Singh of the Orchha State and others who followed him . 
 The fort complex , which is accessed from an arched causeway , leads to a large gateway . This is followed by a large quadrangular open yard surrounded by palaces . These are Raja Mahal or Raja Mandir , Sheesh Mahal , Jahangir Mahal , a temple , gardens and pavilions . The battlements of the fort have ornamentation . Notable architectural features in the fort complex are projected balconies , open flat areas and decorated latticed windows . 
 = = Location = = 
 The fort complex is located in the <unk> district of Madhya Pradesh in the erstwhile state of Orchha . The fort complex is within an island formed by the confluence of the Betwa River and <unk> River in Orchha town . Approach to the complex from the eastern part of the market in the town is through a multiple arched bridge with 14 arches built in granite stones . 
 Orchha town is approximately 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) away from <unk> town , which is the district headquarters of the district of the same name . Jhansi town is 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) away . Orchha is a railway station of the Central Railway on the Jhansi @-@ <unk> section . 
 = = History = = 
 The fort was built following the founding of the Orchha State in 1501 AD by Rudra Pratap Singh ( r . 1501 – 1531 ) , a Bundela <unk> . The palaces and temples within the fort complex were built over a period of time by successive Maharajas of the Orchha State . Of these , the Raja Mandir or Raja Mahal was built by <unk> Shah who ruled from 1554 to 1591 . Jahangir Mahal and Sawan <unk> Mahal were built during the reign of Vir Singh Deo ( r . 1605 – 1627 ) . The features of " pepper pots and domes " seen in the fort complex are believed to have inspired Lutyens in the architecture of the structures which he built in New Delhi . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 The fort complex , accessed from an arched causeway , leads to a large gateway followed by a large quadrangular open space which is surrounded by palaces such as Raja Mahal or Raja Mandir , Sheesh Mahal , Jahangir Mahal , a temple , gardens and pavilions . The fort walls have battlements , which have ornamentation . Notable architectural features seen in the fort complex consist of projected balconies , open flat areas and decorated latticed windows . 
 = = = Raja Mahal = = = 
 The Raja Mahal ( King ’ s Palace ) , where the kings and the queens had resided till it was abandoned in 1783 , was built in the early part of 16th century . Its exterior is simple without any embellishments but the interior chambers of the palace are elaborately royal in its architectural design , decorated with murals of social and religious themes of gods , mythical animals and people . In the upper floor of the palace there are traces of mirrors in the ceilings and walls . Its windows , arcaded passages and layout plan are designed in such a way that the " sunlight and shadow create areas of different moods and temperatures throughout the day " . The interior walls of the Mahal have murals of Lord Vishnu . The Mahal has several secret passages . 
 A part of this Mahal was converted into a temple and named Rama Raja Temple in honour of the god Rama . There is legend associated with naming it as a temple . According to a local legend , the temple was built following Rani <unk> , the queen getting a " dream visitation " by Lord Rama directing her to build a temple for Him ; while <unk> Shah was a devotee of Krishna , his wife 's dedication was to Rama . Following this a new temple known as the <unk> Temple was approved to be built , and the queen went to Ayodhya to obtain an image of Lord Rama that was to be enshrined in her new temple . When she came back from Ayodhya with the image of Rama , initially she kept the idol in her palace as the <unk> Temple was still under construction . She was , however , unaware of an injunction that the image to be deified in a temple could not be kept in a palace . Once the temple construction was completed and the idol of the lord had to be moved for installation at the <unk> Temple , it refused to be shifted from the palace . Hence , instead of the <unk> Temple , the Rama 's idol remained in the palace where as the <unk> Temple remained without an idol in its sanctum . As Rama was worshipped in the palace , part of the palace was converted into the Rama Raja Temple ; it is the only shrine in the country where Rama is worshipped as a King . The temple is guarded by a police force and the deity , Lord Rama , is considered as the king and is given a gun salute of honour every day . 
 = = = Sheesh Mahal = = = 
 Sheesh Mahal is flanked on either side by the Raja Mahal and the Jahangir Mahal . This has royal accommodation , which was built for king <unk> Singh . It has now been converted into a hotel . The interior of this edifice consists of a huge impressive hall with high ceiling , which is the dining hall . Its recent colour scheme renovations are an eyesore . But staying in two of its royal suites on the upper floor , which provide scenic views of the town , gives the guest a feeling of royalty . 
 = = = Jahangir Mahal = = = 
 Jahangir Mahal is a palace that was exclusively built by Bir Singh Deo in 1605 to humor the Mughal emperor Jahangir who was a guest of the Maharaja for one night only . The palace is built in four levels with elegant architectural features of both Muslim and Rajput architecture . Its layout is a symmetrical square built in the inner courtyard of the fort and has eight large domes . It has a plethora of rooms with arcaded openings , projecting platforms and windows with lattice design work . The roof above top floor of this Mahal is accessed through a steep stairway . It provides picture perfect views of the temples and the Betwa River outside the fort complex . The palace also houses a small archaeological museum . 
 The entrance gate from this palace , which was earlier the main gate and which has carved ornamentation , leads to the royal baths and then to an elegant small dwelling unit built within a garden in typical Mughal architectural style ; this had been built exclusively for Rai Parveen , the female escort of the Raja <unk> ( 1672 – 76 ) ; her large @-@ size portrait in a revealing and seductive attire adorns hall in this Mahal . She was a poet and musician . The building is a double storied structure built with bricks , rising to the height of the trees in the well tended garden called Anand Mahal . The garden is laid out with octagonal flower beds and has good network of water supply . There are niches in the Mahal which permit natural light to the main hall and smaller rooms . 
 It is said that Emperor Akbar ( r . 1556 – 1605 ) who was enamored by Parveen 's beauty had taken her to his palace in Agra to be his courtesan . But Parveen , who wanted to get out of the situation , composed a <unk> or a couplet which stated her status as an already used woman not fit for an emperor , which enabled her to get release from Akbar 's court and return to Orchha . 
 = = = Phool Bagh = = = 
 Phool Bagh is an elegantly laid out garden in the fort complex which has a line of water fountains that terminates in a " palace @-@ pavilion " which has eight pillars . Below this garden is an underground structure which was used by the royalty as a cool summer retreat . This cooling system consists of water ventilation system that is linked to an underground palace with " Chandan <unk> " , which is in the shape of a bowl from where fountains of droplets trickle through the roof creating rainfall . 
 = Cyclone Gretelle = 
 Tropical Cyclone Gretelle was a deadly storm that struck southeastern Madagascar in January 1997 . The seventh named storm of the 1996 – 97 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season , Gretelle developed within the intertropical convergence zone on January 19 , and gradually intensified while moving southwestward . On January 22 , the storm intensified to tropical cyclone status while passing northwest of Réunion ; there , Gretelle produced strong wind gusts and heavy rainfall in mountainous regions . Subsequently , the cyclone strengthened to reach peak 10 – minute sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . On January 24 , Gretelle made landfall near Farafangana , the first in the region in 41 years . The cyclone weakened while crossing Madagascar , but restrengthened slightly in the Mozambique Channel . Gretelle meandered off the coast of Mozambique , bringing gusty winds that downed trees , but caused little damage . An approaching trough turned the cyclone to the southeast , and Gretelle dissipated on January 31 to the south @-@ southwest of Madagascar . 
 Damage from Cyclone Gretelle was heaviest near where it made landfall in Madagascar . In several villages , over 90 % of the buildings were destroyed , leaving about 80 @,@ 000 people homeless . Wind gusts at <unk> reached 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) , which knocked trees onto roads and wrecked about 138 @,@ 000 tons of crops . Heavy rainfall and high waves flooded coastal regions , in some areas up to 16 m ( 52 ft ) deep . Overall damage was estimated at around $ 50 million , and there 152 deaths . After the storm , there was a coordinated international relief effort to provide food and money to Madagascar . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The intertropical convergence zone spawned a tropical disturbance on January 19 , developing a circulation just west of St. Brandon . That day , the Météo @-@ France on Réunion ( MFR ) classified the system as a tropical disturbance , and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring the system as a low @-@ pressure area a day prior . The system intensified into Tropical Storm Gretelle late on January 20 , by which time the JTWC gave it the designation Tropical Cyclone 20S . Due to a large ridge centered near Île Amsterdam , the storm tracked generally southwestward toward the Mascarene Islands . Early on January 22 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , and later that day , the MFR upgraded Gretelle to tropical cyclone status , or with 10 – minute sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . 
 Shortly after attaining tropical cyclone status , Gretelle made its closest point of approach to Réunion late on January 22 , passing about 300 km ( 190 mi ) northwest of the island . Subsequently , the cyclone developed a small eye , and the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) at 0000 UTC on January 23 . Meanwhile , the JTWC estimated Gretelle continued to intensify to a 1 – minute sustained wind peak of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) at 0600 UTC on January 24 , equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Later that day , the cyclone made landfall on southeastern Madagascar near Farafangana near peak intensity . Reports from the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs considered Gretelle the first cyclone to strike the region in 41 years . Gretelle rapidly weakened over land , emerging into the Mozambique Channel as a tropical depression on January 25 . Continuing to the southwest , the depression re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on January 27 . 
 After becoming a tropical storm again , Gretelle slowed in the Mozambique Channel . A cold front bypassed the storm to the south , and a building ridge behind it turned Gretelle to a west @-@ northwest drift . Although it approached southeastern Africa on January 28 , an advancing trough turned the storm to the southeast . The next day , the JTWC briefly re @-@ upgraded Gretelle to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , and on January 30 , the <unk> estimated a secondary 10 – minute wind peak of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Accelerating to the south @-@ southeast , Gretelle dissipated on January 31 well to the south @-@ southwest of Madagascar . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While passing north of Réunion , Gretelle dropped heavy rainfall in the eastern and western portions of the island . Over 48 hours , rainfall totaled nearly 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) at Commerson Crater , while <unk> recorded over 600 mm ( 24 in ) . Gretelle produced gusts of about 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) in portions of Réunion . Late in its duration , the cyclone produced heavy rainfall but left minimal damage in Mozambique , estimated at $ 50 @,@ 000 . Winds of over 55 km / h ( 34 km / h ) knocked over trees and caused power outages in Gaza and Maputo provinces . Officials in South Africa issued rain and wind warnings for the northeast coast . 
 In Madagascar , Gretelle produced wind gusts of over 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) at Vangaindrano near where it moved ashore , and over 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) at Farafangana . The storm also dropped heavy rainfall , although peak totals were unknown due to the meteorological station in Farafangana being destroyed . Heavy rainfall and high waves left heavy damage near the coast , washing away several boats and causing rivers to overflow . Floods in some areas reached 16 m ( 52 ft ) deep . Where Gretelle made landfall , most buildings were damaged or destroyed excluding those made of concrete , leaving about 80 @,@ 000 people homeless . Among the wrecked buildings included a hospital and a prison . About 95 % of homes in <unk> were wrecked , and in Farafangana , 90 % of government buildings were destroyed . In both southern Midongy and Vangaindrano , nearly every building was destroyed . Gretelle damaged or destroyed 1 @,@ 538 homes in Manakara . 
 Reports from the Red Cross indicated that Gretelle was the severest in the region " in living memory " , with many people surviving the high tides and winds by " clinging to trees " . The storm also damaged water stations , power lines , and thousands of hectares of crops , including food reserves . The World Food Programme estimated that Gretelle destroyed 7 @,@ 000 tons of rice , 123 @,@ 500 tons of cassava , and 8 @,@ 000 tons of cash crops , mostly to coffee . About 40 @,@ 000 people were isolated for weeks after the storm in <unk> and Midongy Sud , with many roads blocked by fallen trees . Overall , about 200 people were killed or left missing in Madagascar , with 152 confirmed fatalities by two weeks after the storm , 82 of whom in Vangaindrano . The International Disaster Database later listed 140 as the total fatalities related to Gretelle . Damage from the storm was estimated at $ 50 million . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After heavy damage from Cyclone Bonita in 1996 , the government of Madagascar initiated a disaster response system that was used during Gretelle ; there was quick response but efforts were hampered by damaged infrastructure and disrupted transportation . The storm had cut communications in some areas , but by January 29 , or five days after landfall , telephone service was restored to Manakara . Following the storm , the Madagascar government coordinated the distribution of emergency rice rations and other relief items . On January 27 , the government launched a fundraiser on television that raised over ₣ 130 million ( FMG , $ 30 @,@ 000 USD ) . The southern portion of the country was declared a disaster area . A plane of relief supplies flew from the capital Antananarivo to Manakara along the southeast coast , where trucks distributed the items to the affected areas . A radio station based out of the country criticized the slow pace of relief , citing the lack of available boats after many were destroyed . In addition , there were reports that government aid was being stolen by looters . 
 In the weeks after the storm , the hardest hit residents faced food shortages and lacked access to clean water , in an area already facing ongoing food shortages . In response , the World Food Programme and other agencies of the United Nations created a program to feed about 350 @,@ 000 people in the region over three months , providing about 5 @,@ 900 tons of food . In the months after the storm , roads were repaired , including the link from Vangaindrano to Midongy . Farmers grew additional beans and potatoes to compensate for the damaged crops , while the quick distribution of food prevented significant malnutrition . In the subsequent years , about 40 % of the forest at Manombo that regrew following Gretelle was of foreign nature , which threatened the original plants in the region . 
 Due to the scale of the cyclone damage , the government issued an international appeal for assistance . As a result , the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs provided a grant of $ 30 @,@ 000 . UNICEF provided about $ 48 @,@ 000 to secure drug kits for children impacted by the cyclone . The Red Cross of Seychelles donated about one tonne of clothing and 20 tonnes of tuna , and the Red Cross of Réunion sent drugs to Madagascar . The government of France also sent a crew from Réunion to Madagascar to assist in the aftermath , as well as a plane to airdrop the aid . The governments of Germany , Japan , France , the United Kingdom each donated about $ 100 @,@ 000 to Madagascar , while the United States provided about $ 25 @,@ 000 and 500 tons of food . The government of Japan also sent 2 @,@ 040 blankets and 10 tents . By February 18 , the total contributions by the international community reached about $ 3 million . 
 = Ayu Tsukimiya = 
 Ayu Tsukimiya ( <unk> <unk> , Tsukimiya Ayu ) is a fictional character and the main heroine in Key 's adult visual novel Kanon , followed closely by Nayuki Minase who is the only Kanon heroine to appear with Ayu on three of the official game covers released by Key . Ayu was created by Naoki Hisaya who wrote her scenario for the visual novel , and designed by Itaru Hinoue . Hisaya commented on how he thought Ayu was the one character in Kanon that he felt he grasped the best , but noted it was very difficult to write her character due to Ayu being primarily energetic . After Hinoue drew wings on Ayu 's backpack , Hisaya suggested that they remove them due to spoiler reasons , and while Hinoue went along with it at the time , the wings were later included once again . 
 Yuichi Aizawa , the protagonist of Kanon , meets a lively seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Ayu on the day after he moves to the city depicted in the game . As the story progresses , Yuichi discovers that she is trying to find something she lost , but she cannot remember what it is ; Yuichi tries to help her in her search , but with no initial success . One of her most defining characteristics is the repeated utterance of her catch phrase " ugū " ( うぐぅ ) which she mutters as an expression of various negative emotions such as frustration , anger , and fear . Her favorite food is taiyaki , and she is seen eating the confection many times throughout Kanon . 
 The main focus of both Kanon anime is Ayu , who has also appeared in all of Kanon 's adaptations , and has been incorporated into numerous dōjin games . Ayu makes a cameo appearance in the second episode of the Air anime series along with Nayuki , and Makoto Sawatari from Kanon . Her voice actresses are Yui Horie in the Japanese versions of the visual novel and anime , and Brittney Karbowski in the English version of Kyoto Animation 's Kanon anime , who also voiced Ayu during her cameo in Air . A leitmotif named " Hidamari no Machi " ( 日溜りの街 , lit . " A Sunny City " ) is associated with Ayu which is played in Kanon numerous times during scenes which involve her , and is also used in a similar fashion throughout Kyoto Animation 's Kanon anime . In a review by Anime News Network , Ayu is described as a character that " persists on a degree of earnest cuteness that will endear her to some viewers . " 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Naoki Hisaya , who wrote Ayu 's story , commented in an interview that the night before he was to present the beginning of a Kanon scenario , he suddenly remembered wanting to write for some time about a ghost girl who waits for the protagonist to come back to her . He said that he wanted to write this no matter what and quickly drew up an outline for the premise of Ayu 's scenario . At the time , Ayu 's premise was the start of the entire Kanon story , though it was still very vague . Eventually , Hisaya was able to form her story into the style of a romance visual novel , and in the process the characters in the story started to multiply . Hisaya said that Ayu was the one character in Kanon that he felt he grasped the best , but noted it was very difficult to write her character due to Ayu being primarily energetic . Hisaya said that he is much better at writing about quiet characters , so Ayu gave him a lot of trouble . Hisaya noted that Ayu 's frequent use of " ugū " was not decided from the beginning , and that it merely turned out that way during the natural writing process . 
 Ayu 's character designer , Itaru Hinoue , commented in an interview that she put a lot of effort into Ayu 's design , and Ayu was her favorite character to create among the Kanon characters . Hinoue was able to design Ayu any way she wanted , and by all means she wanted Ayu to wear her large tan duffle coat , and be depicted as a strong character . Hinoue said that she was very particular about Ayu 's attire , but not about everything . At the time she was formulating the character design , many festivals were going on in Osaka , Japan where Key is located . When Hinoue had a chance to attend , there were many people around wearing angel wings as part of the festival , and because she thought they looked cute , she later chose to draw them onto Ayu as well . Hinoue later read Ayu 's finished scenario and became aware of an unintentional form of foreshadowing on her part due to wing imagery factoring into Ayu 's story . Shortly after , Hisaya suggested to Hinoue , " Since they seem to have become a spoiler , let 's lose the wings . " The wings were thus removed , but before long they were attached again . While Hinoue had originally chosen the colors for the hair and eyes of the characters herself , these were later discussed by the development team and altered accordingly , though Ayu , Mai , and Nayuki did not change much . It came to the point where Hinoue had to constantly go back and forth between her intentions and what was later decided by consensus . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Ayu is a strange and mysterious seventeen @-@ year @-@ old girl , the same age as Yuichi , though due to her short stature at 154 cm ( 5 ' 1 " ) and comparatively low body weight at 41 kg ( 90 lbs ) , she is perceived initially by Yuichi to be much younger ; in fact , Ayu is the shortest and least heavy character introduced in Kanon . Ayu 's three sizes are 80 cm - 52 cm - 79 cm ( 31 " - 20 " - 31 " ) , and are the closest to Shiori 's despite Shiori being one year younger . When first introduced , Ayu is seen wearing a large tan duffle coat over a sweater and shorts , despite the cold winter weather , and is the only Kanon character seen to regularly don mittens . On her feet , she wears brown argyle socks and snow boots . She is immediately recognizable by the red Alice band in her short brown hair , and a small backpack she wears which has two attached wings on either side . In later appearances , she is sometimes seen without her coat or mittens . As a child of ten , Ayu is depicted wearing a pink sweater , a short skirt , and a large white bow in her hair , which is grown @-@ out slightly longer than when Ayu is seventeen . 
 Since childhood , Ayu has referred to herself with the masculine pronoun boku ( <unk> ) — Japanese for " I " , a rare occurrence among females . Ayu is notorious for her catch phrase , " ugū " ( うぐぅ ) , which she mutters as an expression of various negative emotions such as frustration , anger , and fear . Her favorite food is taiyaki , and she is seen eating the confection many times throughout Kanon . Ayu comes off as somewhat strange , such as initially tackling Yuichi and yelling his name whenever she would spot him . These tackling fits eventually diminish in severity to simple taps on the back as time goes on or even simply calling out his name when appearing seemingly out of nowhere behind him . She can be clumsy at times , and is prone to tripping . Ayu tends to be naïve about common things , such as not knowing what a mobile phone is , but enjoys learning about new things . Yuichi quickly discovers how terrified Ayu will become at even the mere mention of ghosts or demons . When put into an uncomfortable situation , such as having to walk alone at night , she is noticeably jumpy and is prone to screaming . She is left @-@ handed . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Visual novel = = = 
 Ayu Tsukimiya is introduced as girl running from a taiyaki salesmen when she collides with Yuichi Aizawa , the protagonist of Kanon , in the shopping district . Yuichi and Ayu become fast friends after she meets him several more times in the shopping district , and Ayu helps him remember that they first met and became friends during Yuichi 's last stay in the city seven years previous . A focus in Ayu 's storyline is that she is constantly searching for something she has lost , but she does not even remember what it is , which troubles her greatly . Yuichi plays an active role in helping her try to find the item with no initial success . Shortly after Yuichi and Ayu become involved in an intimate relationship , Ayu remembers what happened in the past and disappears without a trace . 
 Seven years before the onset of the story , Yuichi first met Ayu in almost exactly the same place as where they collided at the beginning of Kanon . Ayu was crying at the time due to the recent death of her mother , and in an effort to make her feel better , Yuichi bought her taiyaki , which in turn became her favorite food . They met up several more times over the winter school break , and one day Yuichi obtained a small angel doll from a claw vending machine and gave it to Ayu . Yuichi stipulated that he would grant any three wishes she wished on the doll within his limited power . Her first wish was for Yuichi to never forget her . Yuichi took Ayu into the nearby forest to a clearing with a large tree in its center . There , Ayu made her second wish that they could go to school together . Due to this , they decided to make this tree their own private " school " with special stipulations such as no homework or tests , and taiyaki is served for lunch everyday . Afterwards , Ayu decided to bury the doll in a jar near the forest . On the last day of winter break , while Yuichi and Ayu were attending their " school " , Ayu was sitting up in the tree when a strong gust of wind came and knocked her out of it , causing her to land on her head and fall unconscious . This accident is what caused the young Yuichi to suppress his memories of his childhood . 
 After Yuichi remembers what happened in the past , he assumes Ayu died , which causes him to become depressed . During this time , Yuichi remembers the doll that Ayu buried , and gathers his friends to go find it . Once he finds and repairs it , he goes to the now cut @-@ down tree in the forest clearing until Ayu appears again . They have a tearful reunion where Yuichi reminds her of the angel doll , and that she still has one more wish left . Ayu suggests that she might wish for Yuichi to not remember her at all , and move on . After they embrace , Ayu simply vanishes again . Yuichi later discovers that Ayu did not die , and had been in the hospital for seven years in a coma , making her an <unk> . Ayu miraculously wakes up from her coma and the two are shown out in town about to go back to Yuichi 's house . 
 = = = Other Kanon media = = = 
 Ayu has appeared in other media adaptations based on the Kanon visual novel which includes light novels , drama CDs , manga , and anime . Of the five light novels written for Kanon , Ayu is the main focus of the final installment entitled Hidamari no Machi ( 日溜りの街 ) . Two of the fifteen drama CDs released had Ayu as a main focus , and Ayu appears in the five anthology drama CDs . In the first official Kanon manga , Ayu 's story is made the main focus , and her story is the only one of the five heroines to go into detail and reveal the latter portions of her story . Conversely , in the second manga version , Ayu is only the main focus of the final chapter , but is given the second highest number of pages in the manga behind Nayuki . Ayu has also appeared in Kanon 's numerous manga anthologies . 
 In 2002 , Toei Animation produced the first Kanon anime and featured character design by Yōichi Ōnishi who based the designs on Itaru Hinoue 's original concept . In 2006 , Kyoto Animation produced a new rendition of the Kanon anime with updated visuals and a more detailed story ; character design was headed by Kazumi Ikeda who also worked off of Hinoue 's original artwork from the visual novel . In both anime , Ayu is given the focus as the main heroine , and Yuichi ends up falling in love with her in both versions as well . 
 = = = Outside Kanon = = = 
 Ayu has appeared in many works outside of Kanon , as well as being cited as being extremely popular and recognized in both Japan and the west . Ayu especially " has had more appearances outside of the original Kanon than any other anime or H @-@ game character ever . " Ayu has appeared in countless dōjin games such as Glove on Fight and Eternal Fighter Zero . In the anime adaptation of Air , another of Key 's visual novels , Ayu makes a cameo appearance in episode two along with Nayuki Minase and Makoto Sawatari as regular girls who talk with Yukito Kunisaki briefly . 
 As reported in the Kanon Visual Fan Book for the visual novel , Key had once planned to release a social simulation game with the tentative title Angel Maker ( <unk> , Enjeru <unk> ) featuring Ayu , as she appears at ten years old , as the game 's sole heroine . The game was expected to be released on June 30 , 2000 , though Key never mentioned the game again . Other games announced at the time which involved Ayu as the main focus were an action game named Ayu Ayu Panic ( <unk> , Ayu Ayu Panikku ) , a role @-@ playing video game called <unk> Quest ( <unk> , <unk> Kuesuto ) , and a quiz game entitled Quiz de <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> de <unk> ) . 
 = = Musical theme = = 
 A leitmotif named " Hidamari no Machi " ( 日溜りの街 , lit . " A Sunny City " ) is associated with Ayu and is played in Kanon numerous times during scenes which involve her ; it is also used in a similar fashion throughout Kyoto Animation 's Kanon anime adaptation . It is first heard during Ayu 's first appearance in both the visual novel and the aforementioned anime version . The theme is composed by Shinji Orito , one of Key 's signature composers , and is the longest of Kanon 's five leitmotifs on the Kanon Original Soundtrack at 3 : 04 minutes . A remix version by Magome Togoshi appeared on the Kanon soundtracks Anemoscope and Recollections . " Hidamari no Machi " was composed in common time in the E @-@ flat major key , and moves at 126 beats per minute . The theme was composed on a synthesizer which primarily used a piano as a base , along with violin , vibraphone , and percussion accompaniment throughout the piece . Orito commented on the song in the Kanon Original Soundtrack booklet where he remarked , " This is probably the song I like most out of all the theme songs ... I think the percussion is really good . " 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Megatokyo , a webcomic that takes much of its inspiration from Kanon , references Ayu . First , in strip 67 " Saving Points " , Ayu is shown eating taiyaki . This is , in fact , a reference to a Kanon dōjinshi called Quarter <unk> , as stated by Megatokyo 's artist Fred Gallagher in his commentary during the publication of volume one of his webcomic , as well as the " rants " accompanying the strip itself . Also , in strip 224 " packing away " , Gallagher draws himself wearing Ayu 's backpack and mentioning her catchphrase " ugū " , as well as stating that the backpack was the " official winged backpack from Kanon . " 
 Ayu has been parodied in several anime . Episode eight of Magical Shopping Arcade <unk> parodies Kanon and other adult games . In it , Ayu 's Japanese voice actress Yui Horie plays a girl that is modeled after Ayu , and references taiyaki and " ugū " near the end . In episode four of Lucky Star , Konata gives a tardy excuse to her teacher Nanako , stating that she was late because there was a girl running away from a taiyaki seller ; after listening to the excuse , Nanako utters " ugū " out of frustration . Another parody in Lucky Star is that when Kagami scolds Konata in episode 13 when she complains about her winter break being occupied by homework , Ayu 's backpack appears behind Konata , and she utters " ugū " . In Mission @-@ E , a character greatly inspired by Ayu appears on a manga cover near the middle of episode 11 . In My Bride Is a Mermaid , Sun eats a taiyaki and says " ugū " in episode two , and <unk> crushes a taiyaki and says " ugū " in episode 20 . 
 In a review by Anime News Network of the first anime DVD volume of Kyoto Animation 's Kanon anime , Ayu is described as a character that " persists on a degree of earnest cuteness that will endear her to some viewers . " In the same review , Ayu 's winged backpack is cited as possibly being a " little overkill " in regards to the moe attributes of the series . Newtype USA stated in an article on Kanon that , " Ayu beams brightly with joy as she <unk> on her favorite fish @-@ shaped crepe , looking so adorable you almost wanna pinch her . " 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Four figurines of Ayu were produced by different manufacturers in 2007 . The earliest was released on January 29 by Movic which also came with a chibi version of Ayu dressed in a Santa Claus outfit . The next was released on July 2 by Russian Blue , and the third followed a month later on August 6 by Kotobukiya which was in fact a reproduction of a model previously released . The fourth figurine was released on October 19 by Max Factory , and was the most expensive of the four . An official " ugū " audio CD was coupled with the 127 @-@ page Kanon Visual Memories art book for Kyoto Animation 's Kanon anime adaptation released on June 24 , 2007 by Ichijinsha . The CD contains eighty @-@ six variations of Ayu 's iconic catch phrase featured in the anime , and is voiced by Yui Horie . The CD spans ten minutes , though most of the duration is silent due to each " ugū " lasting less than two seconds on each track , resulting in about one @-@ third of the CD as rendered blank . 
 = Variation of Trusts Act 1958 = 
 The Variation of Trusts Act 1958 ( c 62 ) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that governs the courts ' ability to vary the terms of trust documents . Prior to the 1950s , the courts were willing to approve " compromise " agreements as to what terms meant , not only when they were disputed but also for the benefit of certain parties , such as minors . In 1954 , the House of Lords decided in Chapman v Chapman that this would no longer be permitted , creating a gap between the rights of trusts under the Settled Land Act 1925 ( which could be altered if there was a flaw ) and those trusts that were not ( which were affected by the Chapman decision ) . As a result , following a report by the Law Reform Committee , Petre Crowder introduced the Variation of Trusts Bill to Parliament , where it was given the Royal Assent on 23 July 1958 , and came into force as the Variation of Trusts Act 1958 . 
 The Act gave the courts near @-@ unlimited discretion to approve " compromise " agreements , for the benefit of infants or other incapable individuals , for individuals who may become beneficiaries , or for unborn beneficiaries . The courts are also able to approve agreements for individuals who may be beneficiaries under protective trusts , with no requirement that the alterations be for their benefit . The courts have interpreted the Act 's scope fairly widely , stating that almost any " variation " is acceptable , and that " benefit " may mean not just a financial benefit , but also a social or moral one . Despite initial fears that it would allow tax planners another way to hide funds and create a back @-@ and @-@ forth fight between the Chancery Division and Parliament , the Act was met with general approval . The ability of the courts to alter trustees ' investment powers under the Act was criticised as slow and expensive , and as a result this is now covered by the Trustee Investments Act 1961 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the 1950s , the courts commonly accepted that they could approve a " compromise " agreement where there was a dispute over the precise meaning of words in a trust document . In some cases , the courts used this to rearrange trusts for the benefit of certain parties ( such as minors ) where there was no real dispute . In 1954 however , the House of Lords decided in Chapman v Chapman [ 1954 ] AC 429 that this power was reserved for a genuine dispute . This decision caused frustration : where previously all trusts could be varied , either through the court 's ability to create a " compromise " agreement or the rights granted to trusts which came under the Settled Land Act 1925 , Chapman limited this right to those created under the 1925 Act . In January 1957 the Lord Chancellor asked the Law Reform Committee " to consider whether any alteration is desirable in the powers of the court to sanction a variation in the trusts of a settlement in the interests of beneficiaries under disability and unborn persons , with particular reference to the decision in Chapman v. Chapman " , and a report was presented to Parliament in November of that year . A draft bill was drawn up and introduced by Petre Crowder , the Member of Parliament for Ruislip @-@ Northwood ; it received its second reading in the House of Lords on 12 June 1958 , and was given the Royal Assent on 23 July 1958 . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act gives the courts almost unlimited power to exercise their jurisdiction to form " compromise " agreements , with Section 1 ( 1 ) allowing them to approve " any arrangement ... varying or revoking all or any of the trusts or enlarging the powers of the trustees of managing or administering any of the property subject to the trusts " . This power can be exercised for people in one of four categories : beneficiaries who are incapable of assenting to the change ( infants or those who are otherwise incapable ) ; individuals who may " be entitled " to be beneficiaries in the future , but who are not at present ; unborn beneficiaries ; or people who may be beneficiaries under protective trusts . The first three classes may only have a " compromise " agreement if the alterations are for their benefit , while potential beneficiaries under protective trusts have no such limit . The courts have chosen to interpret " benefit " widely , increasing their powers to alter trusts ; in Re Holt 's Settlement [ 1968 ] 1 All ER 470 , Megarry J said that " the word benefit is ... plainly not confined to financial benefit , but may extend to social or moral benefit " . Under Section 1 ( 3 ) , the Act does not apply to trusts created by an Act of Parliament . The wide scope of the act was quantified in Re Steed 's Will Trusts , where the Court of Appeal ruled that the word " arrangement " was " deliberately used in the widest possible senses so as to cover any proposal which any person may put forward for varying or revoking the trusts " , essentially allowing the courts the right to make any alteration whatsoever . Despite this , the Court of Appeal noted in Re T 's Settlement Trusts [ 1964 ] Ch 158 that the court would not permit a compromise agreement where it not only varied the terms of the trust but constituted the creation of an entirely new one . 
 There is the question as to what to do with proposed " compromise " agreements where it is not certain that a benefit will ensue . In this situation , the courts have sometimes agreed to take the chance , as in Re Holt 's Settlement ; on other occasions , as in Re Cohen 's Settlement Trusts [ 1965 ] 3 All ER 139 , they have found that if the claimant , a member of a class of beneficiaries , applies and cannot benefit ( although other members of the class can ) , the court is obliged to refuse the request . It is debatable as to whether the intentions of the testator should be taken into account ; in Re Steed 's Will Trusts [ 1960 ] 1 All ER the courts refused to alter a trust document , partially due to the testator 's wishes ; in Re Remnant 's Settlement Trusts [ 1970 ] 2 All ER 554 , however , the court took the opposite view . 
 While some critics feared that granting the courts unlimited jurisdiction would create " a most undignified game of chess between the Chancery Division and the legislature " , and that it allowed tax planners another way to hide funds , the Act received general approval at the time . It was later criticised as expensive and slow in regards to allowing trustees the right to alter their investment powers , and this part of the Act was later superseded by the Trustee Investments Act 1961 . The second class of beneficiaries covered in Section 1 ( 1 ) caused problems for the courts ; since it only allows the court to alter a trust document where a person " may be entitled " , nothing can be done once this entitlement is confirmed . 
 = Samuel Conway = 
 Samuel Charles Conway ( born June 4 , 1965 in Bryn Mawr , Pennsylvania ) is an American researcher in the pharmaceutical , biomedical and <unk> fields of organic chemistry . He holds a Ph.D. in chemistry from Dartmouth College . 
 Outside the scientific community , Conway is better known as Uncle Kage / <unk> / and is chairman and chief organizer of Anthrocon , the largest furry convention in the world . He is a published author , and has acted as a volunteer emergency coordinator , entertainer , and auctioneer . 
 = = Academic and scientific activities = = 
 A graduate of Ursinus College , Pennsylvania in 1986 , Conway subsequently studied at the Burke Chemical Laboratories of Dartmouth College , New Hampshire , where he obtained his Ph.D. in 1991 . His thesis concerned the attempted generation of <unk> ( an aromatic compound related to indole ) . 
 After college , Conway took a postdoctoral appointment in Chicago , later working as a contractor for the Food and Drug Administration , a researcher for <unk> , a medicinal chemist for Avid Therapeutics ( March 1995 – August 1997 ) and researcher for Message Pharmaceuticals ( August 1997 – April 1999 ) . He spent two years in organ distribution at the National Disease Research Interchange , and was subsequently employed by crop protection company <unk> as a regulatory chemist from May 2001 to June 2007 , when he became a principal chemist for West Pharmaceutical Services . As of July 2013 , he was working for a group near Raleigh , North Carolina . 
 Conway has authored eleven professional publications and two patents . One patent covers compounds intended to treat hepatitis B in synergy with lamivudine ; another relates to recyclable packaging material . His work has been published in <unk> , Synthetic Communications , Organic Preparations and Procedures International , Water Research , Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry , Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy , <unk> & Medicinal Chemistry Letters and Current Organic Chemistry . 
 = = Fandom activities = = 
 Conway was introduced to furry fandom at <unk> 3 ( the 1989 Worldcon ) , and has been involved in fan activities from the early 1990s to the present day . 
 = = = Convention chairman = = = 
 Conway became the chairman of Anthrocon in 1999 , after his invitation as a guest of honor in 1998 . Under his leadership , Anthrocon was incorporated and moved to Philadelphia . The convention 's attendance grew from 842 to 2 @,@ 489 over the period from 1999 to 2006 , necessitating a further move to Pittsburgh ; 3 @,@ 390 attended in 2008 . Conway is the public face of Anthrocon , responsible for public relations , negotiating hotel contracts , managing finances , damage control and other activities before , during and after the convention . He also talks to fans about presenting furry fandom to the public . 
