 Jack Richardson as Peter Grant . Abby 's young son . Unseen during the first series , he is unknowingly set free from Billy and a group of children his age . Billy finds him again and takes him to Dr. Whitaker , who uses him to find a cure for the virus ( he inherited his mother 's ability to fight off the infection ) . He is reunited with his mother at the cliffhanger ending at the close of the second series . 
 Freema Agyeman as Jenny Walsh . A young primary school teacher who lived with Patricia and was good friends with Anya before the virus , who dies shortly after discovering the true power of the disease . She appears in the first episode of Series One . 
 Shaun Dingwall as David Grant . Abby 's husband and Peter 's father . When Abby contracts the virus and collapses , David cares for her until he believes that she has succumbed to the virus . When she awakens three days later , she discovers that David died from the same flu that almost claimed her life . 
 Sacha Parkinson as Kate . Greg and Tom see a helicopter flying over and they also encounter an uninfected family who have been isolated since the onset of the virus but when the family 's daughter ( Kate ) reaches out to them , she risks infecting them . She appears in the third episode of Series One . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 ( 2008 ) = = = 
 = = = Series 2 ( 2010 ) = = = 
 A second series of six episodes was commissioned and began airing in January 2010 . Adrian Hodges returned to oversee the project , and Julie Graham , Paterson Joseph , Zoe Tapper , Philip Rhys , Robyn Addison , <unk> Patel , and Max Beesley returned to their roles for the next series . 
 The cliffhanger is quickly resolved , while the story of the lab plays through series two , allowing more about the backstory of the virus and the lab 's direct connection with that . The production team 's intention was to spend more time exploring the nitty @-@ gritty of survival in the post @-@ virus world and how the various characters coped . 
 Filming took place in various locations around Birmingham including Baskerville House ( exterior ) and the former ITV Central studios ( interior ) standing in for a fictional hospital . 
 = = Series 1 DVD extras and Easter egg = = 
 Making of featurette 
 Character profiles 
 Effects reel 
 Easter egg 
 On disc one the easter egg can be revealed by going to the main menu , highlighting episode selection then when the grey corpuscle appears press up and the corpuscle selects . This reveals around nine to ten minutes of behind the scenes footage . 
 = = Media = = 
 To tie in with the broadcast of the series Terry Nation 's 1976 novelisation was released as a new edition by Orion Books . The 2008 series is credited as being based on this novel . 
 A web site was launched to tie in with the series , entitled " Survivors Interactive " , which included interviews with actors , clips from the programme and original character pieces @-@ to @-@ camera . The interactive component was based on visitors selecting characters from the show and then answering either / or dilemma @-@ based questions , which are then profiled by what type of survivor they would make as they travel through the post @-@ plague environment . 
 The first series was released by 2 Entertain Video on DVD on 26 January 2009 , and includes special features such as an Easter Egg , A New World – The Making of Survivors documentary , character profiles and a Survivors Special Effects featurette . 
 In 2013 , when the show was added to the Netflix platform , it was the highest watched program and consequently , Netflix were in contact with the BBC for discussions on continuing the program . Nothing since has been heard of this rumour . 
 Classic TV Press published the book Worlds Apart : an unofficial and unauthorised guide to the BBC 's remake of Survivors ( March 2010 ) , written by Rich Cross , shortly after transmission of the second series completes . The book incorporates : in depth synopses and reviews for all the episodes from Series 1 and 2 ; insights into the making of the series ; examination of the similarities and differences between the new series and the 1970s series ; a photographic guide to filming locations ; and exclusive production shots . 
 = = Differences from the source material = = 
 In the credits , the re @-@ imagined series is said to be based on the 1976 novel by Terry Nation ; however , there are a number of differences between the series and its source material . In the novel , Jenny Richards survives , whereas her counterpart in the 2008 series , Jenny Collins , does not ; this means that Greg Preston and Jenny cannot have a child as the years unfold . Abby Grant still falls in love with Jimmy Garland ; however in the book , he eventually dies from septicaemia . 
 There is a Tom Price in the 1970s novelisation and series . However , in the novelisation , he was a Welsh tramp who witnessed the climactic accidental killing of Abby Grant by her son , Peter . In the television series , he was an escaped convict who joined Abby 's community . 
 The television characters Anya Raczynski , Najid Hanif , and Al Sadiq have no direct counterparts in the book . Samantha Willis does not appear in the book , either , but her television characterisation incorporates and parallels some of the personality and leadership ambitions of the book character Arthur Wormley , a " ruthless former trade union leader , " who establishes a paramilitary organisation called the National Unity Force which is responsible for Abby 's community 's eventual decision to leave Britain for the Mediterranean in the latter chapters of the novelisation . 
 At the end of the book , Peter Grant , who has joined a nomadic gang of feral adolescents , accidentally shoots and kills Abby , whom he has not seen for the last four years . However , at the end of the current incarnation of Survivors series 2 , Peter shoots but doesn 't kill Tom , and Abby is finally reunited with Peter , without her accidental death . 
 The television portrayal of Sarah Boyer is probably the closest character to her portrayal in the novelisation . In the book , her companion was named Vic , not Bob , and in the 1970s series , she was named Anne Tranter . Vic 's fate is not revealed in the novelization , but it can be inferred that he starved to death . In the 2008 television series , Bob survives his initial abandonment . In the 1970s series , Anne ( Sarah in the 2008 version ) leaves during Episode 11 ; in the 2008 version , she dies from a mutated version of the virus . 
 = John Diefenbaker = 
 John George Diefenbaker , PC , CH , QC ( / <unk> / ; September 18 , 1895 – August 16 , 1979 ) was the 13th Prime Minister of Canada , serving from June 21 , 1957 to April 22 , 1963 . He was the only Progressive Conservative ( PC or Tory ) party leader between 1930 and 1979 to lead the party to an election victory , doing so three times , although only once with a majority of seats in the Canadian House of Commons . 
 Diefenbaker was born in southwestern Ontario in 1895 . In 1903 , his family migrated west to the portion of the North @-@ West Territories which would shortly thereafter become the province of Saskatchewan . He grew up in the province , and was interested in politics from a young age . After brief service in World War I , Diefenbaker became a noted criminal defence lawyer . He contested elections through the 1920s and 1930s with little success until he was finally elected to the House of Commons in 1940 . 
 Diefenbaker was repeatedly a candidate for the PC leadership . He gained that party position in 1956 , on his third attempt . In 1957 , he led the Tories to their first electoral victory in 27 years ; a year later he called a snap election and spearheaded them to one of their greatest triumphs . Diefenbaker appointed the first female minister in Canadian history to his Cabinet , as well as the first aboriginal member of the Senate . During his six years as Prime Minister , his government obtained passage of the Canadian Bill of Rights and granted the vote to the First Nations and Inuit peoples . In foreign policy , his stance against apartheid helped secure the departure of South Africa from the Commonwealth of Nations , but his indecision on whether to accept Bomarc nuclear missiles from the United States led to his government 's downfall . Diefenbaker is also remembered for his role in the 1959 cancellation of the Avro Arrow project . 
 Factionalism returned in full force as the Progressive Conservatives fell from power in 1963 , and while Diefenbaker 's performance as Opposition Leader was heralded , his second loss at the polls prompted opponents within the party to a leadership convention in 1967 . Diefenbaker stood for re @-@ election as party leader at the last moment , but only attracted minimal support and withdrew . He remained an MP until his death in 1979 , two months after Joe Clark became the next Tory Prime Minister . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Diefenbaker was born on September 18 , 1895 , in Neustadt , Ontario , to William Thomas Diefenbaker and the former Mary Florence Bannerman . His father was the son of German immigrants from <unk> ( near Sinsheim ) in Baden ; Mary Diefenbaker was of Scottish descent and Diefenbaker was Baptist . The family moved to several locations in Ontario in John 's early years . William Diefenbaker was a teacher , and had deep interests in history and politics , which he sought to inculcate in his students . He had remarkable success doing so ; of the 28 students at his school near Toronto in 1903 , four , including his son , John , served as Conservative MPs in the 19th Canadian Parliament beginning in 1940 . 
 The Diefenbaker family moved west in 1903 , for William Diefenbaker to accept a position near Fort Carlton , then in the Northwest Territories ( now in Saskatchewan ) . In 1906 , William claimed a quarter @-@ section , 160 acres ( 0 @.@ 65 km2 ) of undeveloped land near Borden , Saskatchewan . In February 1910 , the Diefenbaker family moved to Saskatoon , the site of the University of Saskatchewan . William and Mary Diefenbaker felt that John and his brother Elmer would have greater educational opportunities in Saskatoon . 
 John Diefenbaker had been interested in politics from an early age , and told his mother at the age of eight or nine that he would some day be Prime Minister . She told him that it was an impossible ambition , especially for a boy living on the prairies . She would live to be proved wrong . John 's first contact with politics came in 1910 , when he sold a newspaper to Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier , in Saskatoon to lay the cornerstone for the University 's first building . The present and future Prime Ministers conversed , and when giving his speech that afternoon , Sir Wilfrid commented on the newsboy who had ended their conversation by saying , " I can 't waste any more time on you , Prime Minister . I must get about my work . " 
 After graduating from high school in Saskatoon , in 1912 , Diefenbaker entered the University of Saskatchewan . He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1915 , and his Master of Arts the following year . 
 Diefenbaker was commissioned a lieutenant into the 196th ( Western Universities ) Battalion , CEF in May 1916 . In September , Diefenbaker was part of a contingent of 300 junior officers sent to Britain for pre @-@ deployment training . Diefenbaker related in his memoirs that he was hit by a shovel , and the injury eventually resulted in his being invalided home . Diefenbaker 's recollections do not correspond with his army medical records , which show no contemporary account of such an injury , and his biographer , Denis Smith , speculates that any injury was psychosomatic . 
 After leaving the military in 1917 , Diefenbaker returned to Saskatchewan where he resumed his work as an articling student in law . He received his law degree in 1919 , the first student to secure three degrees from the University of Saskatchewan . On June 30 , 1919 , he was called to the bar , and the following day , opened a small practice in the village of Wakaw , Saskatchewan . 
 = = Barrister and candidate ( 1919 – 1940 ) = = 
 = = = Wakaw days ( 1919 – 1924 ) = = = 
 Although Wakaw had a population of only 400 , it sat at the heart of a densely populated area of rural townships and had its own district court . It was also easily accessible to Saskatoon , Prince Albert and Humboldt , places where the Court of King 's Bench sat . The local people were mostly immigrants , and Diefenbaker 's research found them to be particularly litigious . There was already one barrister in town , and the residents were loyal to him , initially refusing to rent office space to Diefenbaker . The new lawyer was forced to rent a vacant lot and erect a two @-@ room wooden shack . 
 Diefenbaker won the local people over through his success ; in his first year in practice , he tried 62 jury trials , winning approximately half of his cases . He rarely called defence witnesses , thereby avoiding the possibility of rebuttal witnesses for the Crown , and securing the last word for himself . In late 1920 , he was elected to the village council to serve a three @-@ year term . 
 Diefenbaker would often spend weekends with his parents in Saskatoon . While there , he began to woo Olive Freeman , daughter of the Baptist minister , but in 1921 , she moved with her family to Brandon , Manitoba , and the two lost touch for more than 20 years . He then courted Beth Newell , a cashier in Saskatoon , and by 1922 , the two were engaged . However , in 1923 , Newell was diagnosed with tuberculosis , and Diefenbaker broke off contact with her . She died the following year . Diefenbaker was himself subject to internal bleeding , and may have feared that the disease would be transmitted to him . In late 1923 , he had an operation at the Mayo Clinic for a gastric ulcer , but his health remained uncertain for several more years . 
 After four years in Wakaw , Diefenbaker so dominated the local legal practice that his competitor left town . On May 1 , 1924 , Diefenbaker moved to Prince Albert , leaving a law partner in charge of the Wakaw office . 
 = = = Aspiring politician ( 1924 – 1929 ) = = = 
 Since 1905 , when Saskatchewan entered Confederation , the province had been dominated by the Liberal Party , which practised highly effective machine politics . Diefenbaker was fond of stating , in his later years , that the only protection a Conservative had in the province was that afforded by the game laws . 
 Diefenbaker 's father , William , was a Liberal ; however , John Diefenbaker found himself attracted to the Conservative Party . Free trade was widely popular throughout Western Canada , but Diefenbaker was convinced by the Conservative position that free trade would make Canada an economic dependent of the United States . However , he did not speak publicly of his politics . Diefenbaker recalled in his memoirs that , in 1921 , he had been elected as secretary of the Wakaw Liberal Association while absent in Saskatoon , and had returned to find the association 's records in his office . He promptly returned them to the association president . Diefenbaker also stated that he had been told that if he became a Liberal candidate , " there was no position in the province which would not be open to him . " 
 It was not until 1925 that Diefenbaker publicly came forward as a Conservative , a year in which both federal and Saskatchewan provincial elections were held . Journalist and historian Peter C. Newman , in his best @-@ selling account of the Diefenbaker years , suggested that this choice was made for practical , rather than political reasons , as Diefenbaker had little chance of defeating established politicians and securing the Liberal nomination for either the House of Commons or the Legislative Assembly . The provincial election took place in early June ; Liberals would later claim that Diefenbaker had campaigned for their party in the election . On June 19 , however , Diefenbaker addressed a Conservative organizing committee , and on August 6 , was nominated as the party 's candidate for the federal riding of Prince Albert , a district in which the party 's last candidate had lost his election deposit . A nasty campaign ensued , in which Diefenbaker was called a " Hun " because of his German @-@ derived surname . The 1925 federal election was held on October 29 ; he finished third behind the Liberal and Progressive Party candidates , losing his deposit . 
 The winning candidate , Charles McDonald , did not hold the seat long , resigning it to open a place for the Prime Minister , William Lyon Mackenzie King , who had been defeated in his Ontario riding . The Tories ran no candidate against Mackenzie King in the by @-@ election on February 15 , 1926 , and he won easily . Although in the 1925 federal election , the Conservatives had won the greatest number of seats , Mackenzie King continued as Prime Minister with the tacit support of the Progressives . Mackenzie King held office for several months until he finally resigned when the Governor General , Lord Byng , refused a dissolution . Conservative Party leader Arthur Meighen became Prime Minister , but was quickly defeated in the House of Commons , and Byng finally granted a dissolution of Parliament . Diefenbaker , who had been confirmed as Conservative candidate , stood against Mackenzie King in the 1926 election , a rare direct electoral contest between two Canadian Prime Ministers . Mackenzie King triumphed easily , and regained his position as Prime Minister . 
 = = = Perennial candidate ( 1929 – 1940 ) = = = 
 Diefenbaker stood for the Legislative Assembly in the 1929 provincial election . He was defeated , but Saskatchewan Conservatives formed their first government , with help from smaller parties . As the defeated Conservative candidate for Prince Albert City , he was given charge of political patronage there , and was created a King 's Counsel . Three weeks after his electoral defeat , he married Saskatoon teacher Edna Brower . 
 Diefenbaker chose not to stand for the House of Commons in the 1930 federal election , citing health reasons . The Conservatives gained a majority in the election , and party leader R. B. Bennett became Prime Minister . Diefenbaker continued a high @-@ profile legal practice , and in 1933 , ran for mayor of Prince Albert . He was defeated by 48 votes in an election in which over 2 @,@ 000 ballots were cast . 
 In 1934 , when the Crown prosecutor for Prince Albert resigned to become the Conservative Party 's legislative candidate , Diefenbaker took his place as prosecutor . Diefenbaker did not stand in the 1934 provincial election , in which the governing Conservatives lost every seat . Six days after the election , Diefenbaker resigned as Crown prosecutor . The federal government of Bennett was defeated the following year and Mackenzie King returned as Prime Minister . Judging his prospects hopeless , Diefenbaker had declined a nomination to stand again against Mackenzie King in Prince Albert . In the waning days of the Bennett government , the Saskatchewan Conservative Party President was appointed a judge , leaving Diefenbaker , who had been elected the party 's vice president , as acting president of the provincial party . 
 Saskatchewan Conservatives eventually arranged a leadership convention for October 28 , 1936 . Eleven people were nominated , including Diefenbaker . The other ten candidates all deemed the provincial party in such hopeless shape that they withdrew , and Diefenbaker won the position by default . Diefenbaker asked the federal party for $ 10 @,@ 000 in financial support , but the funds were refused , and the Conservatives were shut out of the legislature in the 1938 provincial elections for the second consecutive time . Diefenbaker himself was defeated in the Arm River riding by 190 votes . With the province @-@ wide Conservative vote having fallen to 12 % , Diefenbaker offered his resignation to a post @-@ election party meeting in Moose Jaw , but it was refused . Diefenbaker continued to run the provincial party out of his law office , and paid the party 's debts from his own pocket . 
 Diefenbaker quietly sought the Conservative nomination for the federal riding of Lake Centre , but was unwilling to risk a divisive intra @-@ party squabble . In what Diefenbaker biographer Smith states " appears to have been an elaborate and prearranged charade " , Diefenbaker attended the nominating convention as keynote speaker , but withdrew when his name was proposed , stating a local man should be selected . The winner among the six remaining candidates , riding president W. B. Kelly , declined the nomination , urging the delegates to select Diefenbaker , which they promptly did . Mackenzie King called a general election for March 25 , 1940 . The incumbent in Lake Centre was the Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons , Liberal John Frederick Johnston . Diefenbaker campaigned aggressively in Lake Centre , holding 63 rallies and seeking to appeal to members of all parties . On election day , he defeated Johnston by 280 votes on what was otherwise a disastrous day for the Conservatives , who won only 39 seats out of the 245 in the House of Commons — their lowest total since Confederation . 
 = = Parliamentary rise ( 1940 – 1957 ) = = 
 = = = Mackenzie King years ( 1940 – 1948 ) = = = 
 Diefenbaker joined a shrunken and demoralized Conservative caucus in the House of Commons . The Conservative leader , Robert Manion , failed to win a place in the Commons in the election , which saw the Liberals take 181 seats . The Tories sought to be included in a wartime coalition government , but Mackenzie King refused . The House of Commons had only a slight role in the war effort ; under the state of emergency , most business was accomplished through the Cabinet issuing Orders in Council . 
 Diefenbaker was appointed to the House Committee on the Defence of Canada Regulations , an all @-@ party committee which examined the wartime rules which allowed arrest and detention without trial . On June 13 , 1940 , Diefenbaker made his maiden speech as an MP , supporting the regulations , and emphatically stating that most Canadians of German descent were loyal . When the Mackenzie King government sought to force Canadians of Japanese descent from the Pacific Coast , Diefenbaker fought against the government 's actions . However , his efforts were unsuccessful , and the forced relocation and internment of many Japanese @-@ Canadians proceeded . 
 According to Diefenbaker biographer Smith , the Conservative MP quietly admired Mackenzie King for his political skills . However , Diefenbaker proved a gadfly and an annoyance to Mackenzie King . Angered by the words of Diefenbaker and fellow Conservative MP Howard Green in seeking to censure the government , the Prime Minister referred to Conservative MPs as " a mob " . When Diefenbaker accompanied two other Conservative leaders to a briefing by Mackenzie King on the war , the Prime Minister exploded at Diefenbaker ( a constituent of his ) , " What business do you have to be here ? You strike me to the heart every time you speak . " 
 The Conservatives elected a floor leader , and in 1941 approached former Prime Minister Meighen , who had been appointed as a senator by Bennett , about becoming party leader again . Meighen agreed , and resigned his Senate seat , but lost a by @-@ election for an Ontario seat in the House of Commons . He remained as leader for several months , although he could not enter the chamber of the House of Commons . Meighen sought to move the Tories to the left , in order to undercut the Liberals and to take support away from the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation ( CCF , the predecessor of the New Democratic Party ( NDP ) ) . To that end , he sought to draft the Liberal @-@ Progressive premier of Manitoba , John Bracken , to lead the Conservatives . Diefenbaker objected to what he saw as an attempt to rig the party 's choice of new leader and stood for the leadership himself at the party 's 1942 leadership convention . Bracken was elected on the second ballot ; Diefenbaker finished a distant third in both polls . At Bracken 's request , the convention changed the party 's name to " Progressive Conservative Party of Canada " . Bracken chose not to seek entry to the House through a by @-@ election , and when the Conservatives elected a new floor leader , Diefenbaker was defeated by one vote . 
 Bracken was elected to the Commons in the 1945 general election , and for the first time in five years the Tories had their party leader in the House of Commons . The Progressive Conservatives won 67 seats to the Liberals ' 125 , with smaller parties and independents winning 52 seats . Diefenbaker increased his majority to over 1 @,@ 000 votes , and had the satisfaction of seeing Mackenzie King defeated in Prince Albert — but by a CCF candidate . The Prime Minister was returned in an Ontario by @-@ election within months . 
 Diefenbaker staked out a position on the populist left of the PC party . Though most Canadians were content to look to Parliament for protection of civil liberties , Diefenbaker called for a Bill of Rights , calling it " the only way to stop the march on the part of the government towards arbitrary power " . He objected to the great powers used by the Mackenzie King government to attempt to root out Soviet spies after the war , such as imprisonment without trial , and complained about the government 's proclivity for letting its wartime powers become permanent . 
 = = = Leadership contender ( 1948 – 1956 ) = = = 
 In early 1948 , Mackenzie King , by now aged 73 , announced his retirement ; later that year Louis St. Laurent succeeded him . Although Bracken had nearly doubled the Tory representation in the House , prominent Tories were increasingly unhappy with his leadership , and pressured him to stand down . These party bosses believed that Ontario Premier George A. Drew , who had won three successive provincial elections and had even made inroads in francophone ridings , was the man to lead the Progressive Conservatives to victory . When Bracken resigned on July 17 , 1948 , Diefenbaker announced his candidacy . The party 's backers , principally financiers headquartered on Toronto 's Bay Street , preferred Drew 's conservative political stances to Diefenbaker 's Western populism . Tory leaders packed the leadership convention in Ottawa in favour of Drew , appointing more than 300 delegates at @-@ large . One cynical party member commented , " Ghost delegates with ghost ballots , marked by the ghostly hidden hand of Bay Street , are going to pick George Drew , and he 'll deliver a ghost @-@ written speech that 'll cheer us all up , as we march briskly into a political graveyard . " Drew easily defeated Diefenbaker on the first ballot . St. Laurent called an election for June 1949 , and the Tories were decimated , falling to 41 seats , only two more than the party 's 1940 nadir . Despite intense efforts to make the Progressive Conservatives appeal to Quebecers , the party won only two seats in the province . 
 Newman argued that but for Diefenbaker 's many defeats , he would never have become Prime Minister : 
 If , as a neophyte lawyer , he had succeeded in winning the Prince Albert seat in the federal elections of 1925 or 1926 , ... Diefenbaker would probably have been remembered only as an obscure minister in Bennett 's Depression cabinet ... If he had carried his home @-@ town mayoralty in 1933 , ... he 'd probably not be remembered at all ... If he had succeeded in his bid for the national leadership in 1942 , he might have taken the place of John Bracken on his six @-@ year march to oblivion as leader of a party that had not changed itself enough to follow a Prairie radical ... [ If he had defeated Drew in 1948 , he ] would have been free to flounder before the political strength of Louis St. Laurent in the 1949 and 1953 campaigns . 
 The governing Liberals repeatedly attempted to deprive Diefenbaker of his parliamentary seat . In 1948 , Lake Centre was redistricted to remove areas which strongly supported Diefenbaker . In spite of that , he was returned in the 1949 election , the only PC member from Saskatchewan . In 1952 , a redistricting committee dominated by Liberals abolished Lake Centre entirely , dividing its voters among three other ridings . Diefenbaker stated in his memoirs that he had considered retiring from the House ; with Drew only a year older than he was , the Westerner saw little prospect of advancement , and had received tempting offers from Ontario law firms . However , the gerrymandering so angered him that he decided to fight for a seat . Diefenbaker 's party had taken Prince Albert only once , in 1911 , but he decided to stand in that riding for the 1953 election , and was successful . He would hold that seat for the rest of his life . Even though Diefenbaker campaigned nationally for party candidates , the Progressive Conservatives gained little , rising to 51 seats as St. Laurent led the Liberals to a fifth successive majority . In addition to trying to secure his departure from Parliament , the government opened a home for unwed Indian mothers next door to Diefenbaker 's home in Prince Albert . 
 Diefenbaker continued practising law . In 1951 , he gained national attention by accepting the Atherton case , in which a young telegraph operator had been accused of negligently causing a train crash by omitting crucial information from a message . Twenty @-@ one people were killed , mostly Canadian troops bound for Korea . Diefenbaker paid $ 1 @,@ 500 and sat a token bar examination to join the Law Society of British Columbia to take the case , and gained an acquittal , prejudicing the jury against the Crown prosecutor and pointing out a previous case in which interference had caused information to be lost in transmission . 
 Although Edna Diefenbaker had been devoted to advancing her husband 's career , in the mid @-@ 1940s she began to suffer mental illness , and was placed in a private mental hospital for a time . She later fell ill from leukemia , and died in 1951 . In 1953 , Diefenbaker married Olive Palmer ( formerly Olive Freeman ) , whom he had courted while living in Wakaw . Olive Diefenbaker became a great source of strength to her husband . There were no children born of either marriage . 
 Diefenbaker won Prince Albert in 1953 , even as the Tories suffered a second consecutive disastrous defeat under Drew . Speculation arose in the press that the leader might be pressured to step aside . Drew was determined to remain , however , and Diefenbaker was careful to avoid any action that might be seen as disloyal . However , Diefenbaker was never a member of the " Five O 'clock Club " of Drew intimates who met the leader in his office for a drink and gossip each day . By 1955 , there was a widespread feeling among Tories that Drew was not capable of leading the party to a victory . At the same time , the Liberals were in flux as the aging St. Laurent tired of politics . Drew was able to damage the government in a weeks @-@ long battle over the TransCanada pipeline in 1956 — the so @-@ called Pipeline Debate — in which the government , in a hurry to obtain financing for the pipeline , imposed closure before the debate even began . The Tories and the CCF combined to obstruct business in the House for weeks before the Liberals were finally able to pass the measure . Diefenbaker played a relatively minor role in the Pipeline Debate , speaking only once . 
 = = = Leader of the Opposition ; 1957 election = = = 
 By 1956 , the Social Credit Party was becoming a potential rival to the Tories as Canada 's main right @-@ wing party . Canadian journalist and author Bruce Hutchison discussed the state of the Tories in 1956 : 
 When a party calling itself Conservative can think of nothing better than to outbid the Government 's election promises ; when it demands economy in one breath and increased spending in the next ; when it proposes an immediate tax cut regardless of inflationary results ... when in short , the Conservative party no longer gives us a conservative alternative after twenty @-@ one years ... then our political system desperately requires an opposition prepared to stand for something more than the improbable chance of quick victory . 
 In August 1956 , Drew fell ill and many within the party urged him to step aside , feeling that the Progressive Conservatives needed vigorous leadership with an election likely within a year . He resigned in late September , and Diefenbaker immediately announced his candidacy for the leadership . A number of Progressive Conservative leaders , principally from the Ontario wing of the party , started a " Stop Diefenbaker " movement , and wooed University of Toronto president Sidney Smith as a possible candidate . When Smith declined , they could find no one of comparable stature to stand against Diefenbaker . At the convention in Ottawa in December , Diefenbaker won on the first ballot , and the dissidents reconciled themselves to his victory . After all , they reasoned , Diefenbaker was now 61 and unlikely to lead the party for more than one general election , an election they believed would be won by the Liberals regardless of who led the Tories . 
 In January 1957 , Diefenbaker took his place as Leader of the Official Opposition . In February , St. Laurent informed him that Parliament would be dissolved in April for an election on June 10 . The Liberals submitted a budget in March ; Diefenbaker attacked it for overly high taxes , failure to assist pensioners , and a lack of aid for the poorer provinces . Parliament was dissolved on April 12 . St. Laurent was so confident of victory that he did not even bother to make recommendations to the Governor General to fill the 16 vacancies in the Senate . 
 Diefenbaker ran on a platform which concentrated on changes in domestic policies . He pledged to work with the provinces to reform the Senate . He proposed a vigorous new agricultural policy , seeking to stabilize income for farmers . He sought to reduce dependence on trade with the United States , and to seek closer ties with the United Kingdom . St. Laurent called the Tory platform " a mere cream @-@ puff of a thing — with more air than substance " . Diefenbaker and the PC party used television adroitly , whereas St. Laurent stated that he was more interested in seeing people than in talking to cameras . Though the Liberals outspent the Progressive Conservatives three to one , according to Newman , their campaign had little imagination , and was based on telling voters that their only real option was to re @-@ elect St. Laurent . 
 Diefenbaker characterized the Tory program in a nationwide telecast on April 30 : 
 It is a program ... for a united Canada , for one Canada , for Canada first , in every aspect of our political and public life , for the welfare of the average man and woman . That is my approach to public affairs and has been throughout my life ... A Canada , united from Coast to Coast , wherein there will be freedom for the individual , freedom of enterprise and where there will be a Government which , in all its actions , will remain the servant and not the master of the people . 
 The final Gallup poll before the election showed the Liberals ahead , 48 % to 34 % . Just before the election , Maclean 's magazine printed its regular weekly issue , to go on sale the morning after the vote , editorializing that democracy in Canada was still strong despite a sixth consecutive Liberal victory . On election night , the Progressive Conservative advance started early , with the gain of two seats in reliably Liberal Newfoundland . The party picked up nine seats in Nova Scotia , five in Quebec , 28 in Ontario , and at least one seat in every other province . The Progressive Conservatives took 112 seats to the Liberals ' 105 : a plurality , but not a majority . While the Liberals finished some 200 @,@ 000 votes ahead of the Tories nationally , that margin was mostly wasted in overwhelming victories in safe Quebec seats . St. Laurent could have legally stayed in office until Diefenbaker could defeat him on the floor of the Commons . However , with the minor parties pledging to cooperate with a Tory government , St. Laurent chose not to do so , making Diefenbaker Prime Minister @-@ designate of Canada . 
 = = Prime Minister ( 1957 – 1963 ) = = 
 = = = Domestic events and policies = = = 
 = = = = Minority government = = = = 
 When John Diefenbaker took office as Prime Minister of Canada on June 21 , 1957 , only one Progressive Conservative MP , Earl Rowe , had served in federal governmental office , for a brief period under Bennett in 1935 . Rowe was no friend of Diefenbaker , and was given no place in his government . Diefenbaker appointed Ellen Fairclough as Secretary of State for Canada , the first woman to be appointed to a Cabinet post , and Michael Starr as Minister of Labour , the first Canadian of Ukrainian descent to serve in Cabinet . 
 As the Parliament buildings had been lent to the Universal Postal Union for its 14th congress , Diefenbaker was forced to wait until the fall to convene Parliament . However , the Cabinet approved measures that summer , including increased price supports for butter and turkeys , and raises for federal employees . Once the 23rd Canadian Parliament was opened on October 14 by Queen Elizabeth II — the first to be opened by any Canadian monarch — the government rapidly passed legislation , including tax cuts and increases in old age pensions . The Liberals were ineffective in opposition , with the party in the midst of a leadership race after St. Laurent 's resignation as party leader . 
 With the Conservatives leading in the polls , Diefenbaker wanted a new election , hopeful that his party would gain a majority of seats . It was then Canadian constitutional practice that the Governor General could refuse a dissolution early in a parliament 's term , unless the government had been defeated in the House , or was winning divisions by only a handful of votes . Diefenbaker sought a pretext for a new election . 
 Such an excuse presented itself when former Minister of External Affairs Lester Pearson attended his first parliamentary session as Leader of the Opposition on January 20 , 1958 , four days after becoming the Liberal leader . In his first speech as leader , Pearson ( recently returned from Oslo where he had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize ) , moved an amendment to supply ( a technical device whereby oppositions attempt to secure the government 's resignation ) , and called , not for an election , but for the Progressive Conservatives to resign , allowing the Liberals to form a government . Pearson stated that the condition of the economy required " a Government pledged to implement Liberal policies " . Government MPs laughed at Pearson , as did members of the press who were present . Pearson later recorded in his memoirs that he knew that his " first attack on the government had been a failure , indeed a fiasco " . Diefenbaker spoke for two hours and three minutes , and devastated his Liberal opposition . He mocked Pearson , contrasting the party leader 's address at the Liberal leadership convention with his speech to the House : 
 On Thursday there was shrieking defiance , on the following Monday there is shrinking indecision ... The only reason that this motion is worded as it is is that my honourable friends opposite quake when they think of what will happen if an election comes ... It is the resignation from responsibility of a great party . 
 Diefenbaker read from an internal report provided to the St. Laurent government in early 1957 , warning that a recession was coming , and stated : 
 Across the way , Mr. Speaker , sit the purveyors of gloom who would endeavour for political purposes , to panic the Canadian people ... They had a warning ... Did they tell us that ? No . Mr. Speaker , why did they not reveal this ? Why did they not act when the House was sitting in January , February , March , and April ? They had the information ... You concealed the facts , that is what you did . 
 According to the Minister of Finance , Donald Fleming , " Pearson looked at first merry , then serious , then uncomfortable , then disturbed , and finally sick . " Pearson recorded in his memoirs that the Prime Minister " tore me to shreds " . Prominent Liberal frontbencher Paul Martin called Diefenbaker 's response " one of the greatest devastating speeches " and " Diefenbaker 's great hour " . On February 1 , Diefenbaker asked the Governor General , Vincent Massey , to dissolve Parliament , alleging that though St. Laurent had promised cooperation , Pearson had made it clear he would not follow his predecessor 's lead . Massey agreed to the dissolution , and Diefenbaker set an election date of March 31 , 1958 . 
 = = = = 1958 election = = = = 
 The 1958 election campaign saw a huge outpouring of public support for the Progressive Conservatives . At the opening campaign rally in Winnipeg on February 12 voters filled the hall until the doors had to be closed for safety reasons . They were promptly broken down by the crowd outside . At the rally , Diefenbaker called for " [ a ] new vision . A new hope . A new soul for Canada . " He pledged to open the Canadian North , to seek out its resources and make it a place for settlements . The conclusion to his speech expounded on what became known as " The Vision " , 
 This is the vision : One Canada . One Canada , where Canadians will have preserved to them the control of their own economic and political destiny . Sir John A. Macdonald saw a Canada from east to west : he opened the west . I see a new Canada — a Canada of the North . This is the vision ! 
 Pierre Sévigny , who would be elected an MP in 1958 , recalled the gathering , " When he had finished that speech , as he was walking to the door , I saw people kneel and kiss his coat . Not one , but many . People were in tears . People were delirious . And this happened many a time after . " When Sévigny introduced Diefenbaker to a Montreal rally with the words " <unk> @-@ vous , <unk> @-@ vous , <unk> votre chef ! " ( Rise , rise , salute your chief ! ) according to Postmaster General William Hamilton " thousands and thousands of people , jammed into that auditorium , just tore the roof off in a frenzy . " Michael Starr remembered , " That was the most fantastic election ... I went into little places . Smoky Lake , Alberta , where nobody ever saw a minister . Canora , Saskatchewan . Every meeting was jammed ... The halls would be filled with people and sitting there in the front would be the first Ukrainian immigrants with shawls and hands gnarled from work ... I would switch to Ukrainian and the tears would start to run down their faces ... I don 't care who says what won the election ; it was the emotional aspect that really caught on . " 
 Pearson and his Liberals faltered badly in the campaign . The Liberal Party leader tried to make an issue of the fact that Diefenbaker had called a winter election , generally <unk> in Canada due to travel difficulties . Pearson 's objection cut little ice with voters , and served only to remind the electorate that the Liberals , at their convention , had called for an election . Pearson mocked Diefenbaker 's northern plans as " igloo @-@ to @-@ igloo " communications , and was assailed by the Prime Minister for being condescending . The Liberal leader spoke to small , quiet crowds , which quickly left the halls when he was done . By election day , Pearson had no illusions that he might win the election , and hoped only to salvage 100 seats . The Liberals would be limited to less than half of that . 
 On March 31 , 1958 , the Tories won what is still the largest majority ( in terms of percentage of seats ) in Canadian federal political history , winning 208 seats to the Liberals ' 48 , with the CCF winning 8 and Social Credit wiped out . The Progressive Conservatives won a majority of the votes and of the seats in every province except British Columbia ( 49 @.@ 8 % ) and Newfoundland . Quebec 's Union Nationale political machine had given the PC party little support , but with Quebec voters minded to support Diefenbaker , Union Nationale boss Maurice Duplessis threw the machinery of his party behind the Tories . 
 = = = = Mandate ( 1958 – 1962 ) = = = = 
 An economic downturn was beginning in Canada by 1958 . Because of tax cuts instituted the previous year , the budget presented by the government predicted a small deficit for 1957 – 58 , and a large one , $ 648 million , for the following year . Minister of Finance Fleming and Bank of Canada Governor James Coyne proposed that the wartime Victory Bond issue , which constituted two @-@ thirds of the national debt and which was due to be redeemed by 1967 , be refinanced to a longer term . After considerable indecision on Diefenbaker 's part , a nationwide campaign took place , and 90 % of the bonds were converted . However , this transaction led to an increase in the money supply , which in future years would hamper the government 's efforts to respond to unemployment . 
 As a trial lawyer , and in opposition , Diefenbaker had long been concerned with civil liberties . On July 1 , 1960 , Dominion Day , he introduced the Canadian Bill of Rights in Parliament , and the bill rapidly passed and was proclaimed on August 10 , fulfilling a lifetime goal of Diefenbaker 's . The document purported to guarantee fundamental freedoms , with special attention to the rights of the accused . However , as a mere piece of federal legislation , it could be amended by any other law , and the question of civil liberties was to a large extent a provincial matter , outside of federal jurisdiction . One lawyer remarked that the document provided rights for all Canadians , " so long as they don 't live in any of the provinces " . Diefenbaker had appointed the first First Nations member of the Senate , James Gladstone in January 1958 , and in 1960 , his government extended voting rights to all native people . 
 Diefenbaker pursued a " One Canada " policy , seeking equality of all Canadians . As part of that philosophy , he was unwilling to make special concessions to Quebec 's francophones . Thomas Van Dusen , who served as Diefenbaker 's executive assistant and wrote a book about him , characterized the leader 's views on this issue : 
 There must be no compromise with Canada 's existence as a nation . Opting out , two flags , two pension plans , associated states , Two Nations and all the other baggage of political dualism was ushering Quebec out of Confederation on the instalment plan . He could not accept any theory of two nations , however worded , because it would make of those neither French nor English second @-@ class citizens . 
 Diefenbaker 's disinclination to make concessions to Quebec , along with the disintegration of the Union Nationale , the failure of the Tories to build an effective structure in Quebec , and Diefenbaker appointing few Quebecers to his Cabinet , none to senior positions , all led to an erosion of Progressive Conservative support in Quebec . Diefenbaker did recommend the appointment of the first French @-@ Canadian governor general , Georges Vanier . 
 By mid @-@ 1961 , differences in monetary policy led to open conflict with Bank of Canada Governor Coyne , who adhered to a tight money policy . Appointed by St. Laurent to a term expiring in December 1961 , Coyne could only be dismissed before then by the passing of an Act of Parliament . Coyne defended his position by giving public speeches , to the dismay of the government . The Cabinet was also angered when it learned that Coyne and his board had passed amendments to the bank 's pension scheme which greatly increased Coyne 's pension , without publishing the amendments in the Canada Gazette as required by law . Negotiations between Minister of Finance Fleming and Coyne for the latter 's resignation broke down , with the governor making the dispute public , and Diefenbaker sought to dismiss Coyne by legislation . Diefenbaker was able to get legislation to dismiss Coyne through the House , but the Liberal @-@ controlled Senate invited Coyne to testify before one of its committees . After giving the governor a platform against the government , the committee then chose to take no further action , adding its view that Coyne had done nothing wrong . Once he had the opportunity to testify ( denied him in the Commons ) , Coyne resigned , keeping his increased pension , and the government was extensively criticized in the press . 
 By the time Diefenbaker called an election for June 18 , 1962 , the party had been damaged by loss of support in Quebec and in urban areas as voters grew disillusioned with Diefenbaker and the Tories . The PC campaign was hurt when the Bank of Canada was forced to devalue the Canadian dollar to 92 1 ⁄ 2 US cents ; it had previously hovered in the range from 95 cents to par with the United States dollar . Privately printed satirical " <unk> " swept the country . On election day , the Progressive Conservatives lost 92 seats , but were still able to form a minority government . The New Democratic Party ( the successor to the CCF ) and Social Credit held the balance of power in the new Parliament . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = Britain and the Commonwealth = = = = 
 Diefenbaker attended a meeting of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London shortly after taking office in 1957 . He generated headlines by proposing that 15 % of Canadian spending on US imports instead be spent on imports from the United Kingdom . Britain responded with an offer of a free trade agreement , which was rejected by the Canadians . As the Harold Macmillan government in the UK sought to enter the Common Market , Diefenbaker feared that Canadian exports to the UK would be threatened . He also believed that the mother country should place the Commonwealth first , and sought to discourage Britain 's entry . The British were annoyed at Canadian interference . Britain 's initial attempt to enter the Common Market was vetoed by French President Charles de Gaulle . 
 Through 1959 , the Diefenbaker government had a policy of not criticizing South Africa and its apartheid government . In this stance , Diefenbaker had the support of the Liberals but not that of CCF leader Hazen Argue . In 1960 , however , the South Africans sought to maintain membership in the Commonwealth even if South African white voters chose to make the country a republic in a referendum scheduled for later that year . South Africa asked the Commonwealth Prime Minister 's Conference to allow it to remain in the Commonwealth regardless of the result of the referendum . Diefenbaker privately expressed his distaste for apartheid to South African External Affairs Minister Eric Louw and urged him to give the black and coloured people of South Africa at least the minimal representation they had originally had . Louw , attending the conference as Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd recovered from an assassination attempt , refused . The conference resolved that an advance decision would be interfering in South Africa 's internal affairs . 
 On October 5 , 1960 , South Africa 's white voters decided to make the country a republic . At the Prime Ministers ' Conference in 1961 , Verwoerd formally applied for South Africa to remain in the Commonwealth . The prime ministers were divided . Diefenbaker broke the deadlock by proposing that the conference not reject South Africa 's application , but instead state in a communique that racial equality was a principle of the Commonwealth . This was adopted , although Britain and New Zealand disagreed with Diefenbaker 's proposal . South Africa could not accept the communique , and withdrew its application to remain in the Commonwealth . According to Peter Newman , this was " Diefenbaker 's most important contribution to international politics ... Diefenbaker flew home , a hero . " 
 = = = = Policy towards the United States = = = = 
 = = = = = " Ike " and " John " : the Eisenhower years = = = = = 
 American officials were uncomfortable with Diefenbaker 's initial election , believing they had heard undertones of anti @-@ Americanism in the campaign . After years of the Liberals , one US State Department official noted , " We 'll be dealing with an unknown quantity . " Diefenbaker 's 1958 landslide was viewed with disappointment by the US officials , who knew and liked Pearson from his years in diplomacy and who felt the Liberal Party leader would be more likely to institute pro @-@ American policies . However , US President Dwight Eisenhower took pains to foster good relations with Diefenbaker . The two men found much in common , from Western farm backgrounds to a love of fishing , and Diefenbaker had an admiration for war leaders such as Eisenhower and Churchill . Diefenbaker wrote in his memoirs , " I might add that President Eisenhower and I were from our first meeting on an ' Ike – John ' basis , and that we were as close as the nearest telephone . " The Eisenhower – Diefenbaker relationship was sufficiently strong that the touchy Canadian Prime Minister was prepared to overlook slights . When Eisenhower addressed Parliament in October 1958 , he downplayed trade concerns that Diefenbaker had publicly expressed . Diefenbaker said nothing and took Eisenhower fishing . 
 Diefenbaker had approved plans to join the United States in what became known as NORAD , an integrated air defence system , in mid @-@ 1957 . Despite Liberal misgivings that Diefenbaker had committed Canada to the system before consulting either the Cabinet or Parliament , Pearson and his followers voted with the government to approve NORAD in June 1958 . 
 In 1959 , the Diefenbaker government cancelled the development and manufacture of the Avro CF @-@ 105 Arrow . The Arrow was a supersonic jet interceptor built by Avro Canada in Malton , Ontario , to defend Canada in the event of a Soviet attack . The interceptor had been under development since 1953 , and had suffered from many cost overruns and complications . In 1955 , the RCAF stated it would only need nine squadrons of Arrows , down from 20 , as originally proposed . According to C. D. Howe , the former minister responsible for postwar reconstruction , the St. Laurent government had serious misgivings about continuing the Arrow program , and planned to discuss its termination after the 1957 election . In the run @-@ up to the 1958 election , with three Tory @-@ held seats at risk in the Malton area , the Diefenbaker government authorized further funding . Even though the first test flights of the Arrow were successful , the US government was unwilling to commit to a purchase of aircraft from Canada . In September 1958 , Diefenbaker warned that the Arrow would come under complete review in six months . The company began seeking out other projects including a US @-@ funded " saucer " program that became the VZ @-@ 9 Avrocar , and also mounted a public relations offensive urging that the Arrow go into full production . On February 20 , 1959 , the Cabinet decided to cancel the Avro Arrow , following an earlier decision to permit the United States to build two Bomarc missile bases in Canada . The company immediately dismissed its 14 @,@ 000 employees , blaming Diefenbaker for the firings , though it rehired 2 @,@ 500 employees to fulfil existing obligations . 
 Although the two leaders had a strong relationship , by 1960 US officials were becoming concerned by what they viewed as Canadian procrastination on vital issues , such as whether Canada should join the Organization of American States ( OAS ) . Talks on these issues in June 1960 produced little in results . Diefenbaker hoped that US Vice President Richard Nixon would win the 1960 US presidential election , but when Nixon 's Democratic rival , Senator John F. Kennedy won the race , he sent Senator Kennedy a note of congratulations . Kennedy did not respond until Canadian officials asked what had become of Diefenbaker 's note , two weeks later . Diefenbaker , for whom such correspondence was very meaningful , was annoyed at the President @-@ elect 's slowness to respond . In January 1961 , Diefenbaker visited Washington to sign the Columbia River Treaty . However , with only days remaining in the Eisenhower administration , little else could be accomplished . 
 = = = = = Bilateral antipathy : the Kennedy administration = = = = = 
 The Kennedy administration began its dealings with Canada badly , with Kennedy mispronouncing Diefenbaker 's name in a press conference announcing the Prime Minister 's visit to Washington in February 1961 . A furious Diefenbaker brought up in Cabinet whether to send a note of protest at the gaffe to Washington ; his colleagues were inclined to let the matter pass . When the two met in Washington on February 20 , Diefenbaker was impressed by Kennedy , and invited him to visit Ottawa . President Kennedy , however , told his aides that he never wanted " to see the boring son of a bitch again " . The Ottawa visit also began badly : at the welcome at the airport , Kennedy again mispronounced Diefenbaker 's name and stated that after hearing the Prime Minister 's ( notoriously bad ) French , he was uncertain if he should venture into the language ( Kennedy 's French was equally bad ) . After meeting with Diefenbaker , Kennedy accidentally left behind a briefing note suggesting he " push " Diefenbaker on several issues , including the decision to accept nuclear weapons on Canadian soil , which bitterly divided the Cabinet . Diefenbaker was also annoyed by Kennedy 's speech to Parliament , in which he urged Canada to join the OAS ( which Diefenbaker had already rejected ) , and by the President spending most of his time talking to Leader of the Opposition Pearson at the formal dinner . Both Kennedy and his wife Jackie were bored by Diefenbaker 's Churchill anecdotes at lunch , stories that Jackie Kennedy later described as " painful " . 
 Diefenbaker was initially inclined to go along with Kennedy 's request that nuclear weapons be stationed on Canadian soil as part of NORAD . However , when an August 3 , 1961 , letter from Kennedy which urged this was leaked to the media , Diefenbaker was angered and withdrew his support . The Prime Minister was also influenced by a massive demonstration against nuclear weapons , which took place on Parliament Hill . Diefenbaker was handed a petition containing 142 @,@ 000 names . 
 By 1962 , the American government was becoming increasingly concerned at the lack of a commitment from Canada to take nuclear weapons . The interceptors and Bomarc missiles with which Canada was being supplied as a NORAD member were either of no use or of greatly diminished utility without nuclear devices . Canadian and American military officers launched a quiet campaign to make this known to the press , and to advocate for Canadian agreement to acquire the warheads . Diefenbaker was also upset when Pearson was invited to the White House for a dinner for Nobel Prize winners in April , and met with the President privately for 40 minutes . When the Prime Minister met with retiring American Ambassador Livingston Merchant , he angrily disclosed the paper Kennedy had left behind , and hinted that he might make use of it in the upcoming election campaign . Merchant 's report caused consternation in Washington , and the ambassador was sent back to see Diefenbaker again . This time , he found Diefenbaker calm , and the Prime Minister pledged not to use the memo , and to give Merchant advance word if he changed his mind . Canada appointed a new ambassador to Washington , Charles Ritchie , who on arrival received a cool reception from Kennedy and found that the squabble was affecting progress on a number of issues . 
 Though Kennedy was careful to avoid overt favouritism during the 1962 Canadian election campaign , he did allow his pollster , Lou Harris , to work clandestinely for the Liberals . Several times during the campaign , Diefenbaker stated that the Kennedy administration desired his defeat because he refused to " bow down to Washington " . After Diefenbaker was returned with a minority , Washington continued to press for acceptance of nuclear arms , but Diefenbaker , faced with a split between Defence Minister Douglas Harkness and External Affairs Minister Howard Green on the question , continued to stall , hoping that time and events would invite consensus . 
 When the Cuban Missile Crisis erupted in October 1962 , Kennedy chose not to consult with Diefenbaker before making decisions on what actions to take . The US President sent former Ambassador Merchant to Ottawa to inform the Prime Minister as to the content of the speech that Kennedy was to make on television . Diefenbaker was upset at both the lack of consultation and the fact that he was given less than two hours advance word . He was angered again when the US government released a statement stating that it had Canada 's full support . In a statement to the Commons , Diefenbaker proposed sending representatives of neutral nations to Cuba to verify the American allegations , which Washington took to mean that he was questioning Kennedy 's word . When American forces went to a heightened alert , <unk> 3 , Diefenbaker was slow to order Canadian forces to match it . Harkness and the Chiefs of Staff had Canadian forces clandestinely go to that alert status anyway , and Diefenbaker eventually authorized it . The crisis ended without war , and polls found that Kennedy 's actions were widely supported by Canadians . Diefenbaker was severely criticized in the media . 
 = = = Downfall = = = 
 On January 3 , 1963 , NATO Supreme Commander General Lauris Norstad visited Ottawa , in one of a series of visits to member nations prior to his retirement . At a news conference , Norstad stated that if Canada did not accept nuclear weapons , it would not be fulfilling its commitments to NATO . Newspapers across Canada criticized Diefenbaker , who was convinced the statement was part of a plot by Kennedy to bring down his government . Although the Liberals had been previously indecisive on the question of nuclear weapons , on January 12 , Pearson made a speech stating that the government should live up to the commitments it had made . 
 With the Cabinet still divided between adherents of Green and Harkness , Diefenbaker made a speech in the Commons on January 25 that Fleming ( by then Minister of Justice ) termed " a model of obfuscation " . Harkness was initially convinced that Diefenbaker was saying that he would support nuclear warheads in Canada . After talking to the press , he realized that his view of the speech was not universally shared , and he asked Diefenbaker for clarification . Diefenbaker , however , continued to try to avoid taking a firm position . On January 30 , the US State Department issued a press release suggesting that Diefenbaker had made misstatements in his Commons speech . For the first time ever , Canada recalled its ambassador to Washington as a diplomatic protest . Though all parties condemned the State Department action , the three parties outside the government demanded that Diefenbaker take a stand on the nuclear weapon issue . 
 The bitter divisions within the Cabinet continued , with Diefenbaker deliberating whether to call an election on the issue of American interference in Canadian politics . At least six Cabinet ministers favoured Diefenbaker 's ouster . Finally , at a dramatic Cabinet meeting on Sunday , February 3 , Harkness told Diefenbaker that the Prime Minister no longer had the confidence of the Canadian people , and resigned . Diefenbaker asked ministers supporting him to stand , and when only about half did , stated that he was going to see the Governor General to resign , and that Fleming would be the next Prime Minister . Green called his Cabinet colleagues a " nest of traitors " , but eventually cooler heads prevailed , and the Prime Minister was urged to return and to fight the motion of non @-@ confidence scheduled for the following day . Harkness , however , persisted in his resignation . Negotiations with the Social Credit Party , which had enough votes to save the government , failed , and the government fell , 142 – 111 . 
 Two members of the government resigned the day after the government lost the vote . As the campaign opened , the Tories trailed in the polls by 15 points . To Pearson and his Liberals , the only question was how large a majority they would win . Peter Stursberg , who wrote two books about the Diefenbaker years , stated of that campaign : 
 For the old Diefenbaker was in full cry . All the agony of the disintegration of his government was gone , and he seemed to be a giant revived by his contact with the people . This was Diefenbaker 's finest election . He was virtually alone on the hustings . Even such loyalists as Gordon Churchill had to stick close to their own bailiwicks , where they were fighting for their political lives . 
 Though the White House maintained public neutrality , privately Kennedy made it clear he desired a Liberal victory . Kennedy lent Lou Harris , his pollster to work for the Liberals again . On election day , April 8 , 1963 , the Liberals claimed 129 seats to the Tories ' 95 , five seats short of an absolute majority . Diefenbaker held to power for several days , until six Quebec Social Credit MPs signed a statement that Pearson should form the government . These votes would be enough to give Pearson support of a majority of the House of Commons , and Diefenbaker resigned . The six MPs repudiated the statement within days . Nonetheless , Pearson formed a government with the support of the NDP . 
 = = Later years ( 1963 – 1979 ) = = 
 = = = Return to opposition = = = 
 Diefenbaker continued to lead the Progressive Conservatives , again as Leader of the Opposition . In November 1963 , upon hearing of Kennedy 's assassination , the Tory leader addressed the Commons , stating , " A beacon of freedom has gone . Whatever the disagreement , to me he stood as the embodiment of freedom , not only in his own country , but throughout the world . " In the 1964 Great Canadian Flag Debate , Diefenbaker led the unsuccessful opposition to the Maple Leaf flag , which the Liberals pushed for after the rejection of Pearson 's preferred design showing three maple leaves . Diefenbaker preferred the existing Canadian Red Ensign or another design showing symbols of the nation 's heritage . He dismissed the adopted design , with a single red maple leaf and two red bars , as " a flag that Peruvians might salute " . At the request of Quebec Tory Léon Balcer , who feared devastating PC losses in the province at the next election , Pearson imposed closure , and the bill passed with the majority singing " O Canada " as Diefenbaker led the dissenters in " God Save the Queen " . 
 In 1966 , the Liberals began to make an issue of the <unk> affair — two officials of the Diefenbaker government had slept with a woman suspected of being a Soviet spy . In what Diefenbaker saw as a partisan attack , Pearson established a one @-@ man Royal Commission , which , according to Diefenbaker biographer Smith , indulged in " three months of reckless political inquisition " . By the time the commission issued its report , Diefenbaker and other former ministers had long since withdrawn their counsel from the proceedings . The report faulted Diefenbaker for not dismissing the ministers in question , but found no actual security breach . 
 There were calls for Diefenbaker 's retirement , especially from the Bay Street wing of the party as early as 1964 . Diefenbaker initially beat back attempts to remove him without trouble . When Pearson called an election in 1965 in the expectation of receiving a majority , Diefenbaker ran an aggressive campaign . The Liberals fell two seats short of a majority , and the Tories improved their position slightly at the expense of the smaller parties . After the election , some Tories , led by party president Dalton Camp , began a quiet campaign to oust Diefenbaker . 
 In the absence of a formal leadership review process , Camp was able to stage a de facto review by running for re @-@ election as party president on the platform of holding a leadership convention within a year . His campaign at the Tories ' 1966 convention occurred amidst allegations of vote rigging , violence , and seating arrangements designed to ensure that when Diefenbaker addressed the delegates , television viewers would see unmoved delegates in the first ten rows . Other Camp supporters tried to shout Diefenbaker down . Camp was successful in being re @-@ elected thereby forcing a leadership convention for 1967 . Diefenbaker initially made no announcement as to whether he would stand , but angered by a resolution at the party 's policy conference which spoke of " deux nations " or " two founding peoples " ( as opposed to Diefenbaker 's " One Canada " ) , decided to seek to retain his leadership . Although Diefenbaker entered at the last minute to stand as a candidate for the leadership , he finished fifth on each of the first three ballots , and withdrew from the contest , which was won by Nova Scotia Premier Robert Stanfield . 
 Diefenbaker addressed the delegates before Stanfield spoke : 
 My course has come to an end . I have fought your battles , and you have given me that loyalty that led us to victory more often than the party has ever had since the days of Sir John A. Macdonald . In my retiring , I have nothing to withdraw in my desire to see Canada , my country and your country , one nation . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Diefenbaker was embittered by his loss of the party leadership . Pearson announced his retirement in December 1967 , and Diefenbaker forged a wary relationship of mutual respect with Pearson 's successor , Pierre Trudeau . Trudeau called a general election for June 1968 ; Stanfield asked Diefenbaker to join him at a rally in Saskatoon , which Diefenbaker refused , although the two appeared at hastily arranged photo opportunities . Trudeau obtained the majority against Stanfield that Pearson had never been able to obtain against Diefenbaker , as the PC party lost 25 seats , 20 of them in the West . The former Prime Minister , though stating , " The Conservative Party has suffered a calamitous disaster " in a CBC interview , could not conceal his delight at Stanfield 's humiliation , and especially gloated at the defeat of Camp , who made an unsuccessful attempt to enter the Commons . Diefenbaker was easily returned for Prince Albert . 
 Although Stanfield worked to try to unify the party , Diefenbaker and his loyalists proved difficult to reconcile . The division in the party broke out in well @-@ publicised dissensions , as when Diefenbaker called on Progressive Conservative MPs to break with Stanfield 's position on a bilingualism bill , and nearly half the caucus voted against their leader or abstained . In addition to his parliamentary activities , Diefenbaker travelled extensively and began work on his memoirs , which were published in three volumes between 1975 and 1977 . Pearson died of cancer in 1972 , and Diefenbaker was asked if he had kind words for his old rival . Diefenbaker shook his head and said only , " He shouldn 't have won the Nobel Prize . " 
 By 1972 , Diefenbaker had grown disillusioned with Trudeau , and campaigned wholeheartedly for the Tories in that year 's election . Diefenbaker was reelected comfortably in his home riding , and the Progressive Conservatives came within two seats of matching the Liberal total . Diefenbaker was relieved both that Trudeau had been humbled and that Stanfield had been denied power . Trudeau regained his majority two years later in an election that saw Diefenbaker , by then the only living former Prime Minister , have his personal majority grow to 11 @,@ 000 votes . 
 In the 1976 New Year Honours , Diefenbaker was created a Companion of Honour , an accolade bestowed as the personal gift of the Sovereign . After a long illness , Olive Diefenbaker died on December 22 , a loss which plunged Diefenbaker into despair . 
 Joe Clark succeeded Stanfield as party leader in 1976 , but as Clark had supported the leadership review , Diefenbaker held a grudge against him . Diefenbaker had supported Claude Wagner for leader , but when Clark won , stated that Clark would make " a remarkable leader of this party " . However , Diefenbaker repeatedly criticized his party leader , to such an extent that Stanfield publicly asked Diefenbaker " to stop sticking a knife into Mr. Clark " — a request Diefenbaker did not agree to . According to columnist Charles Lynch , Diefenbaker regarded Clark as an upstart and a pipsqueak . 
 In 1978 , Diefenbaker announced that he would stand in one more election , and under the slogan " Diefenbaker — Now More Than Ever " , weathered a campaign the following year during which he apparently suffered a mild stroke , although the media were told he was bedridden with influenza . In the May election Diefenbaker defeated NDP candidate Stan <unk> ( who , after Diefenbaker 's death , would win the seat in a by @-@ election ) by 4 @,@ 000 votes . Clark had defeated Trudeau , though only gaining a minority government , and Diefenbaker returned to Ottawa to witness the swearing @-@ in , still unreconciled to his old opponents among Clark 's ministers . Two months later , Diefenbaker died in his study about a month before his 84th birthday . 
 Diefenbaker had extensively planned his funeral in consultation with government officials . He lay in state in the Hall of Honour in Parliament for two and a half days ; 10 @,@ 000 Canadians passed by his casket . The Maple Leaf Flag on the casket was partially obscured by the Red Ensign . After the service , his body was taken by train on a slow journey to its final destination , Saskatoon ; along the route , many Canadians lined the tracks to watch the funeral train pass . In Winnipeg , an estimated 10 @,@ 000 people waited at midnight in a one @-@ kilometre line to file past the casket which made the trip draped in a Canadian flag and Diefenbaker 's beloved Red Ensign . In Prince Albert , thousands of those he had represented filled the square in front of the railroad station to salute the only man from Saskatchewan ever to become Prime Minister . His coffin was accompanied by that of his wife Olive , disinterred from temporary burial in Ottawa . Prime Minister Clark delivered the eulogy , paying tribute to " an indomitable man , born to a minority group , raised in a minority region , leader of a minority party , who went on to change the very nature of his country , and change it forever " . John and Olive Diefenbaker rest outside the Diefenbaker Centre , built to house his papers , on the campus of the University of Saskatchewan . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Most of the policies that Diefenbaker held dear did not survive the 16 years of Liberal rule which followed his fall . By the end of 1963 , the first of the Bomarc warheads entered Canada , where they remained until the last were finally phased out during John Turner 's brief government in 1984 . Diefenbaker 's decision to have Canada remain outside the OAS was not reversed by Pearson , and it was not until 1989 , under the Tory government of Brian Mulroney , that Canada joined . 
 But several defining features of modern Canada can be traced back to Diefenbaker . Diefenbaker 's Bill of Rights remains in effect , and signalled the change in Canadian political culture that would eventually bring about the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , which came into force after his death . Diefenbaker was the first to appoint women and ethnic minorities to Cabinet . It was under Diefenbaker that Canada finally achieved universal adult suffrage , with the granting of the vote to Native Canadians in 1960 . The removal of explicit racial discrimination from the criteria for admission to Canada under the Immigration Act of 1961 was a factor in the creation of today 's multi @-@ cultural and multi @-@ ethnic Canada . 
 Diefenbaker reinvigorated a moribund party system in Canada . Clark and Mulroney , two men who , as students , worked on and were inspired by his 1957 triumph , became the only other Progressive Conservatives to lead the party to election triumphs . Diefenbaker 's biographer , Denis Smith , wrote of him , " In politics he had little more than two years of success in the midst of failure and frustration , but he retained a core of deeply committed loyalists to the end of his life and beyond . The federal Conservative Party that he had revived remained dominant in the prairie provinces for 25 years after he left the leadership . " The Harper government , believing that Tory prime ministers have been given short shrift in the naming of Canadian places and institutions , named the former Ottawa City Hall , now a federal office building , the John G. Diefenbaker Building . It also gave Diefenbaker 's name to a human rights award and an icebreaking vessel . Harper often invoked Diefenbaker 's northern vision in his speeches . 
 Conservative Senator Marjory LeBreton worked in Diefenbaker 's office during his second time as Opposition Leader , and has said of him , " He brought a lot of firsts to Canada , but a lot of it has been air @-@ brushed from history by those who followed . " Historian Michael Bliss , who published a survey of the Canadian Prime Ministers , wrote of Diefenbaker : 
 From the distance of our times , Diefenbaker 's role as a prairie populist who tried to revolutionize the Conservative Party begins to loom larger than his personal idiosyncrasies . The difficulties he faced in the form of significant historical dilemmas seem less easy to resolve than Liberals and hostile journalists opined at the time . If Diefenbaker defies rehabilitation , he can at least be appreciated . He stood for a fascinating and still relevant combination of individual and egalitarian values ... But his contemporaries were also right in seeing some kind of disorder near the centre of his personality and his prime @-@ ministership . The problems of leadership , authority , power , ego , and a mad time in history overwhelmed the prairie politician with the odd name . 
 = Premiere ( The O.C. ) = 
 " Premiere " ( also known as " Pilot " ) is the series premiere of the television series The O.C. , which premiered on the Fox network on August 5 , 2003 . Written by series creator Josh Schwartz and directed by executive producer Doug Liman , the episode depicts the introduction of troubled teenager Ryan Atwood ( Benjamin McKenzie ) into the wealthy lifestyle of the Cohen family in Newport Beach , Orange County , California . 
 The casting directors , Patrick J. Rush and Alyson Silverberg , began selecting the principal cast eight to ten weeks before filming started . The role of Ryan was particularly hard to cast . Seth Cohen ( Adam Brody ) was based on Schwartz 's experiences at the University of Southern California as a " neurotic Jewish kid from the East Coast in a land of water polo players " . Other central characters in the episode are Seth 's parents — Sandy ( Peter Gallagher ) and Kirsten ( Kelly Rowan ) — and teenage next @-@ door neighbor Marissa Cooper ( Mischa Barton ) . 
 The series premiere led the first half @-@ hour of its time slot in viewership . It was generally well received by critics , and earned Schwartz a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for Best Screenplay in an Episodic Drama . Rush and Silverberg received an Artios Award nomination for excellence of casting in the Dramatic Pilot category . Originally broadcast and released in a 1 @.@ 33 : 1 aspect ratio , it was remastered in a widescreen ratio for the series DVD , released in November 2007 . The episode was released on MiniDVD on April 26 , 2005 , and is available to purchase from video on demand services . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A cold open shows Trey Atwood ( Bradley Stryker ) and his brother Ryan stealing a car . The police chase and arrest the boys , resulting in a prison term for Trey and a short stay in juvenile hall for the underage Ryan . A conversation between Ryan and his public defender , Sandy Cohen ( Peter Gallagher ) , establishes Ryan as a smart boy with a rough upbringing ; he has three <unk> and two suspensions , but his SAT I scores are in the ninety @-@ eighth percentile . When Ryan 's mother , Dawn ( Daphne Ashbrook ) , collects Ryan , Sandy gives his business card to the boy . At home in Chino , Dawn asks Ryan to leave , and her boyfriend , A.J. ( Ron Del Barrio ) , expels him from the house . Standing at a payphone with nowhere to go , Ryan calls Sandy for help . As Sandy drives Ryan to his house in Newport Beach , the opening credits and the theme tune play — unlike the other episodes , there is no title sequence . 
 While Sandy tries to convince his wife , Kirsten ( Kelly Rowan ) to allow Ryan to stay in the pool house for a night , Ryan meets the girl next door , Marissa Cooper ( Mischa Barton ) . When her boyfriend Luke ( Chris Carmack ) picks her up , Marissa invites Ryan to attend a fashion show fundraiser the following night . On a sailing trip the next day , the Cohens ' son , Seth ( Adam Brody ) reveals to Ryan that he has a crush on Summer ( Rachel Bilson ) and would like to sail to Tahiti with her , but that she never pays him any attention . Later , Marissa leaves for the fashion show with her mother Julie ( Melinda Clarke ) , her father Jimmy ( Tate Donovan ) , and her younger sister Kaitlin ( Shailene Woodley ) . The Cohens and Ryan also attend the show . 
 Summer invites Ryan to a party after the show , and Ryan convinces Seth to join him . For the first time , Seth is introduced to the <unk> , <unk> , and alcohol @-@ fueled side of Newport . He experiences the wildness of a party for the first time , while Ryan flirts with Marissa . Luke takes a girl to the beach . Later at the party , Ryan rebuffs an intoxicated Summer , but Seth misinterprets the encounter and reveals Ryan 's real background . Seth walks down the beach , and is bullied by a group of water polo players that includes Luke . Ryan defends Seth by punching Luke , but Luke 's friends intervene and beat up Ryan and Seth . After returning to the Cohens , Ryan sees that Marissa 's friends left her passed out on her drive ; he carries her to the Cohens ' pool house to sleep . When Kirsten finds Seth and Ryan asleep in the pool house the next morning , she is unhappy with Ryan 's new influence and insists to Sandy that Ryan leaves . Sandy drives Ryan back to Chino , but when they find his home empty , they return to Newport . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 In 2002 , Schwartz met with Joseph " McG " McGinty Nichol and Stephanie Savage of production company Wonderland Sound and Vision . They told Schwartz they wanted to create a television show based in McG 's hometown of Newport Beach . Savage suggested producing a police or extreme sports 21 Jump Street @-@ style show , but Schwartz knew little about the genre . Having had experience with people from Newport Beach during his time at the University of Southern California , Schwartz came back to them with his own characters . The show was pitched to Fox and Warner Bros in August 2002 . Fox targeted a summer launch for the show , and Doug Liman was brought in to direct the premiere after McG withdrew due his scheduling conflicts with Charlie 's Angels 2 . The show was confirmed for the 2003 – 2004 schedule in May , and an August 5 , 2003 broadcast date was selected in June . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting directors Patrick J. Rush and Alyson Silverberg began casting the main roles eight to ten weeks before filming began , with input from Schwartz , McG and Savage . Rush and Silverberg were later nominated in the Dramatic Pilot category of the Casting Society of America 's Artios Awards . 
 In February 2003 , Peter Gallagher became the first actor cast , playing Sandy Cohen . Kelly Rowan auditioned five times before being cast as Sandy 's wife , Kirsten , in March 2003 . Rush found the role of Ryan Atwood particularly hard to cast , as the producers wanted the " perfect " actor . Benjamin McKenzie was only invited to audition for the role after Warner Bros. made them aware of the actor following his unsuccessful audition for a UPN sitcom . McKenzie joined the cast in March 2003 . He lacked working experience and later described his selection as " a tremendous leap of faith " on the producers ' part . The role of Seth Cohen was derived from Schwartz 's experiences at the University of Southern California as a " neurotic Jewish kid from the East Coast in a land of water polo players " . Adam Brody first read for the part of Ryan , but found the bad @-@ boy image did not suit him . In a recall for the role of Seth , Brody lost the producers ' interest by ad @-@ libbing much of the script ; he joined the cast in March 2003 after a second interview . 
 Mischa Barton , who had met McG on Fastlane , portrayed Marissa Cooper . She was cast in February 2003 . Tate Donovan , who played Jimmy Cooper , was cast in March 2003 . Melinda Clarke guest @-@ starred as Julie Cooper , but read for the role of Kirsten in her audition as there were not enough scripted lines for Julie at the time . Rachel Bilson , who was recommended to Schwartz after an unsuccessful audition for Everwood , guest @-@ starred as Summer Roberts , whom the producers had envisaged as a tall Californian blonde . Clarke and Bilson joined as regular cast members later in the season . Chris Carmack , who played Luke Ward , was credited as a guest star for the episode ; he joined the regular cast in the next episode . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Although the show is set in Newport Beach , financial penalties imposed for filming outside the " Thirty Mile Zone " forced production to the Manhattan Beach , Los Angeles County region . The scenes set in Ryan 's hometown of Chino were filmed in Los Angeles . The show was predominantly shot on 35 mm film stock . Unusually for the show , a scene in the Atwood home in Chino was shot using a hand @-@ held camera by Liman . Savage said this ensured the show " doesn 't feel like glossy soap opera " . 
 The Cohen family home was shot on location in Malibu . A mock pool house was built for use in the pilot , and taken down after filming completed . The Cohen 's home was recreated on a soundstage at Raleigh Studios in Manhattan Beach for filming during the rest of the series ; external shots of the house remained in use . The fashion show was filmed at the Wilshire <unk> Theatre ; though it did not advance the story , Schwartz described it as necessary to show the world in which the characters lived . The party at Holly 's beach house following the fashion show was filmed at a beach house in Malibu over three consecutive nights . 
 = = Broadcast and distribution = = 
 The episode premiered at 9 : 00 p.m. ( EDT ) on August 5 , 2003 on Fox , and was simulcast in Canada on CTV . Fox gave the show an early summer premiere to try to establish an audience before the network switched to coverage of post @-@ season baseball in October , and ahead of " the clutter of the fall preview weeks " . In the United Kingdom , the episode first aired at 9 : 00 p.m. ( GMT ) on March 7 , 2004 on Channel 4 , and in Australia on the Nine Network . The episode was released on MiniDVD on April 26 , 2005 , after release plans with other Warner Bros. titles for March were discarded . Although the premiere was originally broadcast and released in a 1 @.@ 33 : 1 aspect ratio , it was remastered in a widescreen ratio for the Region 1 complete series DVD release . The Region 2 release retained the original aspect ratio . The episode is available on video on demand service Amazon <unk> in the United States , and from the iTunes Store in the United States and United Kingdom . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The pilot episode attracted 7 @.@ 46 million viewers in the United States , second in its time slot behind the season finale of Last Comic Standing . The O.C. received a rating / share of 6 @.@ 8 / 11 in the first half @-@ hour , ranking first between 9 and 9 : 30 p.m. , but lost the lead in the second half @-@ hour with a rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 . The episode received the highest rating of the night in the 12- to 17 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , but in its target audience demographic of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , it received a less @-@ than @-@ expected Nielsen Rating of 2 @.@ 9 / 8 . The show built on the audience of lead @-@ in show American Juniors , and Fox said that they were " fairly happy with the show 's performance " . Schwartz received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for Best Screenplay in an Episodic Drama , with casting directors Rush and Silverberg nominated in the Dramatic Pilot category of the Artios Awards . The episode was criticized by City Manager Glen Rojas for its " negative portrayal " of Chino . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Carina Chocano praised The O.C. for being different , claiming that it was " refreshingly free of both [ Aaron ] Spelling @-@ style camp and the twee earnestness that has characterized more recent teen dramas " . Robert Bianco of USA Today drew comparisons with the successful Fox show Beverly Hills , 90210 , saying that " The O.C. is better @-@ written and better @-@ acted by a cast that just might be , incredibly enough , even better @-@ looking " . He praised the cast 's skill and attractiveness as well as the show 's ability to " come up with a few smart deviations from the genre norm " . Nancy Franklin of The New Yorker criticized the plot for being too predictable , but praised Adam Brody as Seth , stating that " he talks too much and too fast , he mumbles , and he projects zero physical confidence . In short , his character is adorable . " Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette felt that " [ Benjamin ] McKenzie , at times , is prone to <unk> scenes " , and considered the young characters " so detestable and yet bland " that it made the show " almost painful " to watch . He nevertheless affirmed that the show had " positive attributes " that made it enjoyable . Andrew Grossman of The Boston Globe commented that " Brody is instantly likable as Seth " and that Barton " does a nice job with Marissa 's torn @-@ between @-@ two @-@ worlds angst " , but stated that Ryan " doesn 't seem to have many clear personality traits " . Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle called the episode " superb " and described McKenzie as " essentially playing James Dean " . He compared the actor to Russell Crowe and noted that McKenzie " pull [ ed ] the whole thing off with aplomb " . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Luke 's line , " Welcome to the O.C. , bitch " , which he says after beating up Ryan , became a tagline for the show . TV Land placed the line as 83rd in its 100 Greatest TV Quotes and Catchphrases in 2006 . Hadley Freeman of The Guardian noted that the teen @-@ focused show made many cultural references due to a " renewed interest in the teen market " , adding that the use of cropped tops , micro @-@ minis , and beaded flip @-@ flops showed a " decidedly West Coast approach to fashion " . The episode 's cultural references to fashion included Julie Cooper 's question to her pre @-@ pubescent daughter , " Do you like my hair this straight or is it too Avril Lavigne ? " , while another mother complains , " What are you doing putting my daughter in Calvin Klein ? She was supposed to be in Vera Wang ! " Teenage misfit Seth complains that " Every day 's a fashion show for these kids " . 
 The episode generated interest in the program 's music and was regarded as " the show to be heard on " . Michael Peck from TV Guide said that he received a large quantity of mail that inquired about the song " Into Dust " by Mazzy Star , which played when Ryan carried Marissa into his bedroom . Other featured music was The All @-@ American Rejects ' 2003 hit , " Swing , Swing " , and " Hands Up " by The Black Eyed Peas from their 2003 multi @-@ platinum album , Elephunk . Among Schwartz 's favorite musical moments from the show was Joseph Arthur 's " Honey and the Moon " , which Schwartz claimed helped him write the pilot . The title track " California " introduced the band Phantom Planet into the mainstream . 
 = Edinburgh International Climbing Arena = 
 Edinburgh International Climbing Arena ( <unk> : Ratho , formerly the Ratho Adventure Centre ) is an adventure sports facility located in Ratho , near Edinburgh , Scotland . Built in a disused quarry , it is the largest indoor climbing wall in the world . 
 Financial problems months after it opened in December 2003 put the Arena into receivership . It was purchased by the City of Edinburgh Council and fully reopened in May 2007 after a further programme of works costing around GB £ 6 million . The centre is now used by both recreational climbers and for competitions , and is also home to the Scottish National Judo Academy . 
 = = History = = 
 Originally used for supplying stone to the Central Belt of Scotland due to its proximity to the Union Canal , the quarry expanded from around a third of its present size in 1853 to the current outline in 1895 . Edinburgh climbers Rab Anderson , Duncan McCallum and architect David Taylor formed the Ratho Quarry Company , and purchased the quarry in 1995 as the site for the climbing centre . The quarry , which had been unused for around ninety years , was filled with compacted rubble and heavily overgrown with trees and shrubs , making assessment of the site difficult until significant work had been carried out , but the assumption that the floor of the quarry was flat proved to be correct . Plans unveiled in late 2001 showed the estimated cost to be GB £ 7 million , with funding of GB £ 1 @.@ 5 million to come from a <unk> lottery fund grant . 
 The climbing centre is located in the smaller of two lobes of a figure of eight that make up the quarry . After 250 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 250 @,@ 000 long tons ; 280 @,@ 000 short tons ) of rubble was removed , the quarry was shown to have a broadly level floor and be almost 30 metres ( 98 ft ) deep . During construction in April 2002 , the partially completed roof was ripped off in a storm . 
 When it opened in December 2003 , the centre was the largest indoor climbing arena in the world , but problems during construction increased the final cost to GB £ 22 million . In March 2004 the centre went into receivership due to a leaky roof , poor management , and a lack of money , leaving a number of contractors unpaid . It was purchased by the City of Edinburgh Council in October 2005 for GB £ 3 @.@ 87 million , and then closed in August 2006 to allow full completion of the venue . 
 It reopened on 25 May 2007 , under the management of Edinburgh Leisure , a non @-@ profit organisation which provides sport and leisure facilities on behalf of the City of Edinburgh Council . GB £ 6 million was spent overhauling the roof , the plumbing , improving the car park and converting an unopened scuba diving tank into a dedicated bouldering room . Under new management , more emphasis was placed on making the centre accessible to families and visitors as well as experienced climbers . The roof , consisting of 8 @,@ 500 square metres ( 91 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of tensioned fabric , was replaced at the end of 2013 at a cost of around GB £ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Climbing = = 
 There are over 11 @,@ 000 bolt @-@ on holds in the centre , with 300 routes ranging in difficulty from grades 2 to 8b . The Aerial Assault course is an assault course suspended 30 metres ( 98 ft ) above the main hall , which takes around 30 minutes and is open to anybody over 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 4 ft 7 in ) tall . As well as a trio of boulders in the centre of the main hall , there is a dedicated bouldering room , with routes ranging in difficulty from <unk> to <unk> . 
 Two identical speed walls allow speed climbing competitions to be conducted head to head , and there is an articulated competition wall known as " The Hanger " that can be raised or lowered to change the angle of overhang . 
 The larger " lobe " of the quarry is also used for outdoor climbing , although some of the rock is described as " loose and scary " . Formed from dolerite , there are around 65 known routes . 
 = = Services and facilities = = 
 The centre contains the world 's largest indoor climbing arena , as well as bouldering facilities , the Scottish National Judo Academy , and an aerial assault course . 
 Within the centre there is a Tiso outdoor shop and a <unk> Ceramics studio , as well as a cafe overlooking the main arena . The centre has a gym that is available when not in use by Scottish National Judo Academy . Other classes are held in the Fitness Studio . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Competitions = = = 
 The centre hosted the UIAA @-@ ICC Boulder & Lead World Cup in December 2003 . 
 The centre also hosted the IFSC World Youth Championship in 2004 and 2010 , and the British Lead Climbing Championships every year until Awesome Walls in Sheffield took over in 2013 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 In the Edinburgh International Festival 2013 , Leaving Planet Earth used the centre as the stage . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 On 20 April 2015 the Scottish National Party held their manifesto launch for the 2015 general election in the main climbing arena . 
 = Confessions Part II = 
 " Confessions Part II " is a song by R & B singer Usher , produced by Jermaine Dupri and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox for Usher 's fourth album Confessions . Written by Usher , Dupri and Cox , the song is a confession of a man to his woman about his impregnated mistress , a continuation of " Confessions Part I " which relates to a man 's infidelity . Its personal content evoked rumors and early responses from the public even before its release , believing that Usher was asserting the truth ; however , Dupri divulged that the story behind the album is his and Usher explained that he only took inspiration from his friends ' similar experiences . 
 " Confessions Part II " received mixed reviews from critics . The song was released as the third single from the album , following the success of " Burn " . The single reached number one on Billboard Hot 100 for two weeks , becoming the album 's third consecutive number @-@ one single . Internationally , the single had lesser success than the album 's previous releases . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 When he started working on his fourth studio album Confessions after the release of his 2001 album 8701 , Usher chose not to branch out much with musical collaborators ; instead , he chose to continue creating music with his previous producers . He again enlisted producer @-@ songwriter Jermaine Dupri , who had produced songs for Usher 's two previous albums . Dupri approached Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , asking him to become a collaborator . Cox has been a frequent partner of Dupri who had produced hits for Usher as well . Like " Burn " , the second single from the album , Dupri and Cox conversed about a situation , creating the idea of the prospective song . However , they were concerned because they needed somebody to write such a song and they never thought Usher would do it . The concept became " Confessions " . 
 Usher started recording the song on July 2003 in New York City . One day , before the night was over , Usher was singing about impregnating a mistress and becoming displeased , having found that she is three months pregnant . The theme of cheating inspired him and Dupri , and they then decided to produce two parts of " Confessions " : Part I and Part II . Usher said that the former is a " dramatization where a guy confesses all the stuff he 's been doing " against his woman . The latter speaks of impregnating a mistress . 
 While Confessions was still in production , Usher promised " real talk " in it . He decided " to let it all hang out by singing about some of his own little secrets , as well as a few bones from his homies ' skeleton @-@ filled closets . " He explained : " All of us have our Pandora 's boxes or skeletons in our closets . I let a few of them out , you know . I 've got a lot to say . I 've got a lot of things and stuff built in me that I just want to let go of . " He further noted that , for the most part , the album 's subject matter is " very personal " . Dupri expected people to question some of the personal lyrics they associated in the song . 
 " Confessions Part II " was released as the third single from the album , following " Burn " . The single was released in the United States as a 12 " single on August 24 , 2004 . It was released in Germany on October 18 , and Australia on October 26 , 2004 , featuring the album and remix version of the track and a song called " Whatever I Want " . In the United Kingdom , it was a double A @-@ side with " My Boo " , the fourth single from the album . It was released in the country on December 28 , 2004 , and re @-@ released on January 18 , 2005 . 
 = = Lyrical interpretation = = 
 Usher held few listening parties for the album prior to its release . Shortly after , people came up with different interpretations of " Confessions Part II " , among other personal songs in the album . In 2003 , Usher 's two @-@ year relationship with TLC 's Chilli was going to " flame @-@ out " , which partly contributed to the concept of " Burn " . They finally broke up early in 2004 because of " irreconcilable differences and because the two found it almost impossible to make compromises " which partly triggered public speculation that some of the songs in the album are in reference to his personal struggle . They referred to the song speaking about Usher 's " infidelity " to Chilli . 
 Alongside the " cheating " rumors , the public inferred from the lyrics that Usher had impregnated a mistress in real life . Usher , however , emphasized that he was not in a relationship and " got another girl pregnant " and he was singing a " character " . The similarity of situations he faced before and experiences of his friends collectively inspired him to write the song . In the middle of rumors , Dupri admitted that the stories behind the songs in the album are his . He stated , " me cheating on my steady girlfriend , having a baby with that other woman and having to confess to everything that happened to my main girl . " Behind rumors , Usher refuted in an interview with MTV News : 
 People assume things , because as I said , I pull from my personal experiences to make my music ... I never experienced [ fathering a child outside of a relationship ] firsthand , but it 's something I wanted to talk about ... and it 's something that has happened to me in the past ... As I said , I have a few deep , dark ones that I 've kept stowed away in a closet for a minute ... That 's why I take this time to speak to you guys and let you know really what it is ... I will tell you that I loved [ Chilli ] a lot and she obviously loved me ; it just didn 't work out . But cheating is not what caused the relationship to collide and crash . That ain 't what broke it up . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Confessions Part II " is an R & B song composed in the key of F minor . Set in common time , the song is performed with a moderate groove . The song follows the chord progression of D ♭ maj7 @-@ E ♭ <unk> , and Usher 's voice spans from the low note of E ♭ 4 to the high note of f6 . The lyrics are constructed in the inverted chorus @-@ verse form . There are four choruses and two verses , and then a break between the third and final chorus which Usher speaks the lyrics . 
 The lyrics of " Confessions Part II " centers on a confession about impregnating a mistress . For the prelude , Usher tells his significant other that he impregnated his mistress . " Confessions Part II " apologizes what he had done in part one . Usher said of the song that right after he confessed with his real woman , he hoped she would still give him a chance . Dupri said that " Confessions Part II " is one of the songs which speak about breakups in relationships . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Many critics found the song intriguing and came up with interpretations of it as well . Andrew McGregor of the BBC questioned if " Confessions Part II " , as well as " Truth Hurts " , are only " mere theatre " or telling the truth . Laura Sinagra of Rolling Stone focuses on how Usher admits in the song about impregnating a mistress . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine commented that Usher was at an age when " getting his ' chick on the side ' " seemed appropriate . Outside of rumors , Jem Aswad of Entertainment Weekly said that the best songs from the album were " Confessions Part II " and " Burn " , which he described as having smooth melodies . Matt Cibula of Popmatters said of the flow of the concept does not work . He pointed out that in the second part , Usher claims he " barely knows the other lady " , while in the first part , he already said that she was his ex @-@ girlfriend . He furthered called it the " <unk> " song on the theme of the album . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times called it a " tricky infidelity narrative " . 
 " Confessions Part II " was nominated for Best R & B / Soul , Male at the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . At the 2005 American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Pop Music Awards , Dupri received the ASCAP Golden Note Award for co @-@ writing the song , alongside his many achievements and contributions to American popular music . British record company EMI was recognized as Publisher of the Year for the song , including " Burn " and songs by Alicia Keys , Beyoncé Knowles , Britney Spears . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Confessions Part II " lived up to the success of its predecessors in the United States , though not as overwhelmingly . The single debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 48 , a higher entry than those of " Yeah ! " and " Burn " did , while " Yeah ! " was still at the top of the chart and " Burn " at number three . It peaked at number one on July 27 , 2004 , replacing " Burn " ' s eighth non @-@ consecutive chart run , and stayed there for two weeks . It failed to match the number of days at top spot of the previous two releases , and remained on the top ten for 13 weeks . The single left the chart after 25 weeks . The single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on for reaching half a million shipments . 
 Internationally , " Confessions Part II " had lesser success . The single debuted at number five in Australia , becoming its highest entry , and failed to reach a higher position . The single reached number five in the United Kingdom , peaked at number seven in Ireland , and below top ten in the Netherlands and France , where it reached # 43 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video of " Confessions Part II " was co @-@ directed by Usher and music video director Chris Robinson , who also directed the video for the album 's fourth single , " My Boo " . " Confessions ( Interlude ) " serves as the opening of the video . Set in a studio , Usher receives a phone message and finds out that he impregnated his mistress . After he speaks the spoken section of the interlude and gets in a car , " Confessions Part II " proceeds . Usher is set in a dark lit room , with only one chair . He occasionally shows a large ring on his ring finger . In the middle of the video , he lies on a piano and in his imagination , his woman and mistress are beside him . The next scene shows Usher in a brown car singing , goes out and kneels before his woman to confess . She refuses to listen and slaps Usher , then leaves and he becomes shirtless . Alone , Usher stands in front of a wide mirror , which breaks into pieces accompanied by a roaring sound , ending the same way " Confessions Part II " started , with him sitting on a chair . 
 The music video successfully charted on video programs . It debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live on June 28 , 2004 , the same entry as " Burn " . The music video reached number one on the countdown , and retired on September 15 , 2004 at number seven . Like " Yeah ! " , " Confessions Part II " video remained on TRL for 50 days . 
 The official remix of " Confessions Part II " was included on the re @-@ release of Confessions , and features additional verses by Usher , Shyne ( rapped his verse on the phone while in prison ) , Kanye West , Twista and Jermaine Dupri . The song is also parodied by " Weird Al " Yankovic on his album Straight Outta Lynwood ( 2006 ) as " Confessions Part III " . 
 = = Track Listings = = 
 UK CD 1 
 " Confessions Part II " 
 " My Boo " ( Duet with Alicia Keys ) 
 UK CD 2 
 " Confessions Part II " 
 " My Boo " ( Duet with Alicia Keys ) 
 " Confessions Part II " ( Remix ) ( featuring Shyne , Kanye West & Twista ) 
 " Confessions Part II " ( Music Video ) 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Kampoeng Rawa = 
 Kampoeng Rawa ( alternatively Kampung Rawa , both Indonesian for " Swamp Hamlet " ) is a tourist attraction in Ambarawa , Central Java , located within the green belt around Lake Rawa Pening . Opened in August 2012 , it is owned and operated by twelve groups of farmers and fishermen who were funded by the Artha Prima Credit Union . It is intended to improve the welfare of local farmers and fishermen while promoting an understanding of the lake 's ecology . Facilities include a floating restaurant , <unk> , crafts centre , fishing area , and docks . During holidays the site may be visited by several thousand people . It has been challenged for its lack of permission to build in the green belt and the possible ecological impact . 
 = = Location and facilities = = 
 Kampoeng Rawa is located at Kilometer 3 of the South Ring Road in Ambarawa , Semarang , Central Java , a road used for travel between Yogyakarta and Semarang that was opened in 2012 . Administratively , the complex is part of the <unk> Hamlet . The complex is situated in the middle of many rice paddies and borders Lake Rawa Pening . From the site visitors have a view of Mount Merbabu and Mount <unk> , both to the south . 
 The 300 @-@ seat restaurant at Kampoeng Rawa floats in a small lake and serves Indonesian dishes using locally produced ingredients , including catfish , <unk> , and tilapia . Dishes included nasi goreng and mie goreng . Customers can sit in the main hall or one of the floating gazebos . All are floated by plastic drums , and to reach the main hall customers must use covered boats which are guided by a rope . 
 In the center of the complex is an open stage , a craft center , and a <unk> for special events . This has included weddings , colouring contests , training sessions , and seminars . A variety of activities and facilities are available onsite , including ATVs , flying fox , jet skis , and fishing . Boats leave from a dock and travel through a canal to Lake Rawa Pening . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept for Kampoeng Rawa emerged in 2004 , when a group of farmers and fishermen from the Rawa Pening area received a billion rupiah grant from the Artha Prima Credit Union . They decided to establish a tourist attraction through which they could sell their wares ( later extended to include arts and crafts ) while raising awareness of and protecting the Rawa Pening ecosystem . In preparation for the 2013 Visit <unk> campaign , in 2011 they began planning a complex which would include culinary tourism and water activities . Artha Prima trained some locals as wait staff , cashiers , and security guards . 
 Twelve groups of farmers and fishermen , a total of 325 individuals , banded together in the Kampoeng Rawa Association on 4 August 2012 . This group was tasked with managing the new tourist site , which opened , despite construction being incomplete , shortly before Eid al @-@ Fitr ( 18 – 19 August ) . The site was quickly popular , receiving an average of 2 @,@ 000 visitors a day during the Eid holidays , and became a common location for events held by the local government . In late August 2012 , the cost of entry was Rp . 2 @,@ 500 per person , with an additional parking fee of Rp . 5 @,@ 000 per car , although various activities were extra . During the four @-@ day Eid al @-@ Fitr holiday in 2013 , the attraction received over 14 @,@ 000 visitors . 
 Controversy over Kampoeng Rawa had developed by late 2012 , when the Water Resource Management Agency declared that the site was illegally located in the green belt around Lake Rawa Pening . In 2013 , the ecologist <unk> of Diponegoro University stated that the area around Rawa Pening had to be clear of all buildings , otherwise the water flow and ecosystem would be disturbed . It was also found that the permits for the establishment had not been obtained . However , the Regent of Semarang , <unk> , was supportive of Kampoeng Rawa , stating that the complex not only improved the welfare of the farmers and fishermen , but stopped feuds over the use of rice paddies in the area . 
 In early 2014 , as part of an incentive to close unlicensed buildings in the regency , police posted notification that the Kampoeng Rawa site was unlicensed . The manager of Kampoeng Rawa , Agus <unk> , stated that they had tried to gain permission for their buildings , but both the provincial and regional governments had stated that they were unable to issue it . When the police banner later disappeared , there were reports that the site 's management had taken it down , although the management stated that it had fallen under a hard wind . The head of the Semarang Regency Council , Bambang <unk> , stated that he had confirmed Kampoeng Rawa 's management had applied for permission and called for the government to process the request expediently . 
 = Quistclose trusts in English law = 
 A Quistclose trust is a trust created where a creditor has lent money to a debtor for a particular purpose . In the event that the debtor uses the money for any other purpose , it is held on trust for the creditor . Any inappropriately spent money can then be traced , and returned to the creditors . The name and trust comes from the House of Lords decision in Barclays Bank Ltd v Quistclose Investments Ltd ( 1970 ) , although the underlying principles can be traced back further . There has been much academic debate over the classification of Quistclose trusts in existing trusts law : whether they are resulting trusts , express trusts , constructive trusts or , as Lord Millett said in Twinsectra Ltd v Yardley , illusory trusts . 
 = = Definition = = 
 A Quistclose trust is a method by which a moneylender can hold a security interest in loans , through inserting a clause into the contract which limits the purposes for which the borrower can use the money . If the funds are used for a different purpose , a trust is created around the money for the benefit of the moneylender . This allows the moneylender to trace any inappropriately spent funds , and , in the case of the borrower 's insolvency , prevents the money from being taken by creditors . The name and trust comes from the House of Lords decision in Barclays Bank Ltd v Quistclose Investments Ltd , in which Lord Wilberforce maintained that in Quistclose situations , the intention must be to create a secondary trust for the benefit of the moneylender , arising if the " primary trust " ( the appropriate use of the money ) is not fulfilled . The idea of a primary and secondary trust comes from <unk> v Milne , where money was lent by A to B , to pay off his debts . When B went bankrupt and returned the money to A , the courts held that the creditors could not recover this money , as it was held in a form comparable to a trust . Most situations in which a trust will arise require that a specific use of the money is identified by the contract . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The primary problem with Quistclose trusts is their categorisation within the accepted types of trust . The two @-@ part trust structure ( primary and secondary trusts ) explained by Lord Wilberforce in Quistclose does not appear elsewhere in English trusts law , and the type of trust used affects the rights available to the parties . Quistclose trusts have variously been considered resulting , express or constructive in nature . An alternate explanation is given by Lord Millett in Twinsectra Ltd v Yardley ; this is that the Quistclose trust is an " illusory trust " , where the apparent beneficiary ( the moneylender , for example ) takes no active role . This trust is created by the intention of either party , and is revocable at any time . The problems with this idea are that the facts in Quistclose are not those of a normal illusory trust , and Millett failed to consider the mutual intention of the parties and any underlying contracts . 
 = = = Resulting trust = = = 
 Lord Wilberforce , in Quistclose , stated that the contract gives the moneylender an equitable interest in the loan . Under Wilberforce 's two @-@ stage trust , the interest in the money first goes from the lender to the borrower ( the primary trust ) and then , when the trust 's purpose fails , reverses ( the secondary trust ) . In Twinsectra Lord Millett also explained that a Quistclose trust is a resulting trust , but held that the lender retains the interest throughout the transaction , with no need for this interest to reverse if the purpose of the loan fails . The problem with Wilberforce 's analysis , as explained by Alastair Hudson , Professor of Equity and Law at Queen Mary , University of London , is that because the resulting trust only comes into existence after the misuse of the loan , it may come too late ; if the money is not available when the claim is brought , there is no remedy . The borrower may already have spent the money , or already be insolvent and the subject of claims by creditors . 
 Another flaw with both Wilberforce 's and Millett 's explanations is that if the interest is retained by the lender from the outset of the contract , it is not a resulting trust at all ; the complete transfer of money should end the lender 's equitable interest . It could be argued that the creation of a Quistclose trust is not based on the recovery of the original interest , but the creation of a new one . Doubts have also been raised about the Twinsectra case in general , in that the facts of the case did not create a stereotypical Quistclose trust ; this causes problems with applying Millett 's analysis . 
 = = = Express trust = = = 
 The second possibility is that Quistclose trusts are express trusts . If the contract included a provision that the money was to only be used for certain purposes , it could be interpreted that this money is held on trust until it is used for those purposes . The borrower would be a trustee ; using the money for any other purpose would be in violation of the trustee 's duties , and so void . This trust would be created as soon as the contract is agreed , with the normal requirement for it to be validly created . Two problems with this are that it has not been upheld by the English courts , and that the courts would require those explicit terms to be part of the contract ; Hudson considers it the most advantageous however , because it would offer the simplest protection of the money by not requiring the contract to be breached for the trust to come into existence . In Swiss Bank Corporation v Lloyds Bank Ltd , the courts considered a situation similar to Quistclose , in that a loan agreement was made where the borrowers explicitly agreed to follow guidelines on the use of the money , something they failed to do . The Court of Appeal and the House of Lords refused to constitute any kind of trust or return the money however , applying Lord <unk> 's judgment in Palmer v Carey , when he said that " such a stipulation will not amount to an equitable assignment " . 
 = = = Constructive trust = = = 
 The third main theory is that Quistclose trusts could be constructive trusts , which are created when the future trustee uses the money in an " unconscionable " manner . In Quistclose situations , the requirement of " <unk> " could be met by the borrower using the money for a purpose other than the one for which it was lent , allowing the lender to claim an equitable interest in it . In Carreras Rothmans Ltd v Freeman Mathews Treasure Ltd , the Quistclose trust principle was said by Peter Gibson J. to be that " equity fastens on the conscience of the person who receives from another property transferred for a specific purpose only and not therefore for the recipient 's own purposes , so that such person will not be permitted to treat the property as his own or to use it for other than the stated purpose " ; this reference to " conscience " could make Quistclose trusts constructive in nature . However , no constructive trust could be created until the money is misused , which may be too late for an effective remedy . 
 = Tony Boles = 
 Tony Boles ( born December 11 , 1967 ) is a retired professional American football running back and kick returner who was drafted by the Dallas Cowboys of the National Football League ( NFL ) . After starring for the Michigan Wolverines football , where he once led the Big Ten Conference in rushing , he went on to a scandal ridden life . His college football career was ended prematurely due to a knee injury . He has been sentenced to prison multiple times and placed in homes for addicts due to cocaine abuse . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Although Boles was born in Thomasville , Georgia and his family settled in Westland , Michigan when he was ten years old . He grew up in a predominantly white neighborhood where he was one of only four African Americans in the entire student body at John Glenn High School . He had also attended Marshall Junior High School . He took a Caucasian woman to the high school prom , but was not allowed to enter her home . She had to pick him up for the prom . 
 = = College = = 
 Boles starred for coach Bo Schembechler at the University of Michigan where he was twice named All @-@ Big Ten on repeat conference champions in 1988 and 1989 and named the team most valuable player for the 1989 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season . These were Schembechler 's final two seasons at Michigan . With Boles , the team won the January 1 , 1989 Rose Bowl , but with him on the sidelines they lost the January 1 , 1990 contest . Boles shared the 1988 Big Ten rushing title with Anthony Thompson . Boles won the title for conference games only , while Thompson won the title for all games played . As a sophomore in 1988 , he rushed for 1 @,@ 408 yards ( 1 @,@ 287 m ) , but during his junior season he suffered a season ending knee injury . Entering the final game before his injury he had accumulated 822 yards ( 752 m ) rushing in nine games on 130 rushes , Schembechler was starting to support his Heisman Trophy candidacy : 
 During the 1989 season , his carries were somewhat limited due to a pinched nerve . He was seriously injured late in the 1989 season and had arthroscopic surgery on his knee , while Leroy Hoard replaced him for the final 2 @.@ 5 games . In 1990 , Boles attempted a senior season comeback as a wide receiver to no avail . Boles compiled 10 100 @-@ yard games while rushing for 2 @,@ 247 yards ( 2 @,@ 055 m ) in two years at Michigan . In addition to playing running back , Boles excelled as a kick returner where he accumulated 639 yards ( 584 m ) and a touchdown on 25 returns for a 25 @.@ 6 yards ( 23 @.@ 4 m ) per return average . In 1990 , Jon Vaughn and Ricky Powers carried the load at tailback in his place . In retrospect , Boles sometimes regrets not having gone to one of the historically black colleges and universities . Before the injury he had been projected as a first round draft pick . After the injury , he dropped out of school fell onto hard times . He dropped out of classes because he says " didn 't want to be <unk> around campus " and he eventually stopped rehabbing his knee and became irregular with his workouts . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Boles , who was represented by agent Thom Darden , was drafted in the eleventh round of the 1991 NFL Draft with the 291st overall selection by the Dallas Cowboys as part of Jimmy Johnson 's rebuilding efforts . He was part of a Cowboy draft class that included three first round selections ( Russell Maryland , Alvin Harper , and Kelvin Pritchett ) , eleven picks in the first four rounds and eighteen overall selections . Boles was assigned rookie initiation duties of washing Emmitt Smith 's Pathfinder , but instead of washing the car disappeared with it for two days while <unk> . He eventually tested positive and was released by the Cowboys . The Cowboys placed him on the reserve non @-@ football injury list in August 1991 . He then played a season with the San Antonio Riders of the World League of American Football for most of a season until he got mixed up in criminal activity . At first , he mysteriously disappeared from practice on a day of random drug testing . Before the disappearance , his World League performance had enabled Boles to get signed as a free agent by the Cowboys in early April 1992 , but by June the team released him . 
 = = Life after football = = 
 On November 11 , 1994 , Boles was arrested on charges of possession of drug paraphernalia and petty theft and wound up in jail in Naples , Florida . 
 Boles discovered at age 27 that he had not been reared by his biological father . He soon thereafter started using cocaine . After football ended , he worked various jobs such as construction and working at a grocery store . He then started selling drugs and then using his product . This led him to a series of arrests , prison stays , and homeless periods . In 2003 , two former teammates tracked him down and set him up with a job at a car wash . However , Boles fell back into his criminal ways . Boles was convicted of robbing an elderly couple and was sentenced to three to fifteen years in prison . He was released into a work program . He also found himself at the Elmhurst Home , Inc. substance abuse treatment center in 2006 . The residential treatment center has since 1972 been used to host about 100 recovering addicts at a time providing Narcotics Anonymous and Alcoholics Anonymous meeting places , military @-@ style roll calls , daily tasks , and progress logs . 
 Physically , in 2006 , Boles was described as starting to gray , missing two top front teeth and suffering from an arthritic knee . He stood 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) and 190 pounds ( 86 kg ; 14 st ) . He had a 21 @-@ year @-@ old daughter and kept in touch with his mother . His stepfather had died in 1994 . 
 Boles was arrested in Ypsilanti , Michigan on September 9 , 2007 and pleaded guilty to one count of receiving and concealing stolen property . He was sentenced to serve two to five years in prison for receiving and concealing stolen property in violation of his parole in Washtenaw County Circuit Court . He had previously served six months in prison for unarmed robbery before he was paroled in 2005 . Boles ' most recent infraction occurred when with an outstanding warrant , he provided a false name to officers investigating why he was blocking traffic with a car they would find out had been stolen from Detroit , Michigan . He had been attempting to converse with sidewalk pedestrians while purchasing drugs . Boles lost his son , Christopher , to a traffic accident at the age of 17 in February 2016 . 
 = Racial wage gap in the United States = 
 In the United States , despite the efforts of equality proponents , income inequality persists among races . Whites and Asian Americans have the highest average income , followed by Latino Americans , African Americans , and Native Americans . A variety of explanations for these differences have been proposed — such as differing intelligence , access to education , and experience of discrimination — and the topic is highly controversial . 
 When the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed , it became illegal for employers to discriminate based on race ; however , income disparities have not flattened out . After the passage of the act , the wage gap for minority groups narrowed , both in absolute difference with white wages and as a percentage of white wages , until the mid @-@ 1970s ; at this time , progress for many racial minorities slowed , stopped , or reversed . As of 2009 , the median weekly wage for African American and Hispanic workers was about 65 percent and 61 percent that of White workers , respectively . Asian workers ' median wage was about 101 percent that of white workers . Overall , minority women 's wages in comparison to those of white women are better than minority men 's wages when compared to those of white men . 
 Knowing the inequalities in the wages of various races is useful for understanding the overall racial inequality in the United States because of the integral role that wages play . Wages from the labor market are the primary source of income for most families in America , and income is a socio @-@ demographic status indicator that is important in understanding the building of wealth . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Studies of the wage gap for various minority races in the United States have revealed a number of factors that contribute to the differences in wages observed between white Americans and Americans of other races . The factors contributing to the wage gaps for various races and the degree to which they affect each race varies , but many factors are common to most or all races . 
 = = = Educational disparities = = = 
 Education is one of the most influential determinants of wage , and thus it is a factor that contributes to the racial wage gap . Varying education levels among races lead to different wages for various racial groups . Education affects wages because it allows access to occupations of higher status that offer greater earnings . Mary C. Waters and Karl <unk> studied the decrease in the black @-@ white wage gap from the 1940s through the 1970s and found the primary reason for the decrease in the wage gap to be the narrowing of the education gap between blacks and whites . When the education of different groups becomes more equal , wage gaps decrease , though they do not disappear . 
 = = = Occupational distribution disparities = = = 
 The way in which races are distributed throughout occupations affects the racial wage gap . White and Asian Americans , who have the highest median incomes , are concentrated more in professional , executive , and managerial occupations than blacks , Hispanics , or American Indians . Black and Hispanic workers are not only more likely to work in blue @-@ collar or service jobs , but they tend to be concentrated in the lower @-@ wage / skilled jobs , such as operators , fabricators , and laborers , rather than higher @-@ paying precision production and craft jobs within those categories . 
 Occupational distribution varies for women of various races as well . White and Asian women are more likely to work in managerial and professional occupations , while black , Hispanic , and American Indian Women are more likely to work in service occupations . Thus , because certain races are more likely to have lower @-@ paying jobs , gaps in median incomes between races arise . 
 A study conducted by Kenneth Couch and Mary Daly found that the occupational distribution between blacks and white improved between 1970 and the 1990s . In 1968 , a black male was only 20 percent as likely to be employed as a manager as a white male and only 40 percent as likely to work in a professional occupation . In 1998 , the percentages increased to 50 % and 70 percent , respectively . Despite this improvement , however , occupational distribution differences still exist between blacks and whites . In 1998 , a black male was still more likely than a white male to work in lower @-@ skills jobs and less likely than a white male to work in high @-@ paying jobs . 
 = = = Globalization = = = 
 The globalization of the United States ' economy in the 1970s and 1980s caused a shift in the U.S. income distribution . As the United States joined the global market economy , three outcomes occurred . Those who possessed financial and human capital , such as education , succeeded in the new economy because the money and skills they had to offer were in short supply . Those who possessed only labor did not fare well because cheap , physical labor was in oversupply in the global market . 
 In the new globalized economy that formed , much of the United States ' manufacturing was exported , which affected most adversely the group of Americans in the lowest section of the education distribution , a section in which minority groups are overrepresented . The increase in overall wage inequality created by the new economy 's lower demand for physical labor disproportionately affected minorities as well . The economic restructuring also served to create structural barriers to improvement for those with the least education and skills . Thus , the United States ' shift to a globalized economy lead to greater income disparity between education groups , which , because of the uneven distribution of minorities in jobs and an overall increase in wage inequality , led to the wage gap between whites and minorities to increase . 
 = = = Geographic distribution = = = 
 The distance between jobs and the location of minorities ' homes affects the ability of minorities to find profitable work . Saskia Sassen found that the redistribution of manufacturing jobs out of central cities in the 1980s negatively affected the wage gap between blacks and whites because most blacks live in cities . 
 = = = Foreign birth = = = 
 A person of a minority race that is not born in the United States fares worse than those who are native born in terms of wages . The worst affected are men and women from Japan and China and Filipino women . However , a study by <unk> and Long ( 1978 ) found that there is a positive effect on economic outcomes for second generation immigrants , or the children of immigrants who are foreign born , which they believe means that there are specific traits of immigrant parents that are beneficial to the economic success of their children . 
 = = = Client channeling = = = 
 When wage gaps in occupations for blacks and whites are compared , it is observed that occupations that depend on social networking for success tend to have the largest racial disparities , while occupations in which success does not depend on the type of clients served tend to have the least racial disparities . This difference has been attributed to employee channeling , or the assignment by white employers of minority employees to serve minority clients . The implications of employee channeling for a black real estate agent , for example , would be that they disproportionately served black clients and neighborhoods , resulting in lower sales commissions . In this way , employee channeling , identified as a social form of discrimination , contributes to the wage gap . 
 = = = Discrimination = = = 
 When human capital , skills , and other factors contributing to the racial wage gap are taken into account , many researchers find that there is still a portion of the racial wage gap that is unexplained . Many attribute this to another factor : race . Differences in wages due solely to race is racial discrimination . Through the use of statistical controls , sociologists and economists " ask whether a given person with the same background characteristics , such as level of education , region of residence , gender , marital characteristics , has the same earnings as a statistically equivalent person from a different racial / ethnic group " . Differences that emerge are taken as evidence of racial discrimination . Research has found wage and employment discrimination against blacks , Native Americans , Hispanics , and Asians ; however , discrimination has been found to be a much larger contributing factor for black wages than wages of other races . 
 A study conducted by <unk> & <unk> ( 2001 ) found that individual attributes , such as human capital and region , account for just more than half of the black @-@ white wage gap , and an additional 20 percent is due to different occupational distributions between blacks and whites . The remaining portion of the wage gap not accounted for by individual and occupational distribution factors is thought to be due , at least in part , to discrimination . 
 Discrimination based on race has been found in other research as well . Seventy @-@ four percent of employers in one study were found to be racially biased toward blacks , and blacks have been found to make lower wages than whites working in the same industry . White Latinos earn higher wages than nonwhite Latinos , regardless of whether they are native or immigrant , suggesting possible discrimination based on skin color . Additionally , many employers openly admit to discriminating against blacks and workers in the inner city , as one study by <unk> and <unk> ( 1991 ) found . Hiring audits have also found discrimination in the labor market . Blacks and whites who have the same credentials receive jobs at a rate of 3 : 1 . 
 = = Specific races = = 
 Wage gaps have been identified for many races within the United States ; however , research has found that the size and causes of the wage gap differs by race . For instance , the median black male worker earns 74 percent as much as the median white male worker , while the median Hispanic male worker earns only 63 percent as much . To understand more fully and accurately the subject of the racial wage gap in the United States , it is useful to look at different races individually to understand the causes and outcomes that are unique to them . 
 = = = Black = = = 
 The history of Black Americans in the United States is one characterized by social control and domination . The disparity in wealth between Black and White America has a history as long as the relationship between the two groups . Across the country , white Americans benefitted from not being required to pay enslaved Africans for more than four centuries , and after slavery was abolished racist groups like the Ku Klux Klan led mobs to engage in boycotts at the least and outright violence against Black businesses ( 1921 Tulsa Race Riot ) , churches ( 16th Street Baptist Church bombing ) , schools , and other pillars of Black society at worst . Though these individuals have since died , their wealth has been passed down until the present in the form of inheritance and historical business investment . 
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which forbade employers from discriminating on the basis of race , was one of the earliest and greatest influences on the black @-@ white wage gap . The act , along with the economic prosperity of the 1960s , contributed to rising black wages , increased education for blacks , and increased returns to education . Indeed , in 1940 , weekly wages of the average black male were only 48 @.@ 4 percent that of the average white male . In 1990 , that had risen to 75 percent , a 60 percent improvement over five decades . 
 From the ending of legal segregation through the mid @-@ 1970s , the black @-@ white wage gap continued to narrow . However , from the mid @-@ 1970s until almost 1990 , progress in wage equality greatly slowed . From 1968 @-@ 1979 , the black @-@ white wage gap decreased by an average of 1 @.@ 2 percent each year . During the 80s , however , it increased <unk> percent each year . During the 1990s , the black @-@ white wage gap decreased <unk> percent each year . This proportional decrease was also accompanied by a decrease in the absolute difference of black and white wages . 
 Analyses have uncovered some of the underlying influences in the improvements of the black @-@ white wage gap . During the decades of progress ( the 1970s and 1990s ) , 30 percent of the wage gap convergence can be attributed to changes in black education and experience . More equalization in employment distribution also influenced the convergence during those decades . Factors identified as contributing to decreases in wage gap convergence include " shifts in industry demand , greater occupational crowding , relative deterioration of unobservable skills in blacks , and rising overall male wage inequality " . 
 The decline of the black @-@ white wage gap in the 1990s was greatest for those who have less than 10 years of potential experience , for whom it decreased 1 @.@ 40 percent per year . Kenneth Couch and Mary C. Daly report in their 2002 study on black @-@ white wage inequality that these decreases are the result of greater occupational diversity and reductions in unobserved or residual differences . In the first decade of the twenty @-@ first century , the wage gap has fluctuated in terms of the ratio between black and white wages : 67 @.@ 7 percent in 2000 , 64 @.@ 0 percent in 2005 , 67 @.@ 5 percent in 2008 , and 64 @.@ 5 percent in 2009 . The absolute difference in black and white wages , however , has decreased over this period . 
 Black Americans now number 36 million , 12 @.@ 9 % of the total population . As of 2009 , the median black male income was $ 23 @,@ 738 , compared to the median white non @-@ Hispanic male income of $ 36 @,@ 785 . 
 While progress in wage inequality for blacks has been made since the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Acts , inequality and discrimination still exist . A study conducted by Major G. Coleman ( 2003 ) reports that as black and white men have more similar competitive performance ratings , racial wage differences increase rather than decrease . He also found that black wages are less than white wages in the same industry . When no factors other than race are considered , Coleman predicts the black hourly wage to be $ 7 @.@ 49 and the white hourly wage to be $ 8 @.@ 92 , 19 percent higher than the black hourly wage . When Coleman controlled for human capital , such as education and skills , the difference decreased to 11 percent . Coleman attributed this 11 percent difference to racial discrimination . 
 <unk> and <unk> also calculated wage differences , and found blacks to make $ 3 @.@ 65 less per hour than whites in the private sector and $ 2 @.@ 85 less in the public sector . Using statistical regressions , they found that human capital , region , and marital status account for 55 percent of the wage gap difference . An additional 20 percent of the wage gap was attributed to differences in occupational distributions between blacks and whites . Thus , 25 percent of the wage gap was unaccounted for by their model . 
 Black women experience more wage equality in comparison to white women than black men do to white men . By the mid @-@ 1970s , wages for black and white women were almost equal ; however , since then , black women 's wages have decreased about 10 percent relative to white women 's wages . This difference that emerged has been attributed to the increase of white women in the labor force following the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 It has been suggested that when more white women began working , the advantages of black women from unmeasured differences in labor force attachment disappeared , revealing a racial wage gap . While an overall wage gap appeared between black and white women , by 1980 , the earnings of black women with college degrees surpassed those of white women with college degrees . An understanding of the earnings of black women has recently become recognized as an important area of research due to role that black women traditionally have in terms of family income : black married couples typically have relied more on women 's earnings than other races and the percentage of single @-@ parent , female @-@ maintained families is highest among the black population . 
 = = = Hispanic = = = 
 The Hispanic minority group in the United States , composed of 50 @.@ 3 million individuals in 2010 , consists of much variance within itself with regard to wages , though all groups ' wages are lower than those of non @-@ Hispanic whites . In 2007 , the largest Hispanic group , consisting of 29 @.@ 2 million people , were individuals of Mexican origin , followed by 4 @.@ 1 million people of Puerto Rican origin and 1 @.@ 6 million people of Cuban origin . By 2009 , the median income of Hispanics was lower than that of Whites and Asians , but much higher than the median wages of African @-@ Americans ; $ 38 @,@ 039 , compared to $ 32 @,@ 584 for African @-@ Americans and $ 49 @,@ 777 for the general population . While their relative wages have fallen since 1979 , this has been attributed to a demand for more educated workers and a gap in educational attainment , supported by the fact that college @-@ educated Hispanic men 's relative wages have changed little over time . 
 Unlike research findings for the black minority , it has been a converging finding that largest contributing factor to the wage gap of Hispanics is observable skill characteristics , especially education . Thus , increased education has been seen to contribute to a decreased wage gap . College @-@ educated Hispanic men have wages that are approximately 80 percent of those earned by college @-@ educated white males and are 10 percent higher than wages earned by college @-@ educated black males . College @-@ educated Hispanic women earn approximately 90 percent of what college @-@ educated white women earn , which is slightly more than the earnings of college @-@ educated black women . 
 Despite the improvement in wages made by educational attainment , less educated Hispanic men still have less return to education than non @-@ Hispanic men that are statistically comparable . A study conducted using 1980 census data on income that controlled for age , education , English language ability , nativity , and State / Metro residence , found a wage gap of 10 percent still existed for Hispanics compared to non @-@ Hispanics . Additionally , discrimination against Hispanic men and women was found in an audit study of employers in San Diego and Chicago . 
 Because skills and educational attainment is the major contributing factor to the wage gap for Hispanics , differences in the education levels of the various Hispanic subgroups has been used to explain differences in their wages . The typical trend in wages for Hispanic subgroups is that Cubans do the best while Puerto Ricans do the worst , being severely disadvantaged even in comparison to blacks and American Indians . George J. Borjas attributes these group differences to two factors : 1 . The nature of the migration decision ( whether individuals migrated to the United States for political or economic reasons ) and 2 . The incentives for immigrants to adapt to the U.S. labor market . 
 When Hispanic persons immigrate to the United States , neither their physical nor human capital specific to their country of origin is easily transferred to the United States ' labor market ; human capital investments must be made in the United States in order to assimilate into the labor market . Borjas argues that the Hispanic groups that immigrate to the United States for economic reasons , rather than political reasons , have more incentive to acquire human capital in the United States and therefore do so faster than other groups . This faster acquisition of human capital results in better economic progress and higher wages . 
 Thus , the relative success of Cubans can be attributed to the fact that they invest in United States education and labor market skills faster and to a greater degree than other Hispanic groups . Borjas recognizes that one of the main reasons for Hispanic migration to the United States is political reasons , and he argues that political refugees have less incentive to assimilate and acquire human capital than those who migrate for economic reasons . This lower incentive leads to the education gaps seen between Hispanics and whites and therefore greatly contributes to the observed wage gap . Based on an analysis of Hispanic wages over the past six decades , Borjas concludes that , due to differing incentives to assimilate and other factors , Puerto Rican immigrants will wait twenty @-@ five years before the assimilation process is reflected in their wages and Mexican immigrants will wait fifteen years . 
 Hispanic women , like black women , have experienced greater success in wage equality relative to males of their race . As of 1995 , Hispanic women of all education levels , except for those without high school diplomas or associate degrees , had parity in earnings with white women . While this information is positive , a broader examination of Hispanic women 's wages reveals that inequality still exists . In the 1990s , Hispanic women 's full @-@ time earnings fell in real terms . This difference is attributed mainly to differences in educational attainment . 
 = = = Asian = = = 
 As of 2010 , 14 @,@ 011 @,@ 000 Asians were living in America . Asian Americans are the only minority in the United States whose median income is higher than whites , assuming Pacific Islanders are not counted as a separate race . In 2009 , the median income for Asian males was $ 37 @,@ 330 , compared to the median income for non @-@ Hispanic white males of $ 36 @,@ 785 . In 2015 , Asian American men were the highest earning racial group at $ 24 / hour . Asian American men earned 117 % as much as white American men ( $ 21 / hour ) and have been out earning their white Americans counterparts since about 2000 . Similarly , in 2015 Asian American women earned 106 % as much as white American women . 
 However , not all Asian groups in the United States have such high wages ; certain Asian groups have fared better than others in the United States labor market . The longer established Asians from China , Japan , the Philippines , and India have higher median wages and household income than Southeast Asian refugees from Laos and Vietnam , though all these groups still have median income above non @-@ Hispanic whites . Cambodians and Hmong , on the other hand , do not , though their median income is still quite close to the national average and above that of blacks and Hispanics . Indian @-@ Americans currently have the highest median household income of any ethnic group in the United States , while Bhutanese Americans have the lowest . 
 Part of the explanation for Asians ' higher wages is their greater @-@ than @-@ average educational attainment : in the 1990s , 23 @.@ 3 percent of the total U.S. male population had at least a college degree , while 48 @.@ 7 percent of Asian Indian men , 41 @.@ 6 percent of Filipino men , and 35 percent of Chinese men had at least a college degree . The higher educational attainment of Asians masks the fact that a wage gap exists between Asians and whites of the same occupations . Whites earn more than Asians in almost all occupational categories when other factors are controlled . Asians still make 8 % less than whites in comparable jobs . 
 = = = American Indian = = = 
 The American Indian minority has been less studied than other minority groups in the United States . In 1990 , the median family income for American Indians was $ 21 @,@ 750 , approximately 62 percent of the $ 35 @,@ 225 median family income for all families . By 2010 , the median household income for Native Americans was $ 38 @,@ 806 , compared to $ 51 @,@ 914 for the total population , making them the second poorest race on average after African @-@ Americans ( $ 35 @,@ 341 ) . The wage gap has been attributed in large part to " human capital differences " , and there is debate as to whether discrimination affects the wage gap . 
 = = Private vs. public sector employment = = 
 The racial wage gap for blacks and whites has been observed to differ in the public and private sectors . In a 2001 analysis , a $ 3 @.@ 65 difference per hour was found between blacks and whites in the private sector , a 34 percent difference . In contrast , a smaller difference of $ 2 @.@ 85 per hour was found in the public sector , a 21 percent difference . For the 23 percent of blacks that work in the public sector , evidence suggests that wages are based primary on individual qualifications , but for the 77 percent of blacks employed in the private sector , this assertion has not been found to be as valid . 
 Additionally , a larger percentage of the wage gap was found to be accounted for by the human capital characteristics of educational attainment and potential years of experience in the public than private sector . Also , an effect encountered in the private sector in which black males have higher absolute wages as they increase in status but lower wages relative to whites of the same status , has not been found in the public sector . 
 = = Policy discussion = = 
 Though solutions to eliminate the racial wage gap have been proposed , there is no one prescription that will eliminate it for all races , or even one race . Research has identified different wage gaps and sources of wage gaps for different minorities , suggesting that public policies will affect different minorities in different ways and that effective strategies must take into account the unique circumstances of each race group . Sociologist Douglas Massey offers two solutions to alleviate wage inequality : greater investments in education and elimination of racial segregation . He notes that , in a globalized economy , those with only physical labor to offer suffer . 
 He argues that investments in education , especially higher education , will result in higher rates of economic growth and lower income inequality . By eliminating racial segregation , Massey argues that many divides between races that exist would be broken down , including income segregation . To accomplish the abolition of racial segregation , Massey argues , simple enforcement of legislation already in place , such as the Fair Housing Act , the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act , and the Community Reinvestment Act , is required . For more group @-@ specific policies , focus on education and language inequalities could be helpful in equalizing employment opportunities , but other more specific policies are dependent on further research on wage gaps for various groups . 
 To tackle wage inequality specifically in companies , random job audits at the national , state , and local levels have been suggested . Audits have been used to study and find wage inequality in the past and could be used as way to actively monitor the presence of the racial wage gap in companies . 
 = = Limitations and criticisms of the racial wage gap = = 
 Evaluating and understanding the causes and consequences of the racial wage gap for various races is an important part of understanding racial inequality in the United States ; however , the wage gap does not encompass all aspects of inequality and therefore is useful when understood in conjunction with other types of inequalities . For example , sociologists Mary C. Waters and Karl <unk> note that other types of inequalities are important for a holistic understanding of inequality in the United States , " including health and demographic measures , such as infant mortality rates , life expectancy , morbidity , and disability . 
 Ethnic and racial groups also differ in rates of homeownership , residential segregation , overall wealth , exposure to crime and toxic pollutants , and in access to power in the upper reaches of our society " . Thus , the racial wage gap is just one aspect of inequality in the United States . 
 A criticism of the racial wage gap has been noted by a few scholars : the racial wage gap fails to account for the amount of people in a certain race that are unemployed . Examining median incomes does not reflect the growing racial disparity in joblessness . The Butler @-@ Heckman hypothesis states that the least @-@ skilled members of society are also the ones who are most likely to be not working , suggesting that the wage gap does not account for the overall difference in wages between races . An analysis of the black @-@ white wage gap which accounted for unemployment found that when unemployment was included in the calculation of the weekly wages convergence from 1950 to 2000 , the convergence percentage went from 13 percent to only 3 percent . 
 = The Contest = 
 " The Contest " is the 51st episode of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld . The 11th episode of the fourth season , it aired on November 18 , 1992 . In the episode , George tells Jerry , Elaine , and Kramer that his mother caught him masturbating . The conversation results in George , Jerry , Elaine , and Kramer entering into a contest to determine who can go for the longest period of time without masturbating . 
 The episode was controversial when broadcast because NBC thought that masturbation was not a topic suitable for prime time television . As a result , the word " masturbation " is never used in the episode . Instead , the subject is described using a series of euphemisms , while the meaning of the subject is still made clear to the audience . The writer of the episode , Larry David , won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing in a Comedy Series for his work on the episode . One of the euphemisms used in the episode is " master of my domain , " said by a character when still in the contest . It has since become a catchphrase in popular culture , although it is not always used in reference to masturbation . 
 The episode was ranked # 1 on TV Guide 's list of " 100 Greatest Episodes of All @-@ Time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The fourth season of Seinfeld has a continuous story arc , in which Jerry and George are writing a television pilot for NBC . In the previous episode , " The Virgin " , Jerry had started dating Marla ( played by Jane Leeves ) , a woman who is a virgin . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Jerry , Kramer , and Elaine dining at Monk 's Cafe . George enters and says , " My mother caught me . " When asked what he was caught doing , he says , " I was alone " , and he goes on to imply that his mother caught him masturbating in her house while reading " a Glamour magazine " , resulting in her falling over in shock and ending up in the hospital . George says he 'll never do " that " again , and when the others express skepticism , Jerry and George make a $ 100 bet over who can go the longest without masturbating . Kramer then joins the bet , as does Elaine . However , Elaine is persuaded to bet $ 150 , because the men claim that it is harder for men not to masturbate , as it is part of a man 's " lifestyle " . 
 Kramer is almost immediately out , due to the presence of a beautiful exhibitionist woman in the apartment across the street who walks around with the curtains open . The others are distracted by various temptations : George is distracted in the hospital his mother is staying at by an attractive nurse giving an even more attractive woman a daily sponge bath ; Elaine visits a fitness club which is also patronized by John F. Kennedy , Jr . ; Jerry is tempted by the naked woman across the street and frustrated because the woman he 's dating won 't have sex with him since she wants to remain a virgin . One method he uses to distract himself is by watching wholesome shows like Tiny Toons on Nickelodeon . 
 The contest affects their sleep , and the remaining contestants suffer insomnia . Only the eliminated Kramer can sleep peacefully . Elaine shares a cab ride with Kennedy , and she tells him that she lives Uptown near Jerry in order to extend the ride . She then learns that Kennedy wants to see her , and says he 'll drop by Jerry 's apartment . Eventually , the pressure becomes too much for her and she is the second person to be knocked out of the contest . 
 While making out on the couch , Marla asks Jerry if they can have sex , claiming that she is ready . However , Jerry then tells Marla about the contest , prompting Marla to leave in disgust . Jerry immediately goes to his window to watch the naked woman across the street , implying that he gives in to his temptation . Elaine believes that Kennedy has changed his mind and not bothered to see her . George then tells Elaine that Kennedy did come , but missed her and went with Marla . They then see Kramer with the naked woman across the street . That night , everyone sleeps well — especially Kramer , who is sleeping with the naked woman — but it is not explicitly stated who won . ( In the fifth season episode " The Puffy Shirt " , George mentions that he " won a contest " when discussing refraining from masturbation with a hand modeling agent . However , in the series finale , he confesses that he cheated . ) Meanwhile , Marla is shown in bed with Kennedy , apparently having finally lost her virginity to him . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Larry David . Kenny Kramer claimed that there actually was a " Contest " in which David and some friends of his took part , although he did not initially want to take part because he thought he could not win it . David won the contest . When David came up with using the idea for an episode of Seinfeld , he did not talk about it with Seinfeld for a considerable time , because he thought the episode was impossible for him to pitch . However , Seinfeld thought it was not offensive . The original script was not revealed until the night before the cast read @-@ through . The first version written by David was not as clean as the one later broadcast . The note from the censor claimed that David should not use the word " <unk> " . Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus thought that the episode would never go ahead due to the subject matter . Seinfeld decided it would be better to remove any references to what George actually did . Seinfeld claimed that what was noteworthy about " The Contest " was the " <unk> " of the stories . He claimed that it probably would have been possible to have used the word " masturbation " in the episode ( it is notable that in " The Ticket " — an earlier episode in the same season — George says " you must have a good story otherwise it 's just masturbation " ) although it would have probably ended up not being as funny . Part of the opening scene of the episode contains some of the script that was originally meant to be used in " The Seinfeld Chronicles " , the original pilot episode . 
 " The Contest " is the first episode to feature Estelle Costanza as an on @-@ screen character . Estelle Harris , who played the character , had not seen Seinfeld before she auditioned for the role . The cast and crew commented positively on the similarity in appearance between Harris and Jason Alexander , as it made it more believable that their characters could be related . Alexander 's real @-@ life mother looks similar to Harris . 
 Rachel Sweet has a cameo role in this episode as George 's cousin Shelly . She appears in the scene with George and his mother in the hospital . 
 There are two deleted scenes in " The Contest " . One features Joyce — the teacher of Elaine 's fitness class — in the opening scene talking to Elaine , Jerry , and Kramer . The second features George and Estelle Costanza in the hospital , where the female patient has been moved to the room next @-@ door after Estelle complained about her nakedness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Contest " is considered to be one of the best Seinfeld episodes , winning several awards and positive reviews from the critics . David won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing in a Comedy Series for the episode . He also won a Writers Guild of America Award for his work on the episode . Director Tom Cherones won a Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Comedy Series for this episode . He was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Directing . TV Guide ranked the episode # 1 on its list of " TV 's Top 100 Episodes of All Time " . 
 " The Contest " received a Nielsen rating of 13 / 19 , meaning that the episode was watched by an average of 13 % of households and 19 % of all televisions were tuned to the episode when it was broadcast . Approximately 18 @.@ 5 million people watched the episode then . The first repeat of the episode gave Seinfeld its highest ratings up till that point , with a 20 @.@ 1 / 30 Nielsen Rating . It also received only 31 complaints from viewers , despite the subject matter . There were worries from advertisers who did not want to advertise during the episode due to the topics that were being discussed . Most regular advertisers did not broadcast adverts during the show , because the series did not have good ratings at the time . 
 The episode is considered by most reviewers as a success for being able to cover a controversial subject in an inoffensive manner . Jonathan Boudreaux for <unk> said , " The Emmy @-@ winning script by Larry David introduced the brilliant euphemism ' master of my domain ' to our lexicon and helped the series to truly become must @-@ see TV . We know what the episode is about , but the script never explicitly says it . ' The Contest ' effortlessly takes a potentially incendiary subject and renders it utterly inoffensive yet hilarious . " He also said that " The Contest " was " one of the series ' most infamous " episodes . Donna Dorsett from <unk> commented on the refusal to use the word " masturbation , " saying , " If the word had been used , even once , the show would not have been nearly as hilarious . The episode was totally inoffensive . " 
 James Plath from DVD Town said , " Estelle Harris , as George 's mother , is hilarious . " Although he himself did not appear in the episode , John F. Kennedy Jr. appeared to have had no problem with appearing as a character in the episode , with his role being played by an uncredited actor . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 This is the second Seinfeld episode to feature Elaine 's fondness for the Kennedy family , the first being " The Baby Shower " . 
 Jerry Seinfeld claimed that he had never heard of the song " The Wheels on the Bus " before recording the episode . 
 The original script featured Jerry watching the TV series Flipper . It was changed due to concerns over music rights . 
 " The Contest " is referenced in other Seinfeld episodes , the first being " The Outing " , of which the plot is that Jerry and George are mistakenly outed as gay . During the episode , when George visits his mother , there is a male patient in the hospital , who receives daily sponge baths from a male nurse . Although the winner of the contest is not mentioned , it is implied in " The Puffy Shirt " that George was the winner . However , as the plane is going down in " The Finale " , it is revealed that George had actually cheated , therefore making Jerry the true winner . When Jerry asks him why he cheated , George simply replies , " Because I 'm a cheater ! " 
 " The Contest " is referenced in the " Shaq " episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm ( <unk> ) , in which Larry David and Shaquille O 'Neal watch " The Contest " together . Shaq also refers to this episode as his favorite . 
 " The Contest " is referenced in the Beavis and Butt @-@ head book " This Book Sucks " as an excuse to get out of finishing a homework assignment . In the book , Kramer is mis @-@ identified as " Creamer " and the act of masturbation is referred to as " spanking the monkey . " 
 In the Family Guy episode " Jungle Love " , Peter pays the people of a South American village to re @-@ enact " The Contest " as one of them hums the Seinfeld scene @-@ changing music . A high priestess plays Elaine , but she says " You can 't spare one square ? " , a reference to " The Stall " . 
 = I Invented Sex = 
 " I Invented Sex " is a song by American R & B singer Trey Songz , and features Canadian recording artist Drake . Together , they wrote the song alongside Tony Scales and its producer , Los Da Mystro . It was released to urban airplay as the third single from Songz 's third studio album Ready on October 13 , 2009 . The song features a sensual message , accompanied by heavy percussion . " I Invented Sex " received positive reviews , and reached number forty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 , and became Songz 's first song to top the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Its official remix features fellow R & B singers Keri Hilson and Usher . The accompanying music video , containing a parental advisory warning , is the follow @-@ up to the " Say Aah " video . 
 = = Background = = 
 When speaking about the record with MTV News , Songz said , " It 's a groove record . It 's got that knock at the same time . It 's sexy at the same time . Conceptually , it 's mind @-@ blowing to tell a woman , ' You gonna think we invented sex when we 're done . ' That 's where I am . " The song was recorded at 11th Street Studios in Atlanta , Georgia . The official remix of the song features fellow American R & B singers Usher and Keri Hilson . Another remix features Willie Taylor of R & B group Day26 . R & B singer Chris Brown <unk> the song in his first mixtape , In My Zone , with the title " Invented Head . " 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Ajitpaul Mangat of Tiny Mix Tapes said the song , along with the intro , " Panty <unk> " , were " swagga @-@ oozing " and " expertly build the mood with chopped and screwed vocals and exploding percussion , respectively . " Drake 's closing rap has been described as " Best I Ever Had " -esque . David Jeffries of Allmusic noted the song as a standout track from Ready . <unk> the wide appeal of song 's title , DJBooth said that , " With a high @-@ caliber guest feature and a radio @-@ ready sound , this single should be just the thing to boost the already @-@ substantial sales of Songz ' third album . " 
 In the song 's remix , Songz makes references to Tiger Woods , as he also refers to " going in like a Lil Wayne @-@ Drake song . " DJBooth said that Songz sings alongside , " Usher , who basically invented the modern sexual r & b blueprint that Songz is following , and Hilson , who more than holds her own alongside the boys with some scintillating vocals and hilarious ' soldier at attention ' sexual entendres . " The review goes on to state , " These three may not have invented sex , but they sure make listening to music while having sex more enjoyable . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending November 7 , 2009 , " I Invented Sex " debuted at number ninety on the Billboard Hot 100 . The following week , it moved up to eighty , and eventually peaked at forty @-@ two . It spent twenty weeks on the chart over 2009 – 10 eventually falling off the chart on the week ending March 10 , 2010 . The song also topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , making it Songz 's first number one on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Yolande Geralds , he car who also helmed the clip for " Say Aah " , Jessica White appears in the video once again while Drake does not appear in the it . The video carries a parental advisory warning . A combination video was released for the clips of " I Invented Sex " and " Say Aah " , as they were later released separately . Songz confirmed to MTV News that the previous would be a continuation of the latter . On the " I Invented Sex " clip , Songz said , " It 's very sensual . The idea I had , it came from a banned Calvin Klein ad . It was a dude and two girls and they was touching and kissing . I was like , ' Man , I wanna do that . ' We didn 't go all the way there . I didn 't have two girls — we simulated best we could , and it 's more sensual than raunchy . " . It ranked at number twenty @-@ two on BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Songz performed " I Invented Sex " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on December 1 , 2009 and on 106 & Park on December 11 , 2009 . The song was then performed again with " Say Aah " on It 's On with Alexa Chung , and then on The Mo 'Nique Show In January , both Songz and Drake appeared at West Hollywood 's House of Blues to perform the song . As a part of a medley with one of his musical influences , Stevie Wonder , " I Invented Sex " was sung at the 2010 BET Honors on February 1 , 2010 . He performed the song once again on 106 & Park on February 11 , 2010 for " Love Week " with a medley of " Neighbors Know My Name " , and " Say Aah " . He again performed it in March 2010 at MTV 's Spring Break 2010 , in Acapulco , Mexico . Keri Hilson and Usher joined Songz to perform the official remix at <unk> 's Jingle Ball in December 2009 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Trey Songz , Drake , Los Da Mystro , Tony Scales 
 Production and all instruments – Los Da Mystro 
 Recording – Scott Naughton 
 Mixing – Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler and Dave Pensado , assisted by Giancarlo Lino 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Stephenson Grand Army of the Republic Memorial = 
 The Stephenson Grand Army of the Republic Memorial , also known as Dr. Benjamin F. Stephenson , is a public artwork in Washington , D.C. honoring Dr. Benjamin F. Stephenson , founder of the Grand Army of the Republic , a fraternal organization for Union veterans . The memorial is sited at Indiana Plaza , located at the intersection of 7th Street , Indiana Avenue , and Pennsylvania Avenue NW in the Penn Quarter neighborhood . The bronze figures were sculpted by J. Massey Rhind , a prominent 20th century artist . Attendees at the 1909 dedication ceremony included President William Howard Taft , Senator William Warner , and hundreds of Union veterans . 
 The memorial is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , which were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The bronze sculptures of Stephenson and allegorical figures are displayed on a triangular granite shaft surmounting a concrete base . The memorial is owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Benjamin F. Stephenson ( 1823 – 1871 ) was a graduate of Rush Medical College who practiced medicine in Petersburg , Illinois . When the Civil War began in 1861 , he was appointed surgeon of the 14th Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment and eventually achieved the rank of major . Following his honorable discharge in 1864 , Stephenson began practicing medicine in Springfield , Illinois , and soon began plans for a national association of Union veterans . He named the new organization the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) , wrote the GAR 's constitution , and adopted the GAR motto " Fraternity , Charity , and Loyalty " . The organization would be open to all Union soldiers and sailors who were honorably discharged . Stephenson found a lack of enthusiasm for the GAR among Springfield veterans , so he chose nearby Decatur to establish Post No. 1 , Decatur , Department of Illinois , Grand Army of the Republic , on April 6 , 1866 . The date was the one year anniversary of the Battle of Shiloh where he and most of the other charter members had taken part . After the GAR began to attract new members , Stephenson was relegated to adjutant general and spent most of his time attending to routine duties . At the time of his death in 1871 , Stephenson 's medical practice was failing and he felt the GAR would never succeed . 
 Following Stephenson 's death , the GAR grew from a charitable organization for Union widows and wounded veterans to the country 's most powerful single @-@ issue political group in the late 19th century . It was the nation 's first veterans association open to both officers and enlisted men and membership grew to over 400 @,@ 000 . The GAR was responsible for securing large pensions for veterans and members played an active role in the election of six Union veterans as U.S. president . In the early 20th century , GAR membership declined as veterans died of old age and organization leaders began plans to memorialize them and the GAR itself . To honor the group 's founder , the GAR , at the behest of General Charles Partridge and the National Tribune , raised $ 35 @,@ 000 from its members to erect a memorial for Stephenson . Congress appropriated an additional $ 10 @,@ 000 on March 4 , 1907 . 
 GAR leaders had specific plans for the memorial which left little leeway for artist creativity . They wanted a tall , triangular granite shaft with three figures representing the organization 's motto . J. Massey Rhind ( 1860 – 1936 ) , a Scottish @-@ American sculptor who immigrated to the United States in 1889 , was chosen for the project . At the time he was considered one of the country 's best architectural sculptors known for the large Soldiers and Sailors Monument in Syracuse , New York . The architectural firm Rankin , Kellogg & Crane was chosen to design the central shaft of the memorial and the reliefs were founded by Roman Bronze Works . William Gray & Sons performed contracting duties for the memorial and P. R. Pullman and Company was chosen as the contractor for the foundation . 
 A resolution passed by the Senate in April 1902 provided the memorial to be erected on any of the city 's public lands other than the Library of Congress and Capitol grounds . The site chosen , at the corner of 7th Street and Louisiana Avenue ( now Indiana Avenue ) NW , was selected by a commission appointed by Congress . The commission consisted of Secretary of War Jacob M. Dickinson , Senator George P. Wetmore , Representative Samuel W. McCall , General Louis Wagner , and Thomas S. Hopkins . The soil at the chosen site , present @-@ day Indiana Plaza , could not support the memorial 's weight , so the concrete foundation had to be expanded . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The Stephenson memorial was formally dedicated at 2 : 30pm on July 3 , 1909 . Hundreds of elderly veterans attended the event , many wearing their military uniforms . Prominent attendees included President William Howard Taft and Senator William Warner . Following the invocation , GAR commander @-@ in @-@ chief Colonel Henry M. <unk> gave an impassioned speech about the sacrifices made by Union forces during the Civil War . He said by the shedding of their blood " the flag of the United States has been raised from the dust and mire , smoke <unk> , powder stained and bullet ridden and thrown to the breeze to float forever over our broad land of the free . " 
 Taft paid tribute to the sacrifices made by veterans and accepted the memorial on behalf of the American people . Following his speech , Warner told the crowd : " Boys , the President of the United States talks like a comrade . Get up on your feet , all of you , now three cheers for the President of the United States . " The president and Rhind , who was introduced to the crowd , were both cheered . At the conclusion of the ceremony , the Marine Band played " Tenting on the Old Camp Ground " as the veterans sang . Brigadier General William Wallace Wotherspoon served as the grand marshal of a military parade that marched from City Hall , past the memorial , west on Pennsylvania Avenue to the Treasury Building , and ended at 15th Street and New York Avenue . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In 1987 , the Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation created Indiana Plaza by closing a portion of C Street , decreasing the width of Indiana Avenue , and adding landscaping . The process required relocating the memorial and nearby Temperance Fountain . The Stephenson memorial is now visible at the terminus of C Street while the fountain now stands where the Stephens memorial was previously located . 
 The memorial is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , which were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . It is also designated a contributing property to the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site , established on September 30 , 1965 . The memorial and surrounding plaza are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The memorial is located at Indiana Plaza ( Reservation 36A ) in the Penn Quarter neighborhood . The small public plaza , located across the street from the Archives Metro station , is bounded by 7th Street to the west , Indiana Avenue to the north , and Pennsylvania Avenue to the south . The east side of the plaza is bounded by two historic buildings : Central National Bank and National Bank of Washington , Washington Branch . Sited directly to the north of the memorial is the historic Temperance Fountain . The memorial is sited within a circular plaza and surrounded by magnolia trees and ivy . Decorative lampposts are located at the three entrances . 
 The triangular shaft , consisting of granite blocks , is 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) tall and surmounts a 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) concrete base . On each side of the shaft is a bronze relief . On the front ( west ) side is a relief of a Union soldier and Union sailor symbolizing Fraternity . The soldier is holding a gun with his right hand and to his left , the sailor holds the American flag with his right hand . The word <unk> is located on the bottom of the relief . Below the Fraternity relief is a relief bust of Stephenson dressed in military uniform . The bust is displayed on a bronze medallion installed in a circular niche decorated with foliage . Below the Stephenson relief is an inscription flanked by Grand Army of the Republic emblems . On the northeast side of the memorial , the relief depicts a woman cloaked in a long robe and cape protecting a small child standing to her left . She is touching the child 's shoulder with her left hand and the word CHARITY is on the bottom of the relief . A woman holding a shield and drawn sword is on the southeast side of the memorial . The word <unk> is located on the bottom of the relief . 
 Inscriptions on the memorial include the following : 
 1861 1865 ( upper portion of shaft , above the Union soldier and sailor relief ) 
 <unk> ( on relief , below the soldier and sailor ) 
 GRAND ARMY OF THE <unk> / <unk> AT <unk> <unk> , APRIL 6 , 1866 / BY <unk> FRANKLIN <unk> M.D. ( lower portion of shaft , below the Stephenson relief ) 
 CHARITY ( on relief , below the Charity figure ) 
 THE <unk> / OF THESE IS / CHARITY ( lower portion of shaft , below the Charity relief ) 
 <unk> ( on relief , below the Loyalty figure ) 
 WHO KNEW NO / GLORY BUT HIS / COUNTRY 'S GOOD ( lower portion of shaft , below the Loyalty relief ) 
 = The Box ( Fringe ) = 
 " The Box " is the second episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode was co @-@ written by Josh Singer and Graham Roland , and directed by Jeffrey Hunt . The third season spent its time alternating between the prime and parallel universes , and " The Box " was set in the former . It followed a mysterious box that when opened , killed whomever heard it . The fringe team of Fauxlivia ( a doppelgänger of Olivia Dunham ) , Peter , and Walter investigate , with unknown consequences to the creation of a doomsday device . 
 It first aired on September 30 , 2010 in the United States to an estimated 5 @.@ 24 million viewers , helping the Fox network finish in fourth place for the night . The episode received generally positive reviews , and it was described as a " strong start " and " chock full of good stuff " by various critics . " The Box " was nominated by Motion Picture Sound Editors for the 2011 Golden Reel Awards but lost to an episode of Boardwalk Empire . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the prime universe ( aka " Our Side " ) , the parallel universe 's Olivia — " Fauxlivia " — ( Anna Torv ) ; meets with Thomas Jerome Newton ( Sebastian Roché ) , who provides Fauxlivia several dossiers and books to help her acclimate herself to the prime universe 's version of the Fringe team . Through them , she is able to successfully impersonate the prime universe 's Olivia to Walter ( John Noble ) and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , and joins the ranks of the Fringe division . Her first case on the team is at a house in Milton , Massachusetts . At first it appears to have been a robbery , with the family tied up and two thieves having dug a hole in the basement ; however , all of the people are dead due to being placed into a vegetative state . Walter believes that a third thief took whatever was uncovered in the hole , but is somehow unaffected by its presence . On examining the corpses , Walter determines that the people were exposed to an ultrasound signal , likely generated by the object that was stolen . 
 Meanwhile , they discover the identity of one of the dead robbers , Blake , and learn of his abandoned apartment . Fauxlivia goes to the apartment alone without alerting Peter , but Peter soon joins her . The two find that Blake had a roommate , likely the third man , but he is nowhere to be seen . That night , while at Olivia 's apartment , Fauxlivia studies Olivia 's case files , and comments of her prime counterpart , " You have a photographic memory . How am I gonna do that ? " indicating that she does not possess this ability . A moment later she is visited by the third man , Joe ( Russell Harvard ) , who had seen Fauxlivia at Blake 's apartment and , believing her to be a cop , brought the item stolen from the Milton home - a small box . Fauxlivia finds Joe is deaf , and thus was unaffected by the ultrasonics of the box . Fauxlivia contacts Newton , who collects the box — having originally hired the men to collect it for him — and offers to kill the deaf man . Fauxlivia tells him she will take care of things herself and shoots the deaf man . While hiding the body , Peter arrives to talk to her . To distract him and prevent him from noticing a pool of blood seeping under the bathroom door , Fauxlivia engages in romantic actions with Peter . 
 Newton takes the box to a crowded subway station , and entices a homeless man ( Eric the Midget ) to watch the box for a short while , expecting the person to steal it after he leaves . The Fringe team is soon on the scene having discovered the ultrasound signal , and find all of the passengers at the station are dead . They find no evidence of the box , and fear that someone took it into the tunnels and may still be active ; the ultrasound would kill everyone on any train that passed . Peter offers to go find the box , and Walter has the idea to make Peter momentarily deaf by having Fauxlivia fire her gun next to Peter 's ears . He finds the box , its lid cracked , in the dead hands of the homeless man . Without a way to seal the lid , Peter is forced to try to defuse the box . He does so in time before his hearing returns , but cannot hear the warning of an errant train bearing down on him ; Fauxlivia enters the tunnels to save Peter . After recovering , Peter and Walter surmise the box is part of the machine , and Peter begins studying it . On her own , Fauxlivia contacts the parallel world through the typewriter shop , informing them that Peter " has the first piece " and is now " engaged " . 
 In a side plot , William Bell is officially declared dead , and his will is read to Nina ( Blair Brown ) and Walter . Walter is hesitant about opening the envelope left for him , but Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) assures him of William 's friendship . Ultimately , Walter finds the envelope contains a typewritten note reading " Don 't be afraid to cross the line , " and a key to a safe deposit box , containing the entirety of the shares of Bell 's multi @-@ billion dollar biomedical technology corporation Massive Dynamic , making Walter the sole owner . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Box " was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer and executive story editor Graham Roland , while being directed by CSI : Crime Scene Investigation veteran Jeffrey Hunt . The episode was shot in the second half of July 2010 . Hunt later tweeted on @-@ set photos in January 2011 . At San Diego Comic @-@ Con International during the summer leading up to the season premiere , actress Jasika Nicole told the audience they would finally be able to see her character 's apartment , which has previously been only alluded to in an early season two episode . She explained , " It 's really neat ! There 's all these tiny little things that give you insight into how things are . I know the color of ( Astrid 's ) walls , so watch out ! " 
 In early August 2010 , Entertainment Weekly reported that Eric the Midget had been cast for a small role in the new season 's second episode . Deaf actor Russell Harvard portrayed Joe , a man who is able to survive the box being opened only to be killed by Fauxlivia . Harvard later commented in an interview , " Fringe was so much fun and not even stressful compared to [ professional fighting film ] Hamill . It was very fast and rapid . Playing the dead guy was very easy . Working with Anna Torv was so much fun , she is a great , great actress and very sweet . I did not think she would be that kind of person . " He continued , " There was a stunt which she did not want to do herself , but I told her ' You want to be authentic so I want you to pull me , ' so she obliged . It was a great experience and so much fun and I wish I could have stayed on the show for a long time . " 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children focusing on the science seen in " The Box " , with the intention of having " students learn about the different characteristics of music and how it can have physiological effects on the listener . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When researching popular culture in the prime universe , Fauxlivia says " Who 's Bono ? " ( pronouncing it " bone @-@ oh " ) , implying Irish rock band U2 and its lead singer Bono either do not exist in the parallel universe , or are not well known . Fauxlivia also mentions liking a song by country music singer Patsy Cline when she and Peter hear it playing in a bar , suggesting either that Cline is famous in both universes , or that Fauxlivia had further studied pop culture of the prime universe before her conversation with Peter . Peter tells Fauxlivia that living with Walter is like a bad buddy cop movie , referring to a genre of movies that have two men of very different and conflicting personalities forced to work together . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Box " first aired on September 30 , 2010 in the United States on the Fox network . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by an estimated 5 @.@ 24 million viewers and earned a 1 @.@ 9 / 5 ratings share among adults 18 to 49 . Fox finished in fourth place for the night , though time shifted viewings increased the episode 's ratings by 42 percent in the adult demographic , from 1 @.@ 9 to a 2 @.@ 7 rating . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Box " received mostly positive reviews . Salon.com gave the episode an A- , explaining " this week 's episode was chock full of good stuff . We get some more fun nuggets about how Earth 2 differs from Earth 1 ... Your Bose headphones cannot protect you from the awesome sonic power of " The Box " . UGO Networks ' Alex Zalben wrote " Two weeks in , Fringe is still the best damn show currently on TV " . Zalben loved the serial aspects of the plot , praised Anna Torv 's performance , but disliked how no one has realized Fauxlivia 's true identity . Josh Wigler from MTV enjoyed the episode particularly because although he found the parallel universe a " compelling world , sometimes it 's nice to just kick your feet up on the table and know that you 're home ... Two episodes down , and it 's safe to say that the third season of " Fringe " is off to a very strong start " . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly thought it was a terrific episode , with " a tremendously clever game @-@ changer of an ending ... This Fringe was a good example of how far the series has come since its first season , dominated by pre @-@ credits scare @-@ scenarios for Fringe Division to investigate , some of which spilled over into the show 's mythology . Now , Fringe is a seamless whole " . 
 A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded it with a B + . SFScope contributor Sarah Stegall wrote , " Tightly written , well acted , and directed with a sure hand , this second episode of the season bears out my original prediction : this year is going to rock . " Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times praised the episode 's use of a " Harold " , in which three separate plots working off a central theme converge together . He also loved the climatic scene involving a gunshot @-@ induced deaf Peter and the subway . " I hope more people were watching this episode for so many reasons : To see how good " Fringe " has become , to get addicted to the show and , most important , to see that they quoted my blog in the promo for next week . Thursday night has become " Fringe " night " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " The Box " was nominated for Best Sound Editing : TV Short Form Music by the Motion Picture Sound Editors for the 2011 Golden Reel Awards . The crew included Supervising Music Editor Paul Apelgren , composers Chris Tilton and Michael Giacchino , and re @-@ recording mixer Rick Norman . " Brown Betty " , a season two Fringe episode , was also nominated for Best Sound Editing : TV Short Form Music in a Musical . " The Box " lost to an episode of Boardwalk Empire . 
 = SMS Wacht = 
 SMS Wacht was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the lead ship of her class . She had one sister ship , Jagd . Wacht was built by the AG Weser shipyard ; she was laid down in 1886 , launched in August 1887 , and commissioned in August 1888 . She served in the active fleet through the 1890s and participated in numerous training exercises . Her career was cut short on 4 September 1901 , when she collided with the old ironclad SMS Sachsen . The latter 's ram bow holed Wacht under the waterline and caused her to rapidly sink . Her crew was safely rescued , however , and there were no casualties . 
 = = Design = = 
 Wacht was 85 @.@ 5 meters ( 281 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 66 m ( 31 @.@ 7 ft ) and a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 74 m ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 499 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 475 long tons ; 1 @,@ 652 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two angled 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 860 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 300 km ; 3 @,@ 290 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Wacht had a crew of 7 officers and 134 enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with three 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) K L / 35 guns placed in single pivot mounts . The guns were supplied with a total of 180 rounds of ammunition . Wacht also carried three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , one mounted submerged in the bow and the other two in deck @-@ mounted launchers on the broadside . In 1891 , four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts were added . The ship was the first German aviso to carry armor : a 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) thick deck , along with 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) of armor plating for the conning tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Wacht was laid down in 1886 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen . She was launched on 27 August 1887 and commissioned into the German fleet on 9 August 1888 . In 1889 , Franz von Hipper served aboard the ship as her watch officer . In early 1889 , Wacht was assigned to the Maneuver Squadron , which at the time consisted of the old ironclads Baden , Bayern , and Oldenburg and the protected cruiser Irene . The Squadron was commanded by Prince Heinrich . In May , the Maneuver Squadron conducted mock combat exercises with the Training Squadron in the Baltic Sea . 
 In late 1889 , Wacht joined a squadron of four old ironclads — Kaiser , Deutschland , Friedrich der Grosse , and Preussen — that cruised the Mediterranean Sea along with Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern and the protected cruiser Irene , which carried Prince Heinrich . The squadron visited numerous ports in the Mediterranean , including state visits to Italy and the Ottoman Empire . Wilhelm II also stopped in Greece , where he attended the wedding of his sister Sophie to the Greek crown prince Constantine . The squadron remained in the Mediterranean until April 1890 , when it returned to Germany . Wacht , meanwhile , was forced to remain in Trieste for six months due to a serious problem with her boiler tubes , which required lengthy repairs . The ship led the torpedo boat flotilla in the Maneuver Squadron in 1893 . In early 1894 , Wacht was assigned to the II Division of the Maneuver Squadron as the divisional dispatch vessel . The division was commanded by Rear Admiral Otto von Diederichs . During the 1896 annual maneuvers , Wacht was assigned to the I Division . 
 On 4 September 1901 , Wacht collided with the ironclad Sachsen while on extensive training maneuvers with the rest of the fleet . Wacht was sunk , but the crew was safely evacuated and neither ship suffered casualties . During the maneuvers , Wacht attempted to pass between Sachsen and Württemberg . However , Wacht 's helmsman misjudged the distance and passed too closely in front of Sachsen . Sachsen immediately attempted to reverse course to avoid ramming the ship , but the two vessels collided . Sachsen 's ram bow tore a large hole in Wacht , which began to slowly sink . The battleship Weissenburg attempted to tow Wacht to shallow water , but several of Wacht 's internal bulkheads collapsed under the strain and the ship quickly sank . Nevertheless , her crew was taken off safely ; neither ship suffered any casualties . 
 = Grown Woman ( Kelly Rowland song ) = 
 " Grown Woman " is a song by American singer Kelly Rowland , recorded during the recording sessions for her third studio album Here I Am ( 2011 ) . It was written by singer @-@ songwriter Ne @-@ Yo as well as Magnus <unk> and Bernt Stray , and co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate . The mid @-@ tempo R & B song 's lyrics revolve around Rowland " assert [ ing ] her maturity and clue [ ing ] her suitors in on what won ’ t fly when it comes to relationships . " It was conceived after Rowland approached Ne @-@ Yo to work on her third album , and asked for a record which would declare she 's grown . " Grown Woman " was described by critics as different from what is normally called R & B. 
 It was serviced to Rhythmic , Urban , and Urban AC stations in the United States on June 29 , 2010 as one of two lead singles for Here I Am It was also released for digital download in some parts of Europe , Canada , and the United States on July 26 , 2010 . It was moderately successful across the airplay formats as it debuted on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Chart at number eighty @-@ seven , just two days after being serviced to radio . In subsequent weeks , the single peaked at number fifty @-@ one . An accompanying music video for " Grown Woman " was reported to have been filmed in mid @-@ late August 2010 , but has not yet been released . Despite being moderately successful , " Grown Woman " was later excluded from Here I Am . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the announcement that Rowland 's international lead single , " Commander " , would not be released in the United States , a new single , penned by Ne @-@ Yo , was announced as the new American lead single . Titled " Shake Them Haters Off " , the up @-@ tempo song sees Rowland " flexing her muscles . " However , those plans were changed once again when , on June 11 , 2010 , " Shake Them Haters Off " was replaced with two new lead singles . On June 29 , 2010 , " Rose Colored Glasses " was sent to Top 40 / Mainstream radio stations as a pop single , and also released for digital download on the same day . " Grown Woman " was also sent to radio on June 29 , but to Rhythmic , Urban , and Urban AC radio stations . The single cover was revealed on June 17 , 2010 via Rowland 's official website . Rap Up called the cover " grown and sexy . " It was released for download on July 27 , 2010 in the United States . 
 = = Lyrics and composition = = 
 " Grown Woman " is an urban R & B song written by Ne @-@ Yo , Magnus <unk> , Bernt Stray , and Norwegian production team StarGate ( who also produced the song ) . Jeremy Helligar of True / Slant commented the song was " still to the left of what normally passes for modern R & B. " Originally revealed as " Grown Ass Woman " and later changed to " Grown Woman , " the lyrics and theme of the song are based on a woman who " asserts her maturity and clues her suitors in on what won ’ t fly when it comes to relationships . " The song is one of three records which Ne @-@ Yo co @-@ wrote for Rowland after the singer specifically approached him to pen records for her album . Its concept was devised in a brief conversation between the pair . Rowland said , " ' Ne @-@ Yo asked me what I wanted to talk about , ' and I replied ' I 'm in a different space . Change is very comfortable for me , and I 'm happy where I am ' . [ I ] want a record that declared that I 'm Grown ! " 
 = = Radio and chart performance = = 
 The single was officially available for airplay on June 29 , 2010 . Two days later , it made its US chart debut on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number eighty @-@ seven . Additionally , during the first week of radio adds , " Grown Woman " became the number one added song to Urban adult contemporary stations . As a result , the song made its debut on the US Hot Urban AC Airplay Chart at number thirty @-@ three and rose nineteen places on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart to number sixty @-@ eight . Since then , it has gone on to peak at number twenty @-@ two on the Urban AC Airplay chart , having amassed about 920 @,@ 000 + audience impressions . It has also peaked on the Urban Contemporary Airplay chart at number thirty @-@ two . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 Rowland told New York station 103 @.@ 5 KTU FM that the music video for " Grown Woman " was due to be filmed in the last week of July 2010 . The filming of the video was rescheduled to the weekend beginning August 21 , 2010 in Los Angeles . It is currently unknown if the clip was filmed or if it will be released . Rowland did , however , perform the song live for the first time at Ne @-@ Yo 's post @-@ American Music Awards Vevo party on November 21 , 2010 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 US Digital download 
 " Grown Woman " – 3 : 45 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Papa Don 't Preach = 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " is a song by American singer Madonna from her third studio album True Blue ( 1986 ) . The song was written by Brian Elliot with additional lyrics by Madonna , and produced by Stephen Bray and Madonna . The song also appears remixed on the 1990 compilation album The Immaculate Collection and in its original form on the 2009 compilation album Celebration . The song 's musical style combines pop and classical styling , and its lyrics deal with teenage pregnancy and abortion . It was based on teen gossip Elliot heard outside his studio , which has a large front window that doubles as a mirror where schoolgirls from the North Hollywood High School in Los Angeles regularly stopped to fix their hair and chat . 
 Released as the album 's second single in mid @-@ 1986 , the song was a commercial success . It became Madonna 's fourth number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , and performed well internationally , reaching the top position in the United Kingdom and Australia . It was well received by music critics and was frequently cited as a highlight in the album . The music video , directed by James Foley , shows Madonna 's second image makeover , featuring her with a more toned and muscular body , and cropped platinum blonde hair . It portrayed a storyline where Madonna is trying to tell her father about her pregnancy . The images are juxtaposed with shots of Madonna dancing and singing in a small , darkened studio , and spending a romantic evening with her boyfriend . 
 Shortly after its release , the song caused heated discussions about its lyrical content . Women 's organizations and others in the family planning field criticized Madonna for encouraging teenage pregnancy , while groups opposed to abortion saw the song as having a positive pro @-@ life message . Madonna has performed " Papa Don 't Preach " in four of her world tours , most recently The MDNA Tour in 2012 . The song also caused her first conflict with the Vatican , as she dedicated it to Pope John Paul II , who urged Italian fans to boycott her concerts during the Who 's That Girl World Tour in 1987 . In 2002 , British singer Kelly Osbourne recorded a hard rock cover of the song which was included as a bonus track on her debut album Shut Up . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 During the autumn of 1985 , Madonna started writing and recording songs for her third studio album , True Blue . She brought back Steve Bray and hired a new songwriter collaborator , Patrick Leonard , to help her co @-@ write eight of the album 's nine tracks . The album 's first track " Papa Don 't Preach " , was written by Brian Elliot , who described it as " a love song , maybe framed a little bit differently " . The song is based on teen gossip he heard outside his studio , which has a large front window that doubles as a mirror where schoolgirls from the North Hollywood High School in Los Angeles regularly stopped to fix their hair and chat . The song was sent to Madonna by Michael Ostin , the same Warner Bros. executive that discovered " Like a Virgin " . Madonna only contributed with some minor lyrical revisions , making " Papa Don 't Preach " the only song on the album that she did not have a strong hand in writing . In 2009 , during an interview with Rolling Stone Madonna was asked by the interviewer Austin Scaggs as to why the theme of the song was meaningful to her . She replied saying , 
 [ The song ] just fit right in with my own personal zeitgeist of standing up to male authorities , whether it 's the pope , or the Catholic Church or my father and his conservative , patriarchal ways . ... For ' Papa Don 't Preach ' there were so many opinions – that 's why I thought it was so great . Is she for ' <unk> @-@ <unk> ' , as they say in Knocked Up ? Is she against abortion ? 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " is a dance @-@ pop song with instrumentation from acoustic , electric , and rhythm guitars , keyboards , and string arrangements . It is set in common time , and moves at a moderate tempo of 116 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of F minor . The combination of key and tempo produces a <unk> between pop and classical rhythms , underlined by the instrumentation during the introduction . 
 The song begins with a distinctly <unk> style , as the fast tempo and classical @-@ style chord progression anticipates the lyrics to follow . The opening chords and the melody emphasize the tonic of the leading notes : Fm – E ♭ – D ♭ – Cm – D ♭ – E ♭ – Fm – D ♭ – E ♭ – Fm , resembling a Baroque work . This is followed by the sound of dance music , produced by a powerful beat from the instruments . Madonna 's vocal range spans from F3 to C5 , and has a different sound from her previous work , more mature , centered , and with a lower range . 
 The lyrics show Madonna 's interest in her Roman Catholic upbringing , as the song theme is about a girl who admits to her father that she is pregnant and refuses to have an abortion or give up the baby for adoption despite what her friends are telling her to do . It is constructed in a verse @-@ chorus form , with a bridge before the third and final chorus . At the beginning , she addresses her father directly , asking him to talk to her as an adult , " You should know by now that I 'm not a baby " . The transition to the chorus employs a more dramatic voice with a higher range , ending nearly in cries as she sings the word " Please " . Leading to the chorus , Madonna switches to a pleading voice , singing the song 's main hook in a high tone . During the bridge , the song features a Spanish @-@ inspired rhythm , one of the earliest examples of the influence that Hispanic music had on Madonna 's musical style . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " was lauded by pop music critics . Davitt Sigerson from Rolling Stone magazine in a review of the album True Blue said that if there is a problem with the album " it 's the lack of outstanding songs " , adding that " only the magnificent ' Papa Don 't Preach ' has the high @-@ profile hook to match ' Like a Virgin ' , ' Dress You Up ' and ' Material Girl ' . " In its review of True Blue , Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that " she is using the music to hook in critics just as she 's baiting a mass audience with such <unk> as ' Papa Don 't Preach ' . " Robert Christgau in a review for The Village Voice felt that " she [ Madonna ] doesn 't speak for the ordinary teenaged stiff any more " , adding that the " <unk> content of ' Papa Don 't Preach ' isn 't unequivocal , and wouldn 't make the song bad by definition if it were , the ambiguity is a cop @-@ out rather than an open door , which is bad . " 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine said that " with songs like ' Papa Don 't Preach ' , Madonna made the transition from pop tart to consummate artist , joining the ranks of 80s icons like Michael Jackson and Prince . " David Browne from Entertainment Weekly in a review of her first compilation album The Immaculate Collection , commented that " in theory a 30 @-@ ish urban sophisticate singing in the voice of a pregnant teen , sounds ridiculous " , but added that " with the help of collaborators like Stephen Bray and Patrick Leonard , though , turns into a perfectly conceived pop record " . In 2005 , the same magazine placed the song at number 486 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . In 1987 , the song was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 29th Grammy Awards , but lost to Barbra Streisand 's The Broadway Album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " was released in the United States in June 1986 . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 42 and , within eight weeks of release , reached the top of the chart , making it Madonna 's fourth number @-@ one single in the US . It maintained the top position for two weeks and spent 18 weeks on the chart . It also reached a peak of four on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart and a peak of number 16 on the Adult Contemporary chart . In October 1998 , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of a million copies of the single . It placed at position 29 for the Billboard Year @-@ End chart for 1986 . In Canada the song debuted at number 53 of the RPM singles chart on July 5 , 1986 , reached the top for two weeks in August 1986 , and stayed on the chart for 20 weeks . It placed at position 13 on the RPM Year @-@ End chart for 1986 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Papa Don 't Preach " was released on June 16 , 1986 . The song debuted at number 13 on the UK Singles Chart before climbing to number one two weeks later . It then spent three consecutive weeks at the top , stayed 15 weeks on the chart , and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in August 1986 for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 645 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 Across Europe , " Papa Don 't Preach " was successful , topping the Eurochart Hot 100 for 11 weeks . It reached the top position of the singles charts in Belgium , Ireland , Italy , and Norway , and peaked inside the top five in Austria , France , Germany , the Netherlands , Spain and Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 For the music video , Madonna sported a complete image makeover . She changed the heavy jewelry and make @-@ up , and adopted the gamine look , which is notably applied to describe the style and appearance that Shirley MacLaine and Audrey Hepburn used during the 1950s . In the video Madonna played a tomboy , dressed in jeans , a black leather jacket , and a slogan T @-@ shirt with the caption " Italians do it better " . The video alternated between tomboy shots and those of a sexier Madonna with a more toned and muscular body , cropped platinum blonde hair , and figure @-@ revealing clothing , consisting of a 1960s @-@ style black bustier top and capri pants . 
 The video was directed by James Foley , who worked with Madonna in her music video for " Live to Tell " , produced by David Naylor and Sharon <unk> , and Michael Ballhaus was in charge of the photography . The video was shot on location over three days in Staten Island , New York and Manhattan . Staten Island was chosen on Foley 's suggestion as it was where he grew up : " We talked about wanting to tap into a working @-@ class environment , because by that time she had done ' Material Girl ' and ' Like a Virgin ' and other stuff that was very glamorous and stylized . She wanted to do something a bit more grounded and ' drama ' . " Actor Alex McArthur was signed to play Madonna 's boyfriend and the father of her child in the video . Madonna had spotted McArthur in a small role as a naive youth in the 1985 film Desert Hearts , and she thought he was a natural to play her mechanic boyfriend . " I was out in the garage working on my Harley , " said McArthur , " I answered the phone and a voice said , ' Hi , this is Madonna . I would like you to be in my next video . ' " 
 The music video starts with shots of the New York skyline , the Staten Island Ferry , and character close @-@ ups . Madonna plays a teenager , who is seen walking along a lane . Then it shows her thinking about her father , played by Danny Aiello , and how much he loves her . She then sees her boyfriend , played by actor Alex McArthur , coming along . The images are juxtaposed with shots of Madonna dancing and singing in a small , darkened studio . Madonna then moves away from her friends , who warn her from her boyfriend . She and her boyfriend spend a romantic evening together on a barge where they reflect upon their lives after watching an elderly couple . Then Madonna finds out that she is pregnant and after much hesitation tells her father . They have a few hours of tension between them . Her father eventually accepts the pregnancy , and the final scene is a reconciliatory embrace between father and daughter . 
 Georges @-@ Claude Guilbert , author of Madonna as Postmodern Myth , compared her look in the video as a " combination of Marilyn Monroe , Jean Seberg and Kim Novak . " He added that it was hard for him to believe that " [ Madonna ] did not know that she was going to cause a huge controversy with the video ... With such a song and video , she was throwing in America 's face the image of a country ravaged by the abortion debate , which is far from being resolved . " Lynda Hart , one of the authors of Acting Out : Feminist Performances , felt that the video " alternated between two competing representations of Madonna ... Charging coercion , both sides make the video as an invitation to a certain way of life , in the process denying it the stylistic invocation of a rhetoric of self @-@ authorization . " At the 1987 MTV Video Music Awards , the " Papa Don 't Preach " video won the Best Female Video award , and was nominated for Best Cinematography and Best Overall Performance . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna has performed the song on four of her world tours . She premiered the song in 1987 , during her Who 's That Girl World Tour , where she danced around the stage wearing a white Spanish @-@ style dress designed by Marlene Stewart , and a black leather jacket similar to the one she used in the music video . The screen in the background showed portraits of Pope John Paul II and then @-@ President of the U.S. Ronald Reagan , along with scenes of John Perry III 's short film , The Nightmare , ending with the words " Safe Sex " , as Madonna finished the song . She dedicated the song to the Pope , marking her first conflict with the Vatican , as Pope John Paul II urged Italian fans to boycott her concerts . Two different performances of the song on this tour can be found on the videos : Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan , filmed in Tokyo , Japan , on June 22 , 1987 , and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy , filmed in Turin , Italy , on September 4 , 1987 . 
 Three years later on her Blond Ambition World Tour in 1990 , Madonna evoked Catholic images during the " Papa Don 't Preach " performance . She wore a black kaftan made of chiffon and energetically danced , accompanied by six male dancers , with a platform full of votive candles in the background . Two different performances were taped and released on video , the Blond Ambition Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and the Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . 
 In 2004 , during the Re @-@ Invention World Tour , Madonna performed the song wearing a Scottish kilt , and a T @-@ shirt that said " Kabbalists do it Better " on most of the shows , and " Brits do it Better " and " Irish do it Better " T @-@ shirts during the shows in the United Kingdom and Ireland , reminiscent of the one she used in the song 's music video . Madonna also performed a shorter , abbreviated version of " Papa Don 't Preach " in the MDNA Tour in 2012 . Wearing a black tight outfit , Madonna sang the song while crawling around on the ground , then towards the end of the performance , several dancers wearing military clothing and animal masks surrounded and tied her up and took her to the main stage , giving way to the next performance , " Hung Up " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " has been covered by numerous artists . In 1986 , " Weird Al " Yankovic included the song as the last in his polka <unk> " Polka Party ! " from his album of the same name . In 2002 , British singer Kelly Osbourne recorded together with Incubus ' members Mike Einziger ( guitar ) , and José <unk> ( drums ) , a hard rock cover of the song that was produced by her brother Jack Osbourne . It was included as a bonus track on her debut album Shut Up and on the soundtrack of MTV 's reality television program The Osbournes . 
 The song was released in the United Kingdom on September 2002 , peaking at number three . In the rest of Europe , the song peaked inside the top ten in Ireland and Finland , and the top twenty in Sweden . In Australia the song debuted at number three , and received a platinum certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . This version was panned by music critics , who thought that the cover " makes precisely zero sense " , and that it " reeks of opportunism " , also criticizing Incubus ' collaboration , describing it as " unimaginative " , and that " their presence makes the whole mess barely distinguishable " . 
 French group Mad 'House made an Eurodance cover of the song , that was included on their 2002 album Absolutely Mad . Covers of the song on tribute albums include Brook Barros on The Music of Madonna , released in 2005 , and a jazz version on Bo . Da 's Plays Madonna in Jazz , released in 2007 . The song has been sampled at the beginning of Mario Winans ' 2004 single " Never Really Was " , and a slowed @-@ down version by Keshia Chanté sample the song in the 2006 single " Fallen " . In 2001 , Picturehouse released a quiet acoustic cover on the first Even Better Than the Real Thing covers album . The television show Glee released an acoustic cover version performed by Dianna Agron as her character Quinn Fabray , a pregnant teenager , in 2009 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As the song 's popularity increased in the United States , so did the criticism and support it received from groups concerned with pregnancy and abortion . In July 1986 , shortly after the release of the video for " Papa Don 't Preach " , Madonna commented on the controversy surrounding the song , to music critic Stephen Holden from The New York Times : 
 Papa Don 't Preach " is a message song that everyone is going to take the wrong way . Immediately they 're going to say I am advising every young girl to go out and get pregnant . When I first heard the song , I thought it was silly . But then I thought , wait a minute , this song is really about a girl who is making a decision in her life . She has a very close relationship with her father and wants to maintain that closeness . To me it 's a celebration of life . It says , ' I love you , father , and I love this man and this child that is growing inside me ' . Of course , who knows how it will end ? But at least it starts off positive . 
 People who criticized the song 's message included Ellen Goodman , a national syndicated columnist , who called the video " a commercial for teenage pregnancy " . Feminist lawyer Gloria Allred , the spokeswoman of the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) , angrily called for Madonna to make a public statement or another record supporting the opposite point of view . Alfred Moran , the executive director of Planned Parenthood of New York City , also criticized the song , fearing that it would undermine efforts to promote birth control among adolescents and that it would encourage teenage pregnancy . Recalling how his agency 's clinics were filled in 1985 with girls wearing clothes that were an imitation of Madonna 's style , Moran said that the song 's message is " that getting pregnant is cool and having the baby is the right thing and a good thing and don 't listen to your parents , the school , anybody who tells you otherwise — don 't preach to me , Papa . The reality is that what Madonna is suggesting to teenagers is a path to permanent poverty . " 
 In contrast , groups opposed to abortion saw " Papa Don 't Preach " as a positive , pro @-@ life song . Susan Carpenter @-@ McMillan , the president of the California chapter of Feminists for Life ( FFL ) in the U.S. , said that " abortion is readily available on every street corner for young women . Now what Madonna is telling them is , hey , there 's an alternative . " Tipper Gore , a founder of the Parents Music Resource Center ( PMRC ) , who a year earlier denounced Madonna for the sexual lyrical content of her single " Dress You Up " , and had led a campaign against explicit content in music , commended Madonna for speaking candidly about such a serious subject and important social issue . When speaking of the song , Gore said " the song speaks to a serious subject with a sense of urgency and sensitivity in both the lyrics and Madonna 's rendition . It also speaks to the fact that there 's got to be more support and more communication in families about this problem , and anything that fosters that I applaud . " 
 The song 's writer , Brian Elliot , commented about the debate : " I just wanted to make this girl in the song a sympathetic character . As a father myself , I 'd want to be accessible to my children 's problems . " Madonna avoided the controversy , and did not comment on the song 's use as a pro @-@ life statement . Her publicist , Liz Rosenberg , said that " she [ Madonna ] is singing a song , not taking a stand " , adding that " her philosophy is people can think what they want to think . " Danny Aiello , having appeared in the video as the titular " Papa " , recorded " Papa Wants the Best for You " later that year , an answer song written by Artie Schroeck from the father 's point of view . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Brian Elliot – Music and lyrics 
 Madonna – additional lyrics , producer , lead vocals 
 Stephen Bray – producer , synth bass , percussion , drums , keyboards 
 Reggie Lucas – producer of " Ain 't No Big Deal " 
 David Williams – rhythm guitar 
 Bruce Gaitsch – electric guitar 
 John Putnam – acoustic guitar , electric guitar 
 Fred Zarr – additional keyboards 
 Johnathan Moffett – percussion 
 Billy Meyers – string arrangement 
 Siedah Garrett – background vocals 
 Edie Lehmann – background vocals 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Syzygy ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Syzygy " is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on January 26 , 1996 , on Fox . It was written by series creator Chris Carter and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Syzygy " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 8 , being watched by 16 @.@ 04 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews , with many critics and fans upset by the negative portrayal of Mulder and Scully . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate the murders of high school students in a small town where everyone is acting strangely . They discover that two teens are responsible , due to a rare planetary alignment that affects their behavior . 
 The episode 's title refers to an astronomical alignment of three celestial objects , usually the sun , the Earth , and a moon or planet . Mulder and Scully 's behavior in the episode was written specifically by Carter to alert the show 's audience that Mulder and Scully would not become a romantic partnership . In addition , the episode contained various fan in @-@ jokes , such as Scully getting upset because Mulder is always the driver , which was inspired by nitpicking from fans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In <unk> , New Hampshire , a group of high school students hold a eulogy for their dead friend , the purported victim of a local Satanic cult . Two girls , Terri Roberts and Margi <unk> , get a ride home from a jock , Jay " Boom " <unk> ( Ryan Reynolds ) . The girls tell Boom that the cult seeks a blonde virgin as a next victim , convincing him to turn off the road . The next day , the police find Boom hanging from a cliff . Out of sight of the police , Terri and Margi sit at the top , laughing . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) arrive in <unk> after arguing over directions along the way . They meet a local detective , Angela White , and go to Boom 's funeral . Scully , in a bad mood , is skeptical of these claims . The high school principal , Bob Spitz , interrupts the funeral by ranting Inquisitorial @-@ style about Satanic cults murdering their children when suddenly the coffin starts smoking and catches on fire . Mulder and Scully go into separate rooms to interview Margi and Terri , both of whom offer an identical story about a satanic ceremony where a baby was sacrificed . Scully thinks their stories are cliché and points out the fact that the belief in a satanic conspiracy is illogical and paranoid . Looking at the latest victim 's body , Mulder and Detective White find a burn mark in the shape of a horned beast ; Scully says she doesn 't see anything . Mulder goes to see White to apologize for Scully 's behavior and the two visit the local <unk> Madame <unk> who claims the town 's crazy behavior is due to the rare planetary alignment of the planets Mars , Uranus , and Mercury . Terri and Margi watch basketball practice , lusting over one of the players , Scott , whose girlfriend is fellow cheerleader Brenda ( much to Terri and Margi 's displeasure ) . One of the other players accidentally spills a table of drinks on them , so they cause the basketball to bounce underneath the bleachers and it closes when he goes to get it , killing him . Scully is angry at Mulder for ditching her to be with Detective White . 
 A town mob searches for a mass grave in the woods and finds a bag belonging to the town pediatrician filled with bones , which Spitz mistakenly assumes belonged to a child . The angry mob goes to see the doctor , who claims the bag was sold . The bones end up belonging to " Mr. Tippy " , a dog that belonged to Terri . Scully gets upset over a joke Mulder makes and tells him she 's returning to Washington . Margi and Terri celebrate their birthday and Brenda uses a Ouija board to know who she will marry ; everyone thinks it 's Scott before the planchette veers away from the C and spells out Satan . Upset , Brenda rushes to the bathroom where Margi and Terri are chanting " Bloody Mary " and is locked in , killed by glass from a shattered mirror . Detective White heads to Mulder 's hotel room because she found a box which inside had her cat 's collar , and then she makes a romantic gesture towards Mulder but they are interrupted by Scully who informs them about Brenda 's death . Terri and Margi try to console Scott , who tells them off . Turned down , Terri is mad at him but Margi still likes him and leaves . 
 Mulder goes to visit Madame <unk> again , who tells him that the planets come into alignment like this only once every 84 years , and additional alignments will cause anyone born on January 12 , 1979 ( Margi and Terri 's birthdate ) to have all the energy in the cosmos focused on them . Margi goes to see Scott alone but an angry Terri arrives . The two argue with each other and end up accidentally killing Scott . Margi goes to Mulder , telling him that Terri is responsible for the murders , while Terri goes to see Scully and tells her the opposite . The agents call each other and bring both girls to the police station , where the place starts shaking and all the guns go off on their own . Mulder locks the girls in a room together and their power goes away once the clock ticks midnight . When the town mob and Detective White finally see Terri and Margi as the culprits , Spitz claims it was the work of Satan , oblivious to the cosmic alignment 's energy . Mulder and Scully drive home , arguing again over directions ; when Scully defiantly runs a stop sign , Mulder notifies her but she tells him to shut up , which he does . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter and directed by Rob Bowman . Bowman was not a fan of the episode , saying " The show proved to be much more difficult than I anticipated , and there wasn 't enough time to shoot the show properly because we were so close to the Christmas break . I felt extremely pressured and frustrated , although there are things in it I love , particularly the banter between Mulder and Scully . But overall , I thought the show was very oblique . I don 't feel that the characters ever knew what was going on and I don 't think it is all that cool that kids are murdering people . I didn 't feel like I was shooting an episode of the X @-@ Files , and I think I let Chris Carter down a bit . " 
 The name of this episode , " Syzygy " refers to an astrological alignment of three celestial objects , usually the sun , the Earth , and a moon or planet . The name of the high school in this episode , Grover Cleveland Alexander High School was a reference to a question David Duchovny got wrong during his appearance on a celebrity edition of Jeopardy ! . The scene where Mulder sees a Keystone Kops movie playing on every channel was originally meant to include the movie A Clockwork Orange , but the rights to the footage were too expensive so the producers settled on another choice . Carter felt that in retrospect it ended up being a better fit . 
 Fox Mulder and Dana Scully 's fight in the episode where Scully gets upset due to Mulder always driving grew out of nitpicking from fans about the fact that Mulder always seems to be the one driving the car . Mulder 's joke about Scully 's " little feet " was a joke that Carter had made before at an X @-@ Files convention in Pasadena , California . Gillian Anderson stated that these have been things that fans on the internet have been nitpicking about since the beginning of the show . David Duchovny later explained that the comedic episodes of the series were often more ludicrous than the other episodes in the show . He noted , " There 's The X @-@ Files of the stand @-@ alone , and then there 's The X @-@ Files of the mythology , and then there are the comedic X @-@ Files as well , in which the characters are really not quite the characters that we know . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Syzygy " premiered on the Fox network on January 26 , 1996 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky One on November 13 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 8 with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 16 @.@ 04 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave " Syzygy " an A , describing the episode as " another uproarious send @-@ up , this time of teen venom , B @-@ movie paranoia , and our agents ' painfully restrained rapport " , with praise to the villains and the discussion on why Mulder always drives , considered " one of Mulder 's and Scully 's funniest exchanges " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave a B- , describing it as " an entertaining hour that never rises to the level of those other episodes " like " Humbug " and " War of the Coprophages " . VanDerWerff argued that " Syzygy " was an attempt by Carter to try and emulate the writing style of Darin Morgan 's scripts , without success ; he noted " the laughs here are emptier than they were the week before in ' Coprophages ' " — and adding that " every time you think the episode has figured out a way to plant its foot firmly in comedic territory , there 's a horribly judged moment of ' drama , ' like Mulder 's final monologue . " Connie Ogle of Popmatters listed Margi and Terri among the best monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week characters of the series , describing " Syzygy " as a " hilarious send @-@ up of Heathers " . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris called the outing " a lost opportunity , " noting that the episode 's humor " falls flat , because the humor exists in a vacuum " . Furthermore , she argued that if the episode had been played @-@ straight , then " Syzygy " could have " been a horror classic " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five . The two criticized the episode for following on the heels of Darin Morgan 's " War of the Coprophages " , which they argued was a superior episode of the series . Shearman and Pearson further noted that the episode was " simply not very funny " . Fox Mulder and Dana Scully 's odd behavior towards each other resulted in criticism from critics and fans on the Internet . Vitaris called the relationship between Mulder and Scully in the episode " ugly " . Shearman and Pearson called the scenes featuring Mulder and Scully 's bickering " hard to stomach " . Chris Carter was somewhat disappointed in the reaction that the episode received , stating that there were hints to the satiric nature of the episode strewn throughout " Syzygy " that fans simply did not understand . Other fans understood what transpired , but disliked the episode due to their desire for Mulder and Scully to become a romantically involved couple . X @-@ Files fans in San Francisco printed up T @-@ shirts featuring the phrase " Sure . Fine . Whatever . " spoken multiple times by Scully in this episode . 
 = Sawtooth National Forest = 
 Sawtooth National Forest is a federally protected area that covers 2 @,@ 110 @,@ 408 acres ( 854 @,@ 052 ha ) in the U.S. states of Idaho ( ~ 96 percent ) and Utah ( ~ 4 percent ) . Managed by the U.S. Forest Service in the U.S. Department of Agriculture , it was originally named the Sawtooth Forest Reserve in a proclamation issued by President Theodore Roosevelt on May 29 , 1905 . On August 22 , 1972 a portion of the forest was designated as the Sawtooth National Recreation Area ( SNRA ) , which includes the Sawtooth , White Clouds , and Hemingway – Boulders wilderness areas . The forest is managed as four units : the SNRA and the Fairfield , Ketchum , and Minidoka Ranger Districts . 
 Sawtooth National Forest is named for the Sawtooth Mountains , which traverse part of the SNRA . The forest also contains the Albion , Black Pine , Boise , Boulder , Pioneer , Raft River , Smoky , Soldier , Sublett , and White Cloud mountain ranges , as well as Hyndman Peak , the ninth @-@ highest point in Idaho at 12 @,@ 009 feet ( 3 @,@ 660 m ) above sea level . Sawtooth National Forest contains land cover types which include sagebrush steppe , spruce @-@ fir forests , alpine tundra , and over 1 @,@ 100 lakes and 3 @,@ 500 miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ) of rivers and streams . Plants and animals found only in the Sawtooth National Forest and adjacent lands include Christ 's Indian paintbrush , Davis ' <unk> , the South Hills crossbill , and the Wood River sculpin . 
 The area that is now Sawtooth National Forest was first occupied by people as early as 8000 BC and by the Shoshone tribe after 1700 AD . The first European descendants migrating from the eastern United States arrived in the area around the 1820s ; they were mainly explorers , trappers , and prospectors , and they founded many of the current towns around what later became the forest . Sawtooth National Forest offers facilities for recreation , with four ski areas , whitewater and flatwater boating , hunting , 81 campgrounds , and over 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) of trails and roads for hiking , mountain biking , and all @-@ terrain vehicle use , including two National Recreation Trails . 
 = = Forest history = = 
 The Forest Reserve Act of 1891 gave the President the authority to establish forest reserves in the U.S. Department of the Interior . After passage of the Transfer Act of 1905 , forest reserves became part of the U.S. Department of Agriculture in the newly created U.S. Forest Service . Sawtooth National Forest was created as the Sawtooth Forest Reserve in the Department of Agriculture by proclamation of President Theodore Roosevelt on May 29 , 1905 . The forest 's initial area was 1 @,@ 947 @,@ 520 acres ( 788 @,@ 130 ha ) , and it was named after the Sawtooth Mountains in the northwestern part of the forest . On November 6 , 1906 , President Roosevelt announced the addition of 1 @,@ 392 @,@ 640 acres ( 563 @,@ 580 ha ) to the Sawtooth Forest Reserve , which then also constituted much of the present @-@ day Salmon @-@ Challis and Boise National Forests . These lands were split into separate National Forests by executive order on June 26 and July 1 , 1908 . The forest 's area underwent a number of smaller changes in the early 20th century . The Fairfield Ranger District was established in 1906 and merged with the Shake Creek Ranger District in 1972 to form the present @-@ day Fairfield District . The Cassia Forest Reserve was established on June 12 , 1905 and the Raft River Forest Reserve on November 5 , 1906 . The names of the forest reserves were changed to national forests on March 4 , 1907 . Formed from the consolidation of Cassia and Raft River National Forests , the Minidoka National Forest was created on July 1 , 1908 and then added to Sawtooth National Forest on July 1 , 1953 . 
 In 1936 , Democratic U.S. Senator from Idaho James P. Pope introduced the first legislation to establish a national park in the <unk> . Under Pope 's proposal , the park would have been approximately 30 mi ( 48 km ) long and 8 to 15 mi ( 13 to 24 km ) wide . The rest of Idaho 's congressional delegation did not support the proposal , which occurred at a time when the National Park Service was taking a more preservation @-@ oriented stance , and the bill died . On October 12 , 1937 , the Forest Service established the Sawtooth Primitive Area in the Sawtooth Mountains . Subsequently , Sawtooth National Forest began to extensively develop recreation opportunities , including new campgrounds , trails , and roads . 
 In 1960 , Democrat Frank Church , a U.S. Senator from Idaho , first introduced legislation for a feasibility study to survey the area for national park status . While Church allowed the 1960 feasibility study legislation to die , he introduced a bill in 1963 to create Sawtooth Wilderness National Park , which would primarily encompass the existing Sawtooth Primitive Area . Although the 1963 bill also was not voted on , Church admitted that it was not designed to pass but rather to encourage thorough feasibility studies by both the Forest Service and National Park Service . A 1965 joint report by the two agencies recommended either a national park administered by the National Park Service or a national recreation area managed by the Forest Service . In April 1966 , Church introduced two bills , one to establish Sawtooth National Park and another to establish the Sawtooth National Recreation Area ( SNRA ) . The SNRA bill was cosponsored by Republican Leonard B. Jordan , another Senator from Idaho , because it preserved the area while also permitting traditional uses such as logging , hunting , and grazing . The legislation was not supported by Idaho 's members of the U.S. House of Representatives . 
 In 1968 the American Smelting and Refining Company ( ASARCO ) discovered a molybdenum deposit at the base of Castle Peak , the highest peak in the White Cloud Mountains . ASARCO filed paperwork with the Forest Service to construct roads and to allow for an open pit mine below Castle Peak to extract the ore . The proposed mine would have been 350 ft ( 110 m ) deep , 700 ft ( 210 m ) wide , and 7 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) long . About 20 @,@ 000 short tons ( 18 @,@ 000 t ) of material would be processed daily with 99 @.@ 5 percent being deposited in waste piles and settling ponds . ASARCO estimated that the mine would create 350 jobs and $ 1 million ( $ 6 @.@ 8 million today ) in taxes per year , while the roads would open up opportunities for further exploration . The Forest Service would not be able to stop mining and protect the White Cloud Mountains because the General Mining Act of 1872 gave mining rights to anyone who had located a lode or placer . Nationally , opposition to the mine mounted , while in 1970 Republican Idaho Governor Don Samuelson voiced support for the mine , saying that ASARCO was not , " going to tear down mountains . They are only going to dig a hole . " He also characterized Castle Peak as , " nothing but sagebrush on one side and scraggly trees on the other . " Samuelson lost reelection in 1970 to Cecil D. Andrus , a Democrat and supporter of preserving the forest who later ( 1977 – 81 ) served as U.S. interior secretary in the Carter Administration . 
 In March 1971 , Idaho 's congressional delegation , which included Senators Church and Jordan and Republican Representatives James A. McClure and Orval H. Hansen , was finally united and introduced legislation to create the SNRA . On August 22 , 1972 Public Law 22 @-@ 400 establishing the SNRA , covering 756 @,@ 019 acres ( 305 @,@ 950 ha ) , and banning mining passed both the House of Representatives and Senate and was signed into law by Republican President Richard Nixon . This legislation included the White Cloud and Boulder Mountains as part of the SNRA . The 217 @,@ 088 @-@ acre ( 87 @,@ 852 ha ) Sawtooth Primitive Area became the Sawtooth Wilderness ( also in the SNRA ) as part of the National Wilderness Preservation System under the Wilderness Act of 1964 . The original bill also authorized $ 19 @.@ 8 million ( $ 112 million today ) for land acquisition and up to $ 26 million ( $ 147 million today ) for development . The SNRA was dedicated in a ceremony held on the shores of Redfish Lake on September 1 , 1972 . The Burley and Twin Falls Ranger Districts of Sawtooth National Forest were consolidated on October 16 , 2002 into the Minidoka Ranger District . On August 7 , 2015 President Obama signed the Sawtooth National Recreation Area and Jerry Peak Wilderness Additions Act to create the Hemingway – Boulders , Jim McClure – Jerry Peak , and White Clouds wilderness areas , which cover a total of 275 @,@ 665 acres ( 111 @,@ 558 ha ) of central Idaho , primarily in Sawtooth National Forest . 
 = = Management = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest is managed by the U.S. Forest Service , an agency within the Department of Agriculture , as four units : the Fairfield ( 420 @,@ 720 acres or 170 @,@ 260 hectares ) , Ketchum ( 321 @,@ 544 acres or 130 @,@ 124 hectares ) , and Minidoka ( 604 @,@ 108 acres or 244 @,@ 474 hectares ) Ranger Districts and Sawtooth National Recreation Area ( SNRA ) . The Minidoka Ranger District is separated into the Albion ( 95 @,@ 000 acres or 38 @,@ 000 hectares ) , Black Pine ( 90 @,@ 000 acres or 36 @,@ 000 hectares ) , Cassia ( 234 @,@ 000 acres or 95 @,@ 000 hectares ) , Raft River ( 95 @,@ 000 acres or 38 @,@ 000 hectares ) , and Sublett ( 90 @,@ 000 acres or 36 @,@ 000 hectares ) divisions . 
 Guard stations and work camps dot the forest . The SNRA headquarters and main visitor center are located north of the city of Ketchum , while there is a ranger station in Stanley and visitor center at Redfish Lake . There are more than 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 10 @,@ 000 ha ) of private land inholdings within the forest , and it is bordered by the Boise and Salmon @-@ Challis National Forests as well as private , state , and Bureau of Land Management land . Curlew National Grassland is 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the Sublett Division 's eastern boundary . Small portions of the area originally designated as Sawtooth National Forest are managed by the Boise and Challis National Forests , while the Sawtooth manages portions of the Boise and Challis National Forests . 
 Sawtooth National Forest balances interests of different groups , such as those interested in recreation , preservation , or resource extraction . The forest practices conservation of resources , in some areas allowing for production of raw materials , such as lumber for construction purposes and wood pulp for paper products , alongside recreational uses , while in other areas only recreation is permitted . Additionally , mineral extraction through mining and oil and natural gas exploration and recovery are also conducted , though in Sawtooth National Forest this has become less common due to a consensus to protect the natural surroundings . Leases offered to ranchers to allow them to graze cattle and sheep on the forest are common . The forest provides guidelines and enforces environmental regulations to ensure that resources are not overexploited and that necessary commodities are available for future generations . 
 = = = Wilderness = = = 
 The Sawtooth Wilderness was originally designated the Sawtooth Primitive Area in 1937 before becoming part of the National Wilderness Preservation System in 1972 under the Wilderness Act . Although entirely managed by Sawtooth National Forest , only about a quarter ( 25 @.@ 33 percent ) of the Sawtooth Wilderness lies within the area Congressionally designated as Sawtooth National Forest , with the majority ( 69 @.@ 13 percent ) lying in Boise National Forest and a relatively small portion ( 5 @.@ 54 percent ) in Salmon @-@ Challis National Forest . According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency , the Sawtooth Wilderness has some of the clearest air in the lower 48 states . 
 On August 7 , 2015 President Barack Obama signed the Sawtooth National Recreation Area and Jerry Peak Wilderness Additions Act creating the Hemingway – Boulders ( 67 @,@ 998 acres or 27 @,@ 518 hectares ) , Jim McClure – Jerry Peak ( 116 @,@ 898 acres or 47 @,@ 307 hectares ) , and White Clouds ( 90 @,@ 769 acres or 36 @,@ 733 hectares ) wilderness areas covering a combined 275 @,@ 665 acres ( 111 @,@ 558 ha ) of Sawtooth National Forest , Salmon @-@ Challis National Forest , and Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) land after it passed Congress on August 4 , 2015 . The Hemingway – Boulders Wilderness is entirely within SNRA , while all but 450 acres ( 180 ha ) of the White Clouds Wilderness is in the SNRA , with the rest managed by the BLM . The Jim McClure – Jerry Peak wilderness is entirely outside the administered area of Sawtooth National Forest , but partially within the area designated as Sawtooth National Forest and thus managed by Salmon @-@ Challis National Forest and the BLM . The 2015 bill and previous versions were introduced by Republican Representative Mike Simpson , while prior bills had proposed to designate 312 @,@ 000 acres ( 126 @,@ 000 ha ) of wilderness as part of the controversial Central Idaho Economic Development and Recreation Act ( <unk> ) . <unk> would have opened over 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 ha ) adjacent to the new wilderness areas to motorized vehicle use , given 5 @,@ 693 acres ( 2 @,@ 304 ha ) of public land to local municipalities , and established a " no net loss " policy for motorized trails . 
 Prior to the 2015 wilderness designations , the White Cloud and Boulder mountains were part of the largest unprotected roadless area in the United States outside of Alaska . In the absence of Congressional action that would designate the Boulder @-@ White Clouds region as wilderness , the area had been studied for possible protection as a national monument by presidential proclamation under the Antiquities Act . Former Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne initially studied the area for national monument status , but did not recommend it because Congressional action seemed likely . The 2015 bill passed after receiving increased attention when President Obama indicated he would designate a national monument in the area if the wilderness bill did not pass . Additionally , other large areas of the forest are parts of proposed wilderness areas , such as through the Northern Rockies Ecosystem Protection Act . These other proposals have gained no support among Idaho 's congressional delegation because the bills could place undue public use and development restrictions on Idaho 's public lands . 
 The Wilderness Act enhanced the protection status of remote or undeveloped land already contained within federally administered protected areas . Passage of the act ensured that no human improvements would take place aside from those already existing . The protected status in wilderness @-@ designated zones prohibits road and building construction , oil and mineral exploration or mining , and logging , and also prohibits the use of motorized equipment and bicycles . The ways people may enter wilderness areas are on foot or on horseback . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 About 47 percent of the forest 's land is forested , and an additional 3 percent can support trees , but does not currently have any . Lower elevations in Sawtooth National Forest often have sagebrush and grassland vegetation types , while forested areas contain a variety of tree species . Lodgepole pine forms nearly monotypic forests in part of the SNRA with sparse vegetation under the tree cover . Plants that can be found under lodgepole pines include grasses , scattered forbs , dwarf huckleberry , and grouse whortleberry . Douglas @-@ fir and quaking aspen are found in similar environments throughout the forest with understories of low shrubs , such as common snowberry and white spirea . Aspen is also found throughout the forest at elevations ranging from 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) to 11 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) . 
 The highest elevation forests contain whitebark pine , Engelmann spruce , subalpine fir , and limber pine , including the largest individual whitebark pine in North America . Based on tree ring chronologies , some of the whitebark pines are believed to be 700 to 1000 or more years old . The highest elevation forests typically have understories of grasses and forbs that are resistant to freezing at any point of the growing season . Willows , alders , cottonwoods , and sedges are found in riparian areas . Ponderosa pine occupy the dry , lower elevations near the western edge of the forest and historically persisted due to the occurrence of frequent non @-@ lethal fires . Ponderosa pine forest understories typically consist of perennial grasses such as Idaho fescue and bluebunch wheatgrass . In the slightly moister ponderosa pine forests grasses such as pinegrass are found with a cover of shrubs including white spirea , common snowberry , and mallow ninebark . 
 The Minidoka District is separated from the rest of the forest by the Snake River Plain , also known as Idaho 's potato belt ; snowmelt from the forest provides a steady supply of water to the plain . The Minidoka District is a part of the Basin and Range Province , and while much of the vegetation here is similar to the northern part of the forest , the presence of Rocky Mountain juniper is notable as well as is the occasional cactus plant . In these pinyon @-@ juniper woodlands trees also include <unk> pinyon , Utah juniper , and curl @-@ leaf mountain mahogany . Idaho 's rarest plant , the Christ 's Indian paintbrush , is endemic to 200 acres ( 81 ha ) on upper elevations of Mount Harrison in the Albion Mountains in the Minidoka District . Davis ' <unk> is also endemic to the Albion Mountains . Additionally , the forest contains potential habitat for the threatened Ute lady 's tresses . 
 Exotic species ( also known as invasive or non @-@ native species ) are often unintentionally introduced by people traveling from outside the forest by sticking to vehicle tires , shoes , or cattle and are usually found near roadways , campgrounds , and other areas used by people . The Forest Service has an invasive species control effort that identifies and attempts to contain the further spread of non @-@ native plants . Invasive plants of particular concern in the forest include spotted knapweed , yellow starthistle , rush <unk> , leafy spurge , and cheatgrass . 
 The mountain pine beetle is a native insect species that is known to experience large outbreaks that infest forest groves , and is particularly common in areas with numerous lodgepole pines and fir trees . A large infestation occurred from 1995 through 2003 , and the beetle wiped out areas of lodgepole pine in the SNRA , an area historically too cold for outbreaks to occur . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest is home to over 243 bird species , 78 mammals , 28 reptiles and amphibians , and 29 fish . Invasive zebra and quagga mussels are potential threats to the forest 's aquatic ecosystems because they can spread rapidly and cover large surface areas , including human structures , thus altering ecosystems , removing native mussels and threatening native fish . Wolves were controversially reintroduced to the SNRA in the mid @-@ 1990s to restore the ecosystem stability that they provide as top <unk> included managing high elk populations , which had inhibited new vegetation growth . Opponents to the reintroduction included hunters concerned that wolves would inhibit their ability to hunt the highest number of game species possible , ranchers concerned for the welfare of their animals , and land developers concerned that a species listed under the Endangered Species Act may restrict what they can do to their land . 
 Along with cougars , timber wolves are the largest top predators that live in the forest and have no predators of their own except humans . Most of the area 's native mammal species are present in the forest , with the exception of grizzly bears , which have become locally extinct . Plans for their reintroduction to central Idaho have been proposed since the 1990s , but have not progressed because of concerns similar to those with the wolf reintroduction as well as fears for human safety . The northern and high elevation areas of the forest contain habitat for wolverines and the endangered Canadian lynx , but no recent sightings of these species have been reported . 
 Elk ( also known as wapiti ) , mule deer , and pronghorn ( also called pronghorn antelope ) are some of the most commonly seen large mammals . During winter , pronghorn that spend the summer in the Sawtooth Valley migrate south to the lower elevations on the Snake River Plain , and some sections of the forest are closed to motorized use to protect the elk winter range . Bighorn sheep are rare sights in the forest , but the forest contains one @-@ third of Idaho 's mountain goat population , and they are commonly seen at high elevations in the Boulder , White Cloud , Pioneer , and Sawtooth mountains . Other mammals in the forest include the coyote , moose , bobcat , beaver , yellow @-@ bellied marmot , pika , and badger . 
 Bull trout are one of the management indicator species for the forest . Population monitoring efforts are undertaken every year to provide an assessment of forest health . They were selected because they are dependent upon specific habitat conditions and are sensitive to habitat changes . Bull trout are only found in parts of the Salmon , Boise , and Payette river watersheds on the Fairfield District and the SNRA . The forest is home to the longest salmon migration in the continental United States , but with the damming of the Columbia River , salmon populations have collapsed . Redfish Lake was named for the sockeye salmon that would return to breed in the lake and its tributaries and historically had 10 @,@ 000 to 35 @,@ 000 adult fish return to the lake annually . Between 1990 and 1998 a total of 16 adult fish returned to Redfish Lake , but populations have recovered somewhat , and in 2014 approximately 1400 adult fish returned , up from 1100 in 2011 . Repeated efforts to repopulate the sockeye salmon have taken place in the Columbia River watershed , and in 2008 the first salmon season in 31 years was held for chinook salmon in the upper Salmon River . Brook trout have been introduced to the forest and are now an invasive species that compete with the threatened bull trout . The Wood River sculpin is a fish species that is endemic to the Big Wood River and its tributaries on the Ketchum District and is listed as vulnerable by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) Red List . Rainbow trout , cutthroat trout , and mountain whitefish are all native to portions of the forest waterways . 
 243 bird species have been observed in the upper Salmon River Basin , with an additional 36 accidental species , or those that are not normally found in the region but have been observed on at least one occasion . Bald eagles can be found on the forest , particularly along rivers , while golden eagles are occasionally seen over the sagebrush steppe . Northern goshawks are listed by the Forest Service as a sensitive species and are found on the forest . Black @-@ billed magpies are common on the forest , and sandhill cranes are seen during the breeding season in the Sawtooth Valley . Black rosy finch breed at the highest elevations in the northern section of the forest , while greater sage @-@ grouse can be found in sagebrush habitats throughout the forest . 
 The South Hills crossbill is a finch endemic to the South Hills and Albion Mountains in the Minidoka District . It rarely interbreeds with similar crossbills that are present in its range , and it has been proposed as a separate species created via ecological speciation . The American Ornithologists ' Union failed to find consensus on the issue so the South Hills crossbill is still considered a subspecies of the red crossbill . 
 There are few reptiles in the forest . Snakes species include bullsnakes and rubber boas , as well as western rattlesnakes , which are most likely to be found at lower elevations and in the Minidoka District . Amphibians including the Columbia spotted frog , long @-@ toed salamander , and the Rocky Mountain tailed frog are relatively common . 
 = = = Fire ecology = = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest has an active Fire Management Program which recognizes that forest fires are a natural part of the ecosystem , but this was not always the case . The 1987 forest plan did not recognize fire as an ecosystem process or as a tool for ecosystem management ; this was rectified in the 2012 forest plan . Previous firefighting efforts , which emphasized quickly extinguishing all fires , caused dead and dying trees to accumulate well in excess of the level found when fires are allowed to burn out naturally . Historically speaking , fires became more common in parts of the SNRA after the development of lodgepole pine forests , which occurred prior to 1450 AD . Between 1989 and 1998 there were on average 50 fires per year , with 58 percent of them caused by lightning . The Smoky Mountains of Idaho were named from the frequent forest fires , and in 2007 the Castle Rock Fire burned 48 @,@ 000 acres ( 19 @,@ 000 ha ) of the Smoky Mountains near Ketchum . In 2005 the Valley Road Fire burned 40 @,@ 800 acres ( 16 @,@ 500 ha ) in the White Cloud Mountains after being ignited from embers that came from a trash barrel which were blown out on a windy day . In August 2013 the Beaver Creek Fire and the Kelley Fire were both ignited by lightning and burned 111 @,@ 490 acres ( 45 @,@ 120 ha ) and 17 @,@ 346 acres ( 7 @,@ 020 ha ) , respectively , of the Fairfield and Ketchum ranger districts . Another lightning @-@ caused fire , the McCan Fire , burned 23 @,@ 389 acres ( 9 @,@ 465 ha ) of the Fairfield Ranger District and other lands north of Fairfield in 2013 . Both natural and prescribed fires are used as a tool to maintain desired vegetation and fuel levels . While the forest 's fire plan operates within historical fire regimes , locally fire is actively suppressed to protect human life , investments , and resources . 
 The forest maintains a full @-@ time fire staff throughout the summer , not only to control and extinguish fires that pose threats to people and structures but also to set controlled burns . Their jobs include maintaining a high level of preparedness , keeping a vigilant lookout for fire activity , responding to reports of fires , maintaining equipment , monitoring weather and relative atmospheric dryness , and preparing daily fire activity reports , which are used to post fire information for visitors and staff . The forest has wildland fire engines , pumps , hand tools and fire hose at its disposal . A helicopter can be summoned quickly , along with support from the South Central Idaho Interagency Dispatch Center , including a team of smokejumpers and air tankers used to provide air support in dropping flame retardant and water . There are small areas around Stanley and Mount Harrison where aerial retardant would not be used in the case of a fire . The 10 @-@ member Sawtooth <unk> crew was established in 1963 and is based at Friedman Memorial Airport in Hailey . In the case of larger fires , the National Interagency Fire Command can quickly mobilize available resources . Only four of the original fire lookout towers remain standing in the forest , but they are no longer in use : Iron Mountain , Horton Peak , Lookout Mountain , and Mount Harrison , which was last fully staffed in 2007 . Many of these towers were built by the Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation in the forest ranges from 4 @,@ 514 feet ( 1 @,@ 376 m ) at Rock Creek south of Twin Falls to 12 @,@ 009 feet ( 3 @,@ 660 m ) above sea level at the top of Hyndman Peak , an elevation gain of 7 @,@ 495 feet ( 2 @,@ 284 m ) . The mountains of the Minidoka District are part of the Basin and Range Province , while those in the northern section of the forest are part of the Rocky Mountains . The Sawtooth Mountains have at least 50 peaks over 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) high . 
 The mountains of Sawtooth National Forest have a varied geological history . The northern Sawtooth Mountains formed from the Eocene Sawtooth batholith , while south of Alturas Lake the Sawtooth , Smoky , and Soldier mountains formed from the Cretaceous granodiorite of the Idaho Batholith . Foothills of the Smoky Mountains are from the Pennsylvanian and Permian <unk> formations . The White Cloud Mountains are underlain by the gray granodiorite of the Idaho batholith , while some of the exposed rock is baked impure limestone from the Permian Grand Prize Formation . The central mass of the Raft River Mountains consists of Precambrian metamorphic rocks with Elba quartzite and interlayered schist on the southern slopes and Cambrian quartzite outcrops on the western part of the range . Below the Sublett Mountains the <unk> Formation , a basal phosphorite overlain by a thick sequence of chert and <unk> sandstone , reaches its greatest thickness . Soils in the northern part of the forest are generally deep and highly fertile in lowlands but shallow and less so on steep slopes . In the Minidoka Ranger District , soils are generally productive , derived from volcanic and sedimentary material , shallow on steep slopes , and deep in the lowlands . 
 The Boulder , Pioneer , Sawtooth , Smoky , and White Cloud mountains are generally jagged , while the ranges on the Minidoka District , the Albion , Black Pine , Raft River , and Sublett mountains , are generally smooth and rolling . Galena Summit is a mountain pass at 8 @,@ 701 ft ( 2 @,@ 652 m ) on Idaho State Highway 75 between Stanley and Ketchum , roughly where the Boulder and Smoky Mountains meet . While not in Sawtooth National Forest , Banner Creek Summit is a 7 @,@ 037 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 145 m ) mountain pass on Idaho State Highway 21 at the northern end of the Sawtooth Mountains at the border of the Boise and Challis National Forests . 
 = = = Waterways = = = 
 There are over 1 @,@ 100 lakes covering 7 @,@ 600 acres ( 3 @,@ 100 ha ) and an estimated 7 @,@ 500 miles ( 12 @,@ 100 km ) of temporary and permanent streams and rivers in the forest . Over 680 miles ( 1 @,@ 090 km ) of streams are found in the Fairfield District , over 500 miles ( 800 km ) in the Ketchum District , and over 450 miles ( 720 km ) in the Minidoka District . The entire northern portion of the forest is in the watershed of the Snake River , a tributary of the Columbia River . The Salmon River 's headwaters are in the upper Sawtooth Valley , and this river drains much of the SNRA and follows a tortuous , overall northwesterly course before flowing into the Snake River 425 mi ( 684 km ) downstream . The eastern side of the Sawtooth Mountains is drained by the South Fork of the Payette River . The northern Soldier Mountains , southern Smoky Mountains , and much of the Fairfield District are drained by the South Fork of the Boise River , which flows into Anderson Ranch Reservoir just west of the forest . The Ketchum District , part of the SNRA , and the southern slopes of the Fairfield District are drained by the Big Wood River . Much of the Minidoka District is also drained by the Snake River via the Raft River and other tributaries , but portions of the Black Pine and Raft River Mountains drain into the Great Salt Lake . The annual water yield from the forest is estimated just below 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 acre foot ( 2 @.@ 8 × 109 m3 ) . 
 Most of the forest 's lakes are the result of glaciation and occur in the SNRA in the Sawtooth and White Cloud Mountains , but lakes can be found in most of the other mountain ranges of the forest . There are over 20 lakes in the Fairfield District , 90 in the Ketchum District , and 6 lakes and 3 reservoirs in the Minidoka District . The largest lake on the forest is Redfish Lake , a moraine @-@ dammed lake that is 4 @.@ 5 mi ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) long , 0 @.@ 72 mi ( 1 @.@ 16 km ) wide , and up to 387 ft ( 118 m ) deep . Other large lakes include Alturas , Pettit , Sawtooth , Stanley , and Yellow Belly lakes . 
 = = = Seismology = = = 
 The Sawtooth Fault is a 40 mi ( 64 km ) long east @-@ dipping normal fault that runs along the base of the Sawtooth Mountains and was discovered and mapped in 2010 . It is believed to be capable of producing an earthquake measuring up to 7 @.@ 5 on the Richter magnitude scale , with one of the most recent large earthquakes occurring 4 @,@ 000 years ago and an earlier one 7 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = = Glaciology = = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest has a history of alpine glaciation that is most obvious in the Sawtooth Mountains , and while no surface glaciers exist today , perennial snow fields and rock glaciers remain , usually on north or east facing slopes . There have been 202 perennial snow fields mapped in the Sawtooth Mountains , and while none have been mapped elsewhere on the forest , some may still exist in the Boulder , Pioneer , and White Cloud Mountains . The Sawtooth Mountains were last extensively glaciated in the Pleistocene , but glaciers probably existed during the Little Ice Age , which ended around 1850 AD . Evidence of past glaciation is abundant in the Sawtooth , White Cloud , Boulder , and Smoky mountains , as well as the north and east @-@ facing slopes of the Albion , Raft River , and Soldier mountains . Remnants of the glaciers include glacial lakes , moraines , horns , hanging valleys , cirques , and arêtes . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Much of Sawtooth National Forest receives less than 15 inches ( 38 cm ) of precipitation a year , with higher elevations typically receiving more precipitation . Summer and early fall are usually drier than winter in most of the forest , while in the lowlands of the Minidoka District , such as near Oakley , the spring may be the wettest season . Winter snowfall provides a steady water supply to the streams during the summer . Locally , climate may depend on mountains that block moist air and river valleys that can funnel weather systems . Dry lightning is common in summer and fall . The growing season ranges from 150 days in the lower valleys to less than 30 days in the highest alpine areas . The climate charts below are ordered ( left to right ) from highest to lowest in both latitude and elevation . 
 = = Human history = = 
 Spear points dating to 12 @,@ 000 years ago document the earliest presence of Paleo @-@ Indians in the area , and there are nearly 1 @,@ 500 known heritage sites in the forest . After AD 1700 , the Shoshone , also known as the Sheepeater people , as well as the Bannock and Northern Paiute tribes , harvested fish , game , roots , timber , tubers , and rocks for tools while living in small groups at the northern end of the forest . 
 Trappers and explorers arrived in southern Idaho in the early 19th century . They established immigrant trails in the region by 1849 , including the Oregon and California trails . The forest was used by early settlers primarily for extractive industries . Fur trappers of the Hudson 's Bay Company discovered the Stanley Basin in the northern part of the forest in the 1820s , but mostly avoided it due to the scarcity of beaver . For early settlers , the welfare of their community was dependent upon timber supply , regulation of stream flow for irrigation , and use of the land for cattle range . Mining began in the 1860s , peaked in the 1880s , and fluctuated over the following century with the extraction of gold , silver , lead , and zinc . The Black Pine Division of the forest was explored in the late 1800s , and the Tallman Mine began producing gold in the 1920s with production peaking from 1949 to 1954 . The Black Pine Mine again produced gold from 1992 through November 1997 , when the mine 's parent company , Pegasus Gold , declared bankruptcy . The location of the mine has since been reclaimed . 
 Towns around the forest , including Stanley , Ketchum , and Sawtooth City , were founded as mining towns in the latter part of the 19th century by prospectors and trappers , including Civil War veteran Captain John Stanley , after whom the town of Stanley is named . Ketchum is named after the trapper and guide David Ketchum , while the Sublett Mountains are named after trapper William Sublette , who lived in the area in the 1830s . Most of the logging in the region was for firewood and timber for miners and homesteaders . For much of the 20th century , sheep and cattle grazing were the primary large @-@ scale land uses of the forest . Sheep drives were common in the Wood River Valley after the mining boom and shepherds from southern Idaho drove their flocks north to graze the upper elevation areas in Sawtooth National Forest . The original sheepherders were Basque Americans , while today many of the sheepherders are Peruvians contracted through the Department of Labor . 
 In 1936 the Union Pacific Railroad and its chairman W. Averell Harriman developed Sun Valley and the Bald Mountain ski area — the first winter @-@ destination resort in the United States developed for the purpose of increasing railroad passenger numbers . The area became popular with celebrities , including Ernest Hemingway and Gary Cooper . On July 2 , 1961 Hemingway committed suicide at his home overlooking the Big Wood River ; he is buried at the Ketchum Cemetery . 
 On February 9 , 1945 a B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber crashed on Mount Harrison in the Albion Division of the forest during a training mission in dense fog . All nine crew were killed in the crash , and their bodies were found inside the plane and recovered over the following days . The plane 's remains have never been removed . A memorial service was held on July 29 , 2004 and a plaque was permanently installed honoring those who died . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest receives over one million visitors a year . Two visitor centers , one at the SNRA headquarters north of Ketchum and one at Redfish Lake , provide orientation , books , maps , and interpretive displays and are staffed by either forest service interpreters or volunteers . The forest 's ranger stations also provide these services , but without interpretive displays . Along the roadways , exhibits showcase key parts of the forest , and there are plentiful day use and picnic areas . There are more than 81 campgrounds in the forest , with 12 in the Fairfield District , 6 in the Ketchum District , 25 in the Minidoka District , and 38 in the SNRA . Most of the campgrounds are on a first come first served basis , while some can be reserved . 
 Visiting distant backcountry areas requires accessing hiking trails and then backpacking or horseback riding into remote destinations . Free permits are required for use of the wilderness and can be obtained at trailheads . Group size is restricted in the wilderness , open fires are not permitted in some high @-@ use areas , and visitors are expected to follow Leave No Trace practices . There are abundant trails throughout the forest , with over 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) in the SNRA , 440 miles ( 710 km ) in the Fairfield District , and 341 miles ( 549 km ) in the Minidoka District . Two National Recreation Trails are found on the forest , the Fishhook Creek Boardwalk at Redfish Lake and the Wood River Nature Trail at the Wood River Campground . 
 All @-@ terrain vehicles are allowed on over 500 mi ( 800 km ) of forest roads and some trails , but access may be restricted depending on season and environmental conditions . The Sun Valley area has an extensive network of mountain biking trails . Hunting and fishing are popular recreational activities permitted throughout the forest , provided that proper permits are obtained and the applicable rules and regulations are followed . Hunting and fishing licenses are available from the state of Idaho through the Idaho Department of Fish and Game . 
 The SNRA is the primary destination for mountain climbers and rock climbers within the forest . Thompson Peak and Hyndman Peak are two popular peaks to hike to , and Mount Heyburn is a popular rock climbing destination . Opportunities for rafting and kayaking on the upper Salmon River with conditions range from flatwater to class IV whitewater . Water levels are highest during snowmelt in spring and early summer . The large lakes in the Sawtooth Valley , including Redfish , Alturas , Pettit , and Stanley lakes , have developed boat accesses . Redfish Lake has a lodge with a marina , restaurant , and various activities . There are numerous hot springs distributed across the forest and open to public use . A few have developed tubs , including those in the Baumgartner Campground . 
 = = = Winter activities = = = 
 Winter activities include downhill skiing , cross @-@ country skiing , snowshoeing , and snowmobiling . The first destination winter resort in the U.S. was developed at Sun Valley in 1936 with ski slopes on Bald Mountain and Dollar Mountain . There are four ski areas in Sawtooth National Forest as well as the <unk> Ski Area just west of Hailey and Dollar Mountain in Sun Valley , but these are just outside the forest 's boundary . There are snowshoe loops and 78 mi ( 126 km ) of groomed backcountry ski trails around Galena Lodge in the SNRA . Sno @-@ Cat and heliskiing opportunities also exist in the forest . Over 50 mi ( 80 km ) of groomed snowmobile trails and warming huts are found in the Fairfield District , and there are 30 mi ( 48 km ) in the Cassia Division . 
 = = = Scenic roads = = = 
 Sawtooth National Forest is home to four of Idaho 's scenic byways , three of which intersect in Stanley . Idaho State Highway 75 is designated as the Sawtooth Scenic Byway for 115 @.@ 7 mi ( 186 @.@ 2 km ) from Shoshone north to Stanley . Highway 75 from Stanley to Challis and U.S. Route 93 from Challis north to the Montana border are designated as the Salmon River Scenic Byway for 161 @.@ 7 mi ( 260 @.@ 2 km ) . Idaho State Highway 21 is the Ponderosa Pine Scenic Byway for 130 @.@ 9 mi ( 210 @.@ 7 km ) from Stanley to Boise . The City of Rocks Backcountry Byway follows a series of roads for 49 mi ( 79 km ) around the Albion Mountains and through the City of Rocks National Reserve at the southern end of the Albion Mountains . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Movies , television shows , and documentaries have been filmed in and around Sawtooth National Forest , particularly around the Sun Valley area . Movies filmed in Sun Valley include I Met Him in Paris ( 1937 ) , Sun Valley Serenade ( 1941 ) , and Bus Stop ( 1956 ) . Clint Eastwood 's 1985 film Pale Rider was filmed in the SNRA , mostly in the Boulder Mountains in late 1984 . The opening credits scene was shot south of Stanley in front of the Sawtooth Mountains . The SNRA was one of the settings of the 2010 3 @-@ D computer animated film Alpha and Omega . 
 Beginning in 1986 Idaho license plates depicted a basic mountain range that was supposed to represent the <unk> ; in 1991 the plates were revised to more accurately represent the mountains . The Idaho Division of Motor Vehicles also created a license plate depicting the SNRA . 
 = Home Soil = 
 " Home Soil " is the 18th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . It first aired in broadcast syndication on February 22 , 1988 . Robert Sabaroff , Karl <unk> and Ralph Sanchez developed the story , with Sabaroff producing the teleplay . " Home Soil " is one of five episodes of the series directed by Corey Allen . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet crew on the Federation starship Enterprise @-@ D. In the episode , the crew of the Enterprise investigate the murder of a crewman on a terraforming colony and discover a crystalline life form possessing intelligence . 
 The production team encountered problems with the sets , casting , and scheduling . Due to issues with the script , it was delivered to Allen just one day before shooting . Nine million viewers watched the episode , the second lowest number of viewers for the first season of The Next Generation . Critical reception was mixed , with one reviewer noting that unlike the original Star Trek series , " Home Soil " explored the realm of hard science fiction . Critics compared the appearance of inorganic life forms in the story to the plot of the original Star Trek series episode , The Devil in the Dark . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise arrives at the terraforming colony on <unk> III , as the project is behind schedule . The director , Kurt Mandl ( Walter Gotell ) , insists they are on time but Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) orders an away team to the surface after Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) senses that Mandl is hiding something . After they arrive , one of Mandl 's team is killed by a malfunctioning laser drill . During Lt. Commander Data 's ( Brent Spiner ) inspection of the tool , it begins to fire at him , but his quick android reflexes allow him to dodge the shot and render the drill harmless . He finds the programming of the laser was rewritten to fire upon the staff . Nearby , a crystal is discovered giving off irregular light and radiation patterns . The crystal is brought aboard the Enterprise to study and Picard orders a halt to the terraforming . 
 Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) and Data discover the crystal may be alive . When the crystal attempts to interact with the Enterprise 's computers , it is placed into a containment force field . The crystal begins to grow and gains access to the computer 's translation program and attempts to communicate with the crew , treating the humans as an enemy , derisively calling them " ugly bags of mostly water " . Picard discovers that Mandl and his team previously encountered the crystals ; at the time , they had considered the possibility that the crystals were alive , but Mandl insisted on continuing to terraform . The <unk> used a drilling process responsible for removing the saline water layer from the water table of <unk> III . This saline layer acted as a conductor , allowing many separate crystals to function as one life form . In a defensive response to the drilling , the crystal life form rewrote the laser 's software and attacked the <unk> . 
 Data hypothesizes that a single crystal is not intelligent , but when linked to other crystals , their intelligence is formidable . As the crystalline life form accesses higher @-@ level functions of the Enterprise 's computer , Picard and the crew try to transport it to the surface but the crystal blocks all attempts to transport it off the ship . Data and Lt. Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) discover the presence of cadmium in the crystal and suspect it has photoelectric properties . They disable the lights in the medical lab and the crystal immediately begs for life . Picard peacefully negotiates to return the crystal life form to the surface of the planet where Starfleet will institute a quarantine , leaving the life form to live in peace . 
 = = Production = = 
 Re @-@ writes on " Home Soil " continued throughout shooting , with Corey Allen receiving pages on the day before filming , something that Allen described as a " struggle " . Of the story in general , The Next Generation writer and producer Maurice Hurley said it was " An interesting idea , but the execution fell apart . " He felt that in addition to the script , there were issues with casting , sets and the time in which to shoot . The story bears similarities to the Space : 1999 episode " All That <unk> " , which also featured intelligent water @-@ ingesting rocks that communicated with humanoids . 
 Andrew Probert created a matte painting of the outside of the terraforming station which never made it into the show . The guest stars in " Home Soil " included Walter Gotell , who was better known for appearing in the James Bond film franchise as General Gogol . The crystalline life form 's description for humanoids in the episode spawned the phrase , " ugly bags of mostly water " , which has been used as the title of a documentary about Star Trek fans , and as the name of a song by the band <unk> , as well as being referenced by Dream Warriors in the lyrics of My Definition of a <unk> Jazz Theme . [ 1 ] 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 The episode first aired on February 22 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 9 million on the first broadcast , which was a decrease of over a million from the previous episode " When the Bough Breaks " , which received ratings of 10 @.@ 2 during the previous week . The next new episode was broadcast three weeks later , when " Coming of Age " gained ratings of 10 @.@ 1 million . " Home Soil " was the second lowest viewed episode of the first season , with " The Last Outpost " viewed by 100 @,@ 000 fewer viewers . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com , saying that " while this episode has its flaws , it 's a wonderful example of science fiction , one that doesn 't skimp on suspense , action , and Trek 's trademark compassion . " He didn 't like the film direction by Allen , saying that the director had a " bizarre insistence on unnatural , stage @-@ y blocking and positioning and obsession with extreme closeups " . DeCandido also thought that the plot suffered " amnesia regarding the Horta " from The Original Series episode " The Devil in the Dark " . He gave " Home Soil " an overall score of seven out of ten . Michelle Erica Green , in her review for TrekNation , thought that the episode was " less interesting " than the " Horta attacks and mind @-@ melds " of " The Devil in the Dark " . She also felt " Home Soil " was too similar " in the science fiction and in the storytelling " to the previous episode , " When the Bough Breaks " . 
 Zack Handlen , who watched the episode for The A.V. Club , thought that the " hard sci @-@ fi " worked well as it was an area that The Original Series never went near . He thought that the story was different enough from " The Devil in the Dark " — although the Horta was silicon based , it was at least easily recognisable as an alien creature . " This makes it less exciting as a creature , but more intriguing as an idea , " Handlen argues . While he felt that the episode was a " winner " , he conceded that it was " a bit on the dry side " . James Hunt , whilst writing for the website Den of Geek , noted that the Enterprise fought a space @-@ bound crystalline entity several episodes earlier in " Datalore " , which he considered " a lot more impressive than these crystal <unk> ... Okay , it wouldn 't talk to them , but nor did it die the moment someone switched the frickin ' lights off . " He felt that " Home Soil " was a generic Star Trek episode and thought that it was similar to The Original Series in tone . 
 " Home Soil " was first released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on August 26 , 1992 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . The most recent release was as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = The Day the Music Died = 
 On February 3 , 1959 , rock and roll musicians Buddy Holly , Ritchie Valens , and J. P. " The Big Bopper " Richardson were killed in a plane crash near Clear Lake , Iowa , together with the pilot , Roger Peterson . The event later became known as " The Day the Music Died " , after singer @-@ songwriter Don McLean so referred to it in his 1971 song " American Pie " . 
 At the time , Holly and his band , consisting of Waylon Jennings , Tommy Allsup , and Carl Bunch , were playing on the " Winter Dance Party " tour across the Midwest . Rising artists Valens and Richardson had joined the tour as well . 
 The long journeys between venues on board the cold , uncomfortable tour buses adversely affected the performers , with cases of flu and even frostbite . After stopping at Clear Lake to perform , and frustrated by such conditions , Holly decided to charter a plane to reach their next venue in Moorhead , Minnesota . Richardson , who had flu , swapped places with Jennings taking the latter 's seat on the plane , while Allsup lost his seat to Valens on a coin toss . 
 Soon after take @-@ off , late at night and in poor , wintry weather conditions , the pilot lost control of the light aircraft , a Beechcraft Bonanza , which subsequently crashed into a cornfield , leaving no survivors . 
 = = Background = = 
 Buddy Holly terminated his association with the Crickets in November 1958 . For the start of the " Winter Dance Party " tour , he assembled a band consisting of Waylon Jennings ( bass ) , Tommy Allsup ( guitar ) , and Carl Bunch ( drums ) , and the opening vocals of Frankie <unk> . The tour was set to cover 24 Midwestern cities in as many days . New hit artist Ritchie Valens , J. P. " The Big Bopper " Richardson and Dion DiMucci ( of Dion and the Belmonts fame ) joined the tour to promote their recordings and make an extra profit . 
 The tour began in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , on January 23 , 1959 . The amount of travel soon became a logistical problem . The distance between venues had not been properly considered when the performances were scheduled . Adding to the disarray , the tour bus was not equipped for the weather . Its heating system broke down shortly after the tour began , in Appleton , Wisconsin . While flu spread among the rest of the performers , drummer Bunch was hospitalized in Ironwood , Michigan , for severely frostbitten feet . The musicians replaced that bus with a school bus and kept traveling . As Holly 's group had been the backing band for all of the acts , Holly , Valens , and DiMucci took turns playing drums for each other at the performance in Green Bay , Wisconsin , and Clear Lake , Iowa . 
 On Monday , February 2 , the tour arrived in Clear Lake . The town had not been a scheduled stop , but the tour promoters , hoping to fill an open date , called the manager of the local Surf Ballroom , Carroll Anderson ( 1920 @-@ 2006 ) , and offered him the show . He accepted , and they set the show for that night . By the time Holly arrived at the venue that evening , he was frustrated with the tour bus and decided to charter a plane to take him , after the show , to Fargo , North Dakota . The party would have picked him up for the next tour stop , in Moorhead , Minnesota , saving him the journey in the bus and leaving him time to get some rest . 
 = = Flight arrangements = = 
 Manager Anderson called Hubert Dwyer , owner of the Dwyer Flying Service , a company in Mason City , Iowa , to charter the plane to fly to Hector Airport in Fargo , the closest one to Moorhead . Flight arrangements were made with Roger Peterson , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old local pilot described as a " young married man who built his life around flying " . 
 The flying service charged a fee of $ 36 per passenger for the flight on the 1947 single @-@ engined , V @-@ tailed Beechcraft 35 Bonanza ( registration N3794N ) , which could seat three passengers plus the pilot . A popular misconception , originating from Don McLean 's eponymous song about the crash , was that the plane was called American Pie . In fact , no record exists of any name ever having been given to N3794N . 
 Richardson had contracted flu during the tour and asked Waylon Jennings for his seat on the plane . When Holly learned that Jennings was not going to fly , he said in jest : " Well , I hope your ol ' bus freezes up . " Jennings responded : " Well , I hope your ol ' plane crashes " , a humorous but ill @-@ fated response that haunted him for the rest of his life . 
 Ritchie Valens , who had once had a fear of flying , asked Tommy Allsup for his seat on the plane . The two agreed to toss a coin to decide . Bob Hale , a DJ with <unk> @-@ AM , was working the concert that night and flipped the coin in the ballroom 's side @-@ stage room shortly before the musicians departed for the airport . Valens won the coin toss for the seat on the flight . Dion had been approached to join the flight , although it is unclear exactly when he was asked . Dion decided that since the $ 36 fare ( equivalent to US $ 292 @.@ 20 in today 's money ) equaled the monthly rent his parents paid for his childhood apartment , he could not justify the indulgence . 
 = = Take @-@ off and crash = = 
 After the show ended , Anderson drove Holly , Valens , and Richardson to the Mason City Municipal Airport . The weather at the time of departure was reported as light snow , a ceiling of 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) AMSL with sky obscured , visibility 6 miles ( 9 @,@ 700 m ) and winds from 20 to 30 mph ( 32 to 48 km / h ) . Although deteriorating weather was reported along the planned route , the weather briefings pilot Peterson received failed to relay the information . 
 The plane took off normally from runway 17 ( today 's runway 18 ) at 12 : 55 a.m. Central Time on Tuesday , February 3 . Dwyer , the owner of the flight service company , witnessed the take @-@ off from a platform outside the control tower . He was able to see clearly the aircraft 's tail light for most of the brief flight , which started with an initial left turn onto a northwesterly heading and a climb to 800 ft . The tail light was then observed gradually descending until it disappeared out of view . Around 1 : 00 a.m. , when Peterson failed to make the expected radio contact , repeated attempts to establish communication were made , at Dwyer 's request , by the radio operator , but they were all unsuccessful . 
