 Virginia <unk> The Georgia Tech – Virginia Tech ( <unk> - Virginia Polytechnic Institute ) rivalry has grown considerably since Virginia Tech entered the ACC . In previous years , the teams played infrequently . The intra @-@ conference game has often seen both teams ranked and the outcome has played a key part in determining the winner of the ACC Coastal Division . Since the ACC switched to Division format in 2005 , the winner of this game has gone on to win the Coastal Division all but once , with VT winning seven times and GT winning three times . Dubbed the Battle of the Techs , the game has seen some very close , very intense match @-@ ups . 
 Tennessee – Georgia Tech and Tennessee haven 't met since 1987 but have scheduled a labor day game in Atlanta in 2017 that will renew the rivalry between the two . When Georgia Tech was part of the Southeastern Conference they played annually . After Georgia Tech left the SEC in 1964 , the teams still met until 1987 . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 Colors – Georgia Tech football features old gold and white uniforms with old gold helmets . Navy blue and black have been used as alternate jerseys . In 2006 , Georgia Tech featured a throwback jersey based on Bud Carson @-@ era uniforms . The jerseys were mustard gold and the helmets were white . 
 Songs – The fight songs for Georgia Tech are " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " and " Up With the White and Gold " . If Georgia Tech scores a touchdown , then both songs are played . If Georgia Tech only kicks a field goal , " Ramblin ' Wreck " is played . For some big plays , a shortened version of either song is played . 
 Nicknames – Georgia Tech football teams have had several nicknames over the years including the " Blacksmiths " , the " Engineers " , the " Golden Tornado " , or just the " Techs " . Officially , the teams are called the " Yellow Jackets " or the " Ramblin ' Wreck " . 
 Mascots – The " Ramblin ' Wreck " and the yellow jacket " Buzz " are the mascots of Georgia Tech football . The " Ramblin ' Wreck " is a 1930 Ford Model A Sports Coupe , and it has led the football team on to Grant Field every game since September 30 , 1961 . " Buzz " began pacing the sidelines of Grant Field as a mischievous anthropomorphized yellow jacket during the 1970s . " Buzz " was ranked the number three top mascot in all of college football by " America 's Best " and the " Top Ten " Web site . 
 Yellow Jacket Alley – " Yellow Jacket Alley " is an event staged before every game . It is a players ' walk in which the team and coaches walk from the buses to the stadium , and the fans surround and cheer the walking players . 
 Steam Whistle – An industrial steam whistle has been present on Georgia Tech 's campus ever since the early industrial shop years . It typically was blown for the change of classes at five minutes before the hour . On football game days , the whistle is blown after every Yellow Jackets ' score , and again after every Yellow Jackets ' victory . 
 Student Section – The student sections for the Yellow Jackets ' home football games are primarily located in the North and South End Zones of Grant Field . Until the 2011 season , Flash Card displays were performed by the student section every football season since 1957 . A semi @-@ official student cheering section called the " Swarm " is located in the North End Zone adjacent to the marching band . The Swarm began in 1996 . 
 RAT Caps - Incoming Georgia Tech freshmen are referred to as RATs , which stands for Recruits At Tech , although in recent years the Student Government has begun incorrectly using Recently Acquired Tech Students . A RAT is encouraged to wear the gold colored beanie caps with the front bill worn turned up and bearing the students name , hometown , major , class year and the letters " RAT " . A RAT should record the scores of each football game on the sides of their RAT Cap , written right side up for victories , upside down for losses , and sideways for ties . A RAT should write the " Good Word " on their caps : " To HELL with georgia " . It is the responsibility of a RAT to know the fight songs , the Alma Mater , all of the cheers and the " Good Word " . Before ACC conference regulations prohibited the practice , upperclassmen ordered " RATs on the field " before each home game , and RATs would line up in the end zone along both sides of the entry way from the locker room forming an alley way for the Ramblin ' Wreck to drive through leading the team out onto the field . The ACC forced an end to this tradition after the 1980 season . The RAT cap tradition is most strictly observed by members of the marching band . 
 Marching Band - Even though Georgia Tech is a high @-@ ranking Institute of Technology , and not a college of the arts and humanities , it still fields a 300 + member marching band at all home football games and Bowl Games . A smaller Pep Band attends road games which the full band doesn 't attend . Among other songs , the Yellow Jacket Marching Band always plays the Georgia Tech fight songs and the Alma Mater , and in addition , it plays " When You Say Budweiser , You 've Said It All " at the completion of the third quarter . 
 = = Team achievements = = 
 Georgia Tech Yellow Jacket football has been ranked as the 18th most prestigious college football program in American history by ESPN U. 
 = = = National championships = = = 
 = = = Conference championships = = = 
 = = = Divisional championships = = = 
 = = = Bowl games = = = 
 Georgia Tech has appeared in 41 bowl games and ranks ninth in all time bowl wins with 23 . Georgia Tech 's first four bowl game appearances , the Rose Bowl ( 1929 ) , Orange Bowl , Cotton Bowl Classic , and Sugar Bowl , marked the first time a team had competed in all four of the Major Bowl Games . 
 = = Individual achievements = = 
 = = = Heisman Trophy finalists = = = 
 Georgia Tech has had several players receive votes in the Heisman Trophy balloting . Eddie Prokop finished fifth in the 1943 Heisman voting , Lenny Snow finished 14th in the 1966 voting , Eddie Lee Ivery finished 8th in the 1978 voting , and Calvin Johnson finished 10th in the 2006 voting . Billy <unk> is the only Tech player to receive votes in multiple years . He was 8th in 1962 and runner @-@ up in 1963 . Clint Castleberry was the only freshman in the history of the Heisman to finish as high as third until Herschel Walker 's third @-@ place finish in 1980 . Castleberry and Walker , however , were both surpassed in 2004 by true freshman Adrian Peterson 's Heisman runner @-@ up season . Joe Hamilton tied <unk> 's runner @-@ up status in 1999 . 
 = = = All @-@ Americans = = = 
 Georgia Tech has fielded 50 First Team All @-@ Americans . The first All @-@ Americans at Tech were Walker Carpenter and Everett Strupper in 1917 while the most recent were Durant Brooks in 2007 , Michael Johnson in 2008 , and Derrick Morgan in 2009 , and Shaquille Mason in 2014 . 
 = = = Position award winners = = = 
 Three Georgia Tech players have been awarded the highest collegiate award possible for their position . Joe Hamilton won the Davey O 'Brien Award after his senior season in 1999 , Calvin Johnson won the Fred Biletnikoff Award after his junior season in 2006 , and Durant Brooks won the Ray Guy Award in 2007 . Hamilton and Johnson were the only Tech players to be named ACC Player of the Year until Jonathan Dwyer received the honor in 2008 . 
 = = = Post @-@ collegiate accolades = = = 
 Georgia Tech has had three coaches and thirteen players inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame just down the street in Atlanta , Georgia . Coaches Heisman , Alexander , and Dodd were inducted in the 1954 , 1951 , and 1993 classes respectively . 
 Georgia Tech has over 150 alumni that have played in the National Football League . Tech has had ten players selected in the first round of the NFL draft since its inception in 1937 . The first Georgia Tech player ever to be drafted was Middleton Fitzsimmons in 1937 . He was drafted 2nd in the 10th round by the Chicago Bears . The first Tech player selected in the first round was Eddie Prokop in 1945 and the most recent first round Yellow Jackets were Demaryius Thomas and Derrick Morgan in 2010 . 
 Two Yellow Jackets have been inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame . Joe Guyon played professional football from 1920 @-@ 1927 . Guyon was a collegiate teammate of Jim Thorpe at Carlisle Indian Industrial School before transferring to Georgia Tech . His playing career began with the Canton Bulldogs and finished with the New York Giants . He was inducted into the Hall of Fame in the class of 1966 . Billy Shaw played professional football for the Buffalo Bills from 1961 @-@ 1969 . He was inducted into the Hall of Fame in the class of 1999 . 
 = = Future non @-@ conference opponents = = 
 Announced schedules as of March 31 , 2016 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Spanish Texas = 
 Spanish Texas was one of the interior provinces of the Spanish colonial Viceroyalty of New Spain from 1690 until 1821 . 
 = = History = = 
 Spain had claimed ownership of the territory , which comprised part of the present @-@ day U.S. state of Texas , including the land north of the Medina and Nueces Rivers , but did not attempt to colonize the area until after locating evidence of the failed French colony of Fort Saint Louis in 1689 . In 1690 , Alonso de León escorted several Catholic missionaries to east Texas , where they established the first mission in Texas . When native tribes resisted the Spanish invasion of their homeland , the missionaries returned to Mexico , abandoning Texas for the next two decades . 
 The Spanish returned to southeastern Texas in 1716 , establishing several missions and a presidio to maintain a buffer between Spanish territory and the French colonial Louisiana district of New France . Two years later in 1718 , the first civilian settlement in Texas , San Antonio , was established as a way station between the missions and the next @-@ nearest existing settlement . The new town quickly became a target for raids by the Lipan Apache . 
 The raids continued periodically for almost three decades , until in 1749 when Spanish settlers and the Lipan Apache peoples made peace . But the treaty angered the enemies of the Apache , and resulted in raids on Spanish settlements by the Comanche , Tonkawa , and Hasinai tribes . Fear of Indian attacks and the remoteness of the area from the rest of the Viceroyalty discouraged settlers from moving to Texas . It remained one of the least @-@ populated by immigrants provinces . The threat of attacks did not decrease until 1785 , when Spain and the Comanche peoples made a peace agreement . The Comanche tribe later assisted in defeating the Lipan Apache and Karankawa tribes , who had continued to cause difficulties for settlers . An increase in the number of missions in the province allowed for a peaceful Indian reductions of other tribes , and by the end of the 18th century , only a few of the nomadic hunting and gathering tribes in the area had not been converted . 
 France formally relinquished its claim to its region of Texas in 1762 , when French Louisiana was ceded to the Spanish Empire . The inclusion of Spanish Louisiana into New Spain meant that Texas was no longer essentially a buffer province . The easternmost Texas settlements were disbanded , with the population relocating to San Antonio . However , in 1799 Spain gave Louisiana back to France , and in 1803 Napoléon Bonaparte ( and France ) sold the territory , known as the Louisiana Purchase , to the United States . U.S. President Thomas Jefferson insisted that the purchase included all land to the east of the Rocky Mountains and to the north of the Rio Grande , although its large southwestern expanse was within New Spain . The dispute was not resolved until the Adams – Onís Treaty compromise in 1819 , when Spain ceded Spanish Florida to the United States in return for recognition of the Sabine River as the eastern boundary of Spanish Texas and western boundary of the Missouri Territory . The U.S. claims on the vast Spanish territories west of the Sabine River into Santa Fe de Nuevo México province ( New Mexico ) . 
 During the Mexican War of Independence from 1810 – 1821 , Texas experienced much turmoil . Governor Manuel María de Salcedo was overthrown by rebels in 1810 , but persuaded his jailer to release him and assist him in organizing a counter @-@ coup . Three years later , the Republican Army of the North , consisting primarily of Indians and Americans , again overthrew the Texas government and executed Salcedo . The Spanish response was brutal , and by 1820 fewer than 2000 Hispanic citizens remained in Texas . Spain was forced to relinquish its control of New Spain in 1821 , with Texas becoming a province of the newly formed nation of Mexico , leading to the period in Texas history known as Mexican Texas . 
 The Spanish left a deep mark on Texas . Their European livestock caused mesquite to spread inland while farmers tilled and irrigated the land , changing the landscape forever . The Spanish language provided the names for many of the rivers , towns , and counties that currently exist , and Spanish architectural concepts still flourish . Although Texas eventually adopted much of the Anglo @-@ American legal system , many Spanish legal practices were retained , including the concept of a homestead exemption and community property . 
 = = Location = = 
 Spanish Texas ( Tejas ) was a colonial province within the northeastern mainland region of the Viceroyalty of New Spain . On its southern edge , Tejas was bordered by the province of Coahuila . The boundary between the provinces was set at the line formed by the Medina River and the Nueces River , 100 miles ( 161 km ) northeast of the Rio Grande . On the east , Texas bordered La Louisiane ( French Louisiana ) . Although Spain claimed that the Red River formed the boundary between the two , France insisted that the border was the Sabine River , 45 miles ( 72 km ) to the west . After Mexican independence from Spain , it was within Coahuila y Tejas from 1824 to 1835 . 
 = = Initial colonization attempts = = 
 Although Alonso Álvarez de Pineda claimed Texas for Spain in 1519 , the area was largely ignored by Spain until the late seventeenth century . In 1685 , the Spanish learned that France had established a colony in the area between New Spain and Florida . Believing the French colony was a threat to Spanish mines and shipping routes , Spanish King Carlos II 's Council of War recommended that " Spain needed swift action ' to remove this thorn which has been thrust into the heart of America . The greater the delay the greater the difficulty of attainment . ' " Having no idea where to find the French colony , the Spanish launched ten expeditions — both land and sea — over the next three years . While unable to fulfill their original goal of locating the French settlement , the expeditions did provide Spain a deeper understanding of the geography of the Gulf Coast region . The last expedition , in 1689 , discovered a French deserter living in southern Texas with the Coahuiltecans . In April 1689 , the Frenchman helped guide the Spanish , under Alonso de León , to Fort Saint Louis , which had been destroyed by Karankawa Indians . De León 's expedition also met representatives of the Caddo people , who lived between the Trinity and the Red Rivers . The Caddo expressed interest in learning about Christianity . 
 De León sent a report of his findings to Mexico City , where it " created instant optimism and quickened religious fervor " . The Spanish government was convinced that the destruction of the French fort was " proof of God 's ' divine aid and favor ' " . In his report de León recommended that presidios be established along the Rio Grande , the Frio River , and the Guadalupe River and that missions be established among the Hasinai Indians , whom the Spanish called the Tejas , in East Texas . In Castilian Spanish , this was often written as the phonetic equivalent Texas , which became the name of the future province . 
 = = = Missions = = = 
 The viceroy approved the establishment of a mission but rejected the idea of presidios , primarily because New Spain was chronically short of funds . On March 26 , 1690 , Alonso de León set out with 110 soldiers and several missionaries . The group stopped first to burn Fort Saint Louis to the ground , and then they proceeded to East Texas . Mission San Francisco de los Tejas was completed near the Hasinai village of <unk> in late May , and its first mass was conducted on June 1 . The missionaries refused to allow the unruly soldiers to remain near the missions , and when de León returned to Mexico later that year , only 3 of his initial 110 soldiers remained to assist the monks . Father Damián Massanet , the priest in charge of the mission , left on June 2 to meet the tribes north of the mission before returning to Mexico to request an additional 14 priests and 7 lay brothers . 
 On January 23 , 1691 , Spain appointed the first governor of Texas , General Domingo Terán de los Ríos . Terán was ordered to help establish seven new missions , including two more among the Tejas Indians , four amongst the <unk> , and one for the tribes near the Guadalupe River . He was only able to recruit 10 friars and 3 lay brothers . His expedition reached the existing mission in August , 1691 and discovered that the priests there had established a second mission , Santísimo Nombre de María , five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of San Francisco de los Tejas . One of the priests had died , leaving two to operate the missions . The Indians regularly stole their cattle and horses and were becoming insolent . With provisions running low , Terán chose not to establish any more missions . When he left Texas later that year , most of the missionaries chose to return with him , leaving only 3 religious people and 9 soldiers at the missions . 
 The group also left a smallpox epidemic . The Indians had no natural immunity to the disease and at first blamed the outbreak on the baptismal waters . After thousands of natives had succumbed , the survivors rose up against the missions . In 1693 , the Caddo warned the Franciscan missionaries to leave the area or be killed . The missionaries buried the church bells and burned the mission , then returned to Mexico . Although this first Spanish attempt to settle Texas failed , it provided Spain an increased awareness of the terrain , rivers , and coastline of Texas and convinced the government that " even the most tractable of Indians " could only be converted " by a combination of coercion and persuasion " . For the next 20 years , Spain again ignored Texas . 
 = = Conflict with France = = 
 During the early eighteenth century France again provided the impetus for Spain 's interest in Texas . In 1699 , French forts were established at Biloxi Bay and on the Mississippi River , ending Spain 's exclusive control of the Gulf Coast . Although Spain " refused to concede France 's right to be in Louisiana " and warned King Louis XIV of France that he could be excommunicated for ignoring the 200 @-@ year @-@ old papal edict giving the Americas to Spain , they took no further actions to stop France 's encroachment or expand the Spanish presence . The two countries became allies during the War of the Spanish Succession and cooperated in the Americas . Despite their friendship , Spain remained unwilling to allow the French to trade within their territory . On hearing rumors of French incursions into Texas in 1707 , the viceroy of New Spain ordered all provincial governors to prevent the entry of foreigners and their goods . To dissuade the Tejas Indians from accepting goods from the French , a contingent of soldiers under Pedro de Aguirre traveled into Texas . His expedition reached only as far as the Colorado River and turned around after learning that the Tejas chief was still unhappy with the Spanish . The group did visit the area around the San Antonio River , and was much impressed with the land and availability of water . They believed the river to be unnamed and called it San Antonio de Padua , not realizing that Terán and Massanet had camped nearby years before on the feast day of Saint Anthony of Padua and had given the river the same name . 
 In 1711 , Franciscan missionary Francisco Hidalgo , who had served in the earlier Texas missions , wanted to reestablish missions with the Caddos . The Spanish government was unwilling to provide the funding and troops for the project , so Hidalgo approached the French governor of Louisiana , Antoine de la <unk> Cadillac for help . Cadillac was under orders to turn Louisiana into a profitable colony and believed that Spanish settlers closer to Louisiana could provide new trading opportunities . He sent Louis <unk> de St. Denis , along with brothers Pierre and Robert Talon , who , as children , had been spared at the massacre of Fort Saint Louis , to find Hidalgo and offer assistance . In July 1714 , the French delegation reached the Spanish frontier , at that time around the Rio Grande , where Hidalgo was located . Although St. Denis was arrested and questioned , he was ultimately released . The Spanish recognized that the French could become a threat to other Spanish areas , and ordered the reoccupation of Texas as a buffer between French settlements in Louisiana and New Spain . 
 On April 12 , 1716 , an expedition led by Domingo Ramón left San Juan Bautista for Texas , intending to establish four missions and a presidio which would be guarded by twenty @-@ five soldiers . The party of 75 people included 3 children , 7 women , 18 soldiers , and 10 missionaries . These were the first recorded female settlers in Spanish Texas . After marrying a Spanish woman , St. Denis also joined the Spanish expedition . 
 The party reached the land of the Hasinai people in late June 1716 and was greeted warmly . On July 3 , mission San Francisco was reestablished as Mission Nuestro Padre San Francisco de los Tejas for the <unk> Indians . Several days later , Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción was established at the main village of the <unk> , the head tribe of the Hasinai Confederacy , along the Angelina River . A third mission , Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe , was established 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of Purísima Concepción , at the main village of the <unk> tribe , at what is now Nacogdoches . A final mission , San José de los <unk> , was built among the <unk> Indians just north of present @-@ day Cushing . A presidio , Nuestra Señora de los Dolores , was built opposite San Francisco de los Tejas . 
 During this period , the area was named " New Philippines " by the missionaries in the twin hopes of gaining royal patronage , and that the Spanish efforts would be as successful as in the Philippines a century and a half earlier . The alternate name persisted in use for about 40 years , but had virtually disappeared from use ( in favor of ' Texas ' ) by the end of the century . The name however persisted in documents , especially in land grants 
 At the same time , the French were building a fort in Natchitoches to establish a more westward presence . The Spanish countered by founding two more missions just west of Natchitoches , San Miguel de los Adaes and Dolores de los Ais . The missions were located in a disputed area ; France claimed the Sabine River to be the western boundary of Louisiana , while Spain claimed the Red River was the eastern boundary of Texas , leaving an overlap of 45 miles ( 72 km ) . 
 The new missions were over 400 miles ( 640 km ) from the nearest Spanish settlement , San Juan Bautista . It was difficult to reprovision the missions , and by 1718 the missionaries were in dire straits . Martín de Alarcón , who had been appointed governor of Texas in late 1716 , wished to establish a way station between the settlements along the Rio Grande and the new missions in East Texas . The Coahuiltecans had built a thriving community near the headwaters of the San Antonio River , in the area the Spanish had admired in 1707 . Alarcón led a group of 72 people , including 10 families , into Texas on April 9 , 1718 . They brought with them 548 horses , 6 droves of mules , and other livestock . On May 1 , the group created a temporary mud , brush and straw structure to serve as a mission , San Antonio de Valero , whose chapel was later known as the Alamo . The mission was initially populated with three to five Indians that one of the missionaries had raised since childhood . <unk> built a presidio , San Antonio de Béxar one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the mission , . Alarcón also chartered the municipality of <unk> , now San Antonio . Given a status higher than a village ( pueblo ) but lower than a city ( ciudad ) , San Antonio became the only villa in Texas , and the colonists who settled there relied on farming and ranching to survive . With the new settlement established , Alarcón continued on to the East Texas missions , where he found evidence of much illicit trade with France . 
 The following year , the War of the Quadruple Alliance broke out , aligning Spain against France , England , the Dutch Republic , and Austria . The war was fought primarily over Italy , but England and France used the war as an excuse to attempt to take over Spanish interests in North America . In June 1719 , 7 Frenchmen from Natchitoches took control of Mission San Miguel de los Adaes from its sole defender , who did not know that the countries were at war . The French soldiers explained that 100 additional soldiers were coming , and the Spanish colonists , missionaries , and remaining soldiers abandoned the area and fled to San Antonio . 
 The Marquis of San Miguel de Aguayo volunteered to reconquer Texas and raised an army of 500 soldiers . Aguayo was named the governor of Coahuila and Texas and the responsibilities of his office delayed his trip to Texas by a year , until late 1720 . Just before he departed , the fighting in Europe halted , and King Felipe V of Spain ordered them not to invade Louisiana , but instead find a way to retake Eastern Texas without using force . The expedition brought with them over 2 @,@ 800 horses , 6 @,@ 400 sheep and many goats ; this constituted the first large " cattle " drive in Texas . This greatly increased the number of domesticated animals in Texas and marked the beginning of Spanish ranching in Texas . 
 In July 1721 , while approaching the Neches River , Aguayo 's expedition met St. Denis , who had returned to the French and was leading a raid on San Antonio . Realizing that he was badly outnumbered , St. Denis agreed to abandon East Texas and return to Louisiana . Aguayo then ordered the building of a new Spanish fort Nuestra Señora del Pilar de los Adaes , located near present @-@ day <unk> , Louisiana , only 12 miles ( 19 km ) from Natchitoches . The new fort became the first capital of Texas , and was guarded by 6 cannon and 100 soldiers . The six East Texas missions were reopened , and Presidio Dolores , now known as Presidio de los Tejas , was moved from the Neches River to a site near mission Purísima Concepción near the Angelina River . The Spaniards then built another fort , Presidio La Bahía del Espíritu Santo , known as La Bahía , on the site of the former French Fort St. Louis . Nearby they established a mission , Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga ( also known as La Bahía ) , for the Coco , Karankawa , and <unk> Indians . Ninety men were left at the garrison . Aguayo returned to Mexico City in 1722 and resigned his governorship . At the beginning of his expedition , Texas had consisted only of San Antonio and about 60 soldiers ; at his resignation , the province had grown to consist of 4 presidios , over 250 soldiers , 10 missions , and the small civilian town of San Antonio . 
 = = Settlement difficulties = = 
 Shortly after Aguayo returned to Mexico , the new viceroy of New Spain , Juan de Acuña , <unk> de <unk> , was ordered to cut costs accrued for the defense of the northern part of the territory . Acuña appointed Colonel Pedro de Rivera y Villalón to inspect the entire northern frontier . Beginning in what is now California in November 1724 , Rivera spent the next three years inspecting the northern frontier , reaching San Antonio in August 1727 . His reports of Los Adaes , Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto , and the presidio at San Antonio were favorable , but he was unimpressed with Presidio de los Tejas , whose 25 soldiers were guarding empty missions . The native population had refused to congregate into communities around the missions and refused baptism unless they were on the brink of death . Because the Indians were well @-@ armed , the Franciscans were unable to compel them to join the missions . The frustrated missionaries finally petitioned the Spanish government for 50 soldiers to burn the Indians ' houses of worship and force them to build homes near the missions . No troops were forthcoming . 
 Rivera recommended closing Presidio de los Tejas and reducing the number of soldiers at the other presidios . His suggestions were approved in 1729 , and 125 troops were removed from Texas , leaving only 144 soldiers divided between Los Adaes , La Bahía , and San Antonio . The three East Texas missions which had depended on Presidio de los Tejas were relocated along the San Antonio River in May 1731 , increasing the number of missions in the San Antonio area to five . The San Antonio missions usually contained fewer than 300 Indians . Many of those who lived at the mission had nowhere else to go , and belonged to small tribes that have since become extinct . 
 Spain discouraged manufacturing in its colonies and limited trade to Spanish goods handled by Spanish merchants and carried on Spanish vessels . Most of the ports , including all of those in Texas , were closed to commercial vessels in the hopes of dissuading smugglers . By law , all goods bound for Texas had to be shipped to Veracruz and then transported over the mountains to Mexico City before being sent to Texas . This caused the goods to be very expensive in the Texas settlements . Settlers were often forced to turn to the French for supplies , as the fort at Natchitoches was well @-@ stocked and goods did not have to travel as far . Without many goods to trade , however , the remaining Spanish missionaries and colonists had little to offer the Indians , who remained loyal to the French traders . 
 = = = Apache raids = = = 
 The tribes traded freely , and soon many had acquired French guns , while others had traded for Spanish horses . Tribes without access to either resource were left at a disadvantage . The Lipan Apache , who had been seasonal farmers , were soon pressed by the Comanche , who had horses , and the Wichita , who had guns . The Apaches were bitter enemies of the Tejas of East Texas and had transferred their enmity to the Spanish as friends of the Tejas . After discovering San Antonio in 1720 , the Apache began repeatedly raiding the area to steal livestock , especially horses . An average of 3 Spaniards died each year in Texas as a result of Apache attacks , with approximately 100 animals taken each year . In retaliation , the Spanish launched multiple attacks on the Apaches , capturing horses and mules , hides and other plunder , and taking Apache captives , whom the Spanish used as household servants . By 1731 , however , the San Antonio garrison was begging the government for help in negotiating a peace with the tribes . 
 The Spanish government believed that settlers would defend their property , alleviating the need for some of the presidios . Texas was an unappealing prospect for most settlers , however , due to the armed nomadic tribes , high costs , and lack of precious metals . In 1731 , the Spanish government resettled 55 people , mostly women and children , from the Canary Islands to San Antonio . At that time , only 300 Hispanic settlers lived in San Antonio , with 200 others dispersed throughout the rest of the colony . The new immigrants began farming and renamed the town San Fernando de Béxar , establishing the first municipal , and only civilian , government in Texas . Juan Leal <unk> , the oldest of the settlers , was appointed the first councilman . 
 As the first settlers of the municipality , the Islanders and their descendants were designated <unk> . The established settlers resented the Islanders for their new titles and exclusive privileges within the city government . The newcomers did not know how to handle horses , rendering them useless in mounted warfare against the Apaches . Unlike the established settlers , who relied on ranching , the Islanders were primarily farmers , and their refusal to build fences led to many disagreements when livestock trampled the fields . By the early 1740s , however , intermarriage and the need for closer economic ties had helped to alleviate some of the infighting , and the original settlers were given permission to serve as magistrates and council members . 
 The threat of Apache raids led to a constant state of unease in San Antonio , and some families left the area , while others refused to leave the safety of the town to tend their livestock . The problems culminated with a late @-@ night raid on San Antonio by 350 Apache on June 30 , 1745 , retaliation for a Spanish military campaign several months before . The attackers were repelled with the assistance of 100 Indians from Mission Valero . The Apache also preyed on other tribes , including the <unk> and Tonkawa . In the 1740s , these weaker tribes requested missions along the San Gabriel River in the hopes that the Spanish could protect them from attack . Mission San Francisco Xavier was established at the confluence of the San Gabriel River and Bushy Creek in January 1746 to serve the <unk> , <unk> , and Coco Indians . In 1748 alone , the Apaches raided the mission four times , killing three soldiers and four of the Indian residents . Many of the resident Indians fled the mission due to the threat of attacks . This did not deter the missionaries , who founded two more missions , San Ildefonso and Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria , in the area the following year . Within six months , all of the potential converts at San Ildefonso had left . By 1755 , the missions were transferred to a new location on the San Marcos River . 
 = = = Missions for the Apache = = = 
 A peace was finally declared in August 1749 , when a group of Apache chiefs and Spanish officials " symbolically [ buried ] the trouble between the two parties " by burying weapons in the plaza at San Antonio . The Spanish also promised to provide military assistance to the Apache . The Lipan Apache had asked for missions several times , and in 1757 all property of the former San Gabriel missions , as well as the military garrison which briefly protected them , was transferred to new Mission Santa Cruz de San Sabá along the San Saba River northwest of San Antonio . A log stockade was constructed three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from the mission , on the other side of the river , so that the soldiers would not corrupt the Indians . The stockade could hold up to 400 including the 237 women and children who accompanied the soldiers . 
 Apaches shunned the mission , and on March 16 , 1758 , a band of Comanche , Tonkawa , and Hasinai tribes , angry that the Spaniards were assisting their enemies , pillaged and burned the mission , killing eight people . The San Sabá mission was the only Spanish mission in Texas to be completely destroyed by Indians , and it was never rebuilt . Although the Indian force had 2000 members , they chose not to attack the fort . 
 The Spanish government refused to abandon the area completely out of fear that such an action would make them appear weak . While they planned a response , Indians raided the San Saba horse herd , stealing all of the horses and pack mules and killing 20 soldiers . In October 1759 , Spain sent the San Sabá commander , Colonel Diego Ortiz Parrilla , on an expedition north to the Red River to avenge the attack . The tribes were forewarned and led Parrilla 's army to a fortified Wichita village , surrounded by a stockade and a moat , where natives brandished French guns and waved a French flag . After a skirmish in which 52 Spaniards were killed , wounded , or deserted , the Spanish retreated . The San Sabá presidio was replaced with a limestone fortress and a moat , but the Comanches and their allies remained close and killed any soldiers who ventured out . By 1769 , Spain abandoned the fort . 
 In 1762 , missionaries established two unauthorized missions south of San Sabá , in the Nueces River valley . For several years the Apache lived in the missions most of the year , but left in winter to hunt buffalo . One of the missions closed in 1763 , when the Apache never returned from their hunt . The surviving mission closed in January 1766 , after a force of 400 natives from the northern tribes attacked , killing 6 Apaches and taking 25 captives as well as all the livestock in the valley . Forty @-@ one Spanish troops and their small cannon ambushed the northern tribes as they returned to East Texas . Before the Spanish were forced to retreat , over 200 Indians and 12 Spanish soldiers died . After the battle , the Apache refused to return to the mission and returned to raiding near San Antonio . Raids by the northern tribes decreased , however . 
 = = Peace with France = = 
 Indians confirmed in 1746 that French traders periodically arrived by sea to trade with tribes in the lower Trinity River region . Eight years later , the Spanish learned of rumors that the French had opened a trading post at the mouth of the Trinity River . In September 1754 , the governor , Jacinto de Barrios y <unk> sent soldiers to investigate , and they captured five Frenchmen who had been living at an Indian village . To dissuade the French from returning , Spain built the presidio of San Agustín de Ahumada and the mission of Nuestra Señora de la Luz de <unk> near the mouth of the Trinity at Galveston Bay . Conditions were awful at the new location , and both the presidio and the mission were closed in 1770 . 
 The Presidio La Bahía was moved from the Guadalupe River to Goliad on the San Antonio River in 1749 . Within five years , a new mission for the Karankawa tribes , Nuestra Señora del Rosario de los <unk> , was built upstream of the presidio . This mission survived for many years . Despite the new missions and presidios , Texas was one of the least populated provinces on the northern frontier of New Spain . By 1760 , almost 1 @,@ 200 Hispanic people lived in Texas , with half in San Antonio , 350 at Los Adaes , and 260 at La Bahía . Other Spaniards lived in what is now the El Paso area , but that was considered part of New Mexico and not part of Texas . 
 On November 3 , 1762 , as part of the Treaty of Fontainebleau , France ceded the portion of Louisiana west of the Mississippi River to Spain . Spain had assisted France against Britain in the Seven Years ' War , and lost both Manila and Havana to the British . Although the Louisiana colony was a financial liability , King Carlos III of Spain reluctantly accepted it , as that meant France was finally ceding its claim to Texas . At the Treaty of Paris on February 10 , 1763 , Great Britain recognized Spain 's right to the lands west of the Mississippi . Great Britain received the remainder of France 's North American territories , and Spain exchanged some of their holdings in Florida for Havana . 
 With France no longer a threat to Spain 's North American interests , the Spanish monarchy commissioned the Marquis of Rubí to inspect all of the presidios on the northern frontier of New Spain and make recommendations for the future . Rubí 's two @-@ year journey , beginning in early 1766 , covered seven thousand miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) from the Gulf of California to East Texas . This was the first comprehensive look at the New Spain frontier since the 1720s , when Pedro de Rivera conducted his expedition . Rubí was unimpressed with the presidio at San Saba , which he declared to be the worst in the kingdom of New Spain . He recommended that only the presidios at San Antonio and La Bahía be maintained , and that East Texas be totally abandoned , with all population moving to San Antonio . With Louisiana in Spanish control , there was no need for Los Adaes to reside so closely to Natchitoches , especially after the missions had relocated to San Antonio . In August 1768 , the acting governor , Juan María <unk> , Baron of <unk> , moved his headquarters and the garrison to San Antonio , and in 1772 San Antonio became the new Texas capital . Los Adaes was abandoned completely . The new governor also augmented the garrison at San Antonio to protect the town from recurring Indian attacks . A new presidio , Fuerte de Santa Cruz de Cibolo , was also established 40 miles ( 64 km ) southeast of San Antonio to protect farmers and ranchers from attacks . 
 As a result of Rubí 's recommendations , Presidio de San Agustín de Ahumada was closed in 1771 , leaving the Texas coast unoccupied except for La Bahía . In July 1772 , however , the governor of Texas heard rumors that English traders were building a settlement in the area of the Texas coast that had been abandoned . The commander of La Bahía was sent to find the settlement , but saw no sign of other Europeans . His expedition did , however , discover that the San Jacinto River emptied into Galveston Bay and not into the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = = Founding of Nacogdoches = = = 
 The 500 Hispanic settlers who had lived near Los Adaes had to resettle in San Antonio in 1773 . In the six years between the inspection and the removal of the settlers , the immigrant population of East Texas had increased from 200 Europeans to 500 , a mixture of Spanish , French , Indians , and a few blacks . The settlers were given only five days to prepare to relocate to San Antonio . Many of them perished during the three @-@ month trek and others died soon after arriving . 
 After protesting , they were permitted in the following year to return to East Texas , but only as far as the Trinity River , 175 miles ( 282 km ) from Natchitoches . Led by Antonio Gil Y <unk> , the settlers founded the town of Nuestra Señora del Pilar de Bucareli " where the trail from San Antonio to Los Adaes crossed the Trinity . " The settlers helped smuggle contraband goods from Louisiana to San Antonio , and also helped the soldiers with coastal reconnaissance . 
 In May 1776 , King Carlos III created a new position , the <unk> General of the <unk> General of the Internal Provinces of the North ( <unk> <unk> ) , to control frontier areas across northern New Spain , including Spanish Texas . The first appointee , Teodoro de Croix , served as governor and commander in chief of the area from 1776 until 1783 . As de Croix prepared to take office , his predecessor , Baron of <unk> , wrote a detailed report , dated April 27 , 1777 , of the settlements in Texas . One @-@ third of the report detailed the village of Bucareli , which he labeled as " ' of the greatest importance as a means of acquiring reports of a coast as extensive as it is uninhabited . ' " The Bucareli settlers regularly performed coastal explorations and developed a friendship with the Bidai tribe , who reported any signs of foreigners along the coast . In the summer of 1777 , Gil <unk> discovered that a group of Englishmen had come from the sea and stayed long enough to plant a crop near the Neches River . He led an expedition to find the Englishmen , but , although they discovered the fields , the expedition did not find any of the settlers . 
 In 1779 , the Comanches began raiding the Bucareli area , and the settlers chose to move further east to the old mission of Nacogdoches , where they founded the town of the same name . The new town quickly became a waystation for contraband . The settlers did not have authorization to move , and no troops were assigned to protect the new location until 1795 . 
 = = Conflict with the Native Americans = = 
 = = = Karankawa difficulties = = = 
 In 1776 , Indians at the Bahia missions told the soldiers that the Karankawas had massacred a group of Europeans who had been shipwrecked near the mouth of the Guadalupe River . After finding the remains of an English commercial frigate , the soldiers warned the Karankawa to refrain from attacking seamen . The soldiers continued to explore the coast , and reported that foreign powers could easily build a small settlement on the barrier islands , which were difficult to access from the mainland , and then ascend the Trinity or San Jacinto Rivers into the heart of Texas . Captain Luis Cazorla , the commander of the La Bahía presidio , recommended that Spain build a small fort on the barrier islands and provide a shallow @-@ draft vessel to continually reconnoiter the coast . The fort would be both a deterrent to the more bloodthirsty tribes and to the English . The Spanish government , fearful of smuggling , declined to give permission for a port or a boat on the Texas coast . 
 De Croix was unimpressed with his new province , complaining that 
 " ' A villa without order , two presidios , seven missions , and an errant population of scarcely 4 @,@ 000 persons of both sexes and all ages that occupies an immense desert country , stretching from the abandoned presidio of Los Adaes to San Antonio , ... does not deserve the name of the Province of Texas ... nor the concern entailed in its preservation . ' " 
 Despite his distaste for the area , he increased the number of troops in the interior provinces by 50 % and created units of " light troops " which did not carry all of the heavy gear and could fight on foot . His administration also attempted to build alliances with native troops , and planned to work with the Comanche and the Wichita to wipe out the Apache raiders . The plan was shelved when Spain entered the American Revolution as an ally of the French and the American revolutionaries and money and troops were diverted to attacking Florida instead of exterminating the Apaches . After soldiers in Coahuila aligned with the Mescaleros against the Lipan Apaches , however , Spain was able to sign a peace treaty with the <unk> . The Comanches were also becoming more brazen , attacking Presidio La Bahía in 1781 , where they were repulsed . 
 After hearing that Englishman George Gauld had surveyed Gulf Coast all the way to Galveston Bay in 1777 , Bernardo de Gálvez appointed a French engineer , Luis Antonio Andry , to conduct a similar survey for Spain . Andry finished his survey in March 1778 , and anchored off Matagorda Bay after running dangerously low on provisions . Over a period of days , the Karankawa lured a few men at a time from the ship with offers of assistance and killed all but one , a Mayan sailor named Tomás de la Cruz . The Karankawa also burned the ship and the newly created map , possibly the first detailed Spanish map of the Texas @-@ Louisiana coast . Several months later , the Indians living at Mission Rosario , near La Bahía , escaped to join the Karankawa , and together they began raiding livestock and harassing settlers . The governor pardoned many of the fugitives , and most of them returned to the mission . The Karankawa continued to cause difficulties for the Spanish , and in 1785 the interim commandant @-@ general , Joseph Antonio <unk> , noted that they were unable to explore in the Matagorda Bay region as long as the Karankawa held it . 
 The Spanish again arranged for their coastline to be mapped , and in September 1783 , José de Evia left Havana to chart the coastline between Key West and Matagorda Bay . During his journey , Evia gave Galveston Bay its name , in honor of his sponsor , De Gálvez . Evia later mapped the Nuevo Santander coast between Matagorda Bay and Tampico , part of which later belonged to Texas . 
 = = = Peace with the Indians = = = 
 For much of the 1770s , the Comanche had raided in New Mexico . They were driven from New Mexico in 1779 by a broad assault led by New Mexico governor Juan Bautista de Anza and redirected their activities to the weakly defended Texas . During the same time period the Apaches , who had been stockpiling guns received from the Karankawas , returned to raiding settlements in Texas , violating their peace treaty . The Comanche promptly declared war on the Apache . 
 Gálvez became the viceroy of New Spain in 1785 and regained control of the interior provinces . Gálvez ordered that the Indians be encouraged to use alcohol , which they could only get through trading , and that the firearms they were traded be poorly made so that they would be awkward to use and easy to break . His policies were never implemented , as Spain did not have the money to provide gifts such as those to the tribes . Instead , the Spanish negotiated a treaty with the Comanche in late 1785 . The treaty promised annual gifts to the Comanches , and the peace it brought lasted for the next 30 years . By late 1786 , northern and western Texas were secure enough that Pedro Vial and a single companion safely " pioneered a trail from San Antonio to Santa Fe , " a distance of 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) . 
 The Comanches were willing to fight the enemies of their new friends , and soon attacked the Karankawa . Over the next several years , the Comanches killed many of the Karankawa in the area and drove the others into Mexico . By 1804 , very few natives lived on the barrier islands , where the Karankawa had made their home . In January 1790 , the Comanche also helped the Spanish fight a large battle against the Mescalero and Lipan Apaches at Soledad Creek west of San Antonio . Over 1000 Comanche warriors participated in raids against the Apache in 1791 and 1792 , and the Apache were forced to scatter into the mountains in Mexico . In 1796 , Spanish officials began an attempt to have the Apache and Comanche coexist in peace , and over the next ten years the intertribal fighting declined . 
 In 1791 and 1792 , Fray José Francisco Garza befriended some of the Karankawa and other native peoples . Their friendship allowed Garza to explore much of the coastal areas that had been too dangerous to visit . The Indians requested that Garza build a mission at the junction of the San Antonio and Guadalupe Rivers , and in February 1793 Mission Nuestra Señora del Refugio opened near Mission Lake at the head of San Antonio Bay . Over 230 Indians lived at the mission initially , but within two years they were forced to move to a less flood @-@ prone site , which became known as Refugio . By the end of the eighteenth century , only a small number of the hunting and gathering tribes within Texas had not been Christianized . In 1793 , mission San Antonio de Valero was secularized , and the following year the four remaining missions at San Antonio were partially secularized . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Comanches were the dominant group in the Southwest from the 1750s to the 1830s , and the domain they ruled was an empire known as <unk> . Confronted with Spanish , Mexican , and American outposts on their periphery in New Mexico , Texas , and Coahuila and Nueva Vizcaya in northern Mexico , they worked to increase their own safety , prosperity and power . Their empire collapsed after the Spanish era as their villages were repeatedly decimated by epidemics of smallpox and cholera in the late 1840s ; the population plunged from 20 @,@ 000 to just a few thousand by the 1870s . The Comanches were no longer able to deal with the U.S. Army , which took over control of the region after the Mexican American War ended in 1848 . 
 The Comanches operated as an autonomous power inside the area claimed by Spain but not controlled by it . The Comanches used their military power to obtain supplies and labor from the Mexicans , and Indians through thievery , tribute , and kidnappings , and the Spanish could do little to stop them because the Comanches controlled most of the horses in the region and thus had more wealth and mobility . Although powered by violence , the Comanche empire was primarily an economic construction , rooted in an extensive commercial network that facilitated long @-@ distance trade . Dealing with subordinate Indians , the Comanche spread their language and culture across the region . In terms of governance , the Comanches created a centralized political system , based on a foraging market economy , and a hierarchical social organization . 
 = = Conflict with the United States = = 
 The Second Treaty of Paris in 1783 ended the American Revolution and established the United States of America . The treaty extended the new country 's western boundary to the Mississippi River and within the first year after it was signed 50 @,@ 000 American settlers crossed the Appalachian Mountains . As it was difficult to return east across the mountains , the settlers began looking toward the Spanish colonies of Louisiana and Texas to find places to sell their crops . Spain closed the mouth of the Mississippi to foreigners from 1784 until 1795 despite Thomas Jefferson 's 1790 threat to begin an Anglo @-@ Spanish war over the matter . Americans risked arrest to come to Texas , many of them desiring to capture wild mustangs in West Texas and trade with the Indians . In 1791 , Philip Nolan became the first Anglo @-@ American known to pursue horse @-@ trading in Texas , and he was arrested several times for being within Spain 's borders . The Spanish feared that Nolan was a spy , and in 1801 they sent 150 troops to capture Nolan and his party of 6 men ; Nolan was killed during the ensuing battle . By 1810 , many Americans were trading guns and ammunition to the Texas Indians , especially the Comanche , in return for livestock . Although some chiefs refused to trade with them and reported their movements to Spanish authorities , other bands welcomed the newcomers . A drought made rangeland scarce and stopped the Comanche 's herds from increasing . To meet the American demand for livestock , the Comanche turned to raiding the area around San Antonio . 
 The Spanish government believed that security would come with a larger population , but was unable to attract colonists from Spain or from other New World colonies . By the late 18th century , Texas was one of the least populated regions of New Spain , with fewer than two inhabitants per square league . The population was relatively stagnant , having grown only to 3 @,@ 169 individuals in 1790 from 3 @,@ 103 in 1777 . Over half of the population was classified as Spaniards , with settled Indians making up the next largest category . Blacks , mostly slaves , made up less than 1 % of the population in 1777 , and only 2 @.@ 2 % of the 1793 census . Over two @-@ thirds of the adults in Texas were married , and single men outnumbered single women , although there was a high percentage of widows . Intermarriage was fairly common , mostly between white men and women of mixed origin . Children from these unions often passed as whites . Illegitimate births increased steadily throughout the century , reaching 20 % of all births in 1799 . Despite the small population , however , Spain actively discouraged immigration to Texas , and a permanent garrison was placed in Nacogdoches in 1790 to keep foreigners from settling in the area . Immigrants from the United States were allowed to settle in Louisiana and Florida after taking an oath of allegiance , but were not required to convert to Roman Catholicism . 
 In 1799 , Spain gave Louisiana back to France in exchange for the promise of a throne in central Italy . Although the agreement was signed on October 1 , 1800 , it did not go into effect until 1802 . The following year , Napoleon sold Louisiana to the United States . Many of the Spaniards who had moved to the colony left for Texas , Florida , or other Spanish @-@ held lands . The original agreement between Spain and France had not explicitly specified the borders of Louisiana , and the descriptions in the documents were ambiguous and contradictory . Even when both territories had been under Spanish control , there was disagreement on where the border should be . In 1793 , the King of Spain decided that there was no need to move the boundary from Natchitoches to the Sabine River , as had been recommended by some Frenchmen . 
 The United States insisted that its purchase also included most of West Florida and all of Texas . Thomas Jefferson claimed that Louisiana stretched west to the Rocky Mountains and included the entire watershed of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers and their tributaries , and that the southern border was the Rio Grande . Spain maintained that Louisiana extended only as far as Natchitoches , and that it did not include the Illinois Territory . 
 Texas was again considered a buffer province , this time between New Spain and the United States . In 1804 , Spain planned to send thousands of colonists to increase the number of residents in Texas ( then at 4 @,@ 000 Hispanic inhabitants ) . The plan was cancelled as the government did not have the money to relocate the settlers . The responsibility for defending Texas now rested with <unk> Salcedo , who held the newly reopened position of Commandant General of the Internal Provinces . Salcedo promoted immigration to Texas , and a new town , Trinidad de Salcedo , was founded where the Trinity River intersected the road from San Antonio to Nacogdoches . For a brief time , Salcedo also allowed former Spanish subjects from Louisiana to come to Texas . A few Americans who had become naturalized Spaniards settled in Texas during that time . Salcedo warned , however , that " ' the foreigners are not and will not be anything but crows to pick out our eyes . ' " 
 King Charles IV of Spain ordered data compiled to determine the true boundary . Before the border was settled , both sides led armed excursions into the disputed areas , and Spain began increasing the number of troops stationed in Texas . By 1806 , the number had doubled , with over 883 stationed in and around Nacogdoches . At the end of 1806 , local commanders negotiated a temporary agreement in which neither the Spanish nor the Americans would venture into the area between the Sabine River and Arroyo Hondo . This neutral ground quickly became a haven for lawlessness and it did not stop individuals from crossing the boundary . While on a mission for the United States Army to explore some of the disputed areas of the Louisiana Purchase Zebulon Pike was arrested by the Spanish while camping on the Rio Grande and escorted back to Natchitoches . Although his maps and notes were confiscated , Pike was able to recreate most of it from memory . His glowing comments about Texas lands and animals made many Americans yearn to control the territory . 
 = = End of Spanish period = = 
 In May 1808 , Napoleon forced King Ferdinand VII to abdicate the Spanish throne . His replacement , Napoleon 's elder brother Joseph Bonaparte ( Joseph I ) , was appointed King of Spain , to violent protests from the Spanish citizens . The uprisings continued for the next six years , until his abdication in 1814 and the return of Ferdinand VII . During the time , there was little oversight of the New World colonies . A shadow government operated out Cádiz during Joseph 's reign , operating under the Spanish Constitution of 1812 . The constitutional government included representatives from the colonies , including Texas and New Mexico in New Spain . When King Ferdinand VII resumed his throne , he refused to recognize the new constitution or the representative government . He was forced to change his mind in 1820 as the only way to avert a military coup . 
 During this time of turmoil , it was unclear who actually governed the colonies : Joseph I , the shadow government representing Ferdinand VII , the colonial officials , or revolutionaries in each province . The Mexican War of Independence began in 1810 at the instigation of Miguel Hidalgo . Fearing that the revolution would reach colonial Texas , governor Manuel María de Salcedo ordered the Texas borders closed to all foreigners . He was soon reversed by his uncle , the Commandant General . Revolutionaries soon overthrew and imprisoned Salcedo , and a new government was established in Texas . Salcedo persuaded Ignacio Elizondo ( his jailer ) to return to the royalist cause and the two organized a counter @-@ coup . Hidalgo was captured and executed in 1811 . 
 Although officially neutral during the Peninsular War , the United States allowed rebels to trade at American ports and much of the weaponry and ammunition used by the rebels came from the United States . Americans also provided manpower for the conflict , with Natchitoches serving as a launching point for several expeditions into Texas . In 1812 , Mexican insurgent Bernardo Gutiérrez de Lara led a small force of Americans into Texas . Indians from the eastern part of Texas quickly joined the insurgency . Calling themselves the Republican Army of the North , the group captured San Antonio in 1813 , assassinated the governor , Manuel María de Salcedo , and proclaimed Texas independent from Spain . The death of the governor caused many of the Anglo @-@ Americans to desert the cause , but on April 17 , 1813 , the Gutiérrez – Magee Expedition members composed Texas 's first constitution , which provided for a centralized form of government . Spanish forces recaptured the province later that year at the Battle of Medina , and killed 1300 and executed any Tejanos accused of having Republican tendencies . Within 2 weeks almost 400 rebels were executed and their wives and daughters were imprisoned for 2 months . Royalist soldiers even chased many of the women and children who had fled San Antonio , killing 200 – 300 . Captured Americans were given an opportunity to take an oath of loyalty to Spain , and those who refused were escorted back to the United States . Fearing that the Comanche would still constitute a threat , Spanish general Arredondo ordered all ranchers to move temporarily to San Antonio to help defend the city . When they returned to their ranches several months later , they found that the Comanche had slaughtered all of the livestock , leaving most of the carcasses where they fell . The Spanish army looted the rest of Texas too , and by 1820 fewer than 2000 Hispanic citizens remained in Texas . " Spanish Texas , or what remained of it , had become a desolate , unprotected land that could not feed itself . " 
 Another revolutionary , José Manuel Herrera , created a government on Galveston Island in September 1816 which he proclaimed part of a Mexican Republic . A group of French exiles in the United States attempted to create their own colony on the Trinity River , known as Le Champ d <unk> . The exiles planned to use the colony as a base to liberate New Spain and then free Napoleon from St. Helena . They abandoned the colony shortly and returned to Galveston . 
 On February 22 , 1819 , Spain and the United States reached agreement on the Transcontinental Treaty , which ceded Florida to the United States in return for the United States relinquishing its claim on Texas . The official boundary of Texas was set at the Sabine River ( the current boundary between Texas and Louisiana ) , then following the Red and Arkansas Rivers to the 42nd parallel ( California 's current northern border ) . For the next two years , until early February 1821 , Spain delayed ratification of the treaty , using it as leverage to prevent the United States from formally recognizing one of the rebellious Spanish colonies as an independent nation . During this period many Americans spoke out against the treaty and the renunciation of the claim to Texas . An essay in the City of Washington Gazette denounced the treaty , claiming that " ' a league ' " of the land in Texas was worth more to the United States " ' than the whole territory west of the Rocky Mountains ' " . 
 In 1819 , James Long led the Long Expedition to invade Texas . He declared Texas an independent republic , but by the end of the year his rebellion had been quelled by Colonel Ignacio Pérez and his Spanish troops . The following year Long established a new base near Galveston Bay " to free Texas from ' the yoke of Spanish authority . . . the most atrocious despotism that ever disgraced the annals of Europe . ' " His basis for a rebellion was soon gone , however . 
 On February 24 , 1821 , Agustín de Iturbide launched a drive for Mexican Independence . Texas became a part of the newly independent nation without a shot being fired . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Spanish control of Texas was followed by Mexican control of Texas , and it can be difficult to separate the Spanish and Mexican influences on the future state . The most obvious legacy is that of the language ; the state 's name comes from the Spanish rendering of an Indian word . Every major river in modern Texas , except the Red River , has a Spanish or Anglicized name , as do 42 of the state 's 254 counties and numerous towns also bear Spanish names . Even many of the words that have been incorporated into American English , such as barbecue , canyon , ranch , and plaza , come from Spanish words . An additional obvious legacy is that of Roman Catholicism . At the end of Spain 's reign over Texas , virtually all inhabitants practiced the Catholic religion , and it is still practiced in Texas by a large number of people . The Spanish missions built in San Antonio to convert Indians to Catholicism have been restored and are a National Historic Landmark . 
 The landscape of Texas was changed as a result of some Spanish policies . As early as the 1690s , Spaniards brought European livestock , including cattle , horses , and mules , with them on their expeditions throughout the province . Some of the livestock strayed or stayed behind when the Spanish retreated from the territory in 1693 , allowing the Indian tribes to begin loosely managing herds of the animals . These herds grazed heavily on the native grasses , allowing mesquite , which was native to the lower Texas coast , to spread inland . Although the introduced livestock were able to adapt to the changing conditions , the buffalo had a more difficult time grazing among the new vegetation , beginning the decline in their numbers . Spanish farmers also introduced tilling and irrigation to the land , further changing the landscape . Spanish architectural concepts were also adopted by those in Texas , including the addition of patios , tile floors and roofs , arched windows and doorways , carved wooden doors , and wrought iron grillwork . 
 Although Texas eventually adopted much of the Anglo @-@ American legal system , many Spanish legal practices were retained . Among these was the Spanish model of keeping certain personal property safe from creditors . Texas implemented the first homestead exemption in the United States in 1839 , and its property exemption laws are now the most liberal state in the United States . Furthermore , Spanish law maintained that both husband and wife should share equally in the profits of marriage , and , like many other former Spanish provinces , Texas retained the idea of community property rather than use the Anglo laws in which all property belonged to the husband . Furthermore , Spanish law allowed an independent executor to be named in probate cases who is not required to gain court permission for each act not explicitly listed in the testament . Texas retained this idea , and it has eventually spread to other states , included Arizona , Washington , and Idaho . In other legal matters , Texas kept the Spanish principle of adoption , becoming the first U.S. state to allow adoption . 
 = Kyle Nix = 
 Kyle Ashley Nix ( born 21 January 1986 ) is an Australian @-@ born English footballer who currently plays for PTT <unk> , where he plays as a midfielder . 
 Nix was born in Sydney , Australia to English parents and moved to England at an early age . Nix started his football career with the youth teams at Manchester United and Aston Villa , before he joined Sheffield United . He had a loan spell with Barnsley , but left Sheffield to join non @-@ league Buxton . He played seven games for Buxton during the 2006 – 07 season , before he joined Parkgate where he spent the remainder of the season . 
 He joined Bradford City for whom he made his debut in league football in August 2007 . After two seasons with City , he was released from his contract and returned to non @-@ league with Mansfield Town . He played two years with Mansfield during which time he reached the FA Trophy final before moving to another Conference side Gateshead . Internationally , Nix has represented England at youth level , playing for the U16 , U18 and U20 teams , and semi @-@ professional levels but holds an Australian passport and has expressed a desire to play for the latter country . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nix was born in Sydney , Australia , while his father , Peter , was playing football there . Peter had been a left winger , whose own professional career included 22 league games for Rotherham United . When the family returned to Rotherham , South Yorkshire , Nix started his own football career . Nix 's brother <unk> is also a footballer . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Nix started his football career in England as a youth player for Premier League side Manchester United , before joining Aston Villa 's youth side for a year . He was part of Villa 's youth team which lost in the final of the FA Youth Cup to Middlesbrough . In July 2005 , he was signed by Sheffield United of the Championship on a one @-@ year deal . His debut came in a League Cup tie against League Two side Shrewsbury Town , which United won on penalties , when he came on as a 90th minute substitute . His only other appearance for Sheffield United was again as a substitute in the League Cup against Reading . 
 Towards the end of the 2005 – 06 season he was sent on loan to League One side Barnsley where he stayed for three months . Barnsley won promotion to the Championship although Nix did not play in any games . He returned to Sheffield United but he was among seven players to be released by manager Neil Warnock . Nix had an unsuccessful trial at Peterborough United , and one at Grimsby Town which was curtailed by an ankle ligament injury , and played a reserve team outing for Rotherham United . But after failing to win a place at any of the three league teams , he turned to non @-@ league football . He first appeared for Northern Premier League side Buxton , making his debut against Bridlington Town on 11 November 2006 . He played seven times for Buxton , scoring one goal , which came in a 9 – 0 Derbyshire Senior Cup victory over Blackwell Miners Welfare . For the rest of the 2006 – 07 season he turned out for Northern Counties East League side Parkgate . He also scored once for Parkgate — in a 4 – 3 Sheffield and Hallamshire Senior Cup semi @-@ final defeat to Stocksbridge Park Steels . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 In summer 2007 , he was offered a short @-@ term deal with League Two side Bradford City following a successful trial , teaming back up with Stuart McCall , who Nix knew from his days at Sheffield United . He made his Bradford debut against Wolverhampton Wanderers in a League Cup game scoring his first senior goal . His league debut came three days later in the first league game to be played at Shrewsbury Town 's new ground the New Meadow . He was offered a longer term deal at City , before becoming a regular first team player . His first league goal was a long @-@ range equaliser as Bradford drew 1 – 1 with Chesterfield on 8 December 2007 before he added a second in successive games in a 2 – 1 defeat to Peterborough United . His goals helped to win him a contract extension in January until the end of the 2007 – 08 season . Later that month he improved his run of goals by scoring in three successive matches to help Bradford to five points from three games within the space of eight days . Nix stayed in the team for the remainder of the season , but it was not until April that he scored again , with a long @-@ range volley against Brentford , as he bid for a new contract for the 2008 – 09 season . On 29 April 2008 , Nix was offered a new deal , which he signed the following week to remain at Bradford for another season . 
 Nix started Bradford 's first two games of the 2008 – 09 season in place of Joe Colbeck , who was suspended following a red card against Milton Keynes Dons at the end of the previous campaign . However , when Colbeck was available again , Nix was dropped to the substitutes ' bench , with new signing Paul McLaren partnering Lee Bullock , who had returned from injury , in central midfield . Nix struggled for form but was also playing with an ankle injury , which eventually forced him to take a hospital scan in November . He was one of six club midfielders to be injured at the time . He returned to action later that month as a second @-@ half substitute against his father 's former team Rotherham United , at the Don Valley Stadium . However , he struggled to hold down a regularly place in the side because of new midfielders signed during the course of the season , and he was released at the end of the campaign having played less than half the games that he played in his first year at City . Nix was offered the chance to return to Bradford by McCall if he could not find a new club but he rejected the invitation . 
 = = = Mansfield Town = = = 
 Nix spent two weeks of summer on holiday in Mexico with three former Bradford colleagues , Joe Colbeck , Dean Furman and Nicky Law . Although Nix had reported interest from League Two clubs , upon his return from holiday he dropped down a division to go on trial with Conference National club Mansfield Town . After just three days of his trial he signed a two @-@ year deal to become their 11th new player of the summer . Nix made his debut for Mansfield in their opening day 4 – 0 victory against Crawley Town , and scored his first goal for his new club at the end of September during a 3 – 1 defeat to Barrow . Nix enjoyed a run of games in the first team and was described by manager David Holdsworth as one of the club 's " best players " until he suffered an ankle injury , which required surgery at a hospital in Northallerton and kept him out of first @-@ team action until the new year . He returned to playing action for Mansfield reserves in late January and was back in the first team squad by the end of the month . He made his comeback to the first team in a 3 – 1 defeat to Stevenage Borough at the start of February . By the end of his first season with Mansfield , he had played 23 league games and scored twice . 
 During the follow pre @-@ season , Holdsworth allowed Nix to attend a trial with Dutch Eerste Divisie side Sparta Rotterdam . Nix described it as a " chance of a lifetime " to pursue his dream of playing for the Australian national side with Sparta having an Australian coach . However , his trial was unsuccessful and he returned to Mansfield and he immediately scored in a friendly ahead of the new Conference season . Nix was not included in Mansfield 's squad for the first three games of the season , and during the third match with the side losing , the club 's fans were singing Nix 's name . After eventually winning 3 – 1 , Holdsworth said : " I know Kyle is a very good player and I respect the fans have individuals they like . But we have a healthy squad here and I picked what I felt was a winning side today which proved to be right . " His first game of the season was as a late substitute for Adam Smith moments after Mansfield conceded an equaliser in a 1 – 1 draw with Kettering Town . His first start of the season came as Holdsworth made changes to personnel and formation for a game at Southport on 11 September . A 2 – 1 victory was Mansfield 's third consecutive win . Before the end of the month , he had scored his first goal of the month , during a 5 – 0 victory against York City which put Mansfield second in the table . 
 At the end of his second season , Nix was one of five players to be released by Mansfield . 
 = = = Gateshead = = = 
 During the summer , he had trials with fellow Conference side Gateshead , scoring a penalty in a friendly against Carlisle United on 16 July 2011 , before the game was abandoned after an hour due to torrential rain . Two weeks later , Nix signed an initial six @-@ month contract with Gateshead . He made his debut as a second @-@ half substitute on 13 August 2011 in Gateshead 's 3 – 2 win over Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough . He made his first start for Gateshead on 22 October 2011 in a 3 – 1 win against Telford United at New Bucks Head . Having started only two games in five months with Gateshead , Nix is due to be released when his contracts expire on 24 January . 
 = = = Tamworth = = = 
 On 14 February 2012 , Nix joined Tamworth on a free transfer . He made his debut on 3 March coming on as a second @-@ half substitute for Chez Isaac in a 3 – 0 league defeat to Fleetwood Town . 
 = = = Chiangrai United = = = 
 Following a brief spell at UR La <unk> Centre in Belgium where he did not play a competitive match Nix moved to Chiangrai United F.C. in the Thai Premier League in 2013 . Nix so far made 26 appearances , scoring five goals and claiming three assists . Nix scored in matches against Muangthong , <unk> F.C. , Bangkok Glass and BEC Tero . 
 = = International career = = 
 Nix has appeared for various England youth international teams including under 16s , under 18s and under 20s . He scored twice for the under 17s , in a 4 – 0 victory over Faroe Islands and another in a 2 – 1 victory over Norway , during the Nordic International Tournament in 2002 . After moving to Mansfield Town in 2009 , he was eligible to play for the England C team , which is the team which represents England at non @-@ league level . He was one of three Mansfield players , along with Louis Briscoe and Scott Garner , to play in a 1 – 1 with Hungary on 15 September 2009 . He was called back up for the England C team by manager Paul Fairclough a year later . 
 Nix also holds an Australian passport , which he picked up in summer 2008 , when he returned to the country for the first time since he left as a youngster in order to coach at <unk> Football Club . It enables him to play for the Australian side , a dream which Nix is still pursuing . 
 = = Personal Life = = 
 Nix holds an Australian passport . 
 On 2 June 2014 , Nix was reported missing by his family after leaving his home in Rotherham in the early hours of the morning . He was found safe and well by police later the same day . 
 = = Playing statistics = = 
 As of match played 28 April 2012 . 
 = TNM 02067 = 
 TNM 02067 ( Tanzanian National Museums specimen 02067 ) is a fragmentary fossil dentary ( lower jaw ) from the Cretaceous ( between 146 and 66 million years ago ) of Tanzania . The short , deep bone is about 19 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 77 in ) long , but the back part is broken off . It contains a large , forward @-@ inclined incisor with a root that extends deep into the jaw , separated by a diastema ( gap ) from five cheekteeth . Very little remains of the teeth , but enough to determine that they are hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) . The third cheektooth is the largest and the roots of the teeth are curved . First described in 2003 , TNM 02067 has been tentatively identified as a sudamericid — an extinct family of high @-@ crowned gondwanathere mammals otherwise known from South America , Madagascar , India , and Antarctica . If truly a gondwanathere , it would be the only African member of the group and may be the oldest . The describers could not exclude other possibilities , such as that the jaw represents some mammalian group known only from younger , Cenozoic times ( less than 66 million years ago ) . 
 = = Discovery and context = = 
 TNM 02067 was discovered in 2002 in the locality TZ @-@ 07 in the <unk> Region of southwestern Tanzania , which has also yielded remains of various other vertebrates , including birds and other saurischian dinosaurs . The discovery was reported in a 2003 paper by David Krause and colleagues . TZ @-@ 07 lies in the " Red Sandstone Unit " ( RSU ) , an informal , poorly defined rock unit . Age estimates for the RSU have ranged from middle Jurassic to Miocene , but according to Krause and colleagues , part of this discrepancy is the result of confusion between two superficially similar rock units that outcrop nearby ; the older one , where TZ @-@ 07 is located , is undoubtedly Mesozoic and the younger is Cenozoic . Based on the presence of non @-@ avian dinosaurs and <unk> fishes , Krause and colleagues assigned TZ @-@ 07 to the Cretaceous ( 146 – 66 million years ago ) . In 2007 , Nancy Stevens and colleagues identified the unit that produced TNM 02067 as likely belonging to the middle part of the Cretaceous ( around Aptian to Cenomanian ) . TNM 02067 is significant as one of the very few mammals from the Cretaceous of the southern continents ( Gondwana ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 TNM 02067 is a damaged , partial left dentary ( lower jaw bone ) . It preserves much of the body of the bone , which is short and deep , but is broken along a vertical fracture behind the toothrow . There is another fracture in the front part of the jaw . The bone is 19 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 77 in ) long and 11 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 45 in ) deep . All the teeth are incomplete or absent , and lack both enamel and cementum , but what remains indicates that there was a large incisor at the front and five cheekteeth further back , separated by a diastema ( gap ) of about 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 098 in ) . On the labial ( outer ) surface of the dentary , there is one large mental foramen ( opening ) . The mandibular symphysis , where the two halves of the lower jaw meet , is poorly preserved , but there is nothing to suggest that the left and right dentaries were fused . The lower margin of the bone is convex at the front , but concave further back , so that the depth of the dentary is 8 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 33 in ) below the diastema , but only 7 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 in ) below the third cheektooth . The origin of the coronoid process , a projection at the back of the dentary , lies far to the front . 
 The large incisor is inclined forward , and its root — the only part of the tooth that is preserved — forms an angle of about 55 ° with the horizontal . At the tip of the alveolus , where the tooth projects out of the bone , it is 3 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) high and 2 @.@ 1 mm broad . The root extends through the dentary to a position below the third cheektooth . Only the roots of the first and second cheekteeth are preserved . Both are about 1 @.@ 5 mm in diameter , but the first tooth may have been slightly smaller than the second . The third tooth , the largest of the cheekteeth , has the root slightly curved backward . This root is deeply anchored in the dentary , extending down through about three @-@ fourths of the bone . The crown is preserved in the form of a stump of dentine , 2 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 091 in ) long and 1 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 075 in ) broad , that extends high above the dentary , indicating that the tooth was hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) . High dentine stumps also remain of the fourth and fifth cheekteeth . The fourth is about as large as the first and second and the fifth is smaller , with a diameter of about 1 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) . The fourth cheektooth also has a long , curved root , which extends more than halfway through the dentary , and that of the fifth tooth is even smaller and shorter . The orientation of the roots and teeth indicates that all the teeth were single @-@ rooted . 
 = = Identity = = 
 The dentary superficially resembles that of various other mammalian groups with enlarged incisors , such as rodents , lagomorphs , hyraxes , wombats , the aye @-@ aye , and the extinct <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> — all of which are known only from the Cenozoic , less than 66 million years ago . Krause and colleagues could not exclude the possibility that TNM 02067 represents an early member of such a group or an otherwise unknown major group of mammals . However , only two groups of Mesozoic mammals resemble TNM 02067 : gondwanatheres ; and multituberculates in the superfamilies <unk> and <unk> . <unk> and <unk> occur in the late Cretaceous through Paleogene of the northern continents ( Laurasia ) , and gondwanatheres , an enigmatic group of uncertain evolutionary affinities , are known from the late Cretaceous through Paleogene of Gondwana , with forms such as Gondwanatherium , Sudamerica ( both from Argentina ) , Lavanify ( Madagascar ) , and Bharattherium ( India ) . 
 No multituberculates are known to have had hypsodont teeth , none has more than two molariform ( molar @-@ like ) teeth in a single toothrow , and most have large , blade @-@ like teeth . However , the form of the remains of TNM 02067 's third cheektooth suggests it was not such a blade @-@ like tooth and that at least the last three cheekteeth were likely molariform . In these respects , TNM 02067 does resemble gondwanatheres in the family Sudamericidae , and Krause and colleagues tentatively identified it as representing that family , primarily on the basis of its hypsodont teeth . Krause and colleagues compared the dentary in detail to that of Sudamerica , the only other gondwanathere for which a substantial fragment of the jaw was known . Sudamerica has only four , not five , cheekteeth ( all of which are molariform ) , a higher , narrower incisor with a root that extends further through the dentary , and a shorter diastema ; in all these respects , TNM 02067 is more primitive . In addition , the mental foramen of the TNM 02067 is located lower and the cheekteeth vary more in size . 
 If truly a gondwanathere , TNM 02067 extends the known geographic range of the group to another part of Gondwana , the African mainland . The uncertain age of locality TZ @-@ 07 renders a precise assessment of the significance of TNM 02067 difficult . It may well be older than the oldest previously known gondwanathere , the Campanian Gondwanatherium . It also has implications for the hypothesis that Africa was isolated from the rest of Gondwana from an early date — as early as the early Cretaceous — and consequently had a fauna distinct from the rest of Gondwana for much of the Cretaceous , as it may be closely related to the sudamericids of South America , India , Madagascar , and Antarctica , a highly derived group . 
 = Battle of the Gates of Trajan = 
 The Battle of the Gates of Trajan ( Bulgarian : <unk> при <unk> <unk> , Greek : Μάχη <unk> <unk> του <unk> ) was a battle between Byzantine and Bulgarian forces in the year 986 . It took place in the pass of the same name , modern <unk> Vrata , in Sofia Province , Bulgaria . It was the largest defeat of the Byzantines under Emperor Basil II . After the unsuccessful siege of Sofia he retreated to Thrace , but was surrounded by the Bulgarian army under the command of Samuil in the Sredna Gora mountains . The Byzantine army was annihilated and Basil himself barely escaped . 
 Fifteen years after the fall of the Bulgarian capital Preslav , the victory at the Gates of Trajan extended the Bulgarian successes achieved since 976 . Later on Tsar Samuil moved the capital from Preslav in the northeast to Ohrid in the southwest . The memory of the great victory over Basil II was preserved thirty years later in the Bitola inscription of Ivan Vladislav ( 1015 – 1018 ) , the son of Aron . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 In addition to the Bitola inscription where the victory of Samuil , commander of the Bulgarian army , is mentioned in summary form , several medieval historians have written accounts for the battle . Among them were Leo the Deacon who was an eyewitness and a direct participant in the campaign ; John Skylitzes and two other historians George <unk> and Joannes Zonaras who repeat the work of Skylitzes . Not only Byzantine historians wrote accounts for the battle , it was also recorded by the Arab chronicler <unk> of Antioch and the Armenians , Stephen of Taron ( also known as <unk> ) and Matthew of Edessa . More details can be found in the commended sermon of Saint Photius of Thessaly . 
 = = Origins of the conflict = = 
 In 971 , the Byzantine emperor John Tzimiskes forced the captured Bulgarian emperor Boris II to abdicate and move to Constantinople following the fall of the Bulgarian capital Preslav . The Byzantines had occupied only the eastern parts of Bulgaria ; to the west , the four sons of the count of Sredets Nikola David , Moses , Samuil and Aron continued to rule western Bulgaria . They ruled the free territories in a tetrarchy residing in four separate cities in order to fight the Byzantines with higher efficiency . 
 The war against Bulgaria was the first major undertaking carried out by Basil II after his ascension to the throne in 976 , although the Bulgarian attacks had begun in that year . One of the reasons for the ten years of inaction was the policy of one of the strongest nobles in Byzantium , Basil , who de facto ruled the Byzantine Empire in the first years of his namesake . During that time , the main objective of the government in Constantinople was to crush the rebellion of the military commander Bardas Skleros in Asia Minor between 976 and 979 . 
 The local Byzantine governors were left alone to cope with the Bulgarian threat but they were unable to stop the Bulgarians . The positions of the brothers Samuil and Aron ( the two eldest brothers David and Moses died soon after the beginning of the great offensive in 976 ) were strengthened not only by the rebellion of Skleros but also the neglect of the former Byzantine Emperor John <unk> towards the southwestern Bulgarian lands . After the fall of Preslav and the north @-@ eastern areas of the Bulgarian Empire his main priority became the war against the Arabs in Syria , which gave the Bulgarians time to prepare for a long struggle from the center of the remaining parts of the Empire around the Ohrid and Prespa Lakes . 
 For one decade in offensive after 976 the Bulgarians achieved major successes . Samuil managed to liberate north @-@ eastern Bulgaria . Between 982 and 986 the Bulgarians occupied the main city of Thessaly ( in modern Greece ) , Larissa . The constant Bulgarian attacks forced Basil II to take serious actions . 
 = = Siege of Sredets = = 
 In 986 , Basil II led a campaign with 30 @,@ 000 soldiers . The commanders of the eastern armies did not take part in the campaign because they were fighting with the Arabs . The Byzantines marched from <unk> via Plovdiv to reach Sredets ( Sofia ) . According to Leo <unk> the objective of their Emperor was to subdue the Bulgarians with one strike . After the capture of Serdica which was a strategic fortress between the northeastern and southwestern Bulgarian lands Basil II intended to continue his campaign towards Samuil 's main strongholds in Macedonia . 
 On his way to Serdica ( the Byzantine name of <unk> , today Sofia , the capital city of modern @-@ day Bulgaria ) , Basil II left a strong company under Leon Melissenos to guard the rear of the Byzantine army . When he finally reached the walls of the city , Basil II built a fortified camp and besieged the fortress . The siege lasted for 20 days of fruitless assaults , until shortage of food occurred in the Byzantine army . Their attempts to find provisions in the surrounding country were stopped by the Bulgarians who burned crops and even took the cattle of the Byzantines . In the end , the city garrison broke out of the walls , killing many enemy soldiers and burning all of the siege equipment , which the inexperienced Byzantine generals had placed too close to the city walls . 
 = = The battle = = 
 As a result of the successful Bulgarian actions the Byzantines were no longer capable of taking the city with a direct assault . They also could not exhaust the defenders with hunger because , after their supplies were cut , the Byzantines themselves had to deal with that problem . In addition , an army led by Samuil marched into the mountains at the Byzantines ' rear . In the meantime , instead of securing the way for retreat , Leon Melissenos pulled back to Plovdiv . That action was an additional reason for Basil II to lift the siege . The commander of the Western armies , Kontostephanos , persuaded him that Melissenos had set off to Constantinople to take his throne . 
 The Byzantine army retreated from the Sofia Valley towards Ihtiman where it stopped for the night . The rumours that the Bulgarians had barred the nearby mountain routes stirred commotion among the soldiers and on the following day the retreat continued in growing disorder . When the Bulgarians under Samuil and probably Roman saw that , they rushed to the enemy camp and the retreat turned to flight . The Byzantine advance guard managed to squeeze through slopes which were not yet taken by the Bulgarian attackers . The rest of the army was surrounded by the Bulgarians . Only the elite Armenian unit from the infantry managed to break out with heavy casualties and to lead their Emperor to safety through secondary routes . Enormous numbers of Byzantine soldiers perished in the battle ; the rest were captured along with the Imperial insignia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The disaster of the campaign in Bulgaria in 986 was a blow to the consolidation of the <unk> of Basil II . Soon after the Battle of the Gates of Trajan , the nobility in Asia Minor , led by the general Bardas Phokas , rebelled against Basil II for three years . 
 According to the historian Petar <unk> , after the battle Samuil was in control of the Balkans . According to some historians , the northeastern parts of the Bulgarian Empire were liberated in the years after the battle . However , according to other sources , they were liberated ten years prior to the battle , in 976 . The Bulgarians firmly took the initiative and launched continuous attacks towards Thessaloniki , Edessa , and the Adriatic coast . The Serbs were also defeated and their state incorporated into Bulgaria . 
 = 2011 – 12 York City F.C. season = 
 The 2011 – 12 season was the ninetieth season of competitive association football and eighth season in the Football Conference played by York City Football Club , a professional football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . Their eighth @-@ place finish in 2010 – 11 meant it was their eighth successive season in the Conference Premier . The season covers the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 . 
 Gary Mills , who was starting his first full season as manager , signed eleven players before the summer transfer window closed . York occupied a play @-@ off position for most of the season , and finished the Conference Premier season in fourth place . York beat Mansfield Town 2 – 1 on aggregate in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . Luton Town were then beaten 2 – 1 in the 2012 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley Stadium , which meant the club was promoted into League Two , returning into the Football League after an eight @-@ year absence . Eight days beforehand , York won their first national knockout competition , with a 2 – 0 victory over Newport County at Wembley in the 2012 FA Trophy Final . They were knocked out of the 2011 – 12 FA Cup in the fourth qualifying round , after being beaten 2 – 1 away at Wrexham . 
 Thirty players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first @-@ team competition , and there were nineteen different goalscorers . Goalkeeper Michael Ingham , defender James Meredith and midfielder Patrick McLaughlin missed only three of the fifty @-@ eight competitive matches played over the season . Matty Blair finished as leading scorer with twenty goals , of which ten came in league competition , eight came in the FA Trophy and two came in the play @-@ offs . The winner of the Clubman of the Year , voted for by the club 's supporters , was Scott Kerr for his first full season with the club . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 Just over a month into the 2010 – 11 season , manager Martin Foyle resigned with York City fifteenth in the league table . Tamworth manager Gary Mills took over and after pushing for a play @-@ off place the team finished the season in eighth place . Released following the end of the season were Neil Barrett , Chris Carruthers , Leon Constantine , Liam Darville , Michael Gash , Levi Mackin and Andy McWilliams . George Purcell , Michael Rankine , Jonathan Smith , Peter Till and Greg Young also left the club after departing for Dover Athletic , Aldershot Town , Swindon Town , Fleetwood Town and Alfreton Town respectively . Jamal Fyfield , Michael Ingham and James Meredith signed new contracts with York , with David McDermott being retained on non @-@ contract terms . 
 New additions in defence ahead of the season 's start included goalkeeper Paul Musselwhite from Lincoln City and defender Lanre Oyebanjo from Histon . Midfielders to sign were Patrick McLaughlin from Newcastle United , Adriano Moké from Jerez Industrial ( via a spell at the Glenn Hoddle Academy ) , and Michael Potts from Blackburn Rovers , with winger Matty Blair joining from Kidderminster Harriers . Strikers Ashley Chambers , who had been on loan the previous season , and Liam Henderson signed from Championship sides Leicester City and Watford respectively . Striker Jason Walker was the only player signed for a fee , having cost £ 60 @,@ 000 from Luton Town . 
 New home and away kits were introduced for the second successive summer , the home kit featuring red shirts with a white ' V ' shape decoration toward the top of the shirt , light blue shorts with white trims on each side and white socks . The away kit included light blue shirts with the same ' V ' shape decoration , white shorts with light blue trims on each side and light blue socks . Pryers Solicitors continued as shirt sponsors for the third successive season . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = August = = = 
 Walker scored an eighty @-@ third @-@ minute penalty kick and a ninetieth @-@ minute header to give York a 2 – 1 victory away at Ebbsfleet United in the opening game of the season . A second victory came in York 's first home game of the season , a 3 – 1 victory over Barrow , with Walker , McLaughlin and Blair scoring . Former Stockport County winger Danny Pilkington was signed on non @-@ contract terms following a trial with the club . The team 's first defeat of the season came after going down 1 – 0 at home to AFC Telford United , after former York striker Craig Farrell scored an eighty @-@ seventh @-@ minute goal . York responded to this by defeating Kettering Town 5 – 1 away from home , with Boucaud , Walker and Moké scoring in the first half and debutant Pilkington scoring the fifth in stoppage time . Shortly after this game , Kettering midfielder Jon Challinor was signed by York on a contract until January 2012 . York picked up their first clean sheet of the season after drawing 0 – 0 away at Fleetwood Town . A second successive defeat at home came after Alfreton Town won 1 – 0 at Bootham Crescent , with former York player Levi Mackin scoring the only goal with a penalty . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Walker scored what proved to be only a consolation after scoring in the eighty @-@ fourth @-@ minute against Tamworth , with York losing 2 – 1 after conceding two penalties , both of which were awarded from fouls committed by Chris Smith . York 's first victory in four games came after Jamie Reed scored an eighty @-@ eighth @-@ minute winner to give the side a 1 – 0 win at home to Bath City . This was followed by a 3 – 0 win away at league leaders Wrexham , with first half goals from McLaughlin , Chambers and Reed handing York victory . York then drew 2 – 2 at home to Darlington ; Reed opened the scoring in the second @-@ minute with a shot into the top corner from the edge of the penalty area , and in the seventy @-@ ninth @-@ minute Walker scored with a curling shot into the top corner to equalise for York . Chambers and Walker scored first half goals as York defeated Luton 3 – 0 at home . After a four @-@ game unbeaten run York were defeated 3 – 2 away at Gateshead , with former York loanee Jon Shaw scoring their three goals , and Walker and a Curtis own goal making up York 's tally . 
 = = = October = = = 
 Following defeat to Gateshead , York beat Stockport County away 2 – 1 after Blair and Walker scored second @-@ half goals . York then went on to beat Braintree Town 6 – 2 at home , with Chambers , McLaughlin , Fyfield , Walker and Moké scoring . Chambers scored in the sixty @-@ second @-@ minute with York 's goal in a 1 – 1 draw away at Southport , before the home side scored an equaliser nine minutes from time . Chambers scored an eighty @-@ sixth @-@ minute winner in a 2 – 1 victory at home to Grimsby Town , in which Walker had earlier scored with a bicycle kick for York in the first half . Walker scored twice at home against Cambridge United to give York a 2 – 2 draw , with the equaliser being scored direct from a free kick in the eighty @-@ ninth @-@ minute . York then beat Hayes & Yeading United 4 – 2 away , with Walker , Challinor , McLaughlin and Chambers scoring . York were knocked out of the FA Cup in the fourth qualifying round after losing 2 – 1 away at Conference league leaders Wrexham , with McLaughlin scoring York 's only goal . 
 = = = November = = = 
 A second game with Wrexham in eight days finished in a 0 – 0 draw at home , with Ingham making a number of fine saves to preserve the clean sheet . Henderson was signed by fellow Conference side Forest Green Rovers on a one @-@ month loan . York drew 0 – 0 draw away at Barrow , with Walker and Boucaud being sent off during stoppage time . Striker Moses Ashikodi was signed on loan from league rivals Kettering until January 2012 . Reed gave York the lead away at Forest Green after scoring a penalty in the eighty @-@ third @-@ minute , before the home side scored an equaliser in the fourth minute of stoppage time . York defeated Lincoln 2 – 0 at home with Pilkington and McLaughlin scoring in each half . 
 = = = December = = = 
 A second successive victory came after a 7 – 0 win at home to Kettering , in which Ashikodi scored against his parent club for his first for York goal . The other scorers were Reed , Challinor , Blair , McLaughlin and Chambers . York were held to a 0 – 0 draw away at AFC Telford , in which Boucaud , Blair and Walker were denied from scoring by opposition goalkeeper Ryan Young during the first fifteen minutes . Challinor scored during stoppage time to secure an FA Trophy first round replay with Conference North side Solihull Moors , with the match ending a 2 – 2 draw at Bootham Crescent . York won the replay away at Solihull 3 – 0 , with Smith scoring his first goal of the season and Blair scoring twice . York suffered their first league defeat since September after losing 3 – 2 at home to Kidderminster . Henderson scored his first goal for York with the equaliser away at Mansfield on Boxing Day , which finished a 1 – 1 draw . 
 = = = January = = = 
 York were 2 – 0 down in their New Year 's Day fixture at home to Mansfield until the seventy @-@ seventh @-@ minute when Blair scored , and in the first @-@ minute of stoppage time substitute Fyfield scored the equaliser to draw the game at 2 – 2 . Ashikodi was signed on a permanent contract until the end of the season , having scored one goal in six appearances for the club while on loan . Challinor signed an extended contract until the end of the season , while McDermott was allowed to join AFC Telford after being unable to break into the team . Henderson joined Forest Green for a second loan spell , signing until the end of the season . On the same day , York signed former Fleetwood midfielder Scott Brown on a contract until the end of the season . Blair scored both of York 's goals in a 2 – 0 victory away at Lincoln , which was the team 's first win in five league games . Striker Matthew Blinkhorn was signed on a contract until the end of the season after his contract with League of Ireland Premier Division side Sligo Rovers expired . 
 York won their FA Trophy second round game away at Salisbury City 6 – 2 , with Blair , Reed , McLaughlin and Blinkhorn scoring the goals . York defeated Ebbsfleet 3 – 2 at home for a second successive league win , in which Blair scored twice and James Meredith scored his first goal of the season . Smith scored York 's goal in a 1 – 1 draw away at Kidderminster with a fifty @-@ seventh @-@ minute header , before the home side equalised in the eighty @-@ fifth @-@ minute . York fought back from two goals down in the following game away at Darlington , with Smith and Chambers scoring in the second half . Transfer deadline day saw the departure of Boucaud to Luton for a fee of £ 25 @,@ 000 , while Norwegian midfielder Erik Tønne was signed on loan from Sheffield United until the end of the season . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Free agents Chris Doig , a Scottish defender who previously played for Aldershot Town , and Ben Swallow , a Welsh winger who previously played for Bristol Rovers , were signed on contracts until the end of the season . Middlesbrough defender Ben Gibson was signed on loan until the end of the season . York progressed to the quarter @-@ finals of the FA Trophy after Ebbsfleet were beaten 1 – 0 at home in the third round , courtesy of a second half Blair goal . Reed and Blinkhorn scored late goals to give York a 2 – 1 victory at home to Stockport , with the visitors having taken the lead earlier in the second half . York suffered their first defeat in eight league games after losing 2 – 1 at home to Gateshead . Progression to the semi @-@ final of the FA Trophy for the third time in five seasons came after York defeated Grimsby 1 – 0 away in the quarter @-@ final , in which Scott Kerr scored his first goal for the club . 
 = = = March = = = 
 Oyebanjo , with his first goal for the club , and Walker scored to give York a 2 – 0 victory at home to Hayes . This was followed by a 0 – 0 home draw with Tamworth . York defeated Luton in the first leg of the FA Trophy semi @-@ final at Bootham Crescent , with Reed scoring a penalty in a 1 – 0 victory . Fyfield scored the winning goal away at Grimsby during stoppage time with a twenty @-@ five yard strike , after Reed and Smith had scored York 's earlier goals in a 3 – 2 victory . York reached the FA Trophy final for the second time in four seasons after drawing 1 – 1 away at Luton in the semi @-@ final second leg , with Blair scoring a ninetieth @-@ minute equaliser , meaning the team went through 2 – 1 on aggregate . Free agent midfielder Eugen Bopp was signed on a contract until the end of the season after a trial . York were beaten 2 – 1 at home to Southport , with Reed 's eighty @-@ fourth @-@ minute goal not being enough to earn York any points , after the visitors had scored twice earlier in the second half . McLaughlin scored for the first time since December with the only goal in a 1 – 0 victory away at Bath , which restored York 's position in the play @-@ offs . A second goal in two games from McLaughlin saw York equalise away at Luton in the eighty @-@ first @-@ minute , before Meredith scored an eighty @-@ sixth @-@ minute winner in a 2 – 1 victory . 
 = = = April = = = 
 McLaughlin 's third goal in three games came in a 2 – 1 defeat away at Newport County , with the home side scoring the winner twenty @-@ minutes from time through <unk> Rose . York lost the second game in a row when league leaders Fleetwood won 1 – 0 at Bootham Crescent , in which former York striker Richard Brodie scored the only goal in the seventy @-@ third @-@ minute . Blair and Oyebanjo scored in the second half to give York a 2 – 0 victory away at Alfreton . Swallow was prematurely released by the club because of an internal issue . York drew 1 – 1 at home to Newport with Walker scoring a second half equaliser , which was his first goal from open play since 22 October . Musselwhite was forced to make his debut in York 's visit to Cambridge due to an injury to Ingham , with York winning 1 – 0 through a second half Walker goal . York were guaranteed a play @-@ off place after beating Braintree 1 – 0 away , with Tønne scoring his first goal for the club in the seventy @-@ fifth @-@ minute . The league campaign concluded after a 1 – 0 victory at home to Forest Green , with Moké scoring in the eighty @-@ second @-@ minute . The result meant York finished fourth in the Conference table and that they would play third @-@ placed Mansfield in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . Following the game , Kerr was named as the season 's Clubman of the Year , voted for by the club 's supporters . 
 = = = May = = = 
 York drew 1 – 1 with Mansfield at home in the first leg of the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . Mansfield took the lead in the twenty @-@ sixth @-@ minute after Exodus Geohaghon 's long throw was headed in by Ross Dyer , before York equalised on forty @-@ two minutes after Geohaghon scored an own goal from a Challinor cross . York defeated Mansfield 1 – 0 after extra time in the second leg after Blair scored a header from a Walker cross in the 111th @-@ minute . With an aggregate score of 2 – 1 York progressed to the play @-@ off final to play Luton . The club won its first national knockout competition , and first piece of silverware in nineteen years , after Newport were defeated 2 – 0 in the 2012 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium , with Blair and Oyebanjo scoring in the second half . Days after the Trophy victory , plans for a community stadium to be built at Monks Cross , which would be shared by York City and rugby league team York City Knights , were approved by City of York Council . 
 On 20 May 2012 , York regained their Football League status with promotion to League Two after a 2 – 1 win over Luton in the 2012 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley . Luton took the lead when Andre Gray scored in the second minute , before Chambers scored the equaliser on twenty @-@ six minutes with a low shot from a Smith hooked cross . The winner came two minutes into the second half after Blair , despite being in an offside position , scored from close range after latching onto Parslow 's header . After the match , Blair was quoted as saying " I scored the goal and it feels unbelievable but I 'm not taking anything away from the other lads today . The back five , and Daniel Parslow in front , defended like heroes and were brilliant all game " . Mills summarised York 's achievements by saying " To come to Wembley two weeks running and do the double is an incredible feeling . In fact , with the ground announcement , it ’ s been a terrific treble and probably the best hat @-@ trick ever at York City Football Club " . 
 The day after the play @-@ off final thousands turned out to witness the club 's players , management , staff and directors ride through York city centre on an open @-@ topped bus , in celebration of what The Press described as " an unsurpassed nine days in the Minstermen 's proud existence " . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 York occupied a play @-@ off position for the majority of the season , briefly rising as high as first place during the first month of the season while never dropping below fourteenth . For the third time in the space of six seasons , York had a better record away than at home in the league . The team won twelve matches , drew eight and lost three away , compared to winning eleven , drawing six and losing six at home . Ingham , McLaughlin and Meredith recorded the highest number of appearances during the season , each appearing in fifty @-@ five of York 's fifty @-@ eight games . Blair was top scorer in all competitions with twenty goals , followed by Walker , whose eighteen goals made him York 's leading league scorer . Three other players , Chambers , McLaughlin and Reed , reached double figures . 
 Prior to the club 's Football League return , York released Ashikodi , Blinkhorn , Bopp and Brown , while Meredith , Moké and Pilkington left on their own accord for Bradford City , Cambridge and Kidderminster . Challinor , Chambers , Doig , Fyfield , Ingham , Kerr and Parslow signed new contracts with the club . New players to join were defender Danny Blanchett from Burton Albion , midfielders Lee Bullock from Bradford , John McReady from Darlington and Jonathan Smith from Swindon , winger Michael Coulson from Grimsby and striker Oli Johnson from Oxford United . Midfielder Tom Platt was promoted to the first team squad from the youth team after signing a professional contract with the club . 
 = = Match details = = 
 League positions are sourced by Statto , while the remaining information is referenced individually . 
 = = = Conference Premier = = = 
 = = = League table ( part ) = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = FA Trophy = = = 
 = = = Conference Premier play @-@ offs = = = 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player 's contract with that club had expired before he joined York . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player joined that club after his York contract expired . 
 = = = Loans in = = = 
 = = = Loans out = = = 
 = = Appearances and goals = = 
 Source : 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with names struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with York . 
 Players listed with no appearances have been in the matchday squad but only as unused substitutes . 
 Key to positions : GK – Goalkeeper ; DF – Defender ; MF – Midfielder ; FW – Forward 
 = Goodbye , Michael = 
 " Goodbye , Michael " is the thirty @-@ six @-@ minute episode of the seventh season of the American comedy series The Office and the show 's 148th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 28 , 2011 . In the episode , Michael prepares to leave for Colorado with Holly , and spends his last day in the office saying goodbye to everyone individually , wanting no drama to ensue . Meanwhile , new manager Deangelo and Andy try to keep Michael 's biggest clients . 
 The episode was written by series developer and executive producer Greg Daniels and was directed by Paul Feig . It marks the final appearance of Steve Carell as a series regular having announced he was leaving the series near the end of the sixth season . The episode aired in an extended 50 @-@ minute timeslot , having originally been meant to be a two @-@ parter combined with the previous episode , " Michael 's Last Dundies " . The episode featured guest appearances from Will Ferrell and Amy Ryan , and Andy Buckley appeared in a deleted scene . 
 " Goodbye , Michael " was met with critical acclaim from critics and fans and is considered one of the best episodes of The Office . The later seasons that followed this airing received extensive criticism for a decline in quality , and many critics believed that it could have served as a potential series finale . In a poll conducted by fansite OfficeTally , the episode was named the best episode of the seventh season . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 416 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 11 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , making it the third @-@ highest @-@ rated episode of the season among adults between ages 18 and 49 . It later received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Carell and Daniels ' work on the episode . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) arrives at work for what he claims is his second @-@ to @-@ last day before he moves to Colorado to live with his fiancee , Holly ( Amy Ryan ) . As the day progresses , he tries to have an individual goodbye with each employee . A phone call with Holly reveals that this is his last day , and he is flying out to Colorado that night . After having a few mini @-@ crises , including getting cold feet , he starts to break down , but regains his composure after speaking with Holly . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) leaves the office to supposedly run errands , but takes a break from the workday to see The King 's Speech before Michael can say his goodbye to her . 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) is given Michael 's client list as a going @-@ away present , much to the shock and envy of the other salesmen , and after losing one , requests the help of Deangelo Vickers ( Will Ferrell ) to retain them . Vickers nearly ruins a relationship with a client but Andy gains enough confidence to salvage the sale . Along the way , Vickers reveals that he was not hired for his business experience , but because he helped prevent the theft of one of Sabre CEO Jo Bennett 's dogs . Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) is antagonistic towards Michael , still bitter over Michael not recommending him for a manager position , despite Michael 's attempts to reconcile . He initially expresses disdain for Michael 's going @-@ away present , a recommendation letter , but appears touched as he reads further . He also discovers a card challenging him to a paintball match , and the two play behind the building . 
 Gabe ( Zach Woods ) is taking Erin 's ( Ellie Kemper ) public breakup badly . He makes several threats against Andy , who had dated Erin before she dated Gabe , and follows Erin into the women 's bathroom to make his case . Michael advises Erin that she does not necessarily need to choose Andy or Gabe , telling her that she is smart enough to know what to do . 
 Jim ( John Krasinski ) deduces over the course of the day that Michael is leaving early and confronts him about it . Michael admits his plans , and begins a personal goodbye , but breaks down after a few words . Jim , trying to hold back tears , in turn says how much he respects Michael , and that Michael was the best boss he ever had and they jokingly promise to have a proper goodbye over lunch the next day . Michael 's cab to the airport then arrives , and Michael departs the office after one last look at the employees , exiting silently . His cab pulls out of the parking lot just as Pam is pulling in . At the airport , Michael asks the camera crew to inform him if the documentary ever airs , then turns over his microphone , quipping one last " That 's what she said " about how good it will feel to " get this thing [ the mic ] off [ his ] chest " . He begins to walk off when Pam makes it past security and runs up to him . They hug twice and say goodbyes that are not heard by the camera . Pam says in an interview that Michael was not sad , that he was hopeful and excited to start his new life with Holly . Pam stands at the gate and watches Michael 's plane take off . 
 In the epilogue , several of the staff share thoughts about Michael in private interviews . The episode finishes with a scene that takes place the next morning , with the entire staff waiting in the conference room for Michael to arrive for his farewell party , unaware he has already left , with the exception of Jim and Pam . When DeAngelo deduces Michael is not coming , he begins tearing pieces off Michael 's farewell cake ( a major subplot point of the episode ) and throwing them in the trash , in a bizarre public internal struggle over his dieting . The rest of the staff , particularly Jim and Dwight , watch their new boss 's outburst with concern . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Goodbye , Michael " was written by series developer and executive producer Greg Daniels , his 10th writing credit of the series . The episode was directed by Paul Feig , marking his 14th credit for the series . On June 28 , 2010 , it was confirmed that the seventh season of The Office would be Steve Carell 's last . He had previously announced this while being interviewed on BBC Radio . " I just think it 's time ... I want to fulfill my contract . When I first signed on I had a contract for seven seasons , and this coming year is my seventh . I just thought it was time for my character to go , " Carell was quoted as saying . In January 2011 , it was announced that Carell would exit the show early , four episodes before the end of the season . A few weeks after this announcement came the news that Will Ferrell , who previously starred alongside Carell in Anchorman : The Legend of Ron Burgundy , had signed on to appear in a four @-@ episode arc as a Dunder Mifflin branch manager who temporarily takes Michael Scott 's position in Scranton . To help ease the transition , Ferrell appeared in Carell 's final episodes as well as one additional episode after he departs . 
 The writers had gone through different scenarios on how Michael would leave with one suggestion being that he was fired due to a business mistake . They ultimately decided that ending would not be " as much fun for the viewers " . According to Daniels , filming on set actors being " very emotional " and would often be " sadder than their characters were supposed to be " . Andy Buckley confirmed filming a scene saying goodbye to Michael as David Wallace ; however , these scenes were deleted from the network airing . When the episode re @-@ aired three weeks later , it was split into two parts , and Wallace 's scene was inserted into the first part . Steve Carell finished filming his final scenes for " Goodbye , Michael " on March 4 , 2011 . As a goodbye gift , Carell was given a hockey jersey with the # 1 — his number on the call sheet . After Carell 's departure the number was no longer used . The episode ran for an extended 50 minutes instead of the usual 30 minutes . The episode marks the first extended episode since the third season penultimate episode , " Beach Games " . Greg Daniels stated in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that due to Ferrell 's performance and Michael 's goodbyes , the episode " ended up being real long " . NBC Entertainment Chairman Robert Greenblatt allowed Daniels to " do whatever is best [ ... ] to give Steve [ Carell ] the proper goodbye . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Goodbye , Michael " features several references to previous episodes . During one scene , Michael puts his Dundie on his desk , a homage to the final shot in the series opening sequence . Michael 's obsession with basketball and wanting to use the <unk> serves as a reference to the season one episode , " Basketball " and the season three episode " Safety Training " , respectively . Michael 's character Ping appears , having previously appeared in " The Dundies " and " The Seminar . " It also featured the reforming of the Party Planning Committee after being broken up in " Moroccan Christmas " , and briefly showed Creed 's continual habit of using the women 's bathroom as seen in " Women 's Appreciation " . Michael gives Darryl his book " Somehow I Manage " , which was originally mentioned in " Happy Hour . " Two callbacks are made to the episode " Christmas Party " : Phyllis ' gift to Michael being homemade sewn mittens and Dwight wanting to play paintball with Michael . Michael 's goodbye to Pam serves as a homage to a scene in the British version of The Office , where Tim Canterbury proclaims his love for Dawn Tinsley in a meeting room , but Tim turns off his microphone first so the cameras pick up only their reactions and no sound . This scene was also referenced in the fifth season finale , " Company Picnic . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Goodbye , Michael " originally aired on April 28 , 2011 in a 50 @-@ minute timeslot from 9 p.m. ET to 9 : 50 p.m. ET . Nielsen ratings were expected to be high since it was Carell 's last episode and also due to the extended timeslot with 22 @.@ 66 % of readers of TV by the Numbers predicting the episode would receive above a 6 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . However , the episode was viewed by an estimated 8 @.@ 416 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 11 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a twenty @-@ six percent rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Michael 's Last Dundies " . This made the episode the most @-@ watched episode of the season and the third @-@ highest @-@ rated episode of the season after " Ultimatum " and " Nepotism " in the 18 – 49 demo . The episode ranked first in its timeslot beating Grey 's Anatomy , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and Bones . " Goodbye , Michael " was the most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 and the second highest @-@ rated NBC program after The Voice . Added with DVR viewers , " Goodbye , Michael " received a 5 @.@ 9 rating marking a 37 percent rise from the original viewership . The first half @-@ hour of the producer 's cut received a 2 @.@ 76 million viewers , and a 1 @.@ 1 rating / 3 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , while the second half @-@ hour attained 2 million viewers and a 0 @.@ 9 rating / 3 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Since its airing , " Goodbye , Michael " was met with critical acclaim and is considered one of the best episodes of The Office by critics and fans . Cindy White of IGN said that overall the episode was " one of those historic television moments " . She went on to praise the character 's awareness of the camera crew along with Michael saying his goodbyes to the staff . She ultimately gave the episode a 9 out of 10 . The A.V. Club writer Myles McNutt considered the episode to be a classic and praised Greg Daniels choice of showing " their [ fans ] Michael Scott " . He ultimately gave the episode an A. TV Squad writer Joel Keller wrote the episode felt like the series finale and that " As final episodes go , this one was a mixed bag " . Entertainment Weekly 's Hillary Busis praised Carell 's performance . HitFix writer Daniel Feinberg wrote that while the episode " wasn 't flawless " it was " an appropriate disentanglement " . Despite this , he criticized the episode for proving the point that the show could not survive without Michael . Despite this he complimented the performance of the supporting actors . New York writer Phoebe Reilly slightly criticized Pam 's silent goodbye to Michael . Despite this , she said , Dwight 's tears in his talking head and Jim 's goodbye to Michael " achieved the bearable level of poignancy " . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone praised the ending of the episode and the reference to the original British version of The Office . BuddyTV writer Meghan Carlson called Oscar 's scarecrow gift scene the best moment of the episode . HitFix reviewer Alan Sepinwall called the episode " a pretty fantastic tribute to that man on his way out the door . " 
 Will Ferrell 's performance received mixed reviews from critics . Rob Sheffield called his performance " pure magic " , while Miles McNutt said that his scenes were a " momentum killer " . Cindy White criticized the writers for waiting for Ferrell 's second @-@ to last episode to give his character a " juicy quirk " . Soon after the episode 's airdate , the series received publicity for a possible storyline featuring Phyllis as Erin 's birth mother . The rumor was started during an interview with executive producer Greg Daniels with Entertainment Weekly in which he stated " A tiny mystery story – which I 'm not sure anyone ’ s going to catch and will come out a few episodes from now – is being set up here " . This was further explored in the seventh season finale , " Search Committee " , where it was proven false . 
 The episode has also been put on several top ten lists for 2011 . Time reviewer James Poniewozik named the episode the second best television episode of 2011 calling the episode " pitch @-@ perfect " . The A.V. Club named the episode among the top 2011 TV highlights . David Sims wrote that " Although every member of the ensemble gets a moment in the sun , Michael ’ s silent airport farewell to Pam [ ... ] works best of all , a testament to the audience 's deep understanding of these characters " . Daniel Feinberg named Carell 's final episodes for The Office the 20th @-@ best television episodes of 2011 , although he only named Carell 's final episodes under the banner . He mainly praised Carell 's performance for switching from both laughs to sadness with a nuance . TV Guide named the episode the 12 @-@ best episode of 2011 and compared the episode to the humor of the series calling it " understated and pitch @-@ perfect " . " Goodbye , Michael " was voted the highest @-@ rated episode out of 24 from the season , according to an episode poll by the fansite , OfficeTally . In another poll , the episode was voted the fourth highest @-@ rated episode of the series , out of 139 , receiving 403 votes . 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 Greg Daniels , who wrote the script , received a nomination for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . Steve Carell had also submitted this episode for consideration for his nomination for Outstanding Lead in a Comedy Series . Daniels eventually lost to Jeffrey Richman and Steven Levitan of Modern Family for the episode " Caught in the Act " , while Carell lost to Jim Parsons of The Big Bang Theory . Office star Rainn Wilson expressed anger for the snub on Twitter saying " The world of TV should be ashamed of itself that Steve Carell never won an Emmy for Michael Gary Scott . Goodnight . " Former Office writer Michael Schur and director Paul Feig also criticized this choice with Schur calling it a " goddamn fucking embarrassment " . Daniels had also received a nomination for the Writers Guild of America Award for Television : Episodic Comedy , but once again lost to Richman and Levitan . 
 = X & Y = 
 X & Y is the third studio album by the British alternative rock band Coldplay , released on 6 June 2005 in the United Kingdom by the record label Parlophone . The album , which features influences of electronic music , was produced by the band and British record producer Danton Supple . Development of the album was often troubled ; the album 's original producer , British record producer Ken Nelson , was supposed to produce much of the album , however , many songs written during their sessions were ditched due to the band 's dissatisfaction . The album 's cover art is a combination of colours and blocks , which is a representation of the Baudot code . 
 The album contains twelve tracks and an additional hidden track , " Til Kingdom Come " . It is omitted from the track listing on the album sleeve , but listed as " + " on the disc label and inside the album booklet . It was originally planned for American singer @-@ songwriter Johnny Cash to record it with lead singer Chris Martin , but Cash died before he was able to do so . The song " Talk " appeared on the main track listing , although it was thought to have been downgraded to a B @-@ side for the album 's subsequent single releases , after it leaked online in early 2005 . 
 X & Y was released after a considerable amount of hype and was a significant commercial success , reaching the top spot of many charts worldwide , including the United Kingdom and United States , the latter being their first . With accumulated sales of 8 @.@ 3 million units in 2005 alone , X & Y was the best @-@ selling album released in 2005 worldwide . By 2011 , the album had sold over 13 million copies worldwide . 
 Overall reaction to the album has been generally positive , though some critics cited it as being inferior to its predecessors . The album spawned the singles " Speed of Sound " , " Fix You " , " Talk " , " The Hardest Part " , " What If " and " White Shadows . " 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 2004 , Coldplay announced details about " X & Y " while the album was being recorded . Initial plans were to stay out of the public eye throughout the year . Vocalist Chris Martin stated , " We really feel that we have to be away for a while and we certainly won 't release anything this year , because I think people are a bit sick of us . " This plan , however , was not carried out due to the pressure their second album , A Rush of Blood to the Head , had induced but they were trying " to make the best thing that anyone has ever heard " . 
 Prior to the announcement , Martin , guitarist Jonny Buckland , and British record producer Ken Nelson had started recording demos while in Chicago , Illinois . The band then entered a London studio in January 2004 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The band spent eighteen months working on the album . The released album is the third version which the band had produced during their late sessions , and some have even considered it as their fifth album . The band was not satisfied with the outputs of their initial sessions with Nelson , who produced the band 's previous two albums . 
 The initial set release date was 2004 , and the band had to delay the album to January 2005 . But as the new target date was approaching , the band again discarded songs , which they deemed " flat " and " passionless " . Sixty songs were written during these sessions , fifty @-@ two of which were ditched . The band started rehearsing the songs for a planned tour , but felt the songs sounded better live compared to their recorded versions : " We realized that we didn 't really have the right songs and some of them were starting to sound better because we were playing them than they did on record , so we thought we better go back and record them again . " Guitarist Jonny Buckland has said that the band had pushed themselves " forward in every direction " in making the album , but they felt it sounded like they were going backwards compared to their earlier works . 
 In search of perfection , Coldplay had to " step it up a few notches and work hard at it to get it right " . The band chose Danton Supple , who mixed the bulk of A Rush of Blood to the Head , to oversee the production of X & Y. When January went , the band had to finish the album ; they were conscious of the pressure as " expectations for the record grew larger " and " completing it became tougher and tougher " . Finally , the band was settled with the song " Square One " , which Martin has described as " a call to arms " and a " plea " to each of them " not to be intimidated by anything or anyone else " . Once finished , the band felt like they could do their own songs and not have to think of anyone else 's demands . During this month , the band was into the final weeks of production and had put the finishing touches on the tracks . 
 Drummer Will Champion later admitted that the band was not in a rush in completing the album " because the prospect of touring again was so daunting that we felt we should take our time , and also we wanted to make sure that it was the best it could possibly be " . The band had no deadline , according to him , which caused them not to feel pressured into finishing something . Once a proper deadline was imposed onto the band , they became more productive than previous sessions . At this juncture , the band had written " about 14 or 15 songs " . Martin added that the reason why they ended up late was that they " ... kept [ adding ] finishing [ touches to ] the record until it was way too late ... [ they ] don 't listen to it at the moment , because [ they would ] just find something to go back and change . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Coldplay has cited various influences in the album . The German electronic music pioneer Kraftwerk is evident on the song " Talk " , which borrows its synthetic hook from 1981 's " Computer Love " . Also present is 1970s electronic music from the likes of English musician David Bowie and Brian Eno . Eno , who would later produce Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends and Mylo Xyloto , played backing synthesizer on the track " Low " . The first single , " Speed of Sound " , also takes inspiration from the drumbeat of English singer @-@ songwriters Kate Bush 's song " Running Up that Hill " . According to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , the band attempts to " carry the beauty of ' Clocks ' " across the album , borrowing some of its features to songs like " Speed of Sound " . The opening track " Square One " features the famous motif from Also sprach Zarathustra , known better as the title theme of Stanley Kubrick 's 1968 science @-@ fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The three @-@ note sequence is used as a synthesizer hook , as well as a part of the chorus , showcasing Chris Martin 's trademark falsetto voice . 
 " Fix You " features an organ and piano sound . The song starts with a hushed electric organ ballad , including Martin 's falsetto . The song then builds with both an acoustic guitar and piano sound . The sound then shifts with a plaintive three @-@ note guitar line , ringing through a bringing rhythm upbeat tempo . Its instrumentation is varied with the sound of church @-@ style organs hovering throughout the background , piano notes , acoustic and electric guitar riffs , drums , and a singalong chorus . " The Hardest Part " features a faster piano ballad sound , and starts with a repeating two @-@ note piano riff , and features an instrumentation of a singsong guitar . It also includes a slow tempo with a drumming rhythm . The track ends with the band playing the repeated instrument riffs . " Talk " is built around a simple guitar lick by Jonny Buckland . The track includes a hypnotic pace , with Will Champion adding a metronomic beat to the drums . The song features a synthesizer hook notable from Kraftwerk 's " Computer Love " . It also adds a chiming note to more abrasive riffs during the breakdown near the end of the song . " Speed of Sound " is a similar song musically based on the piano . The song benefits from an insistently ornate keyboard riff and a busy but less @-@ hummable chorus , in which the song builds into a huge drum beat and a synthesizer @-@ heavy chorus , which also includes an upbeat tempo . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Lyrically , X & Y made an apparent shift from its predecessors . On their previous works , Martin sang mostly in the first person " I " , but moves to the second person " you " . Accordingly , the songs on the album are reflection of Martin 's " doubts , fears , hopes , and loves " with lyrics that are " earnest and vague " . 
 The lyrics tend to focus significantly around the idea that everything is broken , out of place or missing ; this is apparent in nearly all songs in the album . Examples include " Fix You " ( " When you lose something you can 't replace " ) and also in " X & Y " ( " When something is broken , and you try to fix it , trying to repair it , any way you can " ) and " Talk " ( " Are you lost or incomplete ? Do you feel like a puzzle , you can 't find your missing piece ? " ) . This theme is also reflective of the random , incomprehensible pattern on the album 's cover ( until you " fix " it using the Baudot Code ) . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The artwork for X & Y was designed by graphic design duo Tappin <unk> , formed by Mark Tappin and Simon <unk> which Mark Tappin previously work for Coldplay for the Parachutes album cover and the single covers . The image , which is visualized through a combination of colours and blocks , is a graphical representation of the Baudot code , an early form of telegraph communication using a series of ones and zeros to communicate . The code was developed by Frenchman Émile Baudot in the 1870s , and was a widely used method of terrestrial and telegraph communication . 
 The alphabet of the code is presented in the liner notes of X & Y , but if deciphered , the code actually reveals the characters ' X 9 Y ' , a fact outlined in Marcus du Sautoy 's book ' The <unk> <unk> ' . It is unclear whether this is a genuine mistake , as the symbol for ' 9' is very similar to the symbol for ' & ' , or whether it was entered to confuse any deciphering fans . The track listing , included on the booklet , CD , and back of the album , uses " X # " on tracks 1 – 6 , and " Y # " on tracks 7 – 12 , rather than the conventional track numbering system . This is a reference to the title of the album . Many pages in the booklet include photos of the band working on the album . The final page of the booklet contains the slogan " Make Trade Fair " , the name of the international organization which Chris Martin continues to support . The band dedicates the album to " <unk> " that is presented also inside the liner notes ; it stands for Bruce W. Paltrow , the late father of Martin 's wife at the time , Gwyneth Paltrow . All singles released from the album feature their titles in the same code on their respective covers . Martin sometimes wears coloured tape on his hands while on stage , as a reference to the album . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 X & Y was initially intended for a 2004 release , although early news reported it would not be released until 2005 ; however , because of personal preferences , songs recorded in several sessions were scrapped and had pushed the expected release date to January 2005 . However , the new date went by and the band had to set another schedule . By early 2005 , the album , rumoured to be called Zero Theory , had a target release date between March and May 2005 . By early April , the band had finalized the track listing of the album . Eventually , the album was released on 6 June 2005 in the United Kingdom via record label Parlophone . It was issued on 7 June in the United States by Capitol Records . The album has been released with the Copy Control protection system in some regions . In 2008 , Capitol released a remastered version of the album on two 180 @-@ gram vinyl records as a part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . 
 Around three months prior to the album release , Coldplay began performing several songs from the album during live performances . The band made a headlining performance at public radio station KCRW @-@ FM 's annual A Sounds Eclectic Evening , staging five songs from X & Y and some of their old favourites . For the song " The Scientist " , Martin sang one of its verses backward , a technique he learned in shooting its music video . 
 The album has four main singles that were released internationally : " Speed of Sound " , " Fix You " , and " Talk " in 2005 , and " The Hardest Part " in 2006 . A fifth single , " What If " , was released in June 2006 to radio stations in France and the French @-@ speaking portions of Belgium and Switzerland . A commercial CD was also released in Belgium and features the same B @-@ side as " The Hardest Part " ( " How You See the World " recorded live at Earls Court ) , which was released in other European markets as well as Japan and Australia . This single features the " Tom Lord @-@ Alge Mix " of " What If " as the A @-@ side which differs from the usual album version . Finally , in June 2007 , " White Shadows " was released as a radio @-@ only single in Mexico , to coincide with the band 's 2007 Latin America Tour . This also complemented the special " Tour Edition " of the album that was released in these regions . 
 The hidden track " ' Til Kingdom Come " is featured in The Shield season 5 premiere and in the superhero film The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 2012 ) . In addition , Chris Martin performed an acoustic rendition of the track at the funeral of former Attorney General of Delaware Beau Biden . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 X & Y received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 33 reviews . Blender hailed it as Coldplay 's " masterpiece . " NME described it as " confident , bold , ambitious , <unk> with singles and impossible to contain , " and added that it reinforces Coldplay as " the band of their time " . Q magazine found it " substantially more visceral and emotionally rewarding experience than both its predecessors . " James Hunter of The Village Voice said that it is remarkably " accomplished , fresh , and emotional " . Uncut assertively called it " an exceptional pop record " . Spin magazine 's Mikael Wood praised Coldplay for " recasting their nerdy @-@ student Britpop as Important Rock Music " without having to compromise Martin 's unpretentious songwriting style . In his review for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised it as " a good record , crisp , professional , and assured , a sonically satisfying sequel to A Rush of Blood to the Head " , stating it as " impeccable " and " a strong , accomplished album " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review for Entertainment Weekly , David Browne felt that Coldplay 's attempt at more grandiose music works " only part of the time " , even though he found their effort to mature commendable . <unk> Rodriguez from Kludge wrote that the album feels " a little forced " , describing the overall sounds as " overtly weak " . Alexis Petridis , writing in The Guardian , said that some of the songs are " mostly beautifully turned " , but marred by lyrics that are " so devoid of personality that they sound less like song lyrics " . Pitchfork Media 's Joe Tangari called it " bland but never offensive , listenable but not memorable . " Mojo wrote that the album is " awash with cliches , non @-@ sequiturs , and cheap existentialism ; at times it all becomes nigh on unbearable " . In a negative review for The Village Voice , Robert Christgau named X & Y " dud of the month " and called Coldplay a " precise , bland , and banal " band with " predictable melodies and impassive lyrics " . Despite this , he gave it a B. 
 The band has received some criticism from some music critics for the similarities between the lead single , " Speed of Sound " , and " Clocks " , one of the band 's most popular songs to date . Kelefa Sanneh of Rolling Stone magazine was less contented with X & Y , writing it " is something less exciting " compared to A Rush of Blood to the Head that " was a nervy bid for bigness " . Sanneh notes that the album is " the sound of a blown @-@ up band trying not to deflate " and " a surprising number of songs here just never take flight " . Despite such , he compliments the album for featuring " lovely ballads that sound , well , Coldplay @-@ ish " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album earned the band several awards . In 2006 , it won the Best British Album accolade at the BRIT Awards , and International Album of the Year at the Juno Awards which Coldplay shared with American hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas . X & Y had scored Coldplay their third consecutive Mercury Prize nomination . It was also nominated for Best Rock Album at the 48th Grammy Awards , but lost to U2 's How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb . X & Y was voted the 32nd best album of the year in The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics poll for 2005 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 X & Y was a commercial success in Europe . The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart ( making it Coldplay 's third consecutive number @-@ one debut ) with sales totalling 464 @,@ 471 the fourth highest opening sales week in UK history , behind Take That , Oasis and Adele . 
 To date , the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) has certified the album eight @-@ times platinum . The album placed at number nine on the list of United Kingdom 's 20 biggest @-@ selling albums of the 21st century , published by the British trade paper Music Week . As of February 2012 , the album had sold 2 @,@ 666 @,@ 980 copies in the UK , making it the second best selling Coldplay album behind A Rush of Blood to the Head . 
 The American press have considered X & Y a landmark achievement of Coldplay . The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , selling 737 @,@ 000 copies despite the highly competitive retail week . The album gave the band their first US number @-@ one album by debut , and its initial sales surpassed the band 's previous album releases ; Parachutes amassed over 6 @,@ 500 copies in its debut and A Rush of Blood to the Head with sales of under 141 @,@ 000 . X & Y marked the third highest first @-@ week sales in the United States for 2005 , behind American rappers 50 Cent , whose second album , The Massacre , sold over one million units in its first week of release , and Kanye West , who sold over 860 @,@ 000 copies with his album Late Registration . X & Y also emerged as the biggest @-@ selling debut under rock genre . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) has since certified the album three @-@ times platinum for accumulated shipments of over three million units . In Canada , the album debuted at # 1 and sold 105 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , making it the biggest @-@ selling debut of 2005 in Canada . It ended up being certified 5 × Platinum in December 2008 for shipping of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Altogether , the album emerged as 2005 's best @-@ selling album worldwide , accumulating over 8 @.@ 3 million units despite the aggregate three percent fall of sales . According to EMI , by the end of 2006 it sold 9 @.@ 9 million copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Chris Martin , Jonny Buckland , Guy Berryman , and Will Champion except where noted . 
 = = = Tour edition DVD = = = 
 To coincide with Coldplay 's tour of Australia , Southeast Asia , and Latin America , the album was re @-@ released in those territories as a " Tour Edition " , which also includes all the B @-@ side tracks and music videos of X & Y 's singles on a bonus DVD : 
 = = = Tour edition CD = = = 
 In addition a rare " Japan Tour Special Edition " ( Cat . No . <unk> @-@ <unk> ) was released in 2006 . This is the only " Tour Edition " which has the bonus disc as a CD ( CD extra ) ( Cat . No . <unk> @-@ 3013 ) , and without Copy Control . All other " Tour Editions " have Copy Control protection . The track listing is exactly the same as in other " Tour Editions " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Hurricane Celia ( 2010 ) = 
 Hurricane Celia was a powerful , early @-@ season Category 5 tropical cyclone that existed over the open waters of the eastern Pacific Ocean during late June 2010 . Forming out of a tropical wave about 370 mi ( 595 km ) southeast of Acapulco , Mexico on June 18 , Celia quickly organized as deep convection consolidated around the center , attaining hurricane status by June 20 . Over the following days , the hurricane 's winds fluctuated as wind shear impeded significant development hindering it from becoming <unk> dangerous . Once this shear lightened on June 24 , the storm rapidly intensified to attain its peak strength with winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) and an estimated barometric pressure of 921 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 2 inHg ) . Not long after reaching this strength , wind shear increased and the system entered a dry , stable environment . Over the following 42 hours , Hurricane Celia 's sustained winds decreased to tropical storm force and the system began to stall over the open ocean by June 27 . Despite highly unfavorable conditions , the storm managed to retain tropical storm status through June 28 and degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low that evening . The remnants of Celia drifted northward , completing a counter @-@ clockwise loop , and dissipated on June 30 . 
 Although Celia remained far away from any populated landmasses , waves from the storm prompted storm advisories along the southern coastline of Mexico . Additionally , its outer bands brought moderate rainfall to parts of Oaxaca and Guerrero . Due to the high intensity and longevity of the hurricane , it significantly contributed to the record @-@ high accumulated cyclone energy value for June 2010 in the eastern Pacific basin . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The precursor to Hurricane Celia was first identified on June 5 , 2010 by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) as a disorganized area of disturbed weather associated with a tropical wave off the western coast of Africa in the Atlantic Ocean . Tracking westward , little development took place and the system eventually crossed Central America and entered the Pacific Ocean on June 17 . Situated several hundred miles south @-@ southeast of the Gulf of Tehuantepec , the disturbance moved slowly towards the west @-@ northwest and little development was expected to occur . By June 18 , scatterometer data of the system indicated that a surface circulation had developed and the system 's overall structure had become increasingly organized . Later that day , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued for the system as it was now anticipated to become a tropical cyclone within 48 hours . At this time , convective banding features had begun wrapping around the system ; however , it lacked deep , central cloud cover . Further development was expected to be slow due to moderate wind shear in the region of the low . Around 1800 UTC , the system had become sufficiently organized for the NHC to designate it as a tropical depression . At this time , the depression was situated roughly 370 mi ( 595 km ) southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . Operationally , the depression was not warned upon until early the next morning . 
 Roughly 18 hours after being classified a depression , deep convection wrapped around the center of the system , prompting the NHC to upgrade the depression to a tropical storm , and to give it the name Celia . Satellite overpasses of the storm revealed that Celia had already begun developing an eye @-@ like feature at the surface , an indication that rapid intensification may ensue . The storm tracked relatively slowly towards the west @-@ southwest in response to a mid @-@ level ridge to the north . By the evening of June 19 , Celia displayed a well @-@ organized structure with an eye beginning to appear within the storm 's central dense overcast . Due to the presence of easterly wind shear , intensification was briefly stalled for several hours ; however , at 1800 UTC on June 20 , the NHC upgraded Celia to a minimal hurricane as it attained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . An intermittent eye was seen on visible satellite image throughout the day , but it failed to fully consolidate by the afternoon of June 21 , by which time the system appeared to be vertically tilted , having the low @-@ level circulation displaced to the northeast of the mid @-@ level circulation . Only modest strengthening took place during this time as the system 's outflow was being restricted by continuing easterly shear . 
 Late on June 21 , Celia turned due west as it moved around the south side of the ridge previously steering the hurricane to the west @-@ southwest . A secondary eyewall was noted as it made the turn , indicating that the storm would further intensify once this feature further developed . Several hours later , the storm intensified into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After briefly developing a prominent central dense overcast , the storm 's structure began to degrade for unknown reasons . By the evening of June 22 , Celia was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane and the eye was no longer apparent on satellite imagery , mainly due to cirrus clouds over the system . The following morning , the eye reformed and the storm became more vertically aligned , allowing Celia to re @-@ attain Category 2 status . Throughout the day , Celia became increasingly organized and intensified , nearly attaining major hurricane status during the afternoon . Operationally , the hurricane was thought to have reached this intensity but post @-@ storm analysis indicated that winds did not exceed 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . 
 = = Peak intensity and dissipation = = 
 Although there were no factors inhibiting the development of Celia , the storm unexpectedly weakened again later on June 23 . The storm 's eye rapidly dissipated and the central dense overcast became asymmetric . Forecaster Todd <unk> at the NHC referred to the unexplained shifts in strength as " puzzling . " However , as suddenly as the weakening took place , strengthening ensued . Very strong convection formed over the center of the storm , with some cloud tops being as cold as − 86 ° C ( − 123 ° F ) but no eye had reformed by the morning of June 24 . Throughout the day , Celia became increasingly organized , with the eye fully reforming and the structure becoming more symmetrical . Rapid intensification soon followed as the storm reached Category 4 status , becoming one of only a handful of tropical cyclones to do so during the month of June in the eastern Pacific . That evening , the storm further intensified into a Category 5 hurricane , the second storm to reach this strength during June in the Eastern Pacific basin on record . Hurricane Celia attained its peak intensity around 0000 UTC with sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) and a barometric pressure estimated at 921 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 2 inHg ) . The storm also displayed a well @-@ defined eye estimated to be 17 to 23 mi ( 27 to 37 km ) in diameter . 
 During the late morning of June 25 , Celia started rapidly weakening as it began to take a more northwesterly track into a more stable environment with cooler water temperatures and higher wind shear ; all of these conditions are highly unfavorable for tropical cyclones . By June 26 , convection associated with the hurricane had substantially lessened and cloud tops warmed . The storm also began to resume a westward track as it moved into an area of weaker steering currents . Traversing water temperatures estimated at 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) , Celia continued to degenerate as it weakened to tropical storm status , by which time it was situated about 955 mi ( 1 @,@ 535 km ) southeast of the southern tip of Baja California Sur . Most of the convection associated with the system had dissipated and the center of circulation became exposed , with a small area of showers and thunderstorms to the north . Throughout June 27 , the system gradually lost its forward momentum over the open water of the Pacific Ocean but managed to maintain minimal tropical storm status longer than initially anticipated . 
 Intermittent bursts of deep convection kept satellite intensity estimates at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) through the morning of June 28 . After becoming embedded within a low @-@ level westerly flow , the system began to slowly execute a small counter @-@ clockwise loop . That afternoon , Celia degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low pressure system ; operationally , the system was monitored as a tropical depression for an additional six hours before the final advisory from the NHC was issued . The remnants of Celia continued to drift towards the north before finally dissipating on June 30 , about 990 mi ( 1 @,@ 590 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Sur . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Throughout the hurricane 's track , it posed little to no threat to any major landmasses or populated islands . During Celia 's early development stages , it brought moderate rainfall to parts of Oaxaca and Guerrero ; however , no loss of life or structural damage was reported . Beaches in both states increased the number of lifeguards on duty since the threat of rip currents would remain high for several days . On June 22 , the Sistema Nacional de Protección Civil ( National System of Civil Protection ) in the Mexican state of Jalisco raised the alert level to stage two for coastal areas . People were urged to be cautious about venturing out into coastal waters as the storm produced rough seas near the coast . The alert was later expanded upon to include coastal areas of Michoacán and Colima . Although out of the storm 's projected path , a precautionary alert was issued for Socorro Island . However , between June 22 and 23 , the outer bands of the storm brought unsettled weather to France 's Clipperton Island . Since this island is unpopulated , the NHC did not issue any warnings for it . 
 During the evening of June 24 , Hurricane Celia intensified into a powerful Category 5 storm , further solidifying it as the strongest of the 2010 Pacific hurricane season . At its peak , the cyclone attained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) along with a minimum pressure of 921 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 2 inHg ) . This ranks it as the second @-@ strongest June hurricane on record , as well as the eleventh @-@ strongest in the basin , and the second known Category 5 to develop during the month on record . The strongest and first known storm of this intensity in June was Hurricane Ava in 1973 . Additionally , it also marked the first time on record that two consecutive seasons featured Category 5 hurricanes , with Hurricane Rick in October 2009 reaching this intensity , the second time two consecutive seasons had a category 5 hurricane was when hurricanes Marie and Patricia formed in 2014 and 2015 respectively . In the National Hurricane Center 's monthly tropical weather summary for June 2010 , it was stated that the accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) for the month was the highest on record , most of which is attributed to Hurricane Celia . 
 = Ala ( demon ) = 
 An ala or hala ( plural : ale or <unk> ) is a female mythological creature recorded in the folklore of Bulgarians , Macedonians , and Serbs . Ale are considered demons of bad weather whose main purpose is to lead hail @-@ producing thunderclouds in the direction of fields , vineyards , or orchards to destroy the crops , or loot and take them away . Extremely voracious , ale particularly like to eat children , though their gluttony is not limited to Earth . It is believed they sometimes try devouring the Sun or the Moon , causing eclipses , and that it would mean the end of the world should they succeed . When people encounter an ala , their mental or physical health , or even life , are in peril ; however , her favor can be gained by approaching her with respect and trust . Being in a good relationship with an ala is very beneficial , because she makes her favorites rich and saves their lives in times of trouble . 
 The appearance of an ala is diversely and often vaguely described in folklore . A given ala may look like a black wind , a gigantic creature of indistinct form , a huge @-@ mouthed , humanlike , or snakelike monster , a female dragon , or a raven . An ala may also assume various human or animal shapes , and can even possess a person 's body . It is believed that the diversity of appearances described is due to the ala 's being a synthesis of a Slavic demon of bad weather and a similar demon of the central Balkans pre @-@ Slavic population . In folk tales with a humanlike ala , her personality is similar to that of the Russian Baba Yaga . Ale are said to live in the clouds , or in a lake , spring , hidden remote place , forest , inhospitable mountain , cave , or gigantic tree . While ale are usually hostile towards humans , they do have other powerful enemies that can defeat them , like dragons . In Christianized tales , St. Elijah takes the dragons ' role , but in some cases the saint and the dragons fight ale together . Eagles are also regarded as defenders against ale , chasing them away from fields and thus preventing them from bringing hail clouds overhead . 
 = = Origin = = 
 While some mythological beings are common to all Slavic ethnic groups , ale seem to be exclusive to Bulgarian , Macedonian and Serb folklore . Even so , other Slavic groups also had demons of bad weather . Among East Slavs , this witch was called Baba Yaga , and was imagined as a woman of gigantic stature with a big nose , iron teeth , and protruding chin ; it was believed that she ate children , and her presence brought thunderstorms and cold weather . The term baba is present in customs , beliefs , and toponyms of all Slavic groups , usually as a personification of wind , darkness , and rain . This leads some scholars to believe there was a proto @-@ Slavic divinity or demon called Baba , associated with bad weather . 
 Traces of beliefs in that demon are preserved among South Slavs in expressions for the bad weather common in early spring ( baba Marta , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , etc . ) . Brought to the Balkans from the ancient homeland , these beliefs combined with those of the native populations , eventually developing into the personage of the ala . The pre @-@ Slavic Balkan source of the ala is related to the <unk> , female demons of bad weather of the Vlachs of Serbia , who , like ale , led hail clouds over crops to ruin them , and uprooted trees . A Greek female demon Lamia might also have contributed in the development of the ala . Just like ale , she eats children , and is called gluttonous . In southern Serbia and Macedonia , <unk> , a word derived from <unk> , is also a synonym for ala . The Bulgarian <unk> has remained a creature distinct from the ala , but shares many similarities with her . The numerous variations in form of ale , ranging from the animal and half @-@ animal to the humanlike concepts , tell us that beliefs in these demons were not uniform . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The demon ’ s name in the standard Serbian , ala , comes from dialects which lost the velar fricative , while hala is recorded in a Serbian dialect which has retained this sound and in Bulgarian . For this reason , it is believed that the original name had an initial h @-@ sound , a fact that has led Serbian scholar <unk> <unk> to reject the etymology given by several dictionaries , including that of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts , by which the demon ’ s name comes from the Turkish word ‘ ala ’ ( snake ) as that word lacks the h @-@ sound . The name may instead stem from the Greek word for hail , <unk> ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ; transliterated <unk> ) . This etymology is proposed by Bulgarian scholar <unk> <unk> , and supported by Bulgarian scholar <unk> Popov and Serbian scholars Slobodan <unk> , and Sreten Petrović . According to Serbian scholar Marta <unk> , ala and hala stem from the noun * <unk> in Proto @-@ South @-@ Slavic , the dialect of Proto @-@ Slavic from which South Slavic languages emerged ( x in <unk> represents the voiceless velar fricative ) . That noun was derived from the Proto @-@ Slavic root * <unk> , denoting the fury of the elements . A possible cognate in Kashubian language might be <unk> - " a large creature or thing " . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Dragon or serpent like demon connected with the wind , and thunderstorm and hail clouds . It was believed in the Gruža region of central Serbia that the ala is invisible , but that she can be heard — her powerful hissing resonated in front of the dark hail clouds . 
 In Bulgaria , farmers saw a horrible ala with huge wings and sword @-@ like thick tail in the contours of a dark cloud . When an ala – cloud overtook the village , villagers peered into the sky hoping to see an imperial eagle emerging there . They believed that the mighty bird with a cross on its back could banish the ala – cloud from the fields . In eastern Bulgaria , ala appeared not in clouds , but in gales and whirlwinds . In other regions of Bulgaria , the ala was seen either as a " bull with huge horns , a black cloud , dark fog or a snake @-@ like monster with six wings and twelve tails " . The ala is thought to inhabit remote mountain areas or caves , in which she keeps bad weather . In Bulgarian tradition , thunderstorms and hail clouds were interpreted as a battle between the good dragon or eagle and the evil ala . 
 Serbs in Kosovo believed that the ala lowers her tail to the ground and hides her head in the clouds . Anyone who saw her head became instantly insane . In a high relief carved above a window of the Visoki Dečani monastery ’ s church , an eagle clutches a snakelike ala while an eaglet looks on . According to a description from eastern Serbia , the ala is a very large creature with a snake ’ s body and a horse ’ s head . A very common opinion is that the ala is the sister of the dragon , and looks more or less like him . In a spell from eastern Serbia , the ala is described as a three @-@ headed snake : 
 By a description recorded in the <unk> region , the ala is a black and horrible creature in the form of wind . Similarly , in the Homolje region of eastern Serbia , the people imagine the ala as a black wind moving over the land . Wherever she goes , a whirlwind blows , turning like a drill , and those who get exposed to the whirlwind go mad . In Bulgaria too , the ala is a violent wind that sweeps up everything in its way and brings havoc : 
 A belief from the Leskovac region states the ala is a monster with an enormous mouth who holds in her hand a big wooden spoon , with which she grabs and devours everything that gets in her way . One story has it that a man kept such an ala in his barn ; she drank thirty liters of milk every day . Another warns that ale in the form of twelve ravens used to take the crops from vineyards . 
 In eastern Serbia it was believed that ale who interact with people can metamorphose into humans or animals , after which their true selves can be seen only by so @-@ called <unk> – men with six fingers on both hands and six toes on both feet – though human @-@ looking ale cause houses to shake when they enter . By a belief recorded in the Homolje region , ale that charge to the Moon also display shapeshifting abilities : they repeatedly shift from their basic shape of two @-@ headed snakes to six @-@ fingered men who hold iron pitchforks , black young bulls , big boars , or black wolves , and back . 
 = = Effect on humans = = 
 Ale primarily destroy crops in fields , vineyards , and orchards by leading hail storm clouds overhead , usually during the first half of the summer when grain crops ripen . Ale are also believed to “ drink the crops ” , or seize the crops of a village and transport them to another place in their huge ears , thereby making some villages poor , and others rich . This was held as the reason why the Aleksandrovac region in central Serbia was so fruitful : it was where ale transported their loot . The people of Kopaonik mountain believed the local ala defended the crops of the area from other ale . If hail destroyed the crops , it was thought that an ala from another area had defeated the local ala and “ drunk the crops ” . Ale can also spread themselves over fields and thwart the ripening of the crops , or worse , consume the field 's fertility , and drink the milk from sheep , especially when it thunders . Ale also possess great strength ; when a storm uprooted trees , the people believed that an ala had done it . This resulted in a saying for a very strong man : jak <unk> ala , " as strong as an ala " . 
 At the sight of hail and thunderstorm clouds , i.e. the ala that leads them , people did not just sit and wait – they resorted to magic . In the <unk> region , this magic was assisted by ala ’ s herbs , picked in levees and the places on a field where a plow turns around during plowing . These locations were considered unclean because ale visited them . In folk spells of eastern Serbia , a particular ala could be addressed by a female personal name : <unk> , Kalina , Magdalena , Dobrica , <unk> , <unk> , etc . An expression for addressing an ala – <unk> <unk> – is of uncertain meaning . One of the spells that was used upon sighting hail clouds , and which explicitly mentioned an ala , was shouted in the direction of the clouds : 
 Another spell was spoken by a <unk> , a woman versed in magic , while she performed a suitable ritual : 
 As several other supernatural entities were also held responsible for bringing hail and torrential rains , when the entity is not explicitly named , it is often impossible to conclude to which the magical measures apply . There was , for example , a custom used when the approach of a thunderstorm was perceived : to bring a table in front of the house , and to put bread , salt , a knife with a black sheath , and an axe with its edge directed skywards on the table . By another custom , a fireplace <unk> with its legs directed skywards , knives , forks , and the stub of the Slava candle were put on the table . 
 Another characteristic attributed to the ala is extreme voracity ; in the Leskovac region , she was imagined as a monster with a huge mouth and a wooden spoon in her hand , with which she grabbed and devoured whatever came her way . According to a widely spread tradition , ale used to seize children and devour them in her dwelling , which was full of children ’ s bones and spilt blood . Less often , they attacked and ate adults ; they were able to find a hidden human by smell . 
 People in eastern and southern Serbia believed that ale , in their voracity , attacked the Sun and the Moon . They gradually ate more and more of those celestial bodies , thereby causing an eclipse . During an eclipse , the Sun turned red because it was covered with its own blood as a result of the ale ’ s bites ; when it shone brightly again , that meant it had defeated the ale . The spots on the Moon were seen as scars from the ale ’ s bites . While ale devoured the Sun or the Moon , many elderly people became depressed and even wept in fear . If ale succeeded in devouring the Sun , the world would end . To prevent that , men shot their guns toward the eclipse or rang bells , and women cast spells incessantly . There was a notion in the Homolje region that , if ale succeeded in devouring the Moon , the Sun would die from sorrow , and darkness would overwhelm the world . 
 Ale were believed to be able to make men insane ; in eastern Serbia there is a special term for such a man : <unk> . When people encountered an ala on a road or field , they could get dangerous diseases from her . Ale are also responsible for dogs ’ rabies , although indirectly : a skylark that reaches the clouds and encounters an ala there goes mad ( <unk> ) , plunges to the ground , and so kills itself ; a dog that finds and eats the bird goes mad too . 
 Traversing a crossroads at night was considered dangerous because it was the place and time of the ala ’ s supper ; the unfortunate person who stepped on an “ ala ’ s table ” could become blind , deaf , or lame . Ale gather at night on the eves of greater holidays , divert men from their ways into gullies , and torture them there by riding them like horses . 
 Ala can “ sneak ” into humans , gaining a human form while retaining their own properties . A tradition has it that an ala sneaked into St. Simeon , which made him voracious , but St. Sava took her out of him . In a tale recorded in eastern Serbia and Bulgaria , a farmer killed an ala who possessed a skinny man living in a distant village , because the ala destroyed his vineyard . In another story , an ala gets into a deceased princess and devours the soldiers on watch . 
 A human going into an ala ’ s house , which is frequently deep in a forest , but may also be in the clouds , in a lake , spring , cave , gigantic tree , or other hidden remote place , or on an inhospitable mountain , can have varied consequences . If he approaches the ala with an appeal , and does not mention the differences between her and humans , he will be rewarded . Otherwise , he will be cruelly punished . According to one story , a stepdaughter , driven away from home by her stepmother , comes to an ala ’ s house ; addresses her with the word mother ; picks lice from the ala ’ s hair full of worms ; and feeds the ala ’ s “ livestock ” of owls , wolves , badgers , and other wild animals ; behaving and talking as if these things are quite normal to her , and is rewarded by the ala with a chest filled with gold . When the stepmother ’ s daughter comes to the ala ’ s house , she does the opposite , and the ala punishes her and her mother by sending them a chest of snakes , which blind them . In another example , when a prince asks an ala for her daughter ’ s hand , she saves him from other ale , and helps him get married . But when a girl to whom an ala is the godmother visits the ala with her mother , the ala eats them both because the mother talked about the strange things in her house . 
 That even a dead ala is bad is seen in the legend explaining the origin of the <unk> fly ( Simulium <unk> ) , a species of bloodsucking black fly ( of the genus Simulium ) that can be lethal to livestock . The legend , recorded in the Požarevac District in the 19th century by Vuk Karadžić , tells how a Serbian man , after a chase , caught and wounded an ala , but she broke away and fled into a cave near Golubac ( a town in the district ) , where she died of the wounds . Ever since , her body has bred the <unk> flies , and in late spring , they fly out of the cave in a big swarm , spreading as far as Šumadija . People walled up the cave ’ s opening once , but when the time came for the flies to swarm , the wall shattered . 
 = = = <unk> men = = = 
 In Serbia , men believed to possess properties of an ala were called aloviti ( ala @-@ like ) men , and they were given several explanations . An ala may have sneaked into them ; these were recognized by their voracity , because the ala , in order to satisfy her excessive hunger , drove them to eat incessantly . They may also have survived an ala blowing on them – an ala ’ s breath is usually lethal to humans . These people would then become exceptionally strong . Alternatively , they could be the offspring of an ala and a woman , or could have been born covered with the caul . It was believed that aloviti men could not be killed with a gun or arrow , unless gold or silver was used . 
 Like ale , aloviti men led hail @-@ producing and thunderstorm clouds : when the skies darkened , such a man would fall into a trance , and his spirit would fly out of his body toward the clouds as if his spirit were an ala herself . There was , however , a significant difference – he never led the clouds over the fields of his own village ; the damage was done to the neighboring villages . In this respect , aloviti men are equivalent to zduhaći . Besides leading clouds away , an aloviti man could also fight against ale to protect his village . Children , too , could be aloviti , and they fought ale using plough beams . In these fights they were helped by the Aesculapian snake ( <unk> in Serbian ) , and for this reason people would not hurt these snakes . 
 There is a story about an aloviti man , who is described as unusually tall , thin , bony @-@ faced , and with a long beard and moustache . When the weather was nice , he worked and behaved like the other people in his village , but as soon as the dark clouds covered the sky , he used to close himself in his house , put blinds on the windows , and remain alone and in a trance as long as the bad weather and thunder lasted . Historical persons believed to be aloviti men are Stefan Nemanja , and Stefan Dečanski . 
 In modern Serbian adjective ' ' <unk> ' ' still signifies voracious appetite . 
 = = Adversaries = = 
 Ale have several adversaries , including dragons , zmajeviti ( dragon @-@ like ) men , eagles , St. Elijah , and St. Sava . The principal enemy of the ala is the dragon ; he is able to defeat her and eliminate her harmful effects . Dragons are thus seen as guardians of the fields and harvest , and as protectors against bad weather . When an ala threatens by bringing hail clouds , a dragon comes out to fight with her and drive her away . His main weapon is lightning ; thunder represents a fight between ale and dragons ( during which ale hide in tall trees ) . An instance of a more abundant crop at a particular point is explained in the Pčinja region as a result of a dragon having struck an ala with lightning just over that place , making her drop the looted grains she had been carrying in her huge ears . If an ala finds a dragon in a hollow tree , however , she can destroy him by burning the tree . 
 Ale can be defeated by zmajeviti men , who have a human mother , but a dragon father . They look like ordinary people except for little wings beneath their armpits ; such men are always born at night after a twelve @-@ month term . Much like a zduhać , a zmajeviti man lives like everybody else when the weather is nice , but when an ala leads threatening clouds into sight , he falls into a trance and his spirit comes out of his body and flies up to the clouds to fight with the ala , just like a dragon would do . A story from Banat , which was held as true until the 1950s , says that before World War I , an exhausted ala in the form of a giant snake fell from the clouds onto a road . The explanation of the event was that the ala was defeated in her fight with a zmajeviti man ; people gave her milk to help her recover . 
 In a Christianized version , the duel involves the Christian St. Elijah and the ala , but there is a belief that the saint and the dragons in fact cooperate : as soon as St. Elijah spots an ala , he summons the dragons , either takes them aboard his chariot or harnesses them to it , and they jointly shoot the ala with lightning . Arrow @-@ shaped stones , like belemnites or stone @-@ age arrowheads , are regarded as materialized lightning bolts imbued with a beneficial magical power , and finding one is a good omen . 
 In a more Christianized version , St. Elijah shoots lightning at the devils who lead the hail clouds ; the devils in this case are obviously ale . As shown by these examples , beliefs with various degrees of Christianization , from none to almost complete , can exist side by side . 
 An eagle ’ s appearance in the sky when thunderclouds threatened was greeted with joy and hope by people who trusted in their power to defeat an ala ; after defeating the ala , the eagle led the clouds away from the fields . An explanation for this , recorded in eastern Serbia , is that the eagles which nest in the vicinity of a village want thunderstorms and hail as far as possible from their nestlings , so coincidentally protect the village ’ s fields as well . The role of eagles , however , was controversial , because in the same region there was a belief that an eagle flying in front of thunderstorm clouds was a manifestation of an ala , leading the clouds toward the crops , rather than driving them away . 
 = = Connection with Baba Yaga = = 
 Comparing folk tales , there are similarities between the ala and the Russian Baba Yaga . The aforementioned motif of a stepdaughter coming to an ala ’ s house in a forest is recorded among Russians too – there a stepdaughter comes to Baba Yaga ’ s house and feeds her “ livestock ” . Similar are also the motifs of an ala ( by Serbs ) and Baba Yaga ( by Russians ) becoming godmothers to children whom they later eat because the children discover their secret . In the Serbian example , the mother of an ala ’ s godchild speaks with the ala , and in the Russian , the godchild speaks with Baba Yaga . 
 Serbian tale 
 ( ... ) Yesterday , the woman went to the ala ’ s house with her child , the ala ’ s godchild . Upon entering the first room , she saw a poker and a broom fighting ; in the second room , she saw human legs ; in the fourth – human flesh ; in the fifth – blood ; in the sixth – she saw that the ala had taken off her head and was delousing it , while wearing a horse ’ s head in its place . After that , the ala brought lunch and said to the woman , “ Eat , kuma . ” “ How can I eat after I saw a poker and a broom fighting in the first room ? ” “ Eat , kuma , eat . Those are my maids : they fight about which one should take the broom and sweep . ” “ How can I eat after I saw human arms and legs in the second and third rooms ? ” And the ala told her , “ Eat , kuma , eat . That is my food . ” “ How can I eat , kuma , after I saw the sixth room full of blood ? ” “ Eat , kuma , eat . That is the wine that I drink . ” “ How can I eat after I saw that you had taken your head off and were delousing it , having fixed a horse ’ s head on yourself ? ” The ala , after hearing that , ate both the woman and her child . 
 Russian tale 
 ( ... ) On her name day , the girl goes to her godmother ’ s house with cakes to treat her . She comes to the gate – the gate is closed with a human leg ; she goes into the yard – there a barrel full of blood ; she goes up the stairs – there dead children ; the porch is closed with an arm ; on the floor – arms , legs ; the door is closed with a finger . Baba Yaga comes to meet her at the door and asks her , “ Have you seen anything , my dear , on your way to my house ? ” “ I saw , ” the girl answers , “ the gate closed with a leg . ” “ That is my iron latch . ” “ I saw a barrel in the yard full of blood . ” “ That is my wine , my darling . ” “ I saw children lying on the stairs . ” “ Those are my pigs . ” “ The porch is closed with an arm . ” “ That is my latch , my golden one . ” “ I saw in the house a hairy head . ” “ That is my broom , my curly one , ” said Baba Yaga , then got angry with her prying goddaughter and ate her . 
 The two examples witness the chthonic nature of these mythological creatures : a hero can enter the chthonic space and discover the secret of that world , but he is not allowed to relate that secret to other humans . Both the ala and Baba Yaga can be traced back to an older concept of a female demonic divinity : the snakelike mistress of the underworld . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Tosca = 
 Tosca ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> ; <unk> ] ) is an opera in three acts by Giacomo Puccini to an Italian libretto by Luigi Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa . It premiered at the Teatro Costanzi in Rome on 14 January 1900 . The work , based on Victorien Sardou 's 1887 French @-@ language dramatic play , La Tosca , is a melodramatic piece set in Rome in June 1800 , with the Kingdom of Naples 's control of Rome threatened by Napoleon 's invasion of Italy . It contains depictions of torture , murder and suicide , as well as some of Puccini 's best @-@ known lyrical arias . 
 Puccini saw Sardou 's play when it was touring Italy in 1889 and , after some vacillation , obtained the rights to turn the work into an opera in 1895 . Turning the wordy French play into a succinct Italian opera took four years , during which the composer repeatedly argued with his librettists and publisher . Tosca premiered at a time of unrest in Rome , and its first performance was delayed for a day for fear of disturbances . Despite indifferent reviews from the critics , the opera was an immediate success with the public . 
 Musically , Tosca is structured as a through @-@ composed work , with arias , recitative , choruses and other elements musically woven into a seamless whole . Puccini used Wagnerian leitmotifs ( short musical statements ) to identify characters , objects and ideas . While critics have frequently dismissed the opera as a facile melodrama with confusions of plot — musicologist Joseph Kerman called it a " shabby little shocker " — the power of its score and the inventiveness of its orchestration have been widely acknowledged . The dramatic force of Tosca and its characters continues to fascinate both performers and audiences , and the work remains one of the most frequently performed operas . Many recordings of the work have been issued , both of studio and live performances . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French playwright Victorien Sardou wrote more than 70 plays , almost all of them successful , and none of them performed today . In the early 1880s Sardou began a collaboration with actress Sarah Bernhardt , whom he provided with a series of historical melodramas . His third Bernhardt play , La Tosca , which premiered in Paris on 24 November 1887 , and in which she starred throughout Europe , was an outstanding success , with more than 3 @,@ 000 performances in France alone . 
 Puccini had seen La Tosca at least twice , in Milan and Turin . On 7 May 1889 he wrote to his publisher , Giulio Ricordi , begging him to get Sardou 's permission for the work to be made into an opera : " I see in this Tosca the opera I need , with no overblown proportions , no elaborate spectacle , nor will it call for the usual excessive amount of music . " Ricordi sent his agent in Paris , Emanuele Muzio , to negotiate with Sardou , who preferred that his play be adapted by a French composer . He complained about the reception La Tosca had received in Italy , particularly in Milan , and also warned that other composers were interested in the piece . Nonetheless , Ricordi reached terms with Sardou , and assigned the librettist Luigi Illica to write a scenario for an adaptation . In 1891 Illica advised Puccini against the project , most likely because he felt the play could not be successfully adapted to a musical form . When Sardou expressed his unease at entrusting his most successful work to a relatively new composer whose music he did not like , Puccini took offence . He withdrew from the agreement , which Ricordi then assigned to Alberto Franchetti . 
 Illica wrote a libretto for Franchetti who was never at ease with the assignment . There are several versions of how Ricordi got Franchetti to surrender the rights so he could recommission Puccini , who had again become interested . By some accounts , Ricordi convinced Franchetti that the work was too violent to be successfully staged . Franchetti family tradition holds that Franchetti gave the work back as a grand gesture , saying , " He has more talent than I do . " American scholar Deborah Burton contends that Franchetti gave it up simply because he saw little merit in it and could not feel the music in the play . Franchetti surrendered the rights in May 1895 , and in August Puccini signed a contract to resume control of the project . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Historical context = = = 
 According to the libretto , the action of Tosca occurs in Rome in June 1800 . Sardou , in his play , dates it more precisely ; La Tosca takes place in the afternoon , evening , and early morning of 17 and 18 June 1800 . 
 Italy had long been divided into a number of small states , with the Pope in Rome ruling the Papal States in central Italy . Following the French Revolution , a French army under Napoleon invaded Italy in 1796 , entering Rome almost unopposed on 11 February 1798 and establishing a republic there . This republic was ruled by seven consuls ; in the opera this is the office formerly held by Angelotti , whose character may be based on the real @-@ life consul Libero <unk> . In September 1799 the French , who had protected the republic , withdrew from Rome . As they left , troops of the Kingdom of Naples occupied the city . 
 In May 1800 Napoleon , by then the undisputed leader of France , brought his troops across the Alps to Italy once again . On 14 June his army met the Austrian forces at the Battle of Marengo ( near Alessandria ) . Austrian troops were initially successful ; by mid @-@ morning they were in control of the field of battle . Their commander , Michael von Melas , sent this news south towards Rome . However , fresh French troops arrived in late afternoon , and Napoleon attacked the tired Austrians . As Melas retreated in disarray with the remains of his army , he sent a second courier south with the revised message . The Neapolitans abandoned Rome , and the city spent the next fourteen years under French domination . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 Inside the church of Sant 'Andrea della Valle 
 Cesare Angelotti , former consul of the Roman Republic and now an escaped political prisoner , runs into the church and hides in the Attavanti private chapel – his sister , the Marchesa Attavanti , has left a key to the chapel hidden at the feet of the statue of the Madonna . The elderly Sacristan enters and begins cleaning . The Sacristan kneels in prayer as the Angelus sounds . The painter Mario Cavaradossi arrives to continue work on his picture of Mary Magdalene . The Sacristan identifies a likeness between the portrait and a blonde @-@ haired woman who has been visiting the church recently ( unknown to him , it is Angelotti 's sister the Marchesa ) . Cavaradossi describes the " hidden harmony " ( " <unk> <unk> " ) in the contrast between the blonde beauty of his painting and his dark @-@ haired lover , the singer Floria Tosca . The Sacristan mumbles his disapproval before leaving . 
 Angelotti emerges and tells Cavaradossi , an old friend who has republican sympathies , that he is being pursued by the Chief of Police , Baron Scarpia . Cavaradossi promises to assist him after nightfall . Tosca 's voice is heard , calling to Cavaradossi . Cavaradossi gives Angelotti his basket of food and Angelotti hurriedly returns to his hiding place . Tosca enters and suspiciously asks Cavaradossi what he has been doing – she thinks that he has been talking to another woman . Cavaradossi reassures her and Tosca tries to persuade him to take her to his villa that evening : " Non la sospiri , la nostra <unk> " ( " Do you not long for our little cottage " ) . She then expresses jealousy over the woman in the painting , whom she recognises as the Marchesa Attavanti . Cavaradossi explains the likeness ; he has merely observed the Marchesa at prayer in the church . He reassures Tosca of his fidelity and asks her what eyes could be more beautiful than her own : " Qual <unk> al mondo " ( " What eyes in the world " ) . After Tosca has left , Angelotti reappears and discusses with the painter his plan to flee disguised as a woman , using clothes left in the chapel by his sister . Cavaradossi gives Angelotti a key to his villa , suggesting that he hide in a disused well in the garden . 
 The sound of a cannon signals that Angelotti 's escape has been discovered . He and Cavaradossi hasten out of the church . The Sacristan re @-@ enters with choristers , celebrating the news that Napoleon has apparently been defeated at Marengo . The celebrations cease abruptly with the entry of Scarpia , his henchman Spoletta and several police agents . They have heard that Angelotti has sought refuge in the church . Scarpia orders a search , and the empty food basket and a fan bearing the Attavanti coat of arms are found in the chapel . Scarpia questions the Sacristan , and his suspicions are aroused further when he learns that Cavaradossi has been in the church ; Scarpia mistrusts the painter , and believes him complicit in Angelotti 's escape . When Tosca arrives looking for her lover , Scarpia artfully arouses her jealous instincts by implying a relationship between the painter and the Marchesa Attavanti . He draws Tosca 's attention to the fan and suggests that someone must have surprised the lovers in the chapel . Tosca falls for his deceit ; enraged , she rushes off to confront Cavaradossi . Scarpia orders Spoletta and his agents to follow her , assuming she will lead them to Cavaradossi and Angelotti . He privately gloats as he reveals his intentions to possess Tosca and execute Cavaradossi . A procession enters the church singing the Te Deum ; exclaiming ' Tosca , you make me forget even God ! ' , Scarpia joins the chorus in the prayer . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 Scarpia 's apartment in the Palazzo Farnese , that evening 
 Scarpia , at supper , sends a note to Tosca asking her to come to his apartment . He has been unable to find Angelotti , but has arrested Cavaradossi . As Cavaradossi is brought in and questioned , the voice of Tosca , singing a celebratory cantata in another room in the Palace , can be heard . Cavaradossi denies knowing anything about Angelotti 's escape . Tosca arrives , just in time to see her lover taken to an antechamber to be tortured . He is able to speak briefly with her , telling her to say nothing . Tosca is told by Scarpia that she can save her lover from indescribable pain if she reveals Angelotti 's hiding place . She resists , but hearing Cavaradossi 's cries of pain , eventually tells Scarpia that Angelotti is in the well in the garden of Cavaradossi 's villa . 
 Scarpia orders the torture of Cavaradossi to cease and the wounded painter is brought back in . He recovers consciousness and , learning of Tosca 's betrayal , is furious with her . Sciarrone , a police agent , enters with news of Napoleon 's victory at Marengo ; Cavaradossi gloats , telling Scarpia that his rule of terror will soon be at an end , before being dragged away by Scarpia 's men . Scarpia , left with Tosca , proposes a bargain : if she gives herself to him , Cavaradossi will be freed . She is revolted , and repeatedly rejects his advances . Outside she hears the drums that announce an execution ; as Scarpia awaits her decision , she prays to God for help , asking why He has abandoned her : " Vissi d 'arte " ( " I lived for art " ) . Scarpia remains adamant despite her pleas . When Spoletta brings news that Angelotti has killed himself , and that everything is in place for Cavaradossi 's execution , Tosca , in despair , agrees to submit to Scarpia in return for Cavaradossi 's freedom . Scarpia tells his deputy Spoletta to arrange a mock execution , both recalling that it will be " as we did with Count Palmieri " . 
 Following Spoletta 's departure , Tosca imposes the further condition that Scarpia provide a safe @-@ conduct out of Rome for herself and her lover . While he is signing the document , Tosca quietly takes a knife from the supper table . As Scarpia triumphantly embraces her , she stabs him , crying " this is Tosca 's kiss ! " . As Scarpia falls dead , she declares that she now forgives him . She removes the safe @-@ conduct from his pocket , lights candles in a gesture of piety and places a crucifix on the body before leaving . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 The upper parts of the Castel Sant 'Angelo , early the following morning 
 A shepherd boy sings ( in <unk> dialect ) " Io de ' sospiri " ( " I give you sighs " ) as church bells sound for matins . Cavaradossi is led in by guards and informed that he has one hour to live . He refuses to see a priest , but asks permission to write a letter to Tosca . He begins to write , but is soon overwhelmed by memories : " E lucevan le stelle " ( " And the stars shone " ) . Tosca enters and shows him the safe @-@ conduct . She tells him that she has killed Scarpia and that the imminent execution is a sham : Cavaradossi must feign death , but afterwards they can leave Rome together , before Scarpia 's body is discovered . Cavaradossi is amazed at the courage shown by one so gentle and tender : " O dolci mani " ( " Oh sweet hands " ) . The pair ecstatically plan the life they will live away from Rome . Tosca then anxiously instructs Cavaradossi on how to play his part in the mock execution convincingly . She tells him that he will be shot with blanks by the firing squad and instructs him to fall down as if dead . He agrees to act " like Tosca in the theatre " . 
 Cavaradossi is led away , and Tosca watches with increasing impatience as the execution is prepared . The men fire , Cavaradossi falls , and Tosca exclaims " Ecco un <unk> ! " ( " What an actor ! " ) . When the soldiers have all left , she hurries towards Cavaradossi , only to find that he is really dead ; Scarpia has betrayed her . Heartbroken , she clasps his lifeless body and weeps . The voices of Spoletta , Sciarrone and soldiers are heard , indicating that Scarpia 's body has been found , and that Tosca is known to have killed him . As Spoletta , Sciarrone and the soldiers rush in , Tosca rises , evades their clutches , and runs to the parapet . Crying " O Scarpia , Avanti a Dio ! " ( " O Scarpia , we meet before God ! " ) , she hurls herself over the edge to her death . 
 = = Adaptation and writing = = 
 Sardou 's five @-@ act play La Tosca contains a large amount of dialogue and exposition . While the broad details of the play are present in the opera 's plot , the original work contains many more characters and much detail not present in the opera . In the play the lovers are portrayed as though they were French : the character Floria Tosca is closely modelled on Bernhardt 's personality , while her lover Cavaradossi , of Roman descent , is born in Paris . Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa , the playwright who joined the project to polish the verses , needed not only to cut back the play drastically , but to make the characters ' motivations and actions suitable for Italian opera . Giacosa and Puccini repeatedly clashed over the condensation , with Giacosa feeling that Puccini did not really want to complete the project . 
 The first draft libretto that Illica produced for Puccini resurfaced in 2000 after being lost for many years . It contains considerable differences from the final libretto , relatively minor in the first two acts but much more appreciable in the third , where the description of the Roman dawn that opens the third act is much longer , and Cavaradossi 's tragic aria , the eventual " E lucevan le stelle " , has different words . The 1896 libretto also offers a different ending , in which Tosca does not die but instead goes mad . In the final scene , she cradles her lover 's head in her lap and hallucinates that she and her Mario are on a gondola , and that she is asking the gondolier for silence . Sardou refused to consider this change , insisting that as in the play , Tosca must throw herself from the parapet to her death . Puccini agreed with Sardou , telling him that the mad scene would have the audiences anticipate the ending and start moving towards the cloakrooms . Puccini pressed his librettists hard , and Giacosa issued a series of melodramatic threats to abandon the work . The two librettists were finally able to give Puccini what they hoped was a final version of the libretto in 1898 . 
 Little work was done on the score during 1897 , which Puccini devoted mostly to performances of La bohème . The opening page of the autograph Tosca score , containing the motif that would be associated with Scarpia , is dated January 1898 . At Puccini 's request , Giacosa irritably provided new lyrics for the act 1 love duet . In August , Puccini removed several numbers from the opera , according to his biographer , Mary Jane Phillips @-@ Matz , " cut [ ting ] Tosca to the bone , leaving three strong characters trapped in an airless , violent , tightly wound melodrama that had little room for lyricism " . At the end of the year , Puccini wrote that he was " busting his balls " on the opera . 
 Puccini asked clerical friends for words for the congregation to mutter at the start of the act 1 Te Deum ; when nothing they provided satisfied him , he supplied the words himself . For the Te Deum music , he investigated the melodies to which the hymn was set in Roman churches , and sought to reproduce the cardinal 's procession authentically , even to the uniforms of the Swiss Guards . He adapted the music to the exact pitch of the great bell of St. Peter 's Basilica , and was equally diligent when writing the music that opens act 3 , in which Rome awakens to the sounds of church bells . He journeyed to Rome and went to the Castel Sant 'Angelo to measure the sound of matins bells there , as they would be heard from its ramparts . Puccini had bells for the Roman dawn cast to order by four different foundries . This apparently did not have its desired effect , as Illica wrote to Ricordi on the day after the premiere , " the great fuss and the large amount of money for the bells have constituted an additional folly , because it passes completely unnoticed " . Nevertheless , the bells provide a source of trouble and expense to opera companies performing Tosca to this day . 
 In act 2 , when Tosca sings offstage the cantata that celebrates the supposed defeat of Napoleon , Puccini was tempted to follow the text of Sardou 's play and use the music of Giovanni Paisiello , before finally writing his own imitation of <unk> 's style . It was not until 29 September 1899 that Puccini was able to mark the final page of the score as completed . Despite the notation , there was additional work to be done , such as the shepherd boy 's song at the start of act 3 . Puccini , who always sought to put local colour in his works , wanted that song to be in Roman dialect . The composer asked a friend to have a " good <unk> poet " write some words ; eventually the poet and folklorist Luigi " <unk> " <unk> wrote the verse which , after slight modification , was placed in the opera . 
 In October 1899 , Ricordi realized that some of the music for Cavaradossi 's act 3 aria , " O dolci mani " was borrowed from music Puccini had cut from his early opera , Edgar and demanded changes . Puccini defended his music as expressive of what Cavaradossi must be feeling at that point , and offered to come to Milan to play and sing act 3 for the publisher . Ricordi was overwhelmed by the completed act 3 prelude , which he received in early November , and softened his views , though he was still not completely happy with the music for " O dolci mani " . In any event time was too short before the scheduled January 1900 premiere to make any further changes . 
 = = Reception and performance history = = 
 = = = Premiere = = = 
 By December 1899 , Tosca was in rehearsal at the Teatro Costanzi . Because of the Roman setting , Ricordi arranged a Roman premiere for the opera , even though this meant that Arturo Toscanini could not conduct it as Puccini had hoped — Toscanini was fully engaged at La Scala in Milan . Leopoldo Mugnone was appointed to conduct . The accomplished ( but temperamental ) soprano <unk> <unk> was selected for the title role ; Eugenio <unk> , whose father had originated multiple Verdi roles , became the first Scarpia . The young Enrico Caruso had hoped to create Cavaradossi , but was passed over in favour of the more experienced Emilio De Marchi . The performance was to be directed by Nino <unk> , with stage designs by Adolfo Hohenstein . 
 At the time of the premiere , Italy had experienced political and social unrest for several years . The start of the Holy Year in December 1899 attracted the religious to the city , but also brought threats from anarchists and other <unk> . Police received warnings of an anarchist bombing of the theatre , and instructed Mugnone ( who had survived a theatre bombing in Barcelona ) , that in an emergency he was to strike up the royal march . The unrest caused the premiere to be postponed by one day , to 14 January . 
 By 1900 , the premiere of a Puccini opera was a national event . Many Roman dignitaries attended , as did Queen Margherita , though she arrived late , after the first act . The Prime Minister of Italy , Luigi <unk> was present , with several members of his cabinet . A number of Puccini 's operatic rivals were there , including Franchetti , Pietro Mascagni , Francesco Cilea and Ildebrando Pizzetti . Shortly after the curtain was raised there was a disturbance in the back of the theatre , caused by latecomers attempting to enter the auditorium , and a shout of " Bring down the curtain ! " , at which Mugnone stopped the orchestra . A few moments later the opera began again , and proceeded without further disruption . 
 The performance , while not quite the triumph that Puccini had hoped for , was generally successful , with numerous encores . Much of the critical and press reaction was lukewarm , often blaming Illica 's libretto . In response , Illica condemned Puccini for treating his librettists " like stagehands " and reducing the text to a shadow of its original form . Nevertheless , any public doubts about Tosca soon vanished ; the premiere was followed by twenty performances , all given to packed houses . 
 = = = Subsequent productions = = = 
 The Milan premiere at La Scala took place under Toscanini on 17 March 1900 . <unk> and <unk> reprised their roles ; the prominent tenor Giuseppe Borgatti replaced De Marchi as Cavaradossi . The opera was a great success at La Scala , and played to full houses . Puccini travelled to London for the British premiere at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , on 12 July , with Milka <unk> and Fernando De Lucia as the doomed lovers and Antonio Scotti as Scarpia . Puccini wrote that Tosca was " [ a ] complete triumph " , and Ricordi 's London representative quickly signed a contract to take Tosca to New York . The premiere at the Metropolitan Opera ( the " Met " ) was on 4 February 1901 , with De Lucia 's replacement by Giuseppe <unk> the only change from the London cast . For its French premiere at the Opéra @-@ Comique on 13 October 1903 , the 72 @-@ year @-@ old Sardou took charge of all the action on the stage . Puccini was delighted with the public 's reception of the work in Paris , despite adverse comments from critics . The opera was subsequently premiered at venues throughout Europe , the Americas , Australia and the Far East ; by the outbreak of war in 1914 it had been performed in more than 50 cities worldwide . 
 Among the prominent early <unk> was Emmy <unk> , who sang the role regularly in a long @-@ standing partnership with the tenor Enrico Caruso . Maria Jeritza , over many years at the Met and in Vienna , brought her own distinctive style to the role , and was said to be Puccini 's ideal Tosca . Jeritza was the first to deliver " Vissi d 'arte " from a prone position , having fallen to the stage while eluding the grasp of Scarpia . This was a great success , and Jeritza sang the aria lying down thereafter . Of her successors , opera enthusiasts tend to consider Maria Callas as the supreme interpreter of the role , largely on the basis of her performances at the Royal Opera House in 1964 , with Tito Gobbi as Scarpia . This production , by Franco Zeffirelli , remained in continuous use at Covent Garden for more than 40 years until replaced in 2006 by a new staging , which premiered with Angela Gheorghiu . Callas had first sung Tosca at age 18 in a performance given in Greek , in Athens on 27 August 1942 . Tosca was also her last on @-@ stage operatic role , in a special charity performance at the Royal Opera House on 7 May 1965 . 
 Among non @-@ traditional productions , in 1996 at La Scala Luca <unk> used distorted and fractured scenery to represent the twists of fate reflected in the plot . Jonathan Miller , in a 1986 production for the 49th Maggio Musicale Fiorentino , transferred the action to Nazi @-@ occupied Rome in 1944 , with Scarpia as head of the fascist police . In Philipp <unk> 's production on the Lake Stage at the Bregenz Festival in 2007 the act 1 set , designed by Johannes <unk> , was dominated by a huge Orwellian " Big Brother " eye . The iris opens and closes to reveal surreal scenes beyond the action . This production updates the story to a modern Mafia scenario , with special effects " worthy of a Bond film " . 
 In 1992 a television version of the opera was filmed at the locations prescribed by Puccini , at the times of day at which each act takes place . Featuring Catherine <unk> , Plácido Domingo and Ruggero Raimondi , the performance was broadcast live throughout Europe . Luciano Pavarotti , who sang Cavaradossi from the late 1970s , appeared in a special performance in Rome on 14 January 2000 , to celebrate the opera 's centenary with Domingo as conductor . Pavarotti 's last stage performance was as Cavaradossi at the Met , on 13 March 2004 . 
 Early <unk> played the part as if the painter believed that he was reprieved , and would survive the " mock " execution . Beniamino Gigli , who performed the role many times in his forty @-@ year operatic career , was one of the first to assume that the painter knows , or strongly suspects , that he will be shot . Gigli wrote in his autobiography : " he is certain that these are their last moments together on earth , and that he is about to die " . Domingo , the dominant Cavaradossi of the 1970s and 1980s , concurred , stating in a 1985 interview that he had long played the part that way . Gobbi , who in his later years often directed the opera , commented , " Unlike Floria , Cavaradossi knows that Scarpia never yields , though he pretends to believe in order to delay the pain for Tosca . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The enduring popularity of Tosca has not been matched by consistent critical enthusiasm . After the premiere , Ippolito Valetta of Nueva <unk> wrote , " [ Puccini ] finds in his palette all colours , all shades ; in his hands , the instrumental texture becomes completely supple , the gradations of sonority are innumerable , the blend unfailingly grateful to the ear . " However , one critic described act 2 as overly long and wordy ; another echoed Illica and Giacosa in stating that the rush of action did not permit enough lyricism , to the great detriment of the music . A third called the opera " three hours of noise " . 
 The critics gave the work a generally kinder reception in London , where The Times called Puccini " a master in the art of poignant expression " , and praised the " wonderful skill and sustained power " of the music . In The Musical Times , Puccini 's score was admired for its sincerity and " strength of utterance . " After the 1903 Paris opening , the composer Paul Dukas thought the work lacked cohesion and style , while Gabriel Fauré was offended by " disconcerting vulgarities " . In the 1950s , the young musicologist Joseph Kerman described Tosca as a " shabby little shocker . " ; in response the conductor Thomas Beecham remarked that anything Kerman says about Puccini " can safely be ignored " . Writing half a century after the premiere , the veteran critic Ernest Newman , while acknowledging the " enormously difficult business of boiling [ Sardou 's ] play down for operatic purposes , " thought that the subtleties of Sardou 's original plot are handled " very lamely " , so that " much of what happens , and why , is unintelligible to the spectator " . Overall , however , Newman delivered a more positive judgement : " [ Puccini 's ] operas are to some extent a mere bundle of tricks , but no one else has performed the same tricks nearly as well " . Opera scholar Julian Budden remarks on Puccini 's " inept handling of the political element " , but still hails the work as " a triumph of pure theatre " . Music critic Charles Osborne ascribes Tosca 's immense popularity with audiences to the taut effectiveness of its melodramatic plot , the opportunities given to its three leading characters to shine vocally and dramatically , and the presence of two great arias in " Vissi d 'arte " and " E lucevan le stelle " . The work remains popular today : according to Operabase , it ranks as fifth in the world with 540 performances given in the five seasons 2009 / 10 to 2013 / 14 . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = General style = = = 
 By the end of the 19th century the classic form of opera structure , in which arias , duets and other set @-@ piece vocal numbers are interspersed with passages of recitative or dialogue , had been largely abandoned , even in Italy . Operas were " through @-@ composed " , with a continuous stream of music which in some cases eliminated all identifiable set @-@ pieces . In what critic Edward Greenfield calls the " Grand Tune " concept , Puccini retains a limited number of set @-@ pieces , distinguished from their musical surroundings by their memorable melodies . Even in the passages linking these " Grand Tunes " , Puccini maintains a strong degree of lyricism and only rarely resorts to recitative . 
 Budden describes Tosca as the most Wagnerian of Puccini 's scores , in its use of musical leitmotifs . Unlike Wagner , Puccini does not develop or modify his motifs , nor weave them into the music symphonically , but uses them to refer to characters , objects and ideas , and as reminders within the narrative . The most potent of these motifs is the sequence of three very loud and strident chords which open the opera and which represent the evil character of Scarpia — or perhaps , Charles Osborne proposes , the violent atmosphere that pervades the entire opera . Budden has suggested that Scarpia 's tyranny , lechery and lust form " the dynamic engine that ignites the drama " . Other motifs identify Tosca herself , the love of Tosca and Cavaradossi , the fugitive Angelotti , the semi @-@ comical character of the sacristan in act 1 and the theme of torture in act 2 . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 The opera begins without any prelude ; the opening chords of the Scarpia motif lead immediately to the agitated appearance of Angelotti and the enunciation of the " fugitive " motif . The sacristan 's entry , accompanied by his sprightly <unk> theme , lifts the mood , as does the generally light @-@ hearted colloquy with Cavaradossi which follows after the latter 's entrance . This leads to the first of the " Grand Tunes " , Cavaradossi 's " <unk> <unk> " with its sustained high B flat , accompanied by the sacristan 's grumbling counter @-@ melody . The domination , in that aria , of themes which will be repeated in the love duet make it clear that though the painting may incorporate the Marchesa 's features , Tosca is the ultimate inspiration of his work . Cavaradossi 's dialogue with Angelotti is interrupted by Tosca 's arrival , signalled by her motif which incorporates , in Newman 's words , " the feline , caressing cadence so characteristic of her . " Though Tosca enters violently and suspiciously , the music paints her devotion and serenity . According to Budden , there is no contradiction : Tosca 's jealousy is largely a matter of habit , which her lover does not take too seriously . 
 After Tosca 's " Non la sospiri " and the subsequent argument inspired by her jealousy , the sensuous character of the love duet " Qual <unk> " provides what opera writer Burton Fisher describes as " an almost erotic lyricism that has been called <unk> " . The brief scene in which the sacristan returns with the choristers to celebrate Napoleon 's supposed defeat provides almost the last carefree moments in the opera ; after the entrance of Scarpia to his menacing theme , the mood becomes sombre , then steadily darker . As the police chief interrogates the sacristan , the " fugitive " motif recurs three more times , each time more emphatically , signalling Scarpia 's success in his investigation . In Scarpia 's exchanges with Tosca the sound of tolling bells , interwoven with the orchestra , creates an almost religious atmosphere , for which Puccini draws on music from his then unpublished Mass of 1880 . The final scene in the act is a juxtaposition of the sacred and the profane , as Scarpia 's lustful reverie is sung alongside the swelling Te Deum chorus . He joins with the chorus in the final statement " Te aeternum Patrem omnis terra <unk> " ( " Everlasting Father , all the earth worships thee " ) , before the act ends with a thunderous restatement of the Scarpia motif . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 Fisher has observed that Puccini 's was a tragic muse ; in the second act of Tosca , according to Newman , he rises to his greatest height as a master of the musical macabre . The act begins quietly , with Scarpia musing on the forthcoming downfall of Angelotti and Cavaradossi , while in the background a <unk> is played in a distant quarter of the Farnese Palace . For this music Puccini adapted a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old student exercise by his late brother , Michele , stating that in this way his brother could live again through him . In the dialogue with Spoletta , the " torture " motif — an " ideogram of suffering " , according to Budden — is heard for the first time as a foretaste of what is to come . As Cavaradossi is brought in for interrogation , Tosca 's voice is heard with the offstage chorus singing a cantata , " [ its ] suave strains contrast [ ing ] dramatically with the increasing tension and ever @-@ darkening colour of the stage action " . The cantata is most likely the Cantata a Giove , in the literature referred to as a lost work of Puccini 's from 1897 . 
 Osborne describes the scenes that follow — Cavaradossi 's interrogation , his torture , Scarpia 's sadistic tormenting of Tosca — as Puccini 's musical equivalent of grand guignol to which Cavaradossi 's brief " Vittoria ! Vittoria ! " on the news of Napoleon 's victory gives only partial relief . Scarpia 's aria " <unk> , mi <unk> venal " ( " Yes , they say I am venal " ) is closely followed by Tosca 's " Vissi d 'arte " . A lyrical andante based on Tosca 's act 1 motif , this is perhaps the opera 's best @-@ known aria , yet was regarded by Puccini as a mistake ; he considered eliminating it since it held up the action . Fisher calls it " a Job @-@ like prayer questioning God for punishing a woman who has lived unselfishly and righteously " . In the act 's finale , Newman likens the orchestral turmoil which follows Tosca 's stabbing of Scarpia to the sudden outburst after the slow movement of Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony . After Tosca 's contemptuous " E <unk> a lui <unk> <unk> Roma ! " ( " All Rome trembled before him " ) , sung on a middle C ♯ monotone ( sometimes spoken ) , the music gradually fades , ending what Newman calls " the most impressively macabre scene in all opera . " The final notes in the act are those of the Scarpia motif , softly , in a minor key . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 The third act 's tranquil beginning provides a brief respite from the drama . An introductory 16 @-@ bar theme for the horns will later be sung by Cavaradossi and Tosca in their final duet . The orchestral prelude which follows portrays the Roman dawn ; the pastoral aura is accentuated by the shepherd boy 's song , and the sounds of sheep bells and church bells , the authenticity of the latter validated by Puccini 's early morning visits to Rome . Themes reminiscent of Scarpia , Tosca and Cavaradossi emerge in the music , which changes tone as the drama resumes with Cavaradossi 's entrance , to an orchestral statement of what becomes the melody of his aria " E lucevan le stelle " . 
 This is a farewell to love and life , " an anguished lament and grief built around the words ' <unk> <unk> ' ( I die in despair ) " . Puccini insisted on the inclusion of these words , and later stated that admirers of the aria had treble cause to be grateful to him : for composing the music , for having the lyrics written , and " for declining expert advice to throw the result in the waste @-@ paper basket " . The lovers ' final duet " Amaro sol per te " , which concludes with the act 's opening horn music , did not equate with Ricordi 's idea of a transcendental love duet which would be a fitting climax to the opera . Puccini justified his musical treatment by citing Tosca 's preoccupation with teaching Cavaradossi to feign death . 
 In the execution scene which follows , a theme emerges , the incessant repetition of which reminded Newman of the Transformation Music which separates the two parts of act 1 in Wagner 's Parsifal . In the final bars , as Tosca evades Spoletta and leaps to her death , the theme of " E lucevan le stelle " is played <unk> <unk> ( as loudly as possible ) . This choice of ending has been strongly criticised by analysts , mainly because of its specific association with Cavaradossi rather than Tosca . Joseph Kerman mocked the final music , " Tosca leaps , and the orchestra screams the first thing that comes into its head . " Budden , however , argues that it is entirely logical to end this dark opera on its blackest theme . According to historian and former opera singer Susan Vandiver <unk> : " The conflict between the verbal and the musical clues gives the end of the opera a twist of controversy that , barring some unexpected discovery among Puccini 's papers , can never truly be resolved . " 
 = = List of arias and set numbers = = 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The first complete Tosca recording was made in 1918 , using the pre @-@ microphone acoustic process . The conductor , Carlo Sabajno , had been the Gramophone Company 's house conductor since 1904 ; he had made recordings of several operas , including Verdi 's La traviata and Rigoletto , before tackling Tosca with a largely unknown cast , featuring the Italian soprano <unk> <unk> in the title role . The next year , in 1919 , Sabajno recorded Tosca again , this time with more well @-@ known singers , including Valentina <unk> and Attilio <unk> as Tosca and Cavaradossi . Ten years later , in 1929 , Sabajno returned to the opera for the third time , recording it with the orchestra and chorus of the Teatro alla Scala and with stars Carmen Melis and Apollo <unk> in the roles of Tosca and Scarpia . In 1938 HMV secured the services of the renowned tenor Beniamino Gigli , together with the soprano Maria <unk> as Tosca and conductor <unk> De <unk> , for a " practically complete " recording that extended over 14 double @-@ sided shellac discs . 
 In the post @-@ war period , following the invention of long @-@ playing records , Tosca recordings were dominated by Maria Callas . In 1953 , with conductor Victor de <unk> and the La Scala forces , she made the recording for EMI which for decades has been considered the best of all the recorded performances of the opera . She recorded the role again for EMI in stereo in 1964 . A number of Callas 's live stage performances of Tosca were also preserved . The earliest were two performances in Mexico City , in 1950 and 1952 , and the last was in London in 1965 . The first stereo recording of the opera was made in 1957 by RCA Victor . Erich <unk> conducted the Rome Opera House orchestra and chorus with <unk> <unk> as Tosca , Jussi <unk> as Cavaradossi and Leonard Warren as Scarpia . Herbert von Karajan 's acclaimed performance with the Vienna State Opera was in 1963 , with Leontyne Price , Giuseppe Di Stefano and Giuseppe <unk> in the leading roles . 
 The 1970s and 1980s saw a proliferation of recordings , many of live performances . Plácido Domingo first recorded Cavaradossi in 1973 , and continued to do so at regular intervals until 1994 . In 1976 he was joined by his son , Plácido Domingo Jr . , who sang the shepherd boy 's song in a British recording with the New Philharmonia Orchestra . More recent commended recordings have included Antonio Pappano 's 2000 Royal Opera House version with Angela Gheorghiu , Roberto <unk> and Ruggero Raimondi . Recordings of Tosca in languages other than Italian are rare but not unknown ; over the years versions in French , German , Spanish , Hungarian and Russian have been issued . An admired English language version was released in 1995 in which David Parry led the Philharmonia Orchestra and a largely British cast . Since the late 1990s numerous video recordings of the opera have been issued on DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc ( BD ) . These include recent productions and remastered versions of historic performances . 
 = = Editions and amendments = = 
 The orchestral score of Tosca was published in late 1899 by Casa Ricordi . Despite some dissatisfaction expressed by Ricordi concerning the final act , the score remained relatively unchanged in the 1909 edition . An unamended edition was published by Dover Press in 1991 . 
 The 1909 score contains a number of minor changes from the autograph score . Some are changes of phrase : Cavaradossi 's reply to the sacristan when he asks if the painter is doing penance is changed from " <unk> " ( " I have eaten . " ) to " Fame non ho " ( " I am not hungry . " ) , which William Ashbrook states , in his study of Puccini 's operas , accentuates the class distinction between the two . When Tosca comforts Cavaradossi after the torture scene , she now tells him , " Ma il giusto <unk> lo <unk> " ( " But a just God will punish him " [ Scarpia ] ) ; formerly she stated , " Ma il <unk> <unk> lo <unk> " ( " But the filthy cop will pay for it . " ) . Other changes are in the music ; when Tosca demands the price for Cavaradossi 's freedom ( " Il <unk> ! " ) , her music is changed to eliminate an octave leap , allowing her more opportunity to express her contempt and loathing of Scarpia in a passage which is now near the middle of the soprano vocal range . A remnant of a " Latin Hymn " sung by Tosca and Cavaradossi in act 3 survived into the first published score and libretto , but is not in later versions . According to Ashbrook , the most surprising change is where , after Tosca discovers the truth about the " mock " execution and exclaims " <unk> così ? <unk> così ? " ( " To end like this ? To end like this ? " ) , she was to sing a five @-@ bar fragment to the melody of " E lucevan le stelle " . Ashbrook applauds Puccini for deleting the section from a point in the work where delay is almost unendurable as events rush to their conclusion , but points out that the orchestra 's recalling " E lucevan le stelle " in the final notes would seem less incongruous if it was meant to underscore Tosca 's and Cavaradossi 's love for each other , rather than being simply a melody which Tosca never hears . 
 = Reborn doll = 
 A reborn doll is a manufactured skin doll that has been transformed to resemble a human infant with as much realism as possible . The process of creating a reborn doll is referred to as reborning and the doll artists are referred to as reborners . Reborn dolls are also known as Bodo dolls or <unk> dolls . 
 The hobby of creating reborn baby dolls began around 1939 when doll enthusiasts wanted more realistic dolls . Since then , an industry surrounding reborn dolls has emerged . Reborn dolls are primarily purchased on the internet but are available at fairs . Depending on craftsmanship , they range in price from hundreds to thousands of dollars . 
 The International Reborn Doll Artists ( IRDA ) group was created to educate artists in the art form of reborn doll making . Any artist can join the association , however certain ethical guidelines must be upheld by members . 
 Reborning involves numerous time consuming steps . The most basic form of the process involves taking a vinyl doll , adding multiple layers of paint , and adding other physical features to the doll . Artists can pick different brands to best suit what doll they wish to create . Consumers can also buy reborn doll kits that include the doll parts and supplies for creating their own reborn . Making a doll from a kit is called newborning and allows artists to omit some steps in the fabrication process . Many supplies are needed for both external and internal modifications of reborns to make the doll seem more realistic . 
 Some consumers of reborn dolls use them to replace a child they once lost , or a child that has grown up . Others collect reborns as they would regular dolls . These dolls are sometimes played with as if they are an infant . Critics debate whether reborn dolls are harmful , or whether these dolls can help in the grieving process . Because of their realistic appearance , reborn dolls have occasionally been mistaken for real babies and " rescued " from parked cars after being reported to the police by passers @-@ by . 
 = = History = = 
 The craft of making reborn dolls began in the United States in the late 1990s . Reborning follows a long tradition of collectors , artists , and manufacturers restoring and enhancing dolls in order to portray more realism . The internet has allowed doll artists and collectors to create an online society focused on reborn dolls . In 2002 , the first reborn was offered on eBay . This has expanded the reborn market allowing artists to open online stores which function figuratively as nurseries . The niche market for the dolls began with doll collectors who admired the superior lifelike accuracy of the doll . The market quickly reached those who wanted to use the doll as an emotional outlet , either to mother or for therapeutic purposes . Mass media coverage has helped to develop the phenomenon in other countries . Reborning enjoys popularity in the United Kingdom and Australia , but has also reached Canada , the rest of Europe , Africa , and Latin America . Doll manufacturers have also taken advantage of the trend and sell supplies , tools , and accessories catering to reborn followers . This has allowed reborners to invent new techniques causing the dolls to become increasingly realistic over time . Magazines , books , organizations , and conventions dedicated to reborn dolls have been started as a result of this popularity . 
 = = Fabrication = = 
 The appearance of the doll depends on the creator ; however , certain reborn artists allow customers to customize their doll , usually using a photograph to replicate a particular infant . 
 = = = Reborning = = = 
 Any type of vinyl doll can be used for reborning . Dolls vary by size , shape , and materials , making some more desirable or popular than others . According to Doll Reader Magazine , Berenguer Babies , <unk> , Lee Middleton , Ashton @-@ Drake Galleries , Apple Valley , and Secrist Dolls are doll companies that make dolls which are easy to transform into reborns . Kathryn Peck of Doll Reader Magazine explains that with JC Toys Berenguer Babies , it is because the dolls already resemble human babies in their expressions , body shapes , surface materials , and other lifelike attributes . Ashton Drake uses a trademark vinyl for their outer skin . Almost all the Ashton @-@ Drake dolls are created using a theme based marketing line . " <unk> " are smaller dolls molded after premature infants . Between " <unk> " and regular dolls , sizes can range from 4 inches to Child size . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 If a reborn is created from a kit as opposed to whole manufactured doll , it may be called newborning . Manufacturers have reacted to the growing trend of artists transforming dolls by hiring reborn artists to become doll sculptors and design doll molds and kits . When newborning from a kit , the first several steps of the process are completed by reborn doll artists and doll manufacturers . The kits come with an already disassembled baby and select supplies . Other supplies not provided in the kit can be purchased separately . The Secrist doll company started making Reborn Doll Kits in 2005 . In 2009 , they began producing supplies , tools , and tutorial videos specifically for reborning or newborning . JC Toys began selling kits in December 2007 Other suppliers offer product lines that give reborners a choice of body parts and skin tones to make a customized doll . 
 = = = Supplies = = = 
 Starter kits are equipped with basic reborning necessities such as limbs , faces , heads , paint brushes , eyelashes , weighting pellets , ' heat set ' paints , cloth bodies , cable ties , nose drill bits , fake tears , thinning shears , cosmetic foam wedges , cotton dipped applicators , and glue These supplies may be purchased separately from a variety of retailers . The nose drill bits are used for creating and perfecting the nostrils of the doll . <unk> or a paint thinner medium is needed for removing the factory paint from the doll . Hair is an optional choice to add to a doll . Fine mohair , human hair , or wigs are usually used , but it is found in a variety of types . Rooting tools are utilized for this process and are available in numerous sizes 20 @,@ 36 @,@ 38 , 40 , and 42 . The smaller the number the thicker the needle which will grab more hair and leave a bigger hole in the head of the doll . Eyes for a reborn doll are offered in a variety of brands and sizes . 
 = = = Process = = = 
 The technique of reborning a play doll typically involves a number of steps . To begin the doll is taken apart and factory paint is removed . Then a blue color wash may be applied to give the appearance of realistic baby skin undertones . For dolls with an awake appearance eyes must be replaced . The outer layer of the vinyl doll is given its skin tone by adding dozens of layers of flesh colored paint . If heat set paints are used , the doll parts must be heat set by baking them inside an oven or by using a <unk> after each layer of paint is applied . Lighter skin tone dolls can take 15 to 30 layers . The effects of the blue color wash combined with the outside layers of paint creates the appearance of veins , and gives the doll its newborn mottled look . Manicured nails and opening of the nose holes are other details that are added during this process . 
 The next step is to apply hair . The hair can either be done in one of two ways ; wigging or <unk> . When <unk> , hair is added strand by strand . This can take up to 30 or more hours per head . Once the hair is finished , the original vinyl body is weighted with a soft stuffed body filled with pellets . The weight corresponds with its age to achieve a real effect . Various additions also can be added to give the doll an even more life like appearance . <unk> heads are often weighted , so that owners have to support the head like one would a real newborn . Purchasers can have magnets attached inside the mouth or head for attaching a pacifier or hair bows . Electronic devices that mimic a heart beat , or make the chest rise and fall to simulate breathing are common . <unk> can come with an umbilical cord , baby fat , heat packs to make the reborn warm to the touch , or voice boxes that mimic infant sounds . For <unk> dolls , they may come in incubators with a breathing apparatus attached to their nose . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Institutions have developed to aid reborn hobbyists with collecting by providing information , products , and social networking . These institutions include magazines , and associations and organizations which sponsor conferences and conventions . Collectors and artists have described their reasons for purchasing and / or creating reborn dolls as varying from a love of dolls to a passion for art . 
 = = = Purchasing = = = 
 Reborn dolls are usually found online and can be purchased through eBay , artists ' online stores ( often termed nurseries ) , and conventions / fairs . Incomplete crafting " kits " to create original reborns can also be purchased from various online stores . There is a large price range depending on the quality of the doll , but they can sell anywhere from hundreds to thousands of dollars . There are many factors to look for when purchasing a reborn . If the complexion is too dark this is called a blue baby , and indicates it was dyed excessively or uses colored sand for weight that could have seeped into the vinyl . The type of material used to weight the reborn should be considered because some materials do not react well with vinyl and will cause it to deteriorate . The doll should not be shiny . This indicates the doll was washed with acetone before painting , which prevents the color from correctly sticking to the doll 's surface . It may also be caused by the type of paint used to color the doll . This is corrected with a heat set matte varnish . The parts used are important , as original parts may be replaced . The replacement parts must be appropriately proportioned with the doll and made of quality material . At times having the original body retains the doll 's value either because it was made to fit that specific doll , or the artist left a signature mark . Eye brand , size , fitting , and alignment should be closely examined . Another feature to observe is the type of paint used for coloring and whether the doll is realistic in its details such as veins and newborn imperfections . The material and technique used in applying the hair may determine the quality . The nose should be open with the holes correctly shaped , and the nails should be properly manicured . 
 = = = Associations and organizations = = = 
 The International Reborn Doll Artists ( IRDA ) originated at the first conference for reborn doll artists on January 21 , 2005 . The IRDA group was assembled in order to offer education for improved skills in the art of reborn doll creation . They offer skill building tutorials and instruction so reborners can remain up to date on the newest techniques and meet others who share a common interest in reborn doll fabrication . A reborn artist can join the organization at any skill level , but members are asked to uphold a list of standards that were created by the IRDA 's executive board . This ethical code stipulates the guidelines members are to follow in advertising , listing , and describing their dolls in order to divide credit fairly between manufacturers , sculptors , and artists . 
 = = = Conferences and conventions = = = 
 The First Annual International Reborn Doll Artists Conference was held in Orlando , Florida on January 21 – 23 , 2005 in conjunction with IDEX The Annual Debut of the World 's Finest Collectibles . In January 2006 in Las Vegas , Nevada , Doll Reader Magazine sponsored the IDEX Reborn Competition at the First International IDEX Reborn Convention . Doll Reader Magazine started publishing over twenty @-@ five years ago . It is now published nine times a year , keeps collectors informed on trends of modern @-@ day doll collecting , and continues to sponsor the IDEX trade shows that feature reborn competitions and conventions . In the summer of 2008 , ABC News followed a reborn convention in Illinois . ABC News was also in St. Louis , Missouri to attend the first annual Tiny Treasures Show held in 2008 . The show features exhibitors , collectors , retailers , manufacturers , workshops , and contests for reborners . Reborn dolls can be found at doll fairs as well . 
 = = Social issues and reactions = = 
 The overwhelming majority of reborn customers are older women . The process of buying a reborn can be done to simulate an adoption process , rather than a prosaic sale of a product . As part of this , the dolls often come with fake birth certificates or adoption certificates . Many women collect reborns as they would a non @-@ reborn doll , whilst others purchase them to fill a void of a lost child and may treat reborns as living babies . Media features and public receptions have used such adjectives as " creepy " to describe the reborns . This can be explained by the uncanny valley hypothesis . This states that as objects become more lifelike they gain an increasing empathetic response , until a certain point at which the response changes to repulsion . Department stores have refused to stock the dolls because of this reaction , claiming they are too lifelike . 
 = = = Emotional bond = = = 
 Many reborn owners are simply doll collectors , while others have experienced miscarriage , stillbirth or neonatal loss , have no means for adoption , or suffer from empty nest syndrome . They may utilize the dolls as a substitute for a child . Some women dress the dolls , wash their hair , and may even take them for walks in strollers and take them shopping . Reborn hobbyists refer to the emotional response to holding their dolls as cuddle therapy . Studies suggest cuddling a baby causes a release of hormones which produce a sense of emotional well @-@ being , and some psychologists believe that this may happen with realistic dolls as well . Consultant psychiatrist Raj <unk> explains that mothering a real newborn baby releases the hormone oxytocin in the mother , and hypothesizes that this may explain why " reborn mothers " become emotionally attached to the reborn doll . 
 For grieving parents who form emotional bonds with reborn dolls , some child bereavement counselors advise against parents substituting their deceased child with the dolls . Reborn mothers contend that they are not replacing children but remembering them . Psychiatrist Sue Varma , teacher at the NYU school of medicine , says mothering reborn dolls rather than just collecting them can become a problem when it is used as prop and becomes the person 's only form of socializing . Psychiatrist Gail Saltz with New York Presbyterian Hospital supports the use of reborns for people who do not want to make the commitment of having a real child , and also to comfort bereaved parents . She offers that in this case the reborn may symbolize a step in the grieving process . Concern should only come if someone who lost a baby grows too attached to their reborn because it could indicate their grief is not getting resolved . In this case , the likeness of the doll to the deceased child risks being harmful as a permanent replacement for the grieving parents . Ian James , a doctor at the Centre for the Health of the Elderly at Newcastle General Hospital in the U.K. , said that holding the dolls helps calm elderly residents , helping them feel peaceful and quiet . 
 = = = Law enforcement incidents = = = 
 Reborn dolls look so real they have been mistaken for real babies . In July 2008 , police in Queensland , Australia smashed a car window to rescue what seemed like an unconscious baby only to find it was a reborn doll . The police stated that the doll was " incredibly lifelike " and that bystanders who thought a baby was dying were frightened by the incident . A similar incident was reported in the United States , in which police broke the window of a Hummer to save a baby that turned out to be a reborn doll . 
 In 2009 reborners uncovered a blogging hoax in which a woman – described by ABC News as an " anti @-@ abortion blogger " – claimed she was pregnant with a terminally ill child . She opened a <unk> box in order to receive gifts , money , and prayers . The hoax was uncovered when reborners reading the blog realized that the pictures of the baby posted on the blog were actually a reborn doll that they recognized through the familiar reborn sculpture . 
 = = = Media appearances = = = 
 Reborn dolls have been featured in a number of television shows . A December 10 , 2008 episode of Dr. Phil entitled " Obsessions " discussed the topic of reborning . In January 2008 , a Channel 4 series , My Fake Baby , explored the lives of women who collect the lifelike baby dolls . Featuring this documentary the British television magazine show on Channel 4 , Richard & Judy , held an interview with the reborn artist in the documentary , Jaime Eaton , collector Mary Flint and psychiatrist Raj <unk> . On January 2 , 2009 , an ABC News article described both the manufacturing and the emotional interaction of reborn dolls , while a January 2 20 / 20 episode talked about the mothering process and attachment to reborns . On January 31 , 2008 , Inside Edition aired a segment showing artist Eve Newsom and her reborn dolls . In December 2015 , <unk> Maxwell , owner & artist of Reborn , Sweet was featured in The Globe and Mail , in a LIFE feature on the therapeutic value of reborn dolls in treating anxiety and grief . 
 = SMS Hela = 
 SMS Hela was an aviso of the German Imperial Navy prior to and during World War I. The only ship of her class , Hela was launched on 28 March 1895 in Bremen . She was named after the Hela peninsula near Danzig ( present @-@ day Gdańsk ) . Hela was lightly armed for a light cruiser ; her main armament consisted of just four 8 @.@ 8 @-@ centimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns . In 1899 she was re @-@ classified to a light cruiser . 
 In 1900 – 1901 , Hela was deployed to China during the Boxer Rebellion . She participated in extensive fleet maneuvers in 1902 , before being significantly rebuilt from 1903 – 1906 . From 1910 , Hela was used as a fleet tender . With the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , she was put back into active service as a support ship for the torpedo boats stationed off Helgoland . On 13 September 1914 , Hela was torpedoed and sunk by the British submarine HMS E9 ; two of her crew died . 
 = = Design = = 
 Hela was the culmination in the development of the aviso type in the Imperial German Navy . German avisos were developed from earlier torpedo boats and were intended for use in home waters with the fleet . The first aviso , Zieten , was purchased from a British shipbuilder in 1875 ; seven more ships were built in German yards before Hela was laid down in 1893 . The aviso type culminated in what would later be referred to as the light cruiser ; Hela 's successors , the Gazelle @-@ class cruisers , were the first true light cruisers built . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Hela was 104 @.@ 6 meters ( 343 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline and 105 m ( 344 ft 6 in ) overall . She had a beam of 11 m ( 36 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 46 m ( 14 ft 8 in ) forward and 4 @.@ 64 m ( 15 ft 3 in ) aft . She was designed to displace 2 @,@ 027 t ( 1 @,@ 995 long tons ) , and at full combat load the displacement increased to 2 @,@ 082 t ( 2 @,@ 049 long tons ) . Her hull was constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames , which contained 22 watertight compartments above the armored deck and ten below . A double bottom ran for 35 percent of the length of the hull . Hela 's crew consisted of 7 officers and 171 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines ; both drove a screw that was 3 @.@ 25 m ( 10 ft 8 in ) in diameter . Each engine had its own separate engine room . The engines were supplied with steam by six locomotive boilers split into two boiler rooms . The engines were rated at 6 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower and a top speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , though on trials they reached a half knot better . Hela was equipped with three electrical generators that produced 36 kilowatts at 67 volts . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Hela was armed with four 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns in individual mountings . The guns fired 7 kg ( 15 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 590 meters per second ( 1 @,@ 936 f / s ) and a rate of approximately 15 shots per minute . At the maximum elevation of 30 ° , the guns could hit targets out to 10 @,@ 500 m ( 11 @,@ 480 yards ) . These guns were provided with a total of 800 rounds , for 200 per gun . She was also equipped with six 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 40 quick @-@ firing guns . These guns fired 1 @.@ 75 kg ( 3 @.@ 9 lb ) shells , at up to 10 shots per minute . They had a maximum range of 6 @,@ 200 m ( 6 @,@ 780 yd ) . Hela carried 250 rounds per gun . Her armament was completed with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Two were placed on the deck and the third was submerged in the bow of the ship . 
 Hela was lightly armored . She was protected by an armor deck that was 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick and composed of steel . The deck sloped on the sides , and was slightly increased in thickness to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) . The conning tower was armored with 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick steel . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In early 1898 , Hela was assigned to the I Division of the Maneuver Squadron for that year 's training exercises . She served as the dispatch vessel for the four Brandenburg @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = Boxer Rebellion = = = 
 During the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 , Chinese nationalists laid siege to the foreign embassies in Peking and murdered Baron Clemens von Ketteler , the German minister . The widespread violence against Westerners in China led to a creation of an alliance between Germany and seven other Great Powers : the United Kingdom , Italy , Russia , Austria @-@ Hungary , the United States , France , and Japan . Those soldiers who were in China at the time were too few in number to defeat the Boxers ; in Peking there was a force of slightly more than 400 officers and infantry from the armies of the eight European powers . At the time , the primary German military force in China was the East Asia Squadron , which consisted of the protected cruisers Kaiserin Augusta , Hansa , and Hertha , the small cruisers Irene and Gefion , and the gunboats Jaguar and Iltis . There was also a German 500 @-@ man detachment in Taku ; combined with the other nations ' units the force numbered some 2 @,@ 100 men . 
 These 2 @,@ 100 men , led by the British Admiral Edward Seymour , attempted to reach Peking but due to heavy resistance were forced to stop in Tientsin . As a result , the Kaiser determined an expeditionary force would be sent to China to reinforce the East Asia Squadron . Hela was part of the naval expedition , which included the four Brandenburg @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , sent to China to reinforce the German flotilla there . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz opposed the plan , which he saw as unnecessary and costly . The force was sent in spite of von Tirpitz 's objections ; it arrived in China in September 1900 . By that time , the siege of Peking had already been lifted . As a result , the task force suppressed local uprisings around Kiaochow . In the end , the operation cost the German government more than 100 million marks . 
 = = = Fleet training , 1902 = = = 
 On 31 August 1902 , the annual fleet maneuvers began . The first portion of the exercise positioned Germany in a naval war against a powerful enemy that had superior forces in the North and Baltic Seas . A German squadron , consisting of the coastal defense ships Hagen , Heimdall , and Hildebrand and a division of torpedo boats were trapped in the Kattegat by a superior enemy unit in the North Sea . The German squadron was tasked with returning to Kiel in the Baltic , where it would return to Wilhelmshaven via the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal to rejoin the rest of the fleet . Hela , along with three Brandenburg @-@ class battleships and the cruisers Nymphe and Amazone , was positioned in one of the three main channels from the Kattegat to Kiel to act as an opposing force . Two other battle squadrons were positioned to block the advance of the isolated German squadron . 
 On the morning of 2 September , the operation commenced . Hela was tasked with sweeping the numerous smaller channels , inlets , and bays in the squadron 's area of responsibility . At 06 : 00 that morning , the commander of the German squadron decided to take his ships through the channel to which Hela was assigned . The " hostile " torpedo @-@ boat screen sighted the German flotilla , but a dense fog precluded effective pursuit by the battleships . However , Hela , the other two cruisers , and the torpedo boats were detached to engage the German torpedo @-@ boat screen . Hela and the other ships quickly " destroyed " several of the German torpedo boats . This prompted the German squadron to retreat northward , with Hela and the other ships in pursuit . The German squadron was chased back through the Kattegat before the exercise was called off . On the night of 3 September , the entire fleet anchored off Læsø island to give the crews a rest . 
 The following day , 4 September , the exercise resumed . The German squadron was reinforced by several battleships and the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich ; Hela was again assigned to the hostile force . The German flotilla was ordered to sail into the North Sea and attempt to reach the safety of the island fortress of Helgoland . Hela was assigned to a screening force that was intended to intercept the German squadron so it could be brought to battle . A short engagement between the hostile screen and Prinz Heinrich ensued , during which Prinz Heinrich damaged the protected cruisers Freya and Victoria Louise . A torpedo boat attack on the German squadron followed in the early hours of 5 September . The hostile force was unable to prevent the escape of the German squadron , however , which reached Helgoland by 12 : 00 . 
 Hela and the rest of the fleet anchored off Helgoland on 8 – 11 September . During the day the ships conducted training with steam tactics . On 11 September the ships returned to Wilhelmshaven where on the following two days the ships replenished their coal supplies . On 14 September the final operation of the annual maneuvers began . The situation specified that the naval war had gone badly for Germany ; only four battleships were still in service , along with Hela , Freya , and a division of torpedo boats . The ships were to be stationed in the mouth of the Elbe river to protect the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal and access to Hamburg . On 15 September , the hostile force blockaded the Elbe , along with other rivers and harbors on the North Sea . The torpedo boats , which had been scattered in the previous engagement , were tracked and destroyed by the hostile force . The hostile battleship squadron steamed to the mouth of the Elbe , where Hela , Freya , and the remaining torpedo boats were stationed as lookouts . Nothing happened during the day of 16 September , but that night several German torpedo boats managed to destroy one of the blockading cruisers and badly damage another . The following day , Prinz Heinrich engaged Hela and Freya briefly before forcing the two ships to retreat . The weather began to storm so the operation was postponed until the following day . That morning , the hostile fleet forced its way into the Elbe , past the fortifications at the mouth of the river . The German flotilla made a desperate attack which resulted in the sinking of two of the hostile battleships . The hostile force , however , ultimately overwhelmed the outnumbered German ships and the exercise ended with their victory . 
 = = = Reconstruction and later service = = = 
 In 1903 , Hela was taken into the dry dock at the Kaiserliche Werft Danzig for extensive modernization . The ship 's superstructure was rebuilt , and her two rear 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed . Her boilers , which had been trunked into a single smoke stack were now split between two funnels . Coal storage capacity was also increased , from 370 t ( 360 long tons ) to 412 t ( 405 long tons ) . The ship was also further subdivided ; the 22 watertight compartments above the armored deck were increased to 30 , and the double bottom was extended to cover 39 percent of the hull . She was also re @-@ boilered ; her six original boilers were replaced with eight Marine @-@ type boilers . Work lasted until 1906 , at which point she rejoined the fleet and was stationed in Germany . Her crew was also increased by the addition of another officer and 16 enlisted men . After 1910 , Hela was withdrawn from active service and used as a fleet tender . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When World War I broke out , Hela was brought back to active duty and assigned to the covering forces for the German torpedo boats that formed the outer ring of coastal scouting patrols in the German portion of the North Sea . Hela was stationed to the northeast of Helgoland , along with the cruiser Stettin . These forces were surprised and attacked by superior British forces on 28 August 1914 in the first Battle of Helgoland Bight . After reports of the initial engagement between light forces reached Hela , the ship turned eastward to join the fighting . However , after another report , which stated that the British ships were retreating to the southwest away from Helgoland , reached Hela , the ship returned to her patrol station . Hela emerged from the battle without damage , and that night regrouped with the cruisers Kolberg and München to provide cover for the remaining torpedo boats and reestablish the Bight patrol line . 
 However , two weeks later , on the morning of 13 September 1914 , Hela was attacked six miles southwest of Helgoland by the British submarine HMS E9 under command of the future Admiral Max Horton . Hela was conducting a training exercise at the time ; the area around Helgoland was presumed safe from British submarines . After surfacing , E9 spotted the German cruiser and immediately re @-@ submerged to fire two of her torpedoes . After 15 minutes , E9 rose to periscope depth to inspect the scene . The British submarine found Hela sinking . Within another 15 minutes , Hela had slipped beneath the waves . The crew of E9 was awarded a bounty of £ 1 @,@ 050 as a reward for sinking Hela . Despite the speed with which the ship sank , her entire crew , with the exception of two sailors , were rescued from the sea . 
 Hela was the first German ship sunk by a British submarine in the war . As a result of her loss , all German ships conducting training exercises were moved to the Baltic Sea to prevent further such sinkings . One of her 8 @.@ 8 cm guns was retrieved from the wreck and is now preserved at Fort <unk> in Cuxhaven . 
 = Oliver Edwards = 
 Oliver Edwards ( January 30 , 1835 – April 28 , 1904 ) was a machine company executive , an inventor , and a volunteer officer in the Union Army during the American Civil War . 
 Raised in Springfield , Massachusetts , Edwards moved to Illinois as a young man to pursue a career as a manager of manufacturing . At the start of the Civil War , he became adjutant of the 10th Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry and later aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Brigadier General Darius N. Couch . In the fall of 1862 , he took command of the 37th Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry as colonel and led that unit through numerous major battles including the Battle of Gettysburg . Just after Gettysburg , in July 1863 , he was placed in command of a provisional brigade sent to assist in quelling the New York Draft Riots . During the Overland Campaign in the spring of 1864 , he was placed in command of a brigade and , during the Valley Campaigns of 1864 he was briefly placed in command of a division of the VI Corps . For his service during these campaigns , Edwards was awarded the honorary rank of brevet brigadier general and later promoted to full grade brigadier general United States Volunteers . In 1866 he was awarded the honorary rank of brevet major general , United States Volunteers , to rank from April 5 , 1865 , for his service during the Appomattox Campaign . 
 After the war , Edwards returned to a career in manufacturing , most notably as manager of the Florence Machine Company in Northampton , Massachusetts and the Gardner Machine and Gun Company in England . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Edwards was born in Springfield , Massachusetts in 1835 , son of Dr. Elisha Edwards and Eunice Lombard Edwards . From an early age , he had a strong interest in mechanics and , rather than attend college , he obtained an apprenticeship at the Springfield Armory . In 1856 , at age 21 , Edwards moved to the American Midwest to establish his own foundry , eventually settling in Warsaw , Illinois . Here he became a partner in a new foundry known as <unk> , Edwards and Co . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 = = = Adjutant and Aide @-@ de @-@ camp = = = 
 At the start of the Civil War in 1861 , Edwards returned to Massachusetts with the intention to enlist as a private . During May and early June 1861 , he recruited a company of men from Springfield which became part of the 10th Massachusetts Infantry . Upon the mustering in of the 10th Massachusetts , Edwards was offered an officer 's commission as a first lieutenant and assigned the role of adjutant — a primarily administrative position assisting Colonel Henry Shaw Briggs who commanded the regiment . 
 Edwards saw little action during his service with the 10th in the fall of 1861 , the regiment being primarily occupied with building fortifications in the vicinity of Washington , D.C. at that time . In January 1862 , Brig. Gen. Darius N. Couch , in command of the division to which the 10th Massachusetts belonged , asked Edwards to be his aide @-@ de @-@ camp . Edwards occupied this administrative position throughout the Peninsular Campaign and the Northern Virginia Campaign , assisting Couch in coordinating the movements of his division . 
 = = = 37th Massachusetts = = = 
 On August 9 , 1862 , Edwards was promoted to major and recalled to Pittsfield , Massachusetts to assist in organizing the 37th Massachusetts Infantry . As the regiment was still being organized , Edwards was promoted to colonel and command of the 37th Massachusetts . The regiment arrived in Washington , D.C. during the first week of September 1862 . They were soon attached to the Army of the Potomac , being assigned to the 2nd Brigade , 3rd Division of the VI Corps . 
 Edwards had already seen numerous battles but his first experience as a field commander in combat occurred during the Battle of Fredericksburg on December 13 , 1862 . His regiment played a minor role in the fight , however , as their brigade was held in reserve during the battle . 
 During the Chancellorsville Campaign , Edwards and the 37th Massachusetts took part in the Second Battle of Fredericksburg and the Battle of Salem Church in May 1863 . During the latter engagement , the 37th occupied the extreme left of the Union line — an exposed and dangerous position . After the battle , Maj. Gen. John Sedgwick extended his compliments to the 37th for holding their ground . 
 The 37th Massachusetts fought at the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863 . During the third day of fighting , the 37th was assigned a new position on the battle line and was en route when the Confederate heavy cannonade preceding Pickett 's Charge began . Unlike most Union regiments which took cover during the cannonade , the 37th was forced to march to their new position during the bombardment , taking heavy casualties . Edwards was credited , however , with keeping the regiment together and bolstering their courage during the dangerous march . 
 = = = New York Draft Riots = = = 
 On July 30 , 1863 , the 37th Massachusetts became one of a small number regiments from the Army of the Potomac hand picked for duty in New York in the wake of the Draft Riots . By the time the 37th reached New York , the worst of the rioting had ended , however a strong U.S. Army presence was required to keep peace until October 1863 . During his time in New York , Edwards commanded a brigade stationed at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn . Hearing that the presence of Massachusetts troops might spark further violence on the part of rioters , Edwards requested permission to place his regiment prominently as guards at a draft office , intending to demonstrate the bravery of his men in the face of threats . Despite the rumors , the presence of Edwards 's regiment incited no further violence . 
 = = = Brigade command = = = 
 Returning to the Army of the Potomac in October 1863 , Col. Edwards and the 37th Massachusetts took part in the Mine Run Campaign then settled into winter camp with the rest of the Army of the Potomac . In the spring of 1864 , the 37th was engaged in the Overland Campaign a rapid series of severe battles during which Lt. Gen. Ulysses Grant attempted to grind down the Confederate army and capture the Confederate capital of Richmond . 
 During the Battle of the Wilderness on May 6 , 1864 , Edwards was ordered to lead the 37th Massachusetts on a dangerous charge to check a Confederate advance and to provide cover for Brig. Gen. James S. Wadsworth 's retreating division . Edwards led the 37th forward as they cleared 900 yards ( 820 m ) of ground , only to be surrounded by Confederates . The retreat of the regiment was orderly , keeping up a constant fire under Edwards 's direction , however the regiment suffered 25 percent casualties during the engagement . 
 After participating in the Battle of Spotsylvania , Edwards was promoted to command of the 4th Brigade , 2nd Division of the VI Corps . Edwards commanded this unit during the remainder of the Overland Campaign including such engagements as the Battle of North Anna and the Battle of Cold Harbor . 
 After the close of the Overland Campaign , in July 1864 , Edwards 's brigade was re @-@ organized and became the 3rd Brigade , 1st Division of the VI Corps . Three divisions of the VI Corps were then transferred to the command of Maj. Gen. Philip Sheridan in the Shenandoah Valley and took part in the Valley Campaigns of the summer and fall of 1864 . 
 The turning point in this campaign for the Union Army came during the Battle of Opequon at Winchester , Virginia on September 19 , 1864 . During this engagement , Edwards was temporarily promoted to the command of the 1st Division of the VI Corps and performed well , earning the attention of Maj. Gen. Sheridan . Subsequently , Sheridan appointed Edwards the commandant of Winchester . On December 12 , 1864 , President Abraham Lincoln nominated Edwards for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general , United States Volunteers , to rank from October 19 , 1864 , for gallantry at the Battle of Spotsylvania and at the Battle of Opequon ( Third Winchester ) . The U.S. Senate confirmed the award on February 14 , 1865 . When Sheridan embarked on his southward offensive through the Shenandoah Valley in October 1864 , he asked Edwards to become his provost marshal general . However , Edwards preferred to retain command of his brigade and to return to the Army of the Potomac . 
 Edwards and his brigade returned to the Army of the Potomac in the midst of the long Siege of Petersburg . During the Third Battle of Petersburg on April 2 , 1865 , Edwards 's brigade was the first Union unit to break through the Confederate works outside Petersburg . After the Confederates had evacuated their fortifications , Edwards personally received the surrender of the city from the mayor of Petersburg . 
 On May 19 , 1865 , President Andrew Johnson nominated Edwards to the full grade of brigadier general , United States Volunteers , to rank from May 19 , 1865 . However , the President did not present the nomination of Edwards for the promotion to the U. S. Senate until January 13 , 1866 . Although Edwards had been mustered out of the U.S. Volunteers on January 15 , 1866 , the Senate confirmed the promotion on February 23 , 1866 . On July 9 , 1866 , President Andrew Johnson nominated Edwards for the award of the honorary grade of brevet major general , United States Volunteers , to rank from April 5 , 1865 , for capturing Confederate Lieutenant General Richard S. Ewell , Major General Custis Lee , ( son of Robert E. Lee ) , who was captured by David <unk> White of the 37th Massachusetts Regiment , which was part of Oliver Edwards ' command , and an entire brigade of Confederate soldiers at the Battle of Sayler 's Creek , Virginia during the Appomattox Campaign . The U.S. Senate confirmed the award on July 23 , 1866 . 
 After the close of the war , Edwards continued his service in the army for the remainder of 1865 and was offered a permanent position in the Regular Army . He declined , however , resigned his commission on January 15 , 1866 and was mustered out that day . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 After the war , Edwards returned to Warsaw , Illinois and his wife , Ann Eliza Johnston Edwards , whom he had married in September 1863 when on leave from the army . They had two children , John E. Edwards and Julia Katherine Edwards . He spent three years as postmaster in Warsaw and then returned to Massachusetts to continue his career in manufacturing . 
 In 1870 , Edwards was hired by the Florence Machine Company in Northampton , Massachusetts and eventually became general superintendent of the company . During this time , Edwards patented a number of inventions including the Florence ice skate and the Florence oil stove . He resigned his position with the Florence Machine Company in 1875 and returned to Warsaw where he went into early retirement for several years . His plans changed , however , when he was offered the position of general manager of the Gardner Machine and Gun Company in England in 1882 . The company manufactured Gardner guns , which had been invented in the United States but the rights to which were purchased by the British Army . Edwards managed the company for a few years , however poor health required him to resign and return to Warsaw and retirement . 
 His remaining years were spent pursuing leisure interests and also supporting various organizations such as the Grand Army of the Republic . Edwards died in Warsaw on April 28 , 1904 . 
 = Mathematical economics = 
 Mathematical economics is the application of mathematical methods to represent theories and analyze problems in economics . By convention , the applied methods refer to those beyond simple geometry , such as differential and integral calculus , difference and differential equations , matrix algebra , mathematical programming , and other computational methods . An advantage claimed for the approach is its allowing formulation of theoretical relationships with rigor , generality , and simplicity . 
 Mathematics allows economists to form meaningful , testable propositions about wide @-@ ranging and complex subjects which could less easily be expressed informally . Further , the language of mathematics allows economists to make specific , positive claims about controversial or contentious subjects that would be impossible without mathematics . Much of economic theory is currently presented in terms of mathematical economic models , a set of stylized and simplified mathematical relationships asserted to clarify assumptions and implications . 
 Broad applications include : 
 optimization problems as to goal equilibrium , whether of a household , business firm , or policy maker 
 static ( or equilibrium ) analysis in which the economic unit ( such as a household ) or economic system ( such as a market or the economy ) is modeled as not changing 
 comparative statics as to a change from one equilibrium to another induced by a change in one or more factors 
 dynamic analysis , tracing changes in an economic system over time , for example from economic growth . 
 Formal economic modeling began in the 19th century with the use of differential calculus to represent and explain economic behavior , such as utility maximization , an early economic application of mathematical optimization . Economics became more mathematical as a discipline throughout the first half of the 20th century , but introduction of new and generalized techniques in the period around the Second World War , as in game theory , would greatly broaden the use of mathematical formulations in economics . 
 This rapid systematizing of economics alarmed critics of the discipline as well as some noted economists . John Maynard Keynes , Robert Heilbroner , Friedrich Hayek and others have criticized the broad use of mathematical models for human behavior , arguing that some human choices are irreducible to mathematics . 
 = = History = = 
 The use of mathematics in the service of social and economic analysis dates back to the 17th century . Then , mainly in German universities , a style of instruction emerged which dealt specifically with detailed presentation of data as it related to public administration . Gottfried <unk> lectured in this fashion , coining the term statistics . At the same time , a small group of professors in England established a method of " reasoning by figures upon things relating to government " and referred to this practice as Political <unk> . Sir William Petty wrote at length on issues that would later concern economists , such as taxation , Velocity of money and national income , but while his analysis was numerical , he rejected abstract mathematical methodology . Petty 's use of detailed numerical data ( along with John Graunt ) would influence statisticians and economists for some time , even though Petty 's works were largely ignored by English scholars . 
 The <unk> of economics began in earnest in the 19th century . Most of the economic analysis of the time was what would later be called classical economics . Subjects were discussed and dispensed with through algebraic means , but calculus was not used . More importantly , until Johann Heinrich von Thünen 's The Isolated State in 1826 , economists did not develop explicit and abstract models for behavior in order to apply the tools of mathematics . Thünen 's model of farmland use represents the first example of marginal analysis . Thünen 's work was largely theoretical , but he also mined empirical data in order to attempt to support his generalizations . In comparison to his contemporaries , Thünen built economic models and tools , rather than applying previous tools to new problems . 
 Meanwhile , a new cohort of scholars trained in the mathematical methods of the physical sciences gravitated to economics , advocating and applying those methods to their subject , and described today as moving from geometry to mechanics . These included W.S. Jevons who presented paper on a " general mathematical theory of political economy " in 1862 , providing an outline for use of the theory of marginal utility in political economy . In 1871 , he published The Principles of Political Economy , declaring that the subject as science " must be mathematical simply because it deals with quantities . " Jevons expected the only collection of statistics for price and quantities would permit the subject as presented to become an exact science . Others preceded and followed in expanding mathematical representations of economic problems . 
 = = = <unk> and the roots of neoclassical economics = = = 
 Augustin Cournot and Léon Walras built the tools of the discipline axiomatically around utility , arguing that individuals sought to maximize their utility across choices in a way that could be described mathematically . At the time , it was thought that utility was quantifiable , in units known as <unk> . Cournot , Walras and Francis Ysidro Edgeworth are considered the precursors to modern mathematical economics . 
 = = = = Augustin Cournot = = = = 
 Cournot , a professor of mathematics , developed a mathematical treatment in 1838 for duopoly — a market condition defined by competition between two sellers . This treatment of competition , first published in Researches into the Mathematical Principles of Wealth , is referred to as Cournot duopoly . It is assumed that both sellers had equal access to the market and could produce their goods without cost . Further , it assumed that both goods were homogeneous . Each seller would vary her output based on the output of the other and the market price would be determined by the total quantity supplied . The profit for each firm would be determined by multiplying their output and the per unit Market price . Differentiating the profit function with respect to quantity supplied for each firm left a system of linear equations , the simultaneous solution of which gave the equilibrium quantity , price and profits . Cournot 's contributions to the <unk> of economics would be neglected for decades , but eventually influenced many of the <unk> . Cournot 's models of duopoly and <unk> also represent one of the first formulations of non @-@ cooperative games . Today the solution can be given as a Nash equilibrium but Cournot 's work preceded modern game theory by over 100 years . 
 = = = = Léon Walras = = = = 
 While Cournot provided a solution for what would later be called partial equilibrium , Léon Walras attempted to formalize discussion of the economy as a whole through a theory of general competitive equilibrium . The behavior of every economic actor would be considered on both the production and consumption side . Walras originally presented four separate models of exchange , each recursively included in the next . The solution of the resulting system of equations ( both linear and non @-@ linear ) is the general equilibrium . At the time , no general solution could be expressed for a system of arbitrarily many equations , but Walras 's attempts produced two famous results in economics . The first is Walras ' law and the second is the principle of tâtonnement . Walras ' method was considered highly mathematical for the time and Edgeworth commented at length about this fact in his review of Éléments d <unk> politique pure ( Elements of Pure Economics ) . 
 Walras ' law was introduced as a theoretical answer to the problem of determining the solutions in general equilibrium . His notation is different from modern notation but can be constructed using more modern summation notation . Walras assumed that in equilibrium , all money would be spent on all goods : every good would be sold at the market price for that good and every buyer would expend their last dollar on a basket of goods . Starting from this assumption , Walras could then show that if there were n markets and n @-@ 1 markets cleared ( reached equilibrium conditions ) that the nth market would clear as well . This is easiest to visualize with two markets ( considered in most texts as a market for goods and a market for money ) . If one of two markets has reached an equilibrium state , no additional goods ( or conversely , money ) can enter or exit the second market , so it must be in a state of equilibrium as well . Walras used this statement to move toward a proof of existence of solutions to general equilibrium but it is commonly used today to illustrate market clearing in money markets at the undergraduate level . 
 <unk> ( roughly , French for groping toward ) was meant to serve as the practical expression of Walrasian general equilibrium . Walras abstracted the marketplace as an auction of goods where the auctioneer would call out prices and market participants would wait until they could each satisfy their personal reservation prices for the quantity desired ( remembering here that this is an auction on all goods , so everyone has a reservation price for their desired basket of goods ) . 
 Only when all buyers are satisfied with the given market price would transactions occur . The market would " clear " at that price — no surplus or shortage would exist . The word tâtonnement is used to describe the directions the market takes in groping toward equilibrium , settling high or low prices on different goods until a price is agreed upon for all goods . While the process appears dynamic , Walras only presented a static model , as no transactions would occur until all markets were in equilibrium . In practice very few markets operate in this manner . 
 = = = = Francis Ysidro Edgeworth = = = = 
 Edgeworth introduced mathematical elements to Economics explicitly in Mathematical <unk> : An Essay on the Application of Mathematics to the Moral Sciences , published in 1881 . He adopted Jeremy Bentham 's <unk> calculus to economic behavior , allowing the outcome of each decision to be converted into a change in utility . Using this assumption , Edgeworth built a model of exchange on three assumptions : individuals are self @-@ interested , individuals act to maximize utility , and individuals are " free to <unk> with another independently of ... any third party . " 
 Given two individuals , the set of solutions where the both individuals can maximize utility is described by the contract curve on what is now known as an Edgeworth Box . Technically , the construction of the two @-@ person solution to Edgeworth 's problem was not developed graphically until 1924 by Arthur Lyon Bowley . The contract curve of the Edgeworth box ( or more generally on any set of solutions to Edgeworth 's problem for more actors ) is referred to as the core of an economy . 
 Edgeworth devoted considerable effort to insisting that mathematical proofs were appropriate for all schools of thought in economics . While at the helm of The Economic Journal , he published several articles criticizing the mathematical rigor of rival researchers , including Edwin Robert Anderson Seligman , a noted skeptic of mathematical economics . The articles focused on a back and forth over tax incidence and responses by producers . Edgeworth noticed that a monopoly producing a good that had <unk> of supply but not <unk> of demand ( such as first class and economy on an airplane , if the plane flies , both sets of seats fly with it ) might actually lower the price seen by the consumer for one of the two commodities if a tax were applied . Common sense and more traditional , numerical analysis seemed to indicate that this was preposterous . Seligman insisted that the results Edgeworth achieved were a quirk of his mathematical formulation . He suggested that the assumption of a continuous demand function and an infinitesimal change in the tax resulted in the paradoxical predictions . Harold Hotelling later showed that Edgeworth was correct and that the same result ( a " diminution of price as a result of the tax " ) could occur with a discontinuous demand function and large changes in the tax rate . 
 = = Modern mathematical economics = = 
 From the later @-@ 1930s , an array of new mathematical tools from the differential calculus and differential equations , convex sets , and graph theory were deployed to advance economic theory in a way similar to new mathematical methods earlier applied to physics . The process was later described as moving from mechanics to <unk> . 
 = = = Differential calculus = = = 
 Vilfredo Pareto analyzed microeconomics by treating decisions by economic actors as attempts to change a given allotment of goods to another , more preferred allotment . Sets of allocations could then be treated as Pareto efficient ( Pareto optimal is an equivalent term ) when no exchanges could occur between actors that could make at least one individual better off without making any other individual worse off . Pareto 's proof is commonly conflated with <unk> equilibrium or informally ascribed to Adam Smith 's Invisible hand hypothesis . Rather , Pareto 's statement was the first formal assertion of what would be known as the first fundamental theorem of welfare economics . These models lacked the inequalities of the next generation of mathematical economics . 
 In the landmark treatise Foundations of Economic Analysis ( 1947 ) , Paul Samuelson identified a common paradigm and mathematical structure across multiple fields in the subject , building on previous work by Alfred Marshall . Foundations took mathematical concepts from physics and applied them to economic problems . This broad view ( for example , comparing Le Chatelier 's principle to tâtonnement ) drives the fundamental premise of mathematical economics : systems of economic actors may be modeled and their behavior described much like any other system . This extension followed on the work of the <unk> in the previous century and extended it significantly . Samuelson approached the problems of applying individual utility maximization over aggregate groups with comparative statics , which compares two different equilibrium states after an exogenous change in a variable . This and other methods in the book provided the foundation for mathematical economics in the 20th century . 
 = = = Linear models = = = 
 Restricted models of general equilibrium were formulated by John von Neumann in 1937 . Unlike earlier versions , the models of von Neumann had inequality constraints . For his model of an expanding economy , von Neumann proved the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of Brouwer 's fixed point theorem . Von Neumann 's model of an expanding economy considered the matrix pencil A - λ B with nonnegative matrices A and B ; von Neumann sought probability vectors p and q and a positive number λ that would solve the complementarity equation 
 <unk> ( A - λ B ) q = 0 @,@ 
 along with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency . In this model , the ( transposed ) probability vector p represents the prices of the goods while the probability vector q represents the " intensity " at which the production process would run . The unique solution λ represents the rate of growth of the economy , which equals the interest rate . Proving the existence of a positive growth rate and proving that the growth rate equals the interest rate were remarkable achievements , even for von Neumann . Von Neumann 's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming , where von Neumann 's model uses only nonnegative matrices . The study of von Neumann 's model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists with interests in computational economics . 
 = = = = Input @-@ output economics = = = = 
 In 1936 , the Russian – born economist Wassily Leontief built his model of input @-@ output analysis from the ' material balance ' tables constructed by Soviet economists , which themselves followed earlier work by the physiocrats . With his model , which described a system of production and demand processes , Leontief described how changes in demand in one economic sector would influence production in another . In practice , Leontief estimated the coefficients of his simple models , to address economically interesting questions . In production economics , " Leontief technologies " produce outputs using constant proportions of inputs , regardless of the price of inputs , reducing the value of Leontief models for understanding economies but allowing their parameters to be estimated relatively easily . In contrast , the von Neumann model of an expanding economy allows for choice of techniques , but the coefficients must be estimated for each technology . 
 = = = Mathematical optimization = = = 
 In mathematics , mathematical optimization ( or optimization or mathematical programming ) refers to the selection of a best element from some set of available alternatives . In the simplest case , an optimization problem involves maximizing or minimizing a real function by selecting input values of the function and computing the corresponding values of the function . The solution process includes satisfying general necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality . For optimization problems , specialized notation may be used as to the function and its input ( s ) . More generally , optimization includes finding the best available element of some function given a defined domain and may use a variety of different computational optimization techniques . 
 Economics is closely enough linked to optimization by agents in an economy that an influential definition <unk> describes economics qua science as the " study of human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means " with alternative uses . Optimization problems run through modern economics , many with explicit economic or technical constraints . In microeconomics , the utility maximization problem and its dual problem , the expenditure minimization problem for a given level of utility , are economic optimization problems . Theory posits that consumers maximize their utility , subject to their budget constraints and that firms maximize their profits , subject to their production functions , input costs , and market demand . 
 Economic equilibrium is studied in optimization theory as a key ingredient of economic theorems that in principle could be tested against empirical data . Newer developments have occurred in dynamic programming and modeling optimization with risk and uncertainty , including applications to portfolio theory , the economics of information , and search theory . 
 <unk> properties for an entire market system may be stated in mathematical terms , as in formulation of the two fundamental theorems of welfare economics and in the Arrow – Debreu model of general equilibrium ( also discussed below ) . More concretely , many problems are amenable to analytical ( formulaic ) solution . Many others may be sufficiently complex to require numerical methods of solution , aided by software . Still others are complex but tractable enough to allow computable methods of solution , in particular computable general equilibrium models for the entire economy . 
 Linear and nonlinear programming have profoundly affected microeconomics , which had earlier considered only equality constraints . Many of the mathematical economists who received Nobel Prizes in Economics had conducted notable research using linear programming : Leonid Kantorovich , Leonid Hurwicz , Tjalling Koopmans , Kenneth J. Arrow , and Robert Dorfman , Paul Samuelson , and Robert Solow . Both Kantorovich and Koopmans acknowledged that George B. Dantzig deserved to share their Nobel Prize for linear programming . Economists who conducted research in nonlinear programming also have won the Nobel prize , notably Ragnar Frisch in addition to Kantorovich , Hurwicz , Koopmans , Arrow , and Samuelson . 
 = = = = Linear optimization = = = = 
 Linear programming was developed to aid the allocation of resources in firms and in industries during the 1930s in Russia and during the 1940s in the United States . During the Berlin airlift ( 1948 ) , linear programming was used to plan the shipment of supplies to prevent Berlin from starving after the Soviet blockade . 
 = = = = Nonlinear programming = = = = 
 Extensions to nonlinear optimization with inequality constraints were achieved in 1951 by Albert W. Tucker and Harold Kuhn , who considered the nonlinear optimization problem : 
 <unk> <formula> ( <formula> ) subject to <formula> i ( <formula> ) ≤ 0 and <formula> j ( <formula> ) 
 = 0 where 
 <formula> ( . ) is the function to be minimized 
 <formula> i ( . ) ( <formula> = 
 1 , ... , <formula> ) are the functions of the <formula> inequality constraints 
 <formula> j ( . ) ( <formula> = 1 , ... , <formula> ) are the functions of the <formula> equality constraints . 
 In allowing inequality constraints , the Kuhn – Tucker approach generalized the classic method of Lagrange multipliers , which ( until then ) had allowed only equality constraints . The Kuhn – Tucker approach inspired further research on Lagrangian duality , including the treatment of inequality constraints . The duality theory of nonlinear programming is particularly satisfactory when applied to convex minimization problems , which enjoy the convex @-@ analytic duality theory of <unk> and <unk> ; this convex duality is particularly strong for polyhedral convex functions , such as those arising in linear programming . Lagrangian duality and convex analysis are used daily in operations research , in the scheduling of power plants , the planning of production schedules for factories , and the routing of airlines ( routes , flights , planes , crews ) . 
 = = = = <unk> calculus and optimal control = = = = 
 Economic dynamics allows for changes in economic variables over time , including in dynamic systems . The problem of finding optimal functions for such changes is studied in variational calculus and in optimal control theory . Before the Second World War , Frank Ramsey and Harold Hotelling used the calculus of variations to that end . 
 Following Richard Bellman 's work on dynamic programming and the 1962 English translation of L. Pontryagin et al . ' s earlier work , optimal control theory was used more extensively in economics in addressing dynamic problems , especially as to economic growth equilibrium and stability of economic systems , of which a textbook example is optimal consumption and saving . A crucial distinction is between deterministic and stochastic control models . Other applications of optimal control theory include those in finance , inventories , and production for example . 
 = = = = Functional analysis = = = = 
 It was in the course of proving of the existence of an optimal equilibrium in his 1937 model of economic growth that John von Neumann introduced functional analytic methods to include topology in economic theory , in particular , fixed @-@ point theory through his generalization of Brouwer 's fixed @-@ point theorem . Following von Neumann 's program , Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu formulated abstract models of economic equilibria using convex sets and fixed – point theory . In introducing the Arrow – Debreu model in 1954 , they proved the existence ( but not the uniqueness ) of an equilibrium and also proved that every Walras equilibrium is Pareto efficient ; in general , equilibria need not be unique . In their models , the ( " primal " ) vector space represented <unk> while the " dual " vector space represented prices . 
 In Russia , the mathematician Leonid Kantorovich developed economic models in partially ordered vector spaces , that emphasized the duality between quantities and prices . Kantorovich renamed prices as " objectively determined valuations " which were abbreviated in Russian as " o. o. o . " , alluding to the difficulty of discussing prices in the Soviet Union . 
 Even in finite dimensions , the concepts of functional analysis have illuminated economic theory , particularly in clarifying the role of prices as normal vectors to a hyperplane supporting a convex set , representing production or consumption possibilities . However , problems of describing optimization over time or under uncertainty require the use of infinite – dimensional function spaces , because agents are choosing among functions or stochastic processes . 
 = = = Differential decline and rise = = = 
 John von Neumann 's work on functional analysis and topology in broke new ground in mathematics and economic theory . It also left advanced mathematical economics with fewer applications of differential calculus . In particular , general equilibrium theorists used general topology , convex geometry , and optimization theory more than differential calculus , because the approach of differential calculus had failed to establish the existence of an equilibrium . 
 However , the decline of differential calculus should not be exaggerated , because differential calculus has always been used in graduate training and in applications . Moreover , differential calculus has returned to the highest levels of mathematical economics , general equilibrium theory ( GET ) , as practiced by the " GET @-@ set " ( the humorous designation due to Jacques H. <unk> ) . In the 1960s and 1970s , however , Gérard Debreu and Stephen Smale led a revival of the use of differential calculus in mathematical economics . In particular , they were able to prove the existence of a general equilibrium , where earlier writers had failed , because of their novel mathematics : Baire category from general topology and <unk> 's lemma from differential topology . Other economists associated with the use of differential analysis include Egbert Dierker , Andreu Mas @-@ <unk> , and Yves <unk> . These advances have changed the traditional narrative of the history of mathematical economics , following von Neumann , which celebrated the abandonment of differential calculus . 
 = = = Game theory = = = 
 John von Neumann , working with Oskar Morgenstern on the theory of games , broke new mathematical ground in 1944 by extending functional analytic methods related to convex sets and topological fixed @-@ point theory to economic analysis . Their work thereby avoided the traditional differential calculus , for which the maximum – operator did not apply to non @-@ differentiable functions . Continuing von Neumann 's work in cooperative game theory , game theorists Lloyd S. Shapley , Martin Shubik , Hervé Moulin , Nimrod Megiddo , Bezalel Peleg influenced economic research in politics and economics . For example , research on the fair prices in cooperative games and fair values for voting games led to changed rules for voting in legislatures and for accounting for the costs in public – works projects . For example , cooperative game theory was used in designing the water distribution system of Southern Sweden and for setting rates for dedicated telephone lines in the USA . 
 Earlier neoclassical theory had bounded only the range of bargaining outcomes and in special cases , for example bilateral monopoly or along the contract curve of the Edgeworth box . Von Neumann and Morgenstern 's results were similarly weak . Following von Neumann 's program , however , John Nash used fixed – point theory to prove conditions under which the bargaining problem and <unk> games can generate a unique equilibrium solution . <unk> game theory has been adopted as a fundamental aspect of experimental economics , behavioral economics , information economics , industrial organization , and political economy . It has also given rise to the subject of mechanism design ( sometimes called reverse game theory ) , which has private and public @-@ policy applications as to ways of improving economic efficiency through incentives for information sharing . 
 In 1994 , Nash , John <unk> , and Reinhard <unk> received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences their work on non – cooperative games . <unk> and <unk> were awarded for their work on repeated games . Later work extended their results to computational methods of modeling . 
 = = = Agent @-@ based computational economics = = = 
 Agent @-@ based computational economics ( ACE ) as a named field is relatively recent , dating from about the 1990s as to published work . It studies economic processes , including whole economies , as dynamic systems of interacting agents over time . As such , it falls in the paradigm of complex adaptive systems . In corresponding agent @-@ based models , agents are not real people but " computational objects modeled as interacting according to rules " ... " whose micro @-@ level interactions create emergent patterns " in space and time . The rules are formulated to predict behavior and social interactions based on incentives and information . The theoretical assumption of mathematical optimization by agents markets is replaced by the less restrictive postulate of agents with bounded rationality adapting to market forces . 
 ACE models apply numerical methods of analysis to computer @-@ based simulations of complex dynamic problems for which more conventional methods , such as theorem formulation , may not find ready use . Starting from specified initial conditions , the computational economic system is modeled as evolving over time as its constituent agents repeatedly interact with each other . In these respects , ACE has been characterized as a bottom @-@ up culture @-@ dish approach to the study of the economy . In contrast to other standard modeling methods , ACE events are driven solely by initial conditions , whether or not equilibria exist or are computationally tractable . ACE modeling , however , includes agent adaptation , autonomy , and learning . It has a similarity to , and overlap with , game theory as an agent @-@ based method for modeling social interactions . Other dimensions of the approach include such standard economic subjects as competition and collaboration , market structure and industrial organization , transaction costs , welfare economics and mechanism design , information and uncertainty , and macroeconomics . 
 The method is said to benefit from continuing improvements in modeling techniques of computer science and increased computer capabilities . Issues include those common to experimental economics in general and by comparison and to development of a common framework for empirical validation and resolving open questions in agent @-@ based modeling . The ultimate scientific objective of the method has been described as " test [ ing ] theoretical findings against real @-@ world data in ways that permit empirically supported theories to cumulate over time , with each researcher 's work building appropriately on the work that has gone before . " 
 = = <unk> of economics = = 
 Over the course of the 20th century , articles in " core journals " in economics have been almost exclusively written by economists in academia . As a result , much of the material transmitted in those journals relates to economic theory , and " economic theory itself has been continuously more abstract and mathematical . " A subjective assessment of mathematical techniques employed in these core journals showed a decrease in articles that use neither geometric representations nor mathematical notation from 95 % in 1892 to 5 @.@ 3 % in 1990 . A 2007 survey of ten of the top economic journals finds that only 5 @.@ 8 % of the articles published in 2003 and 2004 both lacked statistical analysis of data and lacked displayed mathematical expressions that were indexed with numbers at the margin of the page . 
