 = = Econometrics = = 
 Between the world wars , advances in mathematical statistics and a cadre of mathematically trained economists led to econometrics , which was the name proposed for the discipline of advancing economics by using mathematics and statistics . Within economics , " econometrics " has often been used for statistical methods in economics , rather than mathematical economics . Statistical econometrics features the application of linear regression and time series analysis to economic data . 
 Ragnar Frisch coined the word " econometrics " and helped to found both the <unk> Society in 1930 and the journal <unk> in 1933 . A student of Frisch 's , Trygve <unk> published The Probability Approach in Econometrics in 1944 , where he asserted that precise statistical analysis could be used as a tool to validate mathematical theories about economic actors with data from complex sources . This linking of statistical analysis of systems to economic theory was also promulgated by the Cowles Commission ( now the Cowles Foundation ) throughout the 1930s and 1940s . 
 = = = Earlier work in econometrics = = = 
 The roots of modern econometrics can be traced to the American economist Henry L. Moore . Moore studied agricultural productivity and attempted to fit changing values of productivity for plots of corn and other crops to a curve using different values of elasticity . Moore made several errors in his work , some from his choice of models and some from limitations in his use of mathematics . The accuracy of Moore 's models also was limited by the poor data for national accounts in the United States at the time . While his first models of production were static , in 1925 he published a dynamic " moving equilibrium " model designed to explain business cycles — this periodic variation from <unk> in supply and demand curves is now known as the cobweb model . A more formal derivation of this model was made later by Nicholas Kaldor , who is largely credited for its exposition . 
 = = Application = = 
 Much of classical economics can be presented in simple geometric terms or elementary mathematical notation . Mathematical economics , however , conventionally makes use of calculus and matrix algebra in economic analysis in order to make powerful claims that would be more difficult without such mathematical tools . These tools are prerequisites for formal study , not only in mathematical economics but in contemporary economic theory in general . Economic problems often involve so many variables that mathematics is the only practical way of attacking and solving them . Alfred Marshall argued that every economic problem which can be quantified , analytically expressed and solved , should be treated by means of mathematical work . 
 Economics has become increasingly dependent upon mathematical methods and the mathematical tools it employs have become more sophisticated . As a result , mathematics has become considerably more important to professionals in economics and finance . Graduate programs in both economics and finance require strong undergraduate preparation in mathematics for admission and , for this reason , attract an increasingly high number of mathematicians . Applied mathematicians apply mathematical principles to practical problems , such as economic analysis and other economics @-@ related issues , and many economic problems are often defined as integrated into the scope of applied mathematics . 
 This integration results from the formulation of economic problems as stylized models with clear assumptions and falsifiable predictions . This modeling may be informal or prosaic , as it was in Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations , or it may be formal , rigorous and mathematical . 
 Broadly speaking , formal economic models may be classified as stochastic or deterministic and as discrete or continuous . At a practical level , quantitative modeling is applied to many areas of economics and several methodologies have evolved more or less independently of each other . 
 Stochastic models are formulated using stochastic processes . They model economically observable values over time . Most of econometrics is based on statistics to formulate and test hypotheses about these processes or estimate parameters for them . Between the World Wars , Herman Wold developed a representation of stationary stochastic processes in terms of autoregressive models and a determinist trend . Wold and Jan Tinbergen applied time @-@ series analysis to economic data . Contemporary research on time series statistics consider additional formulations of stationary processes , such as autoregressive moving average models . More general models include autoregressive conditional <unk> ( <unk> ) models and generalized <unk> ( <unk> ) models . 
 Non @-@ stochastic mathematical models may be purely qualitative ( for example , models involved in some aspect of social choice theory ) or quantitative ( involving rationalization of financial variables , for example with hyperbolic coordinates , and / or specific forms of functional relationships between variables ) . In some cases economic predictions of a model merely assert the direction of movement of economic variables , and so the functional relationships are used only in a qualitative sense : for example , if the price of an item increases , then the demand for that item will decrease . For such models , economists often use two @-@ dimensional graphs instead of functions . 
 Qualitative models are occasionally used . One example is qualitative scenario planning in which possible future events are played out . Another example is non @-@ numerical decision tree analysis . Qualitative models often suffer from lack of precision . 
 = = Classification = = 
 According to the Mathematics Subject Classification ( MSC ) , mathematical economics falls into the Applied mathematics / other classification of category 91 : 
 Game theory , economics , social and behavioral sciences 
 with <unk> classifications for ' Game theory ' at codes <unk> and for ' Mathematical economics ' at codes <unk> . 
 The Handbook of Mathematical Economics series ( Elsevier ) , currently 4 volumes , distinguishes between mathematical methods in economics , v. 1 , Part I , and areas of economics in other volumes where mathematics is employed . 
 Another source with a similar distinction is The New Palgrave : A Dictionary of Economics ( 1987 , 4 vols . , 1 @,@ 300 subject entries ) . In it , a " Subject Index " includes mathematical entries under 2 headings ( vol . IV , pp. 982 – 3 ) : 
 Mathematical Economics ( 24 listed , such as " <unk> " , " aggregation problem " , " comparative statics " , " lexicographic orderings " , " linear models " , " orderings " , and " qualitative economics " ) 
 Mathematical Methods ( 42 listed , such as " calculus of variations " , " catastrophe theory " , " combinatorics , " " computation of general equilibrium " , " convexity " , " convex programming " , and " stochastic optimal control " ) . 
 A widely used system in economics that includes mathematical methods on the subject is the JEL classification codes . It originated in the Journal of Economic Literature for classifying new books and articles . The relevant categories are listed below ( simplified below to omit " Miscellaneous " and " Other " JEL codes ) , as reproduced from JEL classification codes # Mathematical and quantitative methods JEL : C Subcategories . The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics ( 2008 , 2nd ed . ) also uses the JEL codes to classify its entries . The corresponding footnotes below have links to abstracts of The New Palgrave Online for each JEL category ( 10 or fewer per page , similar to Google searches ) . 
 JEL : C02 - Mathematical Methods ( following JEL : <unk> - General and JEL : C01 - Econometrics ) 
 JEL : C6 - Mathematical Methods ; Programming Models ; Mathematical and Simulation Modeling JEL : C60 - General 
 JEL : <unk> - Optimization techniques ; Programming models ; Dynamic analysis 
 JEL : <unk> - Existence and stability conditions of equilibrium 
 JEL : <unk> - Computational techniques ; Simulation modeling 
 JEL : <unk> - Input – output models 
 JEL : <unk> - <unk> General Equilibrium models 
 JEL : C7 - Game theory and Bargaining <unk> : C70 - General 
 JEL : <unk> - Cooperative games 
 JEL : <unk> - <unk> games 
 JEL : <unk> - Stochastic and Dynamic games ; Evolutionary games ; Repeated Games 
 JEL : <unk> - Bargaining theory ; Matching theory 
 = = Criticisms and defences = = 
 = = = <unk> of mathematics for qualitative and complicated economics = = = 
 Friedrich Hayek contended that the use of formal techniques projects a scientific exactness that does not appropriately account for informational limitations faced by real economic agents . 
 In an interview , the economic historian Robert Heilbroner stated : 
 I guess the scientific approach began to penetrate and soon dominate the profession in the past twenty to thirty years . This came about in part because of the " invention " of mathematical analysis of various kinds and , indeed , considerable improvements in it . This is the age in which we have not only more data but more sophisticated use of data . So there is a strong feeling that this is a data @-@ laden science and a data @-@ laden undertaking , which , by virtue of the sheer <unk> , the sheer equations , and the sheer look of a journal page , bears a certain resemblance to science . . . That one central activity looks scientific . I understand that . I think that is genuine . It approaches being a universal law . But resembling a science is different from being a science . 
 Heilbroner stated that " some / much of economics is not naturally quantitative and therefore does not lend itself to mathematical exposition . " 
 = = = Testing predictions of mathematical economics = = = 
 Philosopher Karl Popper discussed the scientific standing of economics in the 1940s and 1950s . He argued that mathematical economics suffered from being tautological . In other words , insofar that economics became a mathematical theory , mathematical economics ceased to rely on empirical refutation but rather relied on mathematical proofs and disproof . According to Popper , falsifiable assumptions can be tested by experiment and observation while unfalsifiable assumptions can be explored mathematically for their consequences and for their consistency with other assumptions . 
 Sharing Popper 's concerns about assumptions in economics generally , and not just mathematical economics , Milton Friedman declared that " all assumptions are unrealistic " . Friedman proposed judging economic models by their predictive performance rather than by the match between their assumptions and reality . 
 = = = Mathematical economics as a form of pure mathematics = = = 
 Considering mathematical economics , J.M. Keynes wrote in The General Theory : 
 It is a great fault of symbolic pseudo @-@ mathematical methods of formalising a system of economic analysis ... that they expressly assume strict independence between the factors involved and lose their cogency and authority if this hypothesis is disallowed ; whereas , in ordinary discourse , where we are not blindly manipulating and know all the time what we are doing and what the words mean , we can keep ‘ at the back of our heads ’ the necessary reserves and qualifications and the adjustments which we shall have to make later on , in a way in which we cannot keep complicated partial differentials ‘ at the back ’ of several pages of algebra which assume they all vanish . Too large a proportion of recent ‘ mathematical ’ economics are merely concoctions , as imprecise as the initial assumptions they rest on , which allow the author to lose sight of the complexities and interdependencies of the real world in a maze of pretentious and unhelpful symbols . 
 = = = Defense of mathematical economics = = = 
 In response to these criticisms , Paul Samuelson argued that mathematics is a language , repeating a thesis of Josiah Willard Gibbs . In economics , the language of mathematics is sometimes necessary for representing substantive problems . Moreover , mathematical economics has led to conceptual advances in economics . In particular , Samuelson gave the example of microeconomics , writing that " few people are ingenious enough to grasp [ its ] more complex parts ... without resorting to the language of mathematics , while most ordinary individuals can do so fairly easily with the aid of mathematics . " 
 Some economists state that mathematical economics deserves support just like other forms of mathematics , particularly its neighbors in mathematical optimization and mathematical statistics and increasingly in theoretical computer science . Mathematical economics and other mathematical sciences have a history in which theoretical advances have regularly contributed to the reform of the more applied branches of economics . In particular , following the program of John von Neumann , game theory now provides the foundations for describing much of applied economics , from statistical decision theory ( as " games against nature " ) and econometrics to general equilibrium theory and industrial organization . In the last decade , with the rise of the internet , mathematical <unk> and optimization experts and computer scientists have worked on problems of pricing for on @-@ line services --- their contributions using mathematics from cooperative game theory , <unk> optimization , and combinatorial games . 
 Robert M. Solow concluded that mathematical economics was the core " infrastructure " of contemporary economics : 
 Economics is no longer a fit conversation piece for ladies and gentlemen . It has become a technical subject . Like any technical subject it attracts some people who are more interested in the technique than the subject . That is too bad , but it may be inevitable . In any case , do not kid yourself : the technical core of economics is indispensable infrastructure for the political economy . That is why , if you consult [ a reference in contemporary economics ] looking for enlightenment about the world today , you will be led to technical economics , or history , or nothing at all . 
 = = Mathematical economists = = 
 Prominent mathematical economists include , but are not limited to , the following ( by century of birth ) . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 = Sally Hemings = 
 Sarah " Sally " Hemings ( c . 1773 – 1835 ) was an enslaved woman of mixed race owned by President Thomas Jefferson . She is believed to have had a long @-@ term relationship and six children of record with him , of whom four survived to adulthood ; and were given freedom by Jefferson . Hemings was the youngest of six siblings by the widowed planter John Wayles and his mixed @-@ race slave Betty Hemings ; Sally and her siblings were three @-@ quarters European and half @-@ siblings of Jefferson 's wife , Martha Wayles Skelton . 
 In 1787 , Hemings , aged 14 , accompanied Jefferson 's youngest daughter Mary ( " Polly " ) to London and then to Paris , where the widowed Jefferson , aged 44 at the time , was serving as the United States Minister to France . Hemings spent two years there . It is believed by most historians that Jefferson began a sexual relationship with Hemings either in France or soon after their return to Monticello . Hemings was a slave in Jefferson 's house until his death . 
 The historical question of whether Jefferson was the father of Hemings ' children is known as the Jefferson – Hemings controversy . Following renewed historic analysis in the late 20th century and a 1998 DNA study that found a match between the Jefferson male line and a descendant of Hemings ' last son , Eston Hemings , there is a near @-@ consensus among historians that the widower Jefferson fathered her son Eston Hemings and probably all her children . A small number of historians , however , still disagree . 
 Hemings ' children lived in Jefferson 's house as slaves and were trained as artisans . Jefferson freed all of Hemings ' surviving children : Beverly , Harriet , Madison , and Eston , as they came of age ( they were the only slave family freed by Jefferson ) . They were seven @-@ eighths European in ancestry , and three of the four entered white society as adults . Descendants of those three identified as white . Hemings was " given her time " , lived her last nine years freely with her two younger sons in Charlottesville , Virginia , and saw a grandchild born in the house her sons owned . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sally Hemings was born about 1773 to Betty Hemings ( 1735 – 1807 ) , a biracial slave . Her father was their master John Wayles ( 1715 – 1773 ) . Her mother Betty was the daughter of Susanna , an enslaved African , and John Hemings , an English sea captain . Susanna and Betty Hemings were first held by Francis Eppes IV , where Susanna was referred to as Susanna Epps . John Hemings tried to buy them from Eppes , but the planter refused to give them up . The mother and daughter were inherited by Francis 's daughter , Martha Eppes , who took them with her as personal servants upon her marriage to the planter John Wayles . His parents were Edward Wayles and Ellen <unk> @-@ Wayles , both of Lancaster , England . 
 After Martha 's death , Wayles married and was widowed twice more . Several sources assert that the widower John Wayles took his slave Betty Hemings as a concubine and had six children by her during the last 12 years of his life ; the youngest of these was Sally Hemings . They were half @-@ siblings to his daughters by his wives ; his first child , Martha Wayles ( named after her mother , John Wayles 's first wife ) , married the young planter Thomas Jefferson . 
 The biracial children of Betty Hemings by Wayles were three @-@ quarters European in ancestry and very fair @-@ skinned . ( They had a white maternal grandfather and two white paternal grandparents . ) Since 1662 in Virginia slave law , children born to enslaved mothers were considered slaves under the principle of <unk> sequitur <unk> . Elizabeth and her children , including Sally Hemings , and all their children , were legally slaves , although the fathers were the white masters and the children were majority @-@ white in ancestry . 
 After Wayles died in 1773 , his daughter Martha and Jefferson inherited the Hemings family among a total of 135 slaves from his estate , as well as 11 @,@ 000 acres of land . The youngest Wayles @-@ Hemings child was Sally , an infant that year and about 25 years younger than Martha . Scholars have noted that as the mixed @-@ race Wayles @-@ Hemings children grew up at Monticello , they were trained and given assignments as skilled artisans and domestic servants , at the top of the slave hierarchy . Betty Hemings ' other children and their descendants , also mixed race , also had privileged assignments . None worked in the fields . 
 = = <unk> in Paris = = 
 In 1784 , the widower Thomas Jefferson was appointed the American envoy to France ; he took his oldest daughter Martha ( Patsy ) with him to Paris , as well as some of his personal slaves . Among them was Sally 's older brother James Hemings , who became trained as a chef in French cuisine . Jefferson left his two younger daughters in the care of friends in the US . After Lucy died of whooping cough in 1787 , Jefferson sent for his surviving daughter , nine @-@ year @-@ old Maria ( Polly ) Jefferson , to live with him . The teenage slave Sally Hemings was chosen to accompany Polly to France after an older slave became pregnant and could not make the journey . Originally , Jefferson arranged for Polly to " be in the care of her nurse , a black woman , to whom she is confided with safety " [ Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Abigail Adams , Dec. 21 , 1786 ] . According to Abigail Adams , " The old Nurse whom you expected to have attended her , was sick and unable to come . She has a Girl about 15 or 16 with her . " [ Letter from Abigail Adams to Thomas Jefferson , June 26 , 1787 ] . 
 Polly and Sally landed in London , where they stayed with Abigail and John Adams from June 26 until July 10 , 1787 . Jefferson 's associate , Mr. Petit , arranged transportation and escorted the girls to Paris . In a letter to Jefferson on June 27 , 1787 , Abigail wrote , " The Girl who is with [ Polly ] is quite a child , and Captain Ramsey is of opinion will be of so little Service that he had better carry her back with him . But of this you will be a judge . She seems fond of the child and appears good <unk> . " On July 6 , Abigail wrote to Jefferson , " The Girl she has with her , wants more care than the child , and is <unk> incapable of looking properly after her , without some <unk> to direct her . " 
 Sally Hemings remained in France for 26 months ; slavery was abolished in that country after the Revolution in 1789 . Jefferson paid wages to her and James while they were in Paris . He paid Sally Hemings the equivalent of $ 2 a month . In comparison , he paid his Parisian <unk> $ 2 @.@ 50 a month , and James Hemings $ 4 a month as chef in training . The French servants earned from $ 8 to $ 12 a month . Toward the end of their stay , James used his money to pay for a French tutor and learn the language . Sally Hemings also was learning French . There is no record of where she lived : it may have been with Jefferson and her brother in the Hôtel de <unk> on the Champs @-@ Elysées , or at the convent Abbaye de <unk> where the girls Maria and Martha were schooled . Whatever the weekday arrangements , Jefferson and his retinue spent weekends together at his villa . Jefferson purchased some fine clothing for Hemings , which suggests that she accompanied Martha as a lady 's maid to formal events . 
 Under French law , both Sally and James could have petitioned for their freedom , as the 1789 revolutionary constitution in France abolished slavery in principle . Hemings had the legal right to remain in France as a free person ; if she returned to Virginia with Jefferson , it would be as a slave . According to her son Madison 's memoir , Hemings became pregnant by Jefferson in Paris . She was about 16 at the time . She agreed to return with him to the United States based on his promise to free their children when they reached the age of 21 years . Hemings ' strong ties to her mother , siblings and extended family probably drew her back to Monticello . 
 = = Return to the United States = = 
 In 1789 , Sally and James Hemings returned to the United States with Jefferson . He was 46 years old and seven years a widower . As shown by Jefferson 's father @-@ in @-@ law , John Wayles , wealthy Virginia widowers frequently took enslaved women as concubines . Historian Joshua D. Rothman noted that it was not unusual for the time for Jefferson to choose to do so . White society simply expected these men to be discreet . 
 According to Madison Hemings , Sally Hemings ' first child died soon after her return from Paris . Those Jefferson records that have survived mutilation and purge note that Hemings had six children after her return to the US : 
 Harriet Hemings ( I ) ( October 5 , 1795 - December 7 , 1797 ) 
 Beverley Hemings ( possibly named William Beverley Hemings ) ( April 1 , 1798 - after 1873 ) 
 unnamed daughter ( or possibly named <unk> after Hemings ' sister <unk> ) ( born in 1799 and died in infancy ) 
 Harriet Hemings ( II ) ( May 22 , 1801 - after 1863 ) 
 Madison Hemings ( possibly named James Madison Hemings ) ( January 19 , 1805 – 1877 ) 
 Eston Hemings ( possibly named Thomas Eston Hemings ) ( May 21 , 1808 – 1856 ) 
 Jefferson recorded slave births in his Farm Book . Unlike his practice in recording births of other slaves , he did not note the father of Hemings ' children . 
 Sally Hemings ' documented duties at Monticello included being a nursemaid @-@ companion , lady 's maid , chambermaid , and seamstress . It is not known whether she was literate , and she left no known writings . She was described as very fair , with " straight hair down her back " . Jefferson 's grandson , Thomas Jefferson Randolph , described her as " light colored and decidedly good looking " . As an adult she may have lived in a room in Monticello 's " South Dependencies " , a wing of the mansion which was accessible to the main house through a covered passageway . 
 Hemings never married . As a slave , she could not have a marriage recognized under Virginia law , but many slaves at Monticello are known to have taken partners in common @-@ law marriages and had stable lives . ( No such marriage for Hemings is noted in the records . ) While Sally Hemings worked at Monticello , she had her children nearby . According to her son Madison , while young , the children " were permitted to stay about the ' great house ' , and only required to do such light work as going on errands " . At the age of 14 , each of the children began their training : the brothers with the plantation 's skilled master of carpentry , and Harriet as a spinner and weaver . The three boys all learned to play the violin ( Jefferson played the violin ) . 
 In 1822 at the age of 24 , Beverley " ran away " from Monticello and was not pursued . His sister Harriet Hemings , 21 , followed in the same year . The overseer Edmund Bacon said that he gave her $ 50 ( US $ 988 in 2016 dollars ) and put her on a stagecoach to the North , presumably to join her brother . In his memoir , published posthumously , Bacon said Harriet was " near white and very beautiful " , and that people said Jefferson freed her because she was his daughter . Madison Hemings said that Beverley and Harriet each entered white society in Washington , DC , and each married well . 
 Of the hundreds of slaves he owned , in his lifetime Jefferson formally freed only two slaves : Hemings ' older brothers Robert , who had to buy his freedom , and James Hemings ( who was required to train his brother Peter for three years to get his freedom ) . He freed five slaves in his will - all males from the extended Hemings family , including Madison and Eston Hemings , his two " natural " children . Harriet was the only female slave he allowed to go free . In addition to manumission for the Hemings men in his will , he petitioned the legislature to allow them to stay in the state . No documentation has been found for Sally Hemings ' emancipation . 
 Jefferson 's married daughter Martha Randolph informally freed the elderly Hemings by giving her " her time . " As the historian Edmund S. Morgan has noted , " Hemings herself was withheld from auction and freed at last by Jefferson 's daughter , Martha Jefferson Randolph , who was , of course , her niece . " This informal freedom allowed Hemings to live in Virginia with her two youngest sons in nearby Charlottesville for the next nine years until her death . In the Albemarle County 1833 census , all three were recorded as free white persons . Jefferson inherited a great amount of wealth at a young age , but was bankrupt by the time he died . His entire estate , including his slaves , were sold to repay his debts . Hemings lived to see a grandchild born in a house that her sons owned . 
 = = Jefferson – Hemings controversy = = 
 The Jefferson – Hemings controversy is related to the question of whether , after Jefferson became a widower , he had an intimate relationship with Sally Hemings , resulting in his fathering her six children of record . The controversy dates from the 1790s . A relationship between Jefferson and Hemings was first reported in 1802 , by one of Jefferson ’ s enemies , a political journalist named James T. Callender , after he noticed several light skinned slaves at Monticello . However , Jefferson never publicly denied this accusation . In the late 20th century , historians began <unk> the body of evidence . In 1997 , Annette Gordon @-@ Reed published a book , Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings : An American Controversy , that analyzed the historiography of the controversy , demonstrating how historians since the 19th century had accepted early assumptions . They favored Jefferson family testimony while criticizing Hemings family testimony as " oral history " , and failed to note all the facts . A consensus began to emerge after the results of a DNA analysis in 1998 , which showed no match between the Carr male line , proposed for more than 150 years as the father ( s ) , and the one Hemings descendant tested . It did show a match between the Jefferson male line and the Eston Hemings descendant . 
 Since 1998 and the DNA study , many historians have concluded that the widower Jefferson had an intimate , long relationship with Hemings , and fathered six children with her , four of whom survived to adulthood . The Thomas Jefferson Foundation ( <unk> ) , which runs Monticello , conducted an independent historic review in 2000 , as did the National Genealogical Society in 2001 ; scholars concluded Jefferson was probably the father of all Hemings ' children . In an article that appeared in Science , eight weeks after the DNA study , Eugene Foster , the lead co @-@ author of the DNA study , is reported to have " made it clear that the data establish only that Thomas Jefferson was one of several candidates for the paternity of Eston Hemings " . 
 In an interview in 2000 , the historian Annette Gordon @-@ Reed said of the change in historical scholarship about Jefferson and Hemings : " Symbolically , it 's tremendously important for people ... as a way of inclusion . Nathan Huggins said that the Sally Hemings story was a way of establishing black people 's birthright to America . " 
 Critics , such as the Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society ( TJHS ) Scholars Commission ( 2001 ) , have argued against the <unk> report and reached different conclusions about the DNA tests . All but one of the 13 scholars expressed considerable skepticism about the conclusions . The TJHS report suggested that Jefferson 's younger brother Randolph Jefferson could have been the father , and that Hemings may have had multiple partners . Three of the Hemings children were given names from the Randolph family , relatives of Thomas Jefferson through his mother . Herbert Barger , the founder and current Director Emeritus of the TJHS and the husband of a Jefferson descendant , assisted Foster in the DNA study . 
 In 2012 , the Smithsonian Institution and the Thomas Jefferson Foundation held a major exhibit at the National Museum of American History : Slavery at Jefferson 's Monticello : The Paradox of Liberty ; it says that " evidence strongly support [ s ] the conclusion that [ Thomas ] Jefferson was the father of Sally Hemings ' children . " 
 = = Descendants = = 
 In 2008 Gordon @-@ Reed published The <unk> of Monticello : An American Family , which explored the extended family , including James and Sally 's lives in France , Monticello and Philadelphia , during Thomas Jefferson 's lifetime . She was not able to find much new information about Beverly or Harriet Hemings , who left Monticello as young adults and entered the white community , probably changing their names . More documentation reveals the lives of the younger sons Madison Hemings and Eston Hemings , and of their descendants , from Madison 's memoir , a wide variety of historical records , and newspaper accounts . 
 Eventually three of Hemings ' four surviving children , except for Madison , chose to identify as white adults in the North ; they were seven @-@ eighths European in ancestry and this was consistent with their appearance . In his memoir , Madison Hemings said both Beverley and Harriet married well in the white community in Washington , DC . Harriet was described by Edmund Bacon , the longtime Monticello overseer , as " nearly as white as anybody , and very beautiful " . For some time Madison wrote to both his siblings , and learned of their marriages . He knew that Harriet had children and was living in Maryland , but gradually she and Beverly stopped responding to his letters and the siblings lost touch . 
 Both Madison and Eston Hemings married free women of color in Charlottesville . After their mother 's death in 1835 , they and their families moved to Chillicothe in the free state of Ohio . Census records classified them as " mulatto " , at that time meaning mixed race . The census enumerator , usually a local person , classified individuals in part according to who their neighbors were and what was known of them . 
 A high demand for slaves in the Deep South and passage of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 heightened the risk for free blacks of being kidnapped by slave catchers , as they needed little documentation to claim blacks as fugitives . Legally free people of color , Eston Hemings and his family moved to Madison , Wisconsin to be further away from slave catchers . There he changed his name to " Eston H. Jefferson " to acknowledge his paternity , and all the family adopted the surname . From then on the Jeffersons lived in the white community . 
 Madison Hemings ' family were the only Hemings descendants who continued to identify with the black community . They intermarried within the community of free people of color before the Civil War . Over time , some of their descendants are known to have passed into the white community , while many others have identified within the black community . 
 Both Eston and Madison achieved some success in life , were well respected by their contemporaries , and had children who repeated and built on their successes . They worked as carpenters , and Madison also had a small farm . Eston became a professional musician and bandleader , " a master of the violin , and an accomplished ' caller ' of dances " , who " always officiated at the ' swell ' entertainments of Chillicothe " . He was in demand across southern Ohio . A neighbor described him as , " Quiet , unobtrusive , polite and decidedly intelligent , he was soon very well and favorably known to all classes of our citizens , for his personal appearance and gentlemanly manners attracted everybody 's attention to him . " 
 = = Grandchildren and other descendants = = 
 Madison 's sons fought on the Union side in the Civil War . Thomas Eston Hemings enlisted in the United States Colored Troops ( USCT ) ; captured , he spent time at the Andersonville POW camp and died in a POW camp in Meridian , Mississippi . According to a Hemings descendant , his brother James attempted to cross Union lines and " pass " as a white man to enlist in the Confederate army to rescue him . Later , James Hemings was rumored to have moved to Colorado and perhaps passed into white society . Like some others in the family , he disappeared from the record and the rest of his biography remains unknown . A third son , William Hemings , enlisted in the regular Union Army as a white man . Madison 's last known male @-@ line descendant , William never married and was not known to have had children . He died in 1910 in a veterans ' hospital . 
 Some of Madison Hemings ' children and grandchildren who remained in Ohio suffered from the limited opportunities for blacks at that time , working as laborers , servants or small farmers . They tended to marry within the mixed @-@ race community in the region , who became established as people of education and property . 
 Madison 's daughter Ellen Wayles Hemings married Alexander Jackson Roberts , a graduate of Oberlin College . When their first son was young , they moved to Los Angeles , California , where the family and its descendants became leaders in the twentieth century . Their first son Frederick Madison Roberts ( 1879 – 1952 ) – Sally Hemings ' and Jefferson 's great @-@ grandson – was the first person of known black ancestry elected to public office on the West Coast : he served for nearly 20 years in the California State Assembly from 1919 to 1934 . Their second son William Giles Roberts was also a leader . Their descendants have had a strong tradition of college education and public service . 
 Eston 's sons also enlisted in the Union Army , both as white men from Madison . His first son John Wayles Jefferson had red hair and gray eyes like his grandfather Jefferson . By the 1850s , John Jefferson in his 20s was proprietor of the American Hotel in Madison . At one time he operated it with his younger brother Beverley . He was commissioned as a Union officer during the Civil War , during which he was promoted to the rank of Colonel and served at the Battle of Vicksburg . He wrote letters about the war to the newspaper in Madison which were published . After the war , John Jefferson returned to Wisconsin , where he wrote frequently for newspapers and published accounts about his war experiences . He later moved to Memphis , Tennessee , where he became a successful and wealthy cotton broker . He never married or had known children , and left a sizeable estate . 
 Eston 's second son Beverley Jefferson also served in the regular Union Army . After operating the American Hotel with his brother John , he later separately operated the Capital Hotel . He also built a successful horse @-@ drawn " omnibus " business . He and his wife Anna M. Smith had five sons , three of whom reached the professional class as a physician , attorney , and manager in the railroad industry . According to his 1908 obituary , Beverly Jefferson was " a likeable character at the Wisconsin capital , and a familiar of statesmen for half a century " . His friend Augustus J. Munson wrote , " Beverly Jefferson [ ' s ] death deserves more than a passing notice , as he was a grandson of Thomas Jefferson ... [ He ] was one of God 's noblemen - gentle , kind , courteous , charitable . " Beverley and Anna 's great @-@ grandson John Weeks Jefferson is the Eston Hemings descendant whose DNA was tested in 1998 ; it matched the Y @-@ chromosome of the Thomas Jefferson male line . 
 As of 2007 , there are known male @-@ line descendants of Eston Hemings / Jefferson , and known female @-@ line descendants of Madison Hemings ' three daughters : Sarah , Harriet , and Ellen . 
 = = = For young readers = = = 
 Jane Feldman , Shannon Lanier , Jefferson 's Children : The Story of One American Family : ( Random House , 2001 ) , for ages 10 and up 
 Kimberly Brubaker Bradley , " Jefferson 's Sons " : ( Dial Books for Young Readers , 2011 ) , historical fiction for ages 10 and up 
 = Aluminium chloride = 
 Aluminium chloride ( AlCl3 ) is the main compound of aluminium and chlorine . It is white , but samples are often contaminated with iron trichloride , giving it a yellow colour . The solid has a low melting and boiling point . It is mainly produced and consumed in the production of aluminium metal , but large amounts are also used in other areas of chemical industry . The compound is often cited as a Lewis acid . It is an example of an inorganic compound that " cracks " at mild temperature , reversibly changing from a polymer to a monomer . 
 = = Structure = = 
 AlCl3 adopts three different structures , depending on the temperature and the state ( solid , liquid , gas ) . Solid AlCl3 is a sheet @-@ like layered cubic close packed layers . In this framework , the Al centres exhibit octahedral coordination geometry . In the melt , aluminium trichloride exists as the dimer Al2Cl6 , with tetracoordinate aluminium . This change in structure is related to the lower density of the liquid phase ( 1 @.@ 78 g / cm3 ) vs solid aluminium trichloride ( 2 @.@ 48 g / cm3 ) . Al2Cl6 dimers are also found in the vapour phase . At higher temperatures , the Al2Cl6 dimers dissociate into trigonal planar AlCl3 , which is structurally analogous to BF3 . The melt conducts electricity poorly , unlike more ionic halides such as sodium chloride . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Anhydrous aluminium chloride is a powerful Lewis acid , capable of forming Lewis acid @-@ base adducts with even weak Lewis bases such as benzophenone and <unk> . It forms <unk> <unk> − in the presence of chloride ions . 
 Aluminium chloride reacts with calcium and magnesium hydrides in tetrahydrofuran forming <unk> . 
 = = = Reactions with water = = = 
 Aluminium chloride is hygroscopic , having a very pronounced affinity for water . It fumes in moist air and hisses when mixed with liquid water as the Cl − ions are displaced with H2O molecules in the lattice to form the hexahydrate AlCl3 · 6H2O ( also white to yellowish in color ) . The anhydrous phase cannot be regained on heating as HCl is lost leaving aluminium hydroxide or alumina ( aluminium oxide ) : 
 Al ( H2O ) <unk> → Al ( OH ) 3 + 3 HCl + 3 H2O 
 On strong heating ( ~ 400 ° C ) , the aluminium oxide is formed from the aluminium hydroxide via : 
 2 Al ( OH ) 3 → Al2O3 + 3 H2O 
 Aqueous solutions of AlCl3 are ionic and thus conduct electricity well . Such solutions are found to be acidic , indicative of partial hydrolysis of the Al3 + ion . The reactions can be described ( simplified ) as : 
 [ Al ( H2O ) 6 ] 3 + ⇌ [ Al ( OH ) ( H2O ) 5 ] 2 + + H + 
 Aqueous solutions behave similarly to other aluminium salts containing hydrated Al3 + ions , giving a gelatinous precipitate of aluminium hydroxide upon reaction with dilute sodium hydroxide : 
 AlCl3 + 3 NaOH → Al ( OH ) 3 + 3 NaCl 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 Aluminium chloride is manufactured on a large scale by the exothermic reaction of aluminium metal with chlorine or hydrogen chloride at temperatures between 650 to 750 ° C ( 1 @,@ 202 to 1 @,@ 382 ° F ) . 
 2 Al + 3 Cl2 → 2 AlCl3 
 2 Al + 6 HCl → 2 AlCl3 + 3 H2 
 Aluminum chloride may be formed via a single displacement reaction between copper chloride and aluminum metal . 
 <unk> + 3 CuCl2 → <unk> + <unk> 
 In the US in 1993 , approximately 21 @,@ 000 tons were produced , not counting the amounts consumed in the production of aluminium . 
 Hydrated aluminium trichloride is prepared by dissolving aluminium oxides in hydrochloric acid . Metallic aluminum also readily dissolves in hydrochloric acid <unk> releasing hydrogen gas and generating considerable heat . Heating this solid does not produce anhydrous aluminium trichloride , the hexahydrate decomposes to aluminium hydroxide when heated : 
 Al ( H2O ) <unk> → Al ( OH ) 3 + 3 HCl + 3 H2O 
 Aluminium also forms a lower chloride , aluminium ( I ) chloride ( <unk> ) , but this is very unstable and only known in the vapour phase . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Anhydrous aluminium trichloride = = = 
 AlCl3 is probably the most commonly used Lewis acid and also one of the most powerful . It finds application in the chemical industry as a catalyst for Friedel – Crafts reactions , both <unk> and <unk> . Important products are detergents and <unk> . It also finds use in polymerization and isomerization reactions of hydrocarbons . 
 The Friedel – Crafts reaction is the major use for aluminium chloride , for example in the preparation of anthraquinone ( for the dyestuffs industry ) from benzene and phosgene . In the general Friedel – Crafts reaction , an acyl chloride or alkyl halide reacts with an aromatic system as shown : 
 The alkylation reaction is more widely used than the <unk> reaction , although its practice is more technically demanding because the reaction is more sluggish . For both reactions , the aluminium chloride , as well as other materials and the equipment , should be dry , although a trace of moisture is necessary for the reaction to proceed . A general problem with the Friedel – Crafts reaction is that the aluminium chloride catalyst sometimes is required in full stoichiometric quantities , because it complexes strongly with the products . This complication sometimes generates a large amount of corrosive waste . For these and similar reasons , more recyclable or environmentally benign catalysts have been sought . Thus , the use of aluminium trichloride in some applications is being displaced by zeolites . 
 Aluminium chloride can also be used to introduce aldehyde groups onto aromatic rings , for example via the <unk> @-@ Koch reaction which uses carbon monoxide , hydrogen chloride and a copper ( I ) chloride co @-@ catalyst . 
 Aluminium chloride finds a wide variety of other applications in organic chemistry . For example , it can catalyse the " ene reaction " , such as the addition of 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ one ( methyl vinyl ketone ) to <unk> : 
 AlCl3 is also widely used for polymerization and isomerization reactions of hydrocarbons . Important examples include the manufacture of <unk> , which used to make styrene and thus polystyrene , and also production of <unk> , which is used for making detergents . 
 Aluminium chloride combined with aluminium in the presence of an <unk> can be used to synthesize bis ( <unk> ) metal complexes , e.g. bis ( benzene ) chromium , from certain metal halides via the so @-@ called Fischer @-@ Hafner synthesis . 
 = = = Hydrated aluminium chlorides = = = 
 The hexahydrate has few applications , but aluminium <unk> is a common component in <unk> at low concentrations . <unk> sufferers need a much higher concentration ( 12 % or higher ) , sold under such brand names as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Maxim , <unk> , <unk> , B + Drier , <unk> , <unk> Forte and <unk> . 
 = = Symmetry and dipole moment = = 
 Aluminium chloride belongs to the point group <unk> in its monomeric form and <unk> in its dimeric form . Both forms of aluminium chloride , however , do not possess a dipole moment because the bond dipole moments cancel each other out . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Anhydrous AlCl3 reacts vigorously with bases , so suitable precautions are required . It can cause irritation to the eyes , skin , and the respiratory system if inhaled or on contact . 
 Aluminum chloride has been established as a neurotoxin . 
 = Arsenal Training Centre = 
 The Arsenal Training Centre , often referred to as its geographical location London Colney in Hertfordshire , is the training ground of Arsenal Football Club . It houses ten full @-@ size pitches , an indoor facility and a medical and rehabilitation centre . 
 Constructed after manager Arsène Wenger campaigned for Arsenal to replace its existing University College London groundshare site , it opened in October 1999 at a cost of £ 10 million . The training centre was financed by the transfer of Nicolas Anelka to Real Madrid . 
 As well as accommodating Arsenal 's first team and youth teams , the centre from 2003 to 2012 acted as the training base for the England national football team before home internationals and friendlies . It has attracted criticism from local residents over environmental and catchment issues . 
 = = History and development = = 
 When Arsène Wenger joined Arsenal in October 1996 , he attempted to organise an extra training session at the club 's University College London Union ( <unk> ) Shenley Sports grounds , for the benefit of getting to know his players . Wenger was told that the ground – owned by UCL , was reserved for its students , which left him not knowing “ whether to laugh or cry ” . A few weeks after , a fire partially burnt down the training centre , costing £ 50 @,@ 000 in damages . Arsenal temporarily rehoused their training base to <unk> House Hotel in St Albans . Wenger , dismayed by the arrangement , campaigned for a purpose @-@ built , Arsenal @-@ owned ground that housed the latest training equipment . This was one of the " important decisions " he wanted to make for the club – " Without an assurance of that freedom and control I would not have stayed . " 
 By February 1998 , Hertsmere Borough Council granted consent for Arsenal to build a training centre on the greenfield land , adjacent to a local school in the Bell Lane area , London Colney . It is situated adjacent to the former facilities at Shenley Sports grounds , which Watford Football Club use for training purposes . They concluded it was “ … essential to support the training facility ” , that it would replace an existing building used by the club and that Arsenal ’ s community work “ constituted exceptional circumstances ” . The plans were referred to the Environment Secretary John Prescott , who ratified it , in spite of the area 's position on the green belt . Planning permission was obtained in September 1998 . 
 Richard Marshall and <unk> & Henderson designed the training ground and its facilities . Wenger was " heavily involved " in the process – “ even down to the kitchens ” and shared ideas from his time as Nagoya Grampus manager , where the club itself was building its own training centre . As part of a fact @-@ finding mission , club representatives visited other training facilities from around Europe , such as Bayern Munich and Auxerre . Arsenal 's physiotherapist Gary Lewin and fitness coach Tony Colbert were involved in their respective areas . The project , transforming a 140 @-@ foot site , was completed in 45 weeks at a cost of £ 10 million . Arsenal financed this through the transfer of Nicolas Anelka to Real Madrid for £ 22 @.@ 5 million in August 1999 . 
 The Arsenal Training Centre was opened by Sports Minister Kate Hoey on 11 October 1999 . Chairman Peter Hill @-@ Wood described it as “ simply superb ” , while Wenger felt it acted as a " big attraction " for players to come to Arsenal . Unlike before , the training centre was open to the first team squad and youth teams for training simultaneously , which in Wenger ’ s words gave Arsenal a “ stronger feeling of togetherness ” . The club have since expanded its training centre to include a press briefing building , as well as an indoor pitch facility . During development work in August 2006 , an artillery shell was found near the site which led to the surrounding area being evacuated . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The training centre covers an area of 143 acres ( 0 @.@ 58 km2 ) . In all , there are ten full @-@ size pitches at the site . Inside the complex there are training and rehabilitation areas , physiotherapy and massage rooms and remedial and hydrotherapy pools . There are also squash / basketball courts , sauna , steam and weight rooms , a restaurant for staff and players , conference rooms , offices , classrooms and a TV studio to interview players and staff for Arsenal TV . 
 All ten pitches have undersoil drainage and an automated sprinkler system . In addition , two have undersoil heating . Each pitch is built to match the playing surface specifications of the Emirates Stadium . Three of the pitches are reserved for the Arsenal youth team , three for the reserves and three for the first team . The tenth pitch is where first team friendlies and Under @-@ 18 league fixtures take place . 
 A medical and rehabilitation centre was completed in October 2011 , tailored to meet the needs of the Arsenal players . The centre houses apparatus such as an anti @-@ gravity treadmill and a range of screening equipment . Players returning from injury are able to focus on their rehabilitation " in a separate , specialised space " , with medical staff on hand . Extra training pitches are also set to be laid . In February 2015 Arsenal ordered 1 @,@ 400 m2 of artificial grass from the Swiss company called Tisca Tiara for the training pitch . 
 In March 2015 , Arsenal announced plans for a major redevelopment of its training centre . The plans include expanding and upgrading the main building , constructing a player performance centre , and refurbishing the visitors , educational and media centre . Specific gym improvements include new 40m running tracks and dedicated space for Yoga and Pilates . New offices and meeting rooms will be built for the scouting team , academy staff , and data analysis personnel . Upgraded training medical and training facilities include a spa , a <unk> , and ice baths . To accommodate the changes , a two @-@ storey extension will be built , the equipment shed will be moved , and 280 trees will be planted ( to replace the 140 that will be removed during the redevelopment process ) . The project was supported by the Sport England with planning approval given by the Hertsmere borough council planning committee . Project completion is scheduled for the beginning of the 2017 – 18 season . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The ground has attracted criticism from local residents . A parish council meeting in October 2001 revealed that Arsenal players had not been involved with local initiatives , despite claims during its planning phase that the ground would allow the club to develop links with the local community . Shenley Primary School reportedly failed to receive any visits from players despite repeated requests . The club responded by pointing to initiatives by its Ladies team to organise competitions at local grounds . Plans to develop new buildings and road links to the site were challenged by residents four years later ; they believed it would lead to increased traffic and noise pollution in the area . 
 In March 2006 , The Daily Telegraph noted Arsenal 's failure to develop young English players following a UEFA Champions League tie against Juventus , in which they did not use a single English player . According to desk research , youth team opportunities was a main reason the club obtained planning permission for the centre . Arsenal cited in a statement : " The Bell Lane site is within the Arsenal ' catchment area ' and the club already has a very active youth policy in the area . In particular , the club currently works closely with 12 local clubs which would be maintained and enhanced if the Bell Lane proposal were to go ahead . " 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The England national football team frequently trained at the ground when preparing for games in London ; the agreement with Arsenal began in March 2003 . They have since 2012 relocated their training base to St George 's Park National Football Centre . Arsenal 's training ground was used by the national team in November 2013 , for the friendlies against Chile and Germany after St George 's Park reported a stomach bug . 
 For the UEFA Champions League finals that took place at Wembley Stadium in 2011 and 2013 , Barcelona and Borussia Dortmund respectively used the centre 's facilities to train . American Football side St. Louis Rams trained at London Colney in preparation for the 2012 NFL International Series in London . Arsenal had previously " priced " themselves out of hosting the New York Giants or the Miami Dolphins . 
 In November 2009 , the ground held a tournament between teams of colleagues from eight local organisations , which raised £ 1 @,@ 500 for charity . 
 = Hurricane Otto ( 2010 ) = 
 Hurricane Otto produced days of torrential rain over much of the northeastern Caribbean in October 2010 . Otto originated as a subtropical cyclone lingering north of Puerto Rico on October 6 , and transitioned into a tropical storm the next day , the fifteenth of the 2010 hurricane season . Accelerating toward the northeast , Otto strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale on October 8 , attaining peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The storm began weakening due to incompatible surroundings and became extratropical west of the Azores on October 10 . Otto was the first Atlantic tropical cyclone on record to transition from a subtropical storm since Tropical Storm Laura in 2008 . 
 Drifting near the northeastern Caribbean for several days , Otto and its precursor disturbance brought prolonged rainfall to the Leeward Islands , the Virgin Islands , and Puerto Rico , triggering widespread flooding and numerous mudslides . Damage from the storm — in particular to roads , property and infrastructure — exceeded $ 22 million ( 2010 USD ) , but there were no fatalities . After recurving toward the northeast , Otto proceeded across the open Atlantic without affecting any other landmasses . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late September , a large area of disturbed weather associated with two tropical waves formed just east of the Lesser Antilles . The disturbance drifted very slowly west @-@ northwestward , inhibited by strong wind shear that eventually caused the westernmost wave to dissipate . Albeit weak , an elongated remnant trough , or area of low pressure , persisted for several days , stalling over the extreme eastern Caribbean Sea as a nearby upper @-@ level cyclonic vortex <unk> to its north . By October 5 , the trough had drifted northward into a more favorable atmospheric environment over the Virgin Islands , which allowed the lowest pressures to extend to the surface . The low became well defined , interacting with the adjacent upper vortex to produce a wide convective band — a concentrated region in which strong showers and thunderstorms can form — over the northeastern Caribbean . Over the next day , the system continued to acquire a prominent subtropical structure : it developed a markedly larger wind radius than typically seen in pure tropical cyclones . Satellite observations also revealed that although the lower wind circulation was distinct , it had become intertwined with the cyclonic vortex aloft to its southwest , confirming the hybrid nature of the system . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) thus classified the system as a subtropical depression at 06 : 00 UTC on October 6 , when it was 265 mi ( 425 km ) north @-@ northwest of San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 The depression slid slowly northwestward between the contiguous upper vortex and a large high @-@ pressure region over the central Atlantic . A region of lighter wind shear ahead , as well as an anticipated weakening of the upper cyclone , prompted the NHC to introduce the possibility of a tropical transition . Later , satellite observations showed a rapid improvement in the depression 's structure ; convective banding wrapped completely around the broad inner wind field , which produced gusts to 65 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Accordingly , the NHC upgraded the depression to Subtropical Storm Otto at 21 : 00 UTC on October 6 , about 215 mi ( 345 km ) northeast of Grand Turk . Although satellite images continued to display a classical subtropical cyclone , with Otto 's center and the vortex aloft nearly collocated , data from a Hurricane Hunters aircraft indicated a weak warm convective core was developing within the mid levels of the circulation — a feature normally present at the upper levels of tropical cyclones . Moreover , a contraction of the large wind field reaffirmed that Otto was entering the final stages of its tropical transition . Although convective activity briefly weakened overnight , weakening shear and considerably warmer sea surface temperatures permitted small patches of thunderstorms to refire on the morning of October 7 . As Otto meandered northward , temperature contrasts from forecast models indicated that the warm core within the circulation had ascended to the upper levels of the cyclone . In consequence , a burst of deep , tropical convection with extreme cloud top temperatures of approximately − 112 ° F ( − 80 ° C ) occurred over the center . Having shed the last of its subtropical characteristics , Otto became a warm @-@ core system and was operationally declared tropical at 1200 UTC that day . 
 Over the course of October 8 , Otto began to accelerate to the northeast under the increasing influence of a vertically deep trough off the US East Coast . Conditions aloft remained conducive , and the storm 's convection deepened symmetrically over the center to form a large , well @-@ defined central dense overcast . By 1200 UTC , Otto 's winds had reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) while a mid @-@ level eyewall began to form , prompting the NHC to upgrade the storm to a Category 1 hurricane south of Bermuda . Further strengthening ensued as the newly formed hurricane proceeded over the warm waters of the central Atlantic ; microwave imagery revealed the eye , though obscured , was vertically well established , marking Otto 's peak strength with estimated winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . 
 Upon peaking in intensity , Otto had become fully embedded within the deep @-@ layered flow to its southwest . Racing northeastward , the hurricane entered an area of progressively cooler waters and adverse upper atmospheric conditions , which eroded its cloud pattern and disrupted the circulation . With maximum winds dropping below 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , Otto was reduced to a tropical storm late on October 9 . Convective activity came to a near halt due to relentless wind shear and a lack of tropical moisture , leading specialists to conclude the storm was entering an extratropical transition . The next day , the cool dry air infiltrated the weak warm core , and Otto began to develop frontal banding features . With these characteristics , Otto became an extratropical cyclone on October 10 , and the NHC discontinued advisories on the storm . The post @-@ tropical system decelerated near the Azores over the next week , where it eventually degenerated into a remnant low that recurved sharply southeastward before completely dissipating west of Morocco on October 18 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Otto and its precursor disturbance produced days of prolonged rainfall and gusty winds across the northern Leeward Islands , the Virgin Islands , and Puerto Rico . Localized flooding and rough sea conditions caused extensive road damage , infrastructure failures , and some beach erosion along coastlines . During the passage of the storm , numerous residents were left without water and power , and a state of emergency was declared for several Caribbean nations . Schools , businesses and some government offices across all of the Virgin Islands and Saint Kitts and Nevis were closed until storm conditions abated . The weather system ultimately accounted for substantial monetary losses throughout these areas , pinned at over $ 22 million ( 2010 USD ) . In addition , Otto was widely regarded as one of the wettest storms in the history of the northeastern Caribbean , repeatedly shattering various rainfall records . 
 = = = Leeward Islands = = = 
 In Saint Lucia , downpours triggered torrential flooding along the island 's easternmost coast from October 5 through October 6 . In Dennery Quarter , flash floods affected about 500 households ; among them , 400 had their houses flooded or severely damaged . Several residences had to be evacuated , and some people were trapped in their homes . Residents also suffered from the absence of drinking water , lack of electricity , and the inability to prepare meals due to the loss of kitchen equipment and other utensils . In response , the area was declared a disaster zone ; a total of EC $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 185 @,@ 185 USD ) was approved to assist flood victims , as well as an additional US $ 44 @,@ 194 allocated from the Disaster Relief Emergency Fund of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies . 
 Intermittent torrents battered Saint Kitts and Nevis for at least four days ; a total of up to 10 @.@ 99 inches ( 279 mm ) of precipitation was recorded during that time . Several homeowners reported significant flooding , and a number of persons had to be rescued from their homes . Gusty winds generated rough sea conditions along coastal regions , resulting in some beach erosion and the collapse of a sidewalk section . Rains and associated floods topped a number of culverts and bridges , washed out the sides of some roadways , and damage to some utility lines , followed by significant disruptions to electricity services . The exact amount of damage to the territory remains unknown , however . 
 In the U.S. Virgin Islands , heavy rainfall associated with Otto shattered numerous records for October across the US Virgin Islands , with a maximum total of 21 @.@ 52 in ( 547 mm ) reported in Red Hook , Saint Tomas . The rain flooded roads and prompted officials opened shelters on all three islands on October 6 . In Saint Croix , a roadway section leading into Enfield Green collapsed , temporarily cutting the neighborhood off to traffic until a makeshift roadway was created the next day . In La Vallée , on the island 's north shore , floods and landslides affected low @-@ lying areas . Traffic on Saint Thomas and Saint John initially remained unhindered ; however , as the rain continued for several days , flooding , rockslides and asphalt erosion forced authorities to close several roads and highways . Damage estimates from the storm reached $ 2 million across the islands . 
 In the British Virgin Islands , a flash flood warning was in effect during the presence of Otto from October 6 to 8 . Torrential floods across the islands overturned several cars , and caused extensive damage to utility lines and drainage pipes ; dozens of people in Tortola — specifically in Road Town — were temporarily left without power and water . In total , an estimated 24 @.@ 98 inches ( 634 mm ) of rain was recorded , and the government declared a state of emergency for the entire territory . Floods from the storm were regarded as the worst in the history of the British Virgin Islands . In total , damage across the islands was estimated at US $ 10 @.@ 5 million , considerably higher than losses ensured by major Hurricane Earl earlier in the year . 
 Widespread flooding from Otto was responsible for substantial increases in damage to the road network across Sint <unk> initially wrought by Earl , amounting to <unk> million ( $ 838 @,@ 000 USD ) . On the French side of the island nation , torrents and associated floods in Saint Martin were accountable for similar property infrastructural damage ; monetary losses there totaled € 800 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 12 million USD ) . 
 = = = Puerto Rico = = = 
 Rain began to pour across several parts of Puerto Rico on October 5 , persisting for up to five days in some areas . The greatest amount of rainfall during the six @-@ day period of October 3 to 8 was registered at Rio <unk> in Ponce , with 17 @.@ 86 inches ( 454 mm ) recorded . Due to the rainfall , the Government of Puerto Rico issued the closure of more than 40 roads , and an additional 19 streets were partially secured . Subsequent widespread flooding affected at least 295 roads , 14 of which suffered significant damage . In all , damage to road infrastructure was preliminarily estimated at US $ 6 @.@ 5 million . In addition , the municipality of Ponce reported copious losses in agriculture , later estimated at US $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 Following the overflow of the Arecibo River on October 7 , a neighborhood in Utuado was cut off from surrounding communities after gushing waters severely damaged its main road . Shortly thereafter , a landslide lugged a utility pole along the road , making it impossible for larger vehicles — including ambulances — to access the site . Landslides trapped fourteen families in the municipality of Ponce ; a residence alongside a road suffered significant damage and had to be evacuated . In Cayey , a district was isolated from neighboring areas due to the collapse of a bridge . In the area , burst riverbanks triggered floods across local streets , which trapped dozens of families in their homes . Severe flooding contaminated water supplies , leaving an estimated 45 @,@ 000 people without drinking water in the wake of the storm . In response , the government declared a state of emergency for the entire island . Authorities opened 120 shelters , and several flood victims had to be rescued . 
 = Morotai Mutiny = 
 The " Morotai Mutiny " was an incident in April 1945 involving members of the Australian First Tactical Air Force based on the island of Morotai , in the Dutch East Indies . Eight senior pilots , including Australia 's leading flying ace , Group Captain Clive Caldwell , tendered their resignations to protest what they perceived as the relegation of Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) fighter squadrons to strategically unimportant ground attack missions against Japanese positions that had been bypassed in the Allies ' " island @-@ hopping " campaign . A government investigation vindicated the " mutineers " , and three high @-@ ranking officers at First Tactical Air Force Headquarters , including the commander , Air Commodore Harry Cobby , the Australian Flying Corps ' top @-@ scoring ace during World War I , were relieved of their posts . 
 George Odgers summed up the cause of the incident in the official history of the RAAF in World War II as " the conviction of a group of young leaders that they were engaging in operations that were not militarily justifiable — a conviction widely shared also by many Australian soldiers and political leaders . " Odgers concluded that the ensuing inquiry " made it clear that almost everyone concerned acted from the highest motives , and was convinced that , in the crisis , he acted wisely " . 
 = = Background = = 
 First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) , commanded by Air Commodore Harry Cobby , was the main frontline combat formation of the RAAF in 1944 – 45 . It fell under the operational control of United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) Lieutenant General George Kenney , the Allied air forces commander in the South West Pacific Area under General Douglas MacArthur . Initially made up of one Bristol Beaufighter and two P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk wings , No. 1 TAF was augmented in 1945 by No. 80 Wing , commanded by Group Captain Clive Caldwell . This wing comprised three Supermarine Spitfire squadrons , whose pilots included veterans of the North African Campaign and the defence of Northern Australia against Japanese air raids . 
 By early 1945 , Japanese air power in the South West Pacific had been virtually destroyed . US Army forces were focused on completing the recapture of the Philippines as a stepping stone to an invasion of Japan . During this time , Australian forces including No. 1 TAF were increasingly assigned to garrison duties and harassing Japanese bases on islands bypassed by MacArthur 's forces . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , would later contend that the RAAF , in the words of Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " was ' side @-@ stepped ' out of the final victory over Japan by MacArthur , who wanted all the glory for himself " . US Marine Corps aviators from the Air North Solomons command also believed that MacArthur 's headquarters was favouring the USAAF in the assignment of combat duties . 
 The overall situation led to dissatisfaction and poor morale among No. 1 TAF personnel based on Morotai , particularly the Spitfire pilots who had little opportunity for the air @-@ to @-@ air combat they specialised in and whose aircraft were ill @-@ suited to ground attack missions . Group Captain Wilf Arthur , former Officer Commanding No. 81 Wing and now in charge of No. 78 Wing , became concerned that his units ' expenditure in terms of men , machines and ordnance was not justified by the damage inflicted on enemy targets or by the relative importance of those targets . In December 1944 he asked his Intelligence staff to produce a " balance sheet " to quantify losses versus results . Arthur presented the balance sheet to Air Commodore Cobby , who reviewed it and disseminated it to his headquarters staff , but took no further action . 
 = = Prelude to the resignations = = 
 In March 1945 , frustrated by the lack of response from Cobby and his staff and convinced that operations were becoming yet more wasteful , Arthur began discussing his concerns with other senior No. 1 TAF pilots . First , he spoke to Wing Commander Kenneth Ranger , a senior staff officer who had served with No. 9 Operational Group and had made allegations regarding the leadership of its commander , Air Commodore Joe Hewitt , who was eventually dismissed from his post . Arthur sought out Ranger as someone with " moral guts " , who would take " a stand against the type of operations we were engaged in " . Next , he enlisted Caldwell 's support , although Caldwell was , at the time , facing charges from Cobby over liquor trafficking which made it a risk that his involvement in a protest over operations would be misconstrued as an attempt to divert attention from the charges . Arthur believed , however , that Caldwell " would go as far as he possibly could to back up his opinions [ which ] were worth a lot more than the opinions of most other people in the area " . 
 Through Caldwell more officers joined the protest , including two other celebrated aces , Wing Commander Bobby Gibbes and Squadron Leader John Waddy , as well as Squadron Leader Bert Grace , Squadron Leader Douglas <unk> , and later , Squadron Leader Stuart <unk> . During a series of meetings early in April 1945 , Caldwell proposed that the eight resign en masse , and the others agreed . Arthur later stated that , " I meant to make as big a fuss as I possibly could with the object of getting the position corrected ... All the same , we realised that , to lay ourselves open to any charge of mutiny , we might lessen the force of what we were doing , which was the reason we put the things in as resignations and not as any attempt to unseat people higher up . " 
 Arthur also attempted to secure Cobby 's support for the protest . The commander of No. 1 TAF had been the Australian Flying Corps ' leading ace in World War I , as Caldwell was the RAAF 's in World War II . Arthur reasoned that , although Cobby was partly to blame for the morale issue , " we felt that his value to our move , because of his name with the Public , together with Group Captain Caldwell , would give us a very considerable amount of public support ... he was the prima donna of one war , and ... arm @-@ in @-@ arm with the prima donna of the next war , we would put up a reasonable front and attract a lot of attention in the headlines of the newspapers . " Cobby refused to join in and later claimed to be unaware of the depth of feeling among the pilots . 
 = = " Mutiny " = = 
 On 20 April 1945 , the eight pilots presented Cobby with identically worded letters under the heading , " <unk> FOR <unk> OF <unk> . " The letters read , " I hereby respectfully make application that I be permitted to resign my Commission as an officer in the Royal Australian Air Force , forthwith . " Cobby appeared taken aback and would not accept the resignations . He spoke to seven of the pilots individually , but not Caldwell , as he was already under charge . When the men refused to withdraw the letters or elaborate on the reason for their actions , Cobby contacted his immediate superior , Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , head of RAAF Command , the Air Force 's main operational command . Bostock arrived on Morotai the next day and interviewed the pilots , asking them to tear up the letters , without success . His methods were later construed as an attempt to " make the situation go away or to at least cover it up " . The pilots ' only concession to Bostock 's entreaty was to resubmit their resignations with the word " forthwith " replaced by " at the end of current operations " . 
 Following these interviews , Bostock advised Air Vice Marshal Jones that morale in No. 1 TAF was at a " dangerously low level " and recommended that Jones fire Cobby and replace him with Air Commodore Frederick Scherger . Jones considered the pilots ' action " absurd " , because an officer could not legally resign during wartime , but travelled to Morotai from his headquarters in Melbourne to investigate the matter personally . He also interviewed the pilots , later declaring , " I believed them all to be sincere in what they were stating and what they had attempted to do ... Yes , sincerely held beliefs , no matter how ill @-@ founded , coupled possibly with a rather exaggerated sense of national duty . " 
 Lieutenant General Kenney also became embroiled in the affair , having been informed by Bostock , and insisted on speaking directly to the pilots himself over Jones ' protest that this was an internal RAAF disciplinary matter . During a visit to Morotai from his Manila headquarters , Kenney tried to persuade the officers to reconsider their positions , but again they refused . He agreed with Bostock that Cobby should be replaced by Scherger , and declared that if the pilots were court @-@ martialled he would appear in their defence . The commander of the Australian Army 's I Corps , Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead , who was at Morotai preparing for the Borneo campaign , also supported Cobby 's removal . Morshead and other senior army officers were concerned that the dispute could disrupt preparations for the Australian landings in Borneo and consulted with Kenney on the matter . Jones resolved to dismiss not only Cobby but also his staff officers , Group Captains Gibson and Simms . Scherger took over as Air Officer Commanding No. 1 TAF on 10 May . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ultimately , no court @-@ martial took place for any actions directly related to the " mutiny " , and most of the pilots involved continued on operations until the end of the war . An RAAF investigation found that Jones ' removal of Cobby , Gibson and Simms was justified . Upon Jones ' request , the Australian government also set up an inquiry into events on Morotai , headed by Justice John Vincent Barry . Beginning on 16 May 1945 , the inquiry focused on both the resignations and the reports of illegal trafficking in alcohol between RAAF and US service personnel on the island . While Barry 's terms of reference encompassed only No. 1 TAF , the inquiry also heard evidence of shortcomings in the Air Force 's higher command that may have contributed to structural and morale problems on Morotai , particularly a bitter and long @-@ running feud between Jones and Bostock over the division of operational and administrative control of the RAAF in the Pacific . 
 The complete report of the inquiry was released in October , preceded by a summary of findings issued on 14 September 1945 . Judge Barry vindicated Arthur 's " balance sheet " and the stand taken by the pilots , finding that their motives in tendering their resignations were sincere . No further action was taken against them over the " mutiny " itself , but Caldwell and Gibbes were court @-@ martialled for their involvement in the alcohol racket and reduced to the rank of flight lieutenant . Barry found that Cobby had " failed to maintain proper control over his command " , while Cobby defended his leadership of No. 1 TAF , contending that although there was " some discontent " , it was " a healthy sign of discontent amongst certain officers who wished to do more in the war than they were doing . Unfortunately , it was not within the power of 1st <unk> to give them that more important or more interesting work ... " The incident did not change the RAAF 's role in the dying days of the war in the Pacific and may have hindered No. 1 TAF 's preparations for the upcoming Battle of Tarakan . It did however improve the situation on Morotai , as Air Commodore Scherger successfully restored morale . The " mutineers " considered that they had achieved most of their goals by effecting a change of command in No. 1 TAF and instigating a governmental inquiry . 
 News of the resignations , the alcohol racket , and Caldwell 's court @-@ martial were widely reported in Australia . Following publication of Barry 's findings , The Daily Telegraph in Sydney commented that " the RAAF should have a complete new deal . It is a badly run show and the fault is high up . " The same paper later called Caldwell 's court @-@ martial a " witch hunt " . Despite this publicity , the action did not become popularly known as the " Morotai Mutiny " until years later . The phrase dated back to the earliest days of the incident , Group Captain Arthur having written it at the top of an aide @-@ mémoire . He later said that " the alliteration must have appealed to me " . Shortly after writing it , he crossed out " Morotai " and added a question mark following " Mutiny " . The term did not catch on with the public at the time , but Arthur 's original words have been credited as the source of the name by which the incident eventually became known . 
 = Gumball ( video game ) = 
 Gumball is a 1983 video game by Robert Cook and Broderbund in which the player controls the valves of a maze @-@ like machine to sort gumballs by their color . The player meets the quota of each level to earn their character — a factory worker — a promotion , resulting in a raise in difficulty with more color choices and defective gumballs to exclude . Broderbund co @-@ founder Doug Carlston conceived of the game 's machine @-@ sorting concept , and Cook , the designer , added the gumball conceit . He designed the main gumball processing machine within a week and later returned to add smaller features , like sound and decorative animations . The developer also hid a secret image within the game that was only found three decades after Gumball 's release . Broderbund tested the game and prepared its packaging . Gumball debuted at the June 1983 Consumer Electronics Show and released for the Apple II , Atari 8 @-@ bit family , and Commodore 64 platforms . Reviewers separately noted the difficulty of the game 's later stages , praised its comical elements , and commented on the social role of simulating mundane work . The game did not become popular and copies of it became rare . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gumball is an arcade game for the home computer in which the player works in a factory as a gumball sorter and sorts gumballs by color as they flow through a maze @-@ like processing machine . The player controls valves in the machine to divert the flow of individual gumballs towards bins of corresponding colors . If the player sorts incorrectly , the foreman walks onscreen and dumps the gumballs out the bin . The player has a daily quota to meet by the end of the level 's time limit . If successful , the player character receives a promotion ; the player watches an animation of a worker walking home from the factory , and progresses to a more complex level , with more color options to sort and defective , explosive gumballs to deactivate . If unsuccessful in meeting the daily quota , the game ends and the player is left to restart from the beginning . 
 The game requires a color television or monitor , and optionally works with a joystick or paddle controller . 
 = = Development = = 
 Robert Cook wrote Gumball for publication by Broderbund in 1983 . Broderbund had a reputation as a successful publisher . Its games and productivity software each composed about half of the company 's output , and their software in both categories reached the top of sales charts . Broderbund co @-@ founder Doug Carlston conceived the core concept of a machine that sorts based on color , and Robert Cook expanded the concept with the gumball conceit . He spent a week designing the main processing machine , with its pipes and valves . Though he later returned to add more background detail , his original pipe design did not change . Most of Cook 's time was spent programming the game 's functions , such as the how individual gumballs move through the pipes . 
 Once the basic functions ran reasonably well , Cook focused on making the game fun , with challenge and incentive to return . He added smaller features like sound effects and music , conveyor belt animations , and scorekeeping , but each new feature brought new software bugs to address . To make the game more interesting , Cook added the gumball bombs and tweaked the mechanism that caught them . He iterated through prototypes including a player @-@ controlled claw and an item that traversed the pipes before finally deciding on crosshairs for the player to fire . Cook also added the game 's time limit and the differences between levels . Closer to the end , Cook coded Gumball 's title page and the animated transitions between levels . 
 Cook then sent the game to Broderbund for testing , which took two weeks . He resolved three small errors and other minor , proposed changes before submitting the final version . By this point , the company had printed the game 's packaging — boxes , labels , and documentation — such that they were ready to ship after receiving the approval from game testers . The game debuted at the June 1983 Consumer Electronics Show and was later released on diskette for the Apple II , Atari 8 @-@ bit family , and Commodore 64 . 
 In 2016 , an Apple II software cracker team found an Easter egg hidden by the game 's creator 33 years prior . Cook had hidden a secret congratulations screen in the game for players who entered a specific keyboard key combination at a specific time and solved the resulting series of substitution ciphered clues . Cook congratulated the cracker team on Twitter . The crackers found the secret while working to preserve the game for the Internet Archive by removing its digital copyright protections . One of the crackers said that while most 1980s games could be cracked by automation , Gumball 's protections , coded by Roland Gustafsson , were exceptional . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Browning of the Eugene , Oregon @-@ based Atari Computer Enthusiasts wrote that Gumball was a good interlude between shoot @-@ em @-@ up games , but found that he lost interest when tasked with sorting four or more colors of gumballs . Compute ! ' s Gazette thought that Gumball was fun , and highlighted its " comical " elements , such as the factory manager emptying the player 's bin when the player incorrectly sorts the wrong color into it . The magazine described Gumball as a " strategy @-@ action " game and considered it a useful aid in developing faculties of logic and hand @-@ eye coordination . David Hunter of <unk> asked whether the game was satirical commentary " on the Great American Dream of climbing the corporate ladder " depending on whether the factory work inculcated " good work habits " or " Disney @-@ esque automatons " . He wrote that the game had what corporate trainers would want : an introduction to repetitive tasks and a sense of nervous energy . Three decades later , Jason <unk> of <unk> summarized that the game never became popular and that copies of it became rare . 
 = Liverpool Women 's Suffrage Society = 
 The Liverpool Women 's Suffrage Society was set up in 1894 by Edith Bright , Lydia Allen Booth and Nessie Stewart @-@ Brown to promote the enfranchisement of women . The society held its first meeting in a Liverpool temperance hall , with Millicent Fawcett , head of the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies ( NUWSS ) , as its guest speaker . The society set up headquarters in Lord Street . The group became affiliated with the NUWSS in 1898 , it held meetings in cafés which included talks , poetry and dance recitals . Members were recruited from prominent members of society and they distanced themselves from working class suffrage societies such as Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) . 
 Eleanor Rathbone led the society as its secretary from 1897 , especially in campaigning in the 1910 elections . Three campaign shops were opened around Liverpool , asking men to vote for candidates who supported votes for women , especially Alexander Gordon Cameron . In 1911 , Rathbone and Stewart @-@ Brown set up a branch of the society to educate women who would soon get the vote . When the society disagreed with the NUWSS , it merged with the Municipal Women 's Association to create the Liverpool Women 's Citizens Association in 1919 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Liverpool Women 's Suffrage Society was set up in 1894 at a meeting in January at the temperance hall in Hardman Street . A society had been proposed a month earlier by Emily Hornby at a public meeting and after a unanimous vote , was founded by Edith Allan Bright , Lydia Allen Booth and Nessie Stewart @-@ Brown and initially had twenty four members . The society set up headquarters at 6 Lord Street . Millicent Fawcett , leader of the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies , attended the first meeting as a guest speaker . 
 The society distinguished itself from the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) and the Independent Labour Party , and became known as respectable " lady suffragists " as opposed to the more militant suffragettes . The society recruited more prestigious members of society , leading to other disenfranchised women ( especially those from the working @-@ class ) joining the WSPU ; the organisation also actively distanced itself from WSPU protests . By the first annual general meeting , on 11 January 1895 , the membership had expanded to just 71 . 
 In 1896 , the society affiliated with Central National Society for Women 's Suffrage , and by 1898 had joined the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies . Bright invited Christabel Pankhurst to speak in Liverpool in 12 February 1909 , which resulted in a " phenomenal demand for membership cards " . Pankhurst stayed at Bright 's house whilst in the city . 
 = = Goals = = 
 Liverpool Women 's Suffrage Society was formed with the intention of fulfilling a number of goals . It hoped to educate women on why they should have the right to vote and convince men of the same . It had links with Liberal MPs and intended to use these to pressure the government to allow women 's suffrage . In addition , the society tried to drum up support for their cause by holding small scale events , often with speakers at the Yamen Cafe in Liverpool 's Bond Street . The events would also include poetry , singing or performances of acting or ballet by the Blue Bird Theatre Company . 
 The society would take part in wider suffrage demonstrations , for example in June 1908 , it supported a National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies event in London 's Hyde Park and in June 1910 an event by all the Liverpool suffrage <unk> at Liverpool 's St Georges Hall Eleanor Rathbone lead the society 's campaigning in the 1910 Liverpool elections , opening campaign shops on Smithdown Road , Bold Street and Stanley Road , asking men to vote for anyone who would support votes for women , <unk> of party . They actively campaigned for the Labour candidate Alexander Gordon Cameron , although he did not win . 
 = = Founders = = 
 The society was founded by three women . Edith Bright served on the executive committee of Liverpool Ladies Union of Workers among Women and Girls . She was involved in other feminist causes such as Mothers Union & National Union of Women Workers and was a driving force for a Liverpool branch of the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies . Her husband , Allen Bright , was a lawyer , shipping merchant & Liberal MP . Lydia Allen Booth ( née Butler ) was an American who was on the executive committee of Liverpool Ladies Union of Workers among Women and Girls . Nessie Stewart @-@ Brown was president of Liverpool Women 's Liberal Association , and worked with Bright in the Mothers Union & National Union of Women Workers . 
 = = = Secretaries = = = 
 1895 – Edith Bright 
 1897 – Eleanor Rathbone 
 1913 – Miss E. E. Deakin & Eleanor Rathbone 
 = = Liverpool Women 's Citizen Association = = 
 In 1911 , sensing they were close to achieving suffrage , Rathbone & Stewart @-@ Bright created Municipal Women 's Association as a branch of the society ; its aim was to increase awareness of the vote for women , encourage discussion amongst potential women voters and teaching women what to do when they had the vote . In 1912 , the Liverpool Women Suffrage Society disagreed with the route that the National Union Women 's Suffrage Societies was taking , with its Election Fighting Fund , and instead merged with the Municipal Women 's Association to become the Liverpool Women 's Citizen 's Association . The outbreak of World War I changed the focus of groups to help with the national emergency and in 1919 the groups merged . By 1921 they had 12 branches . 
 = New York State Route 33A = 
 New York State Route 33A ( NY 33A ) is an east – west state highway mostly located in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . The route is just over 17 miles ( 27 km ) long and serves as an alternate route of NY 33 between the town of Bergen in Genesee County and the city of Rochester in Monroe County . While NY 33 heads to Rochester by way of Churchville and northern Gates , NY 33A dips south to pass through Chili and southern Gates . NY 33A was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , but only from Riga to Rochester . It was extended westward to its current terminus in Bergen c . 1932 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = West of Gates = = = 
 NY 33A begins at an intersection with NY 33 just east of the village of Bergen in the town of the same name . From this point , NY 33 travels to the west and to the northeast while NY 33A heads east . Less than a quarter of a mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) from its western terminus , NY 33A meets Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) at exit 2 . In this area , I @-@ 490 straddles the border between Genesee County and Monroe County ; thus , the westbound portion of the interchange is in Genesee County while the eastbound half is in Monroe County . 
 Now in the town of Riga , NY 33A becomes Chili – Riga Center Road as it traverses a largely rural portion of southwestern Monroe County . In the small hamlet of Riga , the route intersects and briefly overlaps with NY 36 . East of Riga hamlet , NY 33A heads generally northeastward , passing by Black Creek Park as it enters the town of Chili . Just west of the hamlet of West Chili , the route crosses over Black Creek and intersects Chili Avenue Extension . At this junction , NY 33A becomes Chili Avenue , the name it retains into the city of Rochester . Locally , the Chili Avenue name is used more in common parlance than the NY 33A designation . 
 In West Chili , the route meets the southern terminus of NY 259 . The route continues on , heading northeastward into more densely populated areas of the town of Chili . About 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of West Chili , NY 33A intersects the western terminus of NY 252 . Not far to the northeast , the highway meets NY 386 , which joins NY 33A for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to Chili Center , Chili 's main commercial hub . Here , NY 386 splits off to the north at a junction that also served as the western terminus of NY 252A . Past Chili Center , NY 33A heads northeast through a residential neighborhood and into the town of Gates . 
 = = = Gates and Rochester = = = 
 Just across the town line , NY 33A intersects the east end of the Airport Expressway ( NY 204 ) . At this point , NY 204 leaves the highway and turns to follow NY 33A eastward . While most of NY 33A west of Gates is a two @-@ lane highway , the portion of Chili Avenue that carries both NY 33A and NY 204 is a four @-@ lane roadway . The two routes soon enter <unk> , a hamlet that has been transformed into a major commercial destination . The development is mostly centered on Westgate Plaza , a large shopping plaza anchored by a Walmart . As NY 33A passes south of the plaza , it connects to Howard Road ( unsigned NY 940L and formerly part of NY 47 ) and Brooks Avenue . NY 204 leaves NY 33A at Brooks Avenue to follow the road eastward toward the Greater Rochester International Airport . 
 East of Brooks Avenue , NY 33A passes through a small residential area before entering a more industrial neighborhood surrounding the Erie Canal and the Rochester city line . In the western portion of this area , the route meets I @-@ 390 at exit 19 and intersects Buell Road ( County Route 162 ) , which directly links NY 33A to the airport a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to the south . East of I @-@ 390 , NY 33A crosses the Erie Canal and enters the city of Rochester , at which point maintenance of NY 33A shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to the city of Rochester . On the northern bank of the waterway , the route passes under the Rochester and Southern Railroad . The surroundings become significantly more residential east of the railroad as the route heads northeastward toward downtown Rochester . However , NY 33A ends roughly one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of downtown at a junction with NY 33 ( West Avenue ) . Here , Chili and West Avenues converge and NY 33 continues toward downtown as West Main Street . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 16 , an unsigned legislative route extending from the Southern Tier village of Cuba to the city of Rochester just south of Lake Ontario . Route 16 entered the Rochester area on what is now NY 386 and followed modern NY 386 , Old Scottsville – Chili Road , and Chili Avenue northeastward to the Rochester city line . From there , the route continued for an additional 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the original city limits , where it ended near the intersection of Chili Avenue and Post Street . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 16 was truncated to end in Le Roy while the portion of its former alignment north of Caledonia became part of an extended Route 15 . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the segment of legislative Route 15 north of Caledonia was not assigned a designation . Within two years , a highway extending from Batavia to Rochester by way of Bergen and Gates was designated as NY 33 . However , NY 33 followed a more northerly routing through Gates than old Route 15 did as it used Buffalo Road instead of Chili Avenue . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the Chili Avenue portion of legislative Route 15 became part of the new NY 33A , a then @-@ spur route of NY 33 that began at NY 36 in Riga and ended at NY 33 in southwestern Rochester . NY 33A was extended westward c . 1932 to the town of Bergen , where it reconnected to NY 33 southeast of the village of Bergen . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Fauna of Scotland = 
 The fauna of Scotland is generally typical of the northwest European part of the Palearctic ecozone , although several of the country 's larger mammals were hunted to extinction in historic times and human activity has also led to various species of wildlife being introduced . Scotland 's diverse temperate environments support 62 species of wild mammals , including a population of wild cats , important numbers of grey and harbour seals and the most northerly colony of bottlenose dolphins in the world . 
 Many populations of moorland birds , including the black and red grouse live here , and the country has internationally significant nesting grounds for seabirds such as the northern gannet . The golden eagle has become a national icon , and white @-@ tailed eagles and ospreys have recently re @-@ colonised the land . The Scottish crossbill is the only endemic vertebrate species in the UK . 
 Scotland 's seas are among the most biologically productive in the world ; it is estimated that the total number of Scottish marine species exceeds 40 @,@ 000 . The Darwin Mounds are an important area of deep sea cold water coral reefs discovered in 1998 . Inland , nearly 400 genetically distinct populations of Atlantic salmon live in Scottish rivers . Of the 42 species of fish found in the country 's fresh waters , half have arrived by natural colonisation and half by human introduction . 
 Only six amphibians and four land reptiles are native to Scotland , but many species of invertebrates live there that are otherwise rare in the United Kingdom ( UK ) . An estimated 14 @,@ 000 species of insect , including rare bees and butterflies protected by conservation action plans , inhabit Scotland . Conservation agencies in the UK are concerned that climate change , especially its potential effects on mountain plateaus and marine life , threaten much of the fauna of Scotland . 
 = = Habitats = = 
 Scotland enjoys a diversity of temperate environments , incorporating deciduous and coniferous woodlands , and moorland , montane , estuarine , freshwater , oceanic , and tundra landscapes . About 14 % of Scotland is wooded , much of it in forestry plantations , but before humans cleared the land it supported much larger boreal Caledonian and broad @-@ leaved forests . Although much reduced , significant remnants of the native Scots pine woodlands can be found . Seventeen per cent of Scotland is covered by heather moorland and peatland . Caithness and Sutherland have one of the world 's largest and most intact areas of blanket bog , which supports a distinctive wildlife community . Seventy @-@ five per cent of Scotland 's land is classed as agricultural ( including some moorland ) while urban areas account for around 3 % . The coastline is 11 @,@ 803 kilometres ( 7 @,@ 334 mi ) long , and the number of islands with terrestrial vegetation is nearly 800 , about 600 of them lying off the west coast . Scotland has more than 90 % of the volume and 70 % of the total surface area of fresh water in the United Kingdom . There are more than 30 @,@ 000 freshwater lochs and 6 @,@ 600 river systems . 
 Under the auspices of the European Union 's Habitats Directive , as of December 2007 a total of 239 sites in Scotland covering more than 8 @,@ 750 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 380 sq mi ) had been accepted by European Commission as Special Areas of Conservation ( SAC ) . Scotland 's seas are among the most biologically productive in the world and contain 40 @,@ 000 or more species . Twenty @-@ four of the SACs are marine sites , and a further nine are coastal with marine and non @-@ marine elements . These marine elements extend to an area of around 350 square kilometres ( 140 sq mi ) . The Darwin Mounds , covering about 100 square kilometres ( 39 sq mi ) , are being considered as the first offshore SAC . 
 = = Mammals = = 
 Scotland was entirely covered in ice during the Pleistocene glaciations . As the post @-@ glacial weather warmed and the ice retreated , mammals migrated through the landscape . However , the opening of the English Channel ( as sea levels rose ) prevented further migrations , so mainland Britain has only two @-@ thirds of the species that reached Scandinavia . The Hebridean islands off Scotland 's west coast have only half those of Britain . Sixty @-@ two species of mammal live wild in and around Scotland including 13 species found in coastal waters . The populations of a third of the land mammal species are thought to be in decline due to factors including environmental pollution , habitat fragmentation , changes in agricultural practices , particularly overgrazing , and competition from introduced species . No mammal species are unique to Scotland , although the St. Kilda field mouse , Apodemus sylvaticus <unk> , is an endemic subspecies of the wood mouse that reaches twice the size of its mainland cousins , and the Orkney vole or <unk> , Microtus arvalis orcadensis found only in the Orkney archipelago , is a sub @-@ species of the common vole . It may have been introduced by early settlers about 4 @,@ 000 years ago . There are various notable domesticated Scottish mammal breeds including Highland Cattle , the Shetland Pony , Soay Sheep and Scottish Terrier . 
 = = = Carnivores = = = 
 The representation of the weasel family ( Mustelidae ) in Scotland is typical of Britain as a whole save that the polecat is absent and that Scotland is the UK 's stronghold of the pine marten , although the purity of the latter breed is threatened by a release of American martens in northern England . Scotland hosts the only populations of European wildcat ( sub @-@ species Felis sylvestris <unk> ) in the British Isles with numbers estimated at between 400 and 2 @,@ 000 animals , and of the red fox sub @-@ species Vulpes vulpes vulpes , a larger race than the more common V. v. <unk> and which has two distinct forms . The wild cat is at risk due to the inadequacy of protective legislation and is now considered at serious risk of extinction . In 2013 it was announced that the island of <unk> is to provide a sanctuary and breeding station in order to protect the species . <unk> of the population of feral American mink , which were brought to Britain for fur farms in the 1950s , have been undertaken under the auspices of the Hebridean Mink Project and the Scottish Mink Initiative , which hopes to create a mink @-@ free zone in a large area stretching from Wester Ross to Tayside . 
 Other than occasional vagrants , among the seals only the Phocidae , or earless seals , are represented . Two species , the grey seal and harbour or common seal , are present around the coast of Scotland in internationally important numbers . In 2002 the Scottish grey seal population was estimated at 120 @,@ 600 adult animals , which is around 36 % of the world population and more than 90 % of the UK 's . The Scottish population of the common seal is 29 @,@ 700 , about 90 % of the UK and 36 % of the European total . 
 = = = Rodents , insectivores and lagomorphs = = = 
 Seventy @-@ five per cent of the UK 's red squirrels are found in Scotland . This species faces threats that include competition from the introduced grey squirrel , and the ' Scottish Strategy for Red Squirrel Conservation ' provides a framework for supporting its long @-@ term conservation . Research in 2007 credited the growing population of pine martens with assisting this programme by preying selectively on the grey squirrels . Scotland has no population of the edible or hazel dormouse , or of the yellow @-@ necked mouse , and the harvest mouse 's range is limited to the southern part of the country . The St Kilda mouse and Orkney vole ( see above ) are endemic , but otherwise population distributions are similar to the rest of mainland Britain . Colonies of black rats remain only on the island of Inchcolm in the Firth of Forth and on the Shiant Isles . 
 Mainland insectivore populations are generally similar to the rest of Britain . Recent steps by Scottish Natural Heritage , the Scottish Executive and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds to remove European hedgehogs from the Outer Hebrides , where their introduction has caused declines in internationally important breeding populations of wading seabird such as dunlin , ringed plover and redshank , has caused considerable controversy , and hedgehog culls were halted in 2007 . The trapped animals are now relocated to the mainland . The programme has reduced this population ; only two individuals were caught in 2007 . 
 Of the lagomorphs only hares and rabbits are represented in Scotland . The mountain hare is the only native member of the hare family and is the dominant species throughout most of upland Scotland . The European hare and European rabbit are both present , the latter having been brought to Britain by the Romans but not becoming widespread in Scotland until the 19th century . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Landseer 's painting of a red deer stag , Monarch of the Glen , is one of the most notable images of Victorian Scotland . The species , a member of the biological order <unk> or " even @-@ toed ungulates " , is still 400 @,@ 000 strong , although its existence in the pure form is threatened by hybridisation with introduced sika deer . Very much a hill @-@ dwelling species in Scotland ( and so typically smaller in stature than its European forest @-@ loving cousins ) , it is generally replaced by roe deer in lower @-@ lying land . Although found elsewhere in the UK , no wild populations of Chinese water deer and no or very few Chinese muntjac exist in Scotland . It has isolated populations of feral goats Capra hircus and feral sheep ( Ovis aries ) , such as the herd of 1 @,@ 000 Soay sheep on St Kilda . Since 1952 a herd of semi @-@ domesticated reindeer have lived in the Cairngorm National Park , the species having become extinct in Scotland after it was recorded as having been hunted in Orkney in the 12th century . 
 = = = Other mammals = = = 
 Only nine of the sixteen or seventeen bat species found elsewhere in Britain are present in Scotland . Widespread species are common and soprano pipistrelles , the brown long @-@ eared bat , Daubenton 's bat and Natterer 's bat . Those with a more restricted distribution are the whiskered bat , noctule , Leisler 's bat and Nathusius 's pipistrelle . <unk> include the greater and lesser horseshoe bat , the greater mouse @-@ eared bat and Bechstein 's bat . No bats reside on the Shetland Islands ; the only records there are of migrants or vagrants . 
 Twenty @-@ one species of cetacean have been recorded in Scottish waters within the last 100 years including Cuvier 's beaked whale , killer whales , sperm whales , minke whales and common , white @-@ beaked and Risso 's dolphins . The Moray Firth colony of about 100 bottlenose dolphins is the most northerly in the world . As recent dramatic television coverage indicated , this species preys on harbour porpoises ; a third of the porpoise carcasses examined by pathologists from 1992 to 2002 indicated that death resulted from dolphin attacks . However , conservationists expressed dismay that the UK government decided to allow oil and gas prospecting in the Moray Firth , putting these populations of cetaceans at risk . In response , the government have placed seismic surveys " on hold " during 2009 pending further research . The introduced marsupial , the red @-@ necked wallaby , is confined to a colony on an island in Loch Lomond . 
 = = = Extinctions and reintroductions = = = 
 During the Pleistocene interglacials , arctic animals that are no longer extant occupied Scotland , including the woolly rhinoceros , mammoth , polar bear , lemming , Arctic fox and the giant deer Megaloceros giganteus . Other mammals that used to inhabit Scotland but became extinct in the wild during historic times include the Eurasian lynx , which lived in Britain until 1 @,@ 500 years ago , the European brown bear , subspecies Ursus arctos <unk> , which was taken to entertain the Roman circuses but died out in the 9th or 10th century , and the elk , which lasted until about 1300 . The wild boar and wild ox or <unk> died out in the subsequent two centuries , although the former 's domesticated cousin , the <unk> , lasted until 1930 in Shetland . The last known wolf was shot on Mackintosh land in <unk> in 1743 , and the walrus is now only an occasional vagrant . St Kilda also possessed an endemic subspecies of the house mouse , Mus musculus muralis , which was longer , hairier , coloured differently and had a skull shape at variance to the norm . It became extinct in 1938 , just eight years after the evacuation of the native St Kildans . 
 Scottish Natural Heritage have re @-@ introduced the European beaver to the wild in Scotland using Norwegian stock . The species was found in the Highlands until the 15th century , and although the then Scottish Executive initially rejected the idea , a trial commenced in May 2009 in Knapdale . In Tayside , deliberate releases or escapes have led to up to 250 animals colonising the area . The Scottish Government is monitoring the situation and expected to make an announcement about the species ' future in 2016 . After a feasibility study in Glen <unk> , wild boar have been re @-@ introduced to a large fenced area of the <unk> Estate in Glenmoriston . Various other schemes are under consideration . For example , the owner of the <unk> estate north of Inverness has expressed a desire to reintroduce wolves as part of a wilderness reserve , the first of its kind in Britain . 
 = = Avifauna = = 
 The history of mammals suggests three broad overlapping phases : natural colonisation after the ice age , human @-@ caused extinctions , and introduction by humans of non @-@ native species . The greater mobility of birds makes such generalisations hard to substantiate in their case . Modern humans have done great damage to bird species , especially the raptors , but natural variations in populations are complex . For example , northern fulmars were present at Skara Brae during the Neolithic period , but in medieval times their breeding range was restricted to St Kilda . Since then they have spread throughout the British Isles . 
 Most of about 250 species of bird regularly recorded in Britain venture into Scotland , and perhaps up to 300 more occur with varying degrees of rarity . A total of 247 species have been assessed and each placed onto one of three lists , red , amber or green , indicating the level of concern for their future . Forty species are red @-@ listed , 121 are amber @-@ listed and 86 are green @-@ listed . 
 The Scottish crossbill , Loxia scotica , which inhabits the coniferous forests of the Highlands , is Britain 's only endemic bird and , with only 300 breeding pairs , one of Europe 's most threatened species . Its shape , red / green hue and habit of hanging upside down has led to comparisons with parrots . St Kilda has a unique subspecies of wren , the St Kilda wren Troglodytes troglodytes hirtensis , which has adapted to perching on the rocks and cliffs of this treeless Atlantic island , and consequently has developed larger and stronger feet than the mainland variant . It is also slightly larger , has a longer beak , a drabber though more varied colouring , and a " peculiarly sweet and soft " song . The subspecies was recognised in 1884 and was protected by a special Act of Parliament in 1904 to prevent its destruction " at the hands of ornithologists , egg @-@ collectors , taxidermists and tourists " . 
 = = = Raptors = = = 
 All but a few pairs of Britain 's approximately 600 golden eagles are found in Scotland as are most of the breeding peregrine falcons . The hobby , marsh harrier and Montagu 's harrier although found in England and Wales are generally absent . 
 In 1916 an English vicar stole the last native white @-@ tailed sea eagle eggs on Skye , and the last adult was shot on Shetland two years later . However , the species was reintroduced to the island of Rùm in 1975 . The bird spread successfully to various neighbouring islands , and 30 pairs were established by 2006 . Despite fears expressed by local farmers , the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds ( RSPB ) are in process of releasing up to 100 young eagles on the east coast in the Forth and Tay estuaries . The red kite was exterminated in Scotland in 1879 , and a reintroduction programme was launched by the RSPB in the 1980s . Although the species has made significant advances , it is estimated that 38 % of the 395 birds fledged between 1999 and 2003 were poisoned and a further 9 % shot or otherwise killed by humans . The RSPB stated : " it may take a custodial sentence before people engaged with this activity begin to take the matter seriously " . 
 After an absence of nearly 40 years the osprey successfully re @-@ colonised Scotland in the early 1950s . In 1899 they had bred at the ruined Loch an Eilean castle near Aviemore and at Loch Arkaig until 1908 . In 1952 they claimed a new site at Loch Garten . There are now 150 breeding pairs . 
 Other raptor species found in the UK such as the kestrel , hen harrier , goshawk , sparrowhawk , tawny owl , and barn owl are widely distributed in Scotland , although the little owl is confined to the south . Buzzards have displayed a remarkable resilience , having recovered from human persecution and the myxomatosis epidemic of the 1950s , which reduced their food supply . Numbers more than trebled between 1978 and 1998 . At the other end of the population scale , a single pair of snowy owls bred on Fetlar from 1967 to 1975 . 
 In 2009 it was reported that the Scottish Government have decided to proceed with a controversial plan to relocate sparrowhawks found near pigeon lofts in Glasgow , Edinburgh , Kilmarnock , Stirling and Dumfries at a cost of £ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Seabirds = = = 
 Scotland 's seas host almost half of the European Union 's breeding seabirds including about half of the world 's northern gannets and a third of the world 's Manx shearwaters . Four seabird species have more than 95 % of their combined British and Irish population in Scotland , while a further fourteen species have more than half of their breeding population in Scottish colonies . St Kilda , which is a World Heritage Site , is a seabird haven of great significance . It has 60 @,@ 000 northern gannets , amounting to 24 % of the world population , 49 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of Leach 's storm petrel , up to 90 % of the European population , 136 @,@ 000 pairs of puffin and 67 @,@ 000 northern fulmar pairs , about 30 % and 13 % of the respective UK totals . The island of Mingulay also has a large seabird population and is an important breeding ground for razorbills , with 9 @,@ 514 pairs , 6 @.@ 3 % of the European population . 
 Sixty per cent of all breeding bonxies nest in Scotland , mostly in Orkney and Shetland , even though they did not arrive at all until the 18th century . Scotland is the breeding station for about 90 % of the UK 's Arctic terns , the majority of which make use of colonies in Orkney and Shetland . A similar percentage of the UK 's tysties breed on Scottish islands including Unst , Mingulay and Iona . Scotland also hosts 1 @,@ 000 pairs of Arctic skua and 21 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of shag , 40 % of the global population of the species . 
 In excess of 130 @,@ 000 birds inhabit <unk> nature reserve in Aberdeenshire at the peak of the breeding season , making it one of the largest seabird colonies in Britain . As of 2005 about 18 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of kittiwakes return to each year , and there are also significant numbers of Atlantic puffin , razorbill , fulmar , herring gull and great black @-@ backed gull . The Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth hosts upwards of 40 @,@ 000 pairs of northern gannets and is the largest single rock gannetry in the world . The bird 's scientific name Morus bassanus , derives from the rock . 
 = = = Game birds , waders and water fowl = = = 
 Red @-@ listed western capercaillie and ptarmigan breed in Scotland and are absent elsewhere in the British Isles . The former became extinct in Scotland in 1785 but was successfully reintroduced from Swedish stock in 1837 . There are significant populations of other Galliformes including <unk> and the famous red grouse . Common quail , grey partridge and pheasant are well @-@ distributed , although the red @-@ legged partridge is less so . A small colony of the introduced golden pheasant exists in the southwest . 
 Among the waders , avocet , stone @-@ curlew , little ringed plover and Kentish plover are absent , but most of the 100 or so pairs of <unk> in the UK spend their summers in Scotland as do all of the breeding whimbrel , greenshank and red @-@ necked phalarope , ( although the latter two species also breed in Ireland ) . In summer the shallow lochs of the machair lands in the Uists and Benbecula provide for a remarkable variety of waders and ducks including shoveler , eider , Slavonian grebe and the ' red @-@ listed ' common <unk> . Goldeneye have colonised an area centred around the Cairngorms National Park since the 1970s , and about 100 pairs breed there . The majority of the roughly 8 @,@ 000 whooper swans in the British Isles winter in Scotland and Ireland . 
 Virtually all of the 40 @,@ 000 barnacle geese , which breed in Greenland , arrive on Islay for the winter , most staying only for a few days before dispersing to the surrounding area . A similar number of pink @-@ footed geese use the Montrose Basin as a temporary roost in October and November . The amber @-@ listed black and red @-@ throated diver 's freshwater breeding strongholds in the British Isles are in the north and west of Scotland . 
 = = = Other non @-@ passerines = = = 
 Considerable efforts have been taken to conserve the shy corncrake , and summer numbers of this red @-@ listed species have recovered to 670 pairs . The wryneck is also red @-@ listed and numbers fewer than 2 to 10 breeding pairs in Scotland . Of the Columbidae the turtle dove is largely absent , but in the British Isles the rock dove is confined to the north and west coasts of Scotland and Ireland . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Ravens are typically forest @-@ dwelling birds in much of Europe , but in Scotland they are generally associated with mountains and sea coasts . In 2002 the hooded crow was recognised as a separate species from the carrion crow . Scotland and Northern Ireland host all of the approximately 190 @,@ 000 UK territories of the former . A recent survey suggest that raven numbers are increasing but that hooded crows had declined by 59 % while carrion crow numbers were essentially static . Concentrated on the islands of Islay and Colonsay , 340 pairs of red @-@ billed chough nest in Scotland . 
 In addition to crossbills ( see above ) , crested tits exist as a fragmented population of 2 @,@ 400 breeding pairs in remnant patches of Caledonian Forest and in some larger plantations such as the Culbin Forest in Moray . Ring <unk> have declined to around 7 @,@ 000 pairs , possibly due to disturbance from the growing number of human visitors to their upland habitat . There are fewer than 100 breeding pairs of snow bunting , although in winter they are joined by migrants from continental Europe . A nest site near Dumfries is thought to have been in use by dippers since 1881 . Scotland has 95 % of the British breeding population of red @-@ listed twite , about 64 @,@ 000 pairs . However , a recent RSPB survey found a sudden and dramatic fall in winter numbers from 6 @,@ 000 in 1998 to only 300 in 2006 in the counties of Caithness and Sutherland . 
 = = = Vagrants = = = 
 Scotland 's position on the western seaboard of Europe means that a variety of birds not normally found in the country visit from time to time . These include accidental visits by vagrant birds that have wandered far from their normal habitations . 
 Fair Isle is an internationally renowned site for the observation of migrant birds . Rarities have included passerines such as the thick @-@ billed warbler , white @-@ throated sparrow , yellow @-@ rumped warbler and collared flycatcher . More than 345 species of bird have been recorded on this island , which measures only 7 @.@ 68 square kilometres ( 2 @.@ 97 sq mi ) . 
 Elsewhere , other rarities reported in 2006 include a white @-@ billed diver at <unk> , a black @-@ browed albatross in the Western Isles , a laughing gull in Shetland and a buff @-@ breasted sandpiper at Lossiemouth . <unk> recorded in earlier years include an American bittern in 1888 and a purple heron in the same year , a Baikal teal in 1958 , and a black stork in 1977 . Birds are also presumed to have escaped from captivity , such as a lanner falcon in 1976 , Chilean flamingos in 1976 and 1979 , a black @-@ necked swan in 1988 , and a red @-@ tailed hawk in 1989 . These records are but a small selection from two counties in the north @-@ east and give only a flavour of the complexity and diversity of avian life in Scotland . 
 = = = Extinctions = = = 
 The common crane and great bittern were exterminated by hunters and the draining of marshes in the 18th century . The last great auk seen in Britain was killed on Stac an Armin , a rocky pinnacle in the St Kilda archipelago in July 1840 . 
 = = Fish life in the sea = = 
 Of the 42 species of fish found in Scottish fresh waters , only half have arrived by natural colonisation . Native species include <unk> shad , brown trout , European eel and river lamprey . Scottish rivers support one of the largest Atlantic salmon resources in Europe , with nearly 400 rivers supporting genetically distinct populations . Five fish species are considered ' late arrivals ' to Scotland , having colonised by natural means prior to 1790 . They are the northern pike , roach , stone loach , European perch , and minnow . Rarer native species include the endemic Salvelinus <unk> and the <unk> , the latter found in only two locations and under threat from introduced <unk> and the Arctic <unk> . The latter may have been the first fish species to re @-@ enter fresh waters when the last ice age ended , and about 200 populations exist . 
 The freshwater pearl mussel was once abundant enough to support commercial activities , and Scotland is the remaining European stronghold with about half the global number present . There are populations in more than 50 rivers , mainly in the Highlands , although illegal harvesting has seriously affected their survival . 
 Scotland 's seas , which constitute an area greater than that of the seas around the rest of the UK , are among the most biologically productive in the world . They are home to a third of the world 's whale and dolphin species , most of the UK 's <unk> , ( a collective term for several species of calcified red seaweed , and an important marine habitat ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and seagrass beds , and distinctive species like the tall sea pen , <unk> <unk> . It is estimated that the total number of Scottish marine species exceeds 40 @,@ 000 . This includes 250 species of fish , the most numerous inshore variety being <unk> , and deeper water creatures such as the dogfish , porbeagle and blue shark , European eel , sea bass , Atlantic halibut and various rays . There are four species of sea turtle , the leatherback , loggerhead , Kemp 's ridley and green turtle . Scottish waters contain around 2 @,@ 500 crustacean species and 700 molluscs and in 2012 a bed of 100 million flame shells was found during a survey of Loch Alsh . 
 The Darwin Mounds , an important area of cold water coral reefs discovered in 1988 , are about 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) deep in the Atlantic Ocean , about 185 kilometres ( 115 mi ) north @-@ west of Cape Wrath in the north @-@ east corner of the Rockall trough . The area covers approximately 100 square kilometres ( 39 sq mi ) and contains hundreds of mounds of about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) in diameter and 5 metres ( 16 ft ) in height , many having a teardrop shaped ' tail ' orientated south @-@ west of the mound . This feature may be unique globally . The tops of the mounds have living stands of <unk> corals and support significant populations of the single @-@ celled <unk> <unk> . Fish have been observed in the vicinity but not at higher densities than the background environment . Damage from trawler fishing was visible over about a half of the eastern Darwin Mounds surveyed during summer 2000 , and the UK government is taking steps to protect the area . In 2003 the European Commission provided emergency protection and banned damaging fishing activity in the locality . 
 Further action on a much wider scale may be required . According to a recent report " Scotland 's marine life could be almost wiped out within 50 years unless tough action is taken to manage the way humans use the seas " . Fears were expressed by a consortium of environmental organisations that commercial fish stocks , including Atlantic cod are suffering from over @-@ fishing , that fish farming , especially for salmon is damaging the aquatic environment , a reduction in coastal marsh habitats is affecting marine bird life , litter in densely populated estuaries such as the Firth of Clyde is affecting all forms of marine life and that the growth in off @-@ shore tourism was deleterious to populations of , for example , basking shark . A call was made for a ' Scottish Marine Bill ' to co @-@ ordinate and manage human activity at sea and to provide more protected areas such as marine national parks . The Marine ( Scotland ) Act 2010 was subsequently passed by the Scottish Parliament . 
 <unk> chinensis ( L. ) is a gastropod that has invaded the shores of Scotland and by 1998 had reached nearly as far north as Oban . One living specimen was found at Clachan Sound , and earlier records showed findings of gastropod shells . 
 = = = Riverine extinctions = = = 
 Pollution and predation led to the extinction of both species of vendace from its very restricted range in south @-@ western Scottish <unk> in 1980 . In the 1990s a successful attempt to reintroduce Coregonus <unk> to the Lochmaben area began . Coregonus <unk> remains absent . 
 Salvelinus <unk> , a rare char species that could be vulnerable to extinct , has been found in Loch <unk> , Isle of Skye , Scottish Highlands . 
 = = Amphibians and land reptiles = = 
 Only six amphibians and four land reptiles are native to Scotland . The amphibians include three species of newt : the great crested , of which fewer than 1 @,@ 000 individuals survive ; the smooth , and the palmate . The other amphibians are the common toad , the natterjack toad , found in only four locations in the south @-@ west , and the common frog . A single alien amphibian is known in Scotland , the Alpine newt , a recent escapee confined to the Edinburgh area . 
 The reptiles include the adder and the grass snake , the slow @-@ worm , which is a legless lizard , and the common lizard . Smooth snakes , found elsewhere in the UK are absent , and grass snakes are rarely reported . 
 = = Terrestrial invertebrates = = 
 Seventy @-@ seven species of land snail and an estimated 14 @,@ 000 species of insect live in Scotland , none of them " truly " endemic . These include <unk> lugubris , a species of wolf spider first found in the UK in 2000 at Abernethy Forest nature reserve , and the Scottish wood ant . These ants , which are the most numerous residents of the Caledonian pine forest , build mounds from the pine cones and needles they find on the forest floor and may inhabit the mounds for decades . A single colony may collect 100 @,@ 000 insects a day to feed its half million citizens and produce up to 250 kilograms ( 550 lb ) of honeydew per season . 
 In addition to the Scottish wood ant , several Scottish species of invertebrate exist that are otherwise rare in the UK and important enough to have a specific " Action Plan " to provide protection . These are five species of ant and bee , six moths and butterfly , five flies and a single beetle ( the reed beetle ) and snail ( the round @-@ mouthed whorl snail , Vertigo <unk> ) . Northern <unk> is a rare species of bee , the most significant British habitat for which is in the Outer Hebrides , where there are more than ten colonies . Scotland is also the UK stronghold of the <unk> bumblebee , and the Bumblebee Conservation Trust recently created the world 's first sanctuary for this genus of insects at RSPB Vane Farm Nature Reserve near Loch Leven . The bumblebee Bombus <unk> var. hebridensis is endemic to the Hebrides . In 2010 , a colony of the beetle <unk> <unk> was found on the island of Coll . The species is otherwise extinct in Scotland and is also flightless , raising the question of how the colony arrived on the island . The northern February red stonefly ( <unk> <unk> ) has recently lost its range elsewhere in Britain and is now it considered to be a Scottish endemic . 
 Although many species of butterfly are in decline in the UK , recent research suggests that some , such as the pearl @-@ bordered fritillary , marsh fritillary and chequered skipper , which are becoming rare in the rest of the UK , are moving north into Scotland in response to climate change . In June 2008 an adult <unk> <unk> moth was discovered in Easter Ross . This find was only the fifth sighting since its discovery in the UK at Loch Shin in 1853 , and the species has gained " almost mythical status " according to Butterfly Conservation Scotland . 
 The most well @-@ known invertebrate may be a species of midge ( Culicoides <unk> ) , a tiny flying gnat that is the scourge of summer visitors and residents alike . Its predations result in the loss of up to 20 % of summer working days in the forestry industry . Others of significance include the pine weevil , black pine beetle , <unk> beetle , and the <unk> , a long @-@ horned beetle . The archaeological site at Skara Brae provided the earliest known record of the human flea , Pulex irritans in Europe . 
 The islands of Colonsay and Oronsay are home to about 50 colonies of the only native species of honeybee in Britain – Apis mellifera mellifera . The Scottish Government introduced the Bee Keeping ( Colonsay and Oronsay ) Order 2013 to protect the species from cross @-@ breeding and disease as the species has suffered serious declines on the mainland . 
 = = Cryptozoology = = 
 A variety of exotic cats are rumoured to exist , including the ' Beast of Buchan ' . The ' <unk> Cat ' of Moray is a jet black , long @-@ legged animal , and is probably the result of a modern wild cat / domestic cat hybrid , or a melanistic wild cat . In earlier times it may have spawned the legend of the Cat Sidhe or " Fairy Cat " . The fabulous Loch Ness Monster , possibly a form of " water horse " , has a long history ; the first recorded sighting allegedly took place in 565 AD . More recently , the Stronsay Beast was an unidentified cryptid washed ashore in the Orkney islands in the 19th century . 
 = = Nature conservation in Scotland = = 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
 Conservation of the natural environment is well @-@ developed in the United Kingdom . The resources of the organisations concerned may be insufficient to the challenge , but the contrast with earlier attitudes about the environment is striking . In Victorian times few animals became extinct in Scotland , but the scale of the slaughter on hunting estates was staggering . Richard Perry records that on a single estate in the Cairngorms between 1837 and 1840 the following " vermin " were exterminated by keepers purely in the interests of preserving the grouse population : 
 246 Martens , 198 Wild Cats , 106 Polecats , 67 Badgers , 58 Otters , 475 Ravens , 462 Kestrels , 371 Rough @-@ legged Buzzards , 285 Common Buzzards , 275 Kites , 98 Peregrine Falcons , 92 Hen Harriers , 78 Merlins , 71 Short @-@ eared Owls , 63 <unk> , 35 Long @-@ eared Owls , 27 Sea Eagles , 18 Ospreys , 15 Golden Eagles , 11 <unk> , 6 <unk> , 5 Marsh Harriers , 3 Honey Buzzards , 
 and for reasons apparently unconnected to grouse shooting , a further 
 11 Foxes , 301 <unk> and Weasels , 78 House Cats , 1 @,@ 431 Hooded or Carrion Crow , 3 Barn Owls , 8 Magpies and 7 " Orange @-@ legged Falcons " . 
 Writing in 1947 , Perry stated that his " first reaction to this dreadful black @-@ list was that of amazed incredulity . I still find the details incredible . However , they were supplied by the lessee himself . " In several instances these extermination totals are larger than the current resident numbers for the entire country . 
 It remains to be seen if the destruction wrought by the Victorians continues to be the nadir for the fauna of Scotland . In addition to other difficulties the marine environment faces , climate change is a challenge facing all of Scotland 's habitats . Among the birds , ptarmigan , <unk> and snow bunting in particular may be affected as they depend on high @-@ altitude habitats , and populations are likely to decline if warmer weather brings competitors into their restricted ranges . Mammals and other vertebrates may fare better , although localised invertebrate populations are at risk . Marine life is already being affected . <unk> species that prefer cold water are declining and are not able support the crucial food chains on which many seabirds depend . Further evidence of problems for marine species has been provided by the St Andrews University Sea Mammal Research Unit . An analysis suggests that common seal populations in Orkney and Shetland fell by 40 % from 2001 to 2006 , prompting the then Scottish Executive to announce the likelihood of a new protective conservation order . 
 The complexities involved in conserving Scottish wildlife are highlighted in an RSPB report , noting that pine martens have been found to be a significant predator of capercaillie nests . Both species are protected , providing conservation agencies with a challenging conundrum to address . In 2012 the Scottish Government published a " Code of Practice on Non @-@ Native Species " to help people understand their responsibilities and provide guidance as to which public body has responsibility for the various habitats involved . 
 = = = Conservation organisations = = = 
 Various public sector organisations have an important role in the stewardship of the country 's fauna . Scottish Natural Heritage is the statutory body responsible for natural heritage management in Scotland . One of its duties is to establish National Nature Reserves ( NNR ) s . Until 2004 there were 73 , but a review carried out in that year resulted in a significant number of sites losing their NNR status , and as of 2006 there are 55 . The Forestry Commission in Scotland serves as the forestry department of the Scottish Government and is one of the country 's largest landowners . The Joint Nature Conservation Committee is the statutory adviser to Government on UK and international nature conservation . 
 The country has two national parks . Cairngorms National Park includes the largest area of arctic mountain landscape in the UK . Sites designated as of importance to natural heritage take up 39 % of the land area , two thirds of which are of Europe @-@ wide importance . Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park includes Britain 's largest body of fresh water , the mountains of Breadalbane and the sea lochs of Argyll . 
 Charitable and voluntary organisations also have important roles to play . The National Trust for Scotland is the conservation charity that protects and promotes Scotland 's natural and cultural heritage . With more than 270 @,@ 000 members it is the largest conservation charity in Scotland . The Scottish Wildlife Trust is a leading voluntary conservation organisation , working to protect Scotland 's natural environment . The Royal Zoological Society of Scotland is a learned society and registered charity that maintains Edinburgh Zoo and the Highland Wildlife Park ( a safari park and zoo near Kingussie , which specialises in native fauna ) . The Society is also involved in various conservation programs around Scotland and the world . The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds promotes conservation of birds and other wildlife through the protection and re @-@ creation of habitats . The John Muir Trust is a charity whose main role is as a guardian of wild land and wildlife , through the ownership of land and the promotion of education and conservation . The trust owns and manages estates in locations including Knoydart and Assynt , and on the isle of Skye . It has links with the Sierra Club in the United States , which also celebrates the legacy of Dunbar @-@ born John Muir . Trees for Life is a charity that aims to restore a " wild forest " in the Northwest Highlands and Grampian Mountains . 
 = Fool in Love = 
 " Fool in Love " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna , from the deluxe edition of her sixth studio album Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . The song was written by Ester Dean , Lukasz Gottwald , Henry Walter . Production was helmed by Lukasz Gottwald , Cirkut and Dean . Musically , " Fool in Love " is a rhapsodic ballad , and instrumentation consists of acoustic and electric guitars , synthesizers and drums . The lyrics revolve around Rihanna being the protagonist , and how she has met a relatively good man who her parents do not approve of , but requests that they accept her decision to be with him due to their love for each other , despite familial concerns . 
 It received comparisons to Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " and Britney Spears ' " Criminal " . The song 's composition , production and vocal performance was acclaimed by music critics , however , some criticized its lyrics . Upon the release of Talk That Talk , " Fool in Love " debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 70 , with digital sales of 6 @,@ 536 downloads . It also charted on the UK R & B Chart at number 35 and on the UK Singles Chart at number 123 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Fool in Love " was written and produced by Ester Dean , Dr. Luke , and Cirkut . As noted by Katherine St Asaph of Popdust and Amy Sciarretto of Popcrush , the opening lyrics of " Fool in Love " feature close similarities to that of Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( A Night at the Opera , 1975 ) , with regard to the opening lyric " Mama , I found a man . " Amy Sciaretto from PopCrush , as well as St Asaph , compared the song 's composition to Britney Spears ' " Criminal " ( Femme Fatale , 2011 ) , with regard to how " Fool in Love " ' s instrumental begins with " panning synths " and acoustic guitar , with Sciaretto agreeing that " only Ri [ <unk> ] could make that juxtaposition work . " " Fool in Love " also features a single and double guitar sequence toward the end of the song , which begins with one electric guitar being played and begins to incorporate a second , creating a " twinned " effect , before the song descends into a prolonged fade at the end . 
 Musically , " Fool in Love " is a rhapsodic ballad , which incorporates acoustic and electric guitars , synthesizers and drums . Lyrically , Rihanna tells of how she has met a relatively good man who her parents do not approve of , but requests that they accept her decision to be with him due to their love for each other , despite familial concerns . Rihanna insists that she is in love , singing " Papa he 's quite a man , he adores me / He 's my biggest fan . " She then claims that he has taken a hold over her , singing " We 're too far down the hole / He 's got a hold on my soul . " Rihanna 's vocal performance in the song was described as the singer 's " biggest ornamented " song by Robert Everett @-@ Green of The Globe and Mail , as well as noting that the singer emotes a sense of fatality in her vocals during the bass sequences in the song . " Fool in Love " displays Rihanna emoting a vulnerable style of singing , due to the lyrical content and mood in the song , which can be heard in the lyrics " Papa , are you ashamed of how your little girl turned out ? " due to how the singer feels as though her parents are disappointed in her choice of man . Robert Copsey for Digital Spy commented that Rihanna appeared to be channelling Madonna on the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception towards the song was mostly positive . Robert Copsey from Digital Spy commended the balladry on Talk That Talk , paying particular attention to " Fool in Love " and " Farewell " , writing " anyone questioning her motives need only hear ballads ' Farewell ' and ' Fool in Love ' to find out not only does she have a heart , but she 's without doubt been putting all of it into these past six years . " Robert Everett @-@ Green for The Globe and Mail praised the song , writing " Fool in Love rings down the curtain with a towering anthem that somehow squeezes fresh feeling from a tired lyrical concept . " Katherine St Asaph for Popdust <unk> a mixed response to " Fool in Love " , giving the song three and a half stars out of five and writing that it is " so @-@ bad @-@ it 's @-@ good " . St <unk> praised " Fool in Love " ' s composition and musical influences , but criticized the song as not providing " dynamic variety " amongst Talk That Talk 's material . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In October 2012 , British R & B @-@ singer Iyaz released a cover version of " Fool in Love " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at <unk> Studios , Los Angeles , California , and at <unk> Studio , Brentwood , California . 
 Mixed at MixStar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Talk That Talk , " Fool in Love " debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 70 on November 26 , 2011 , with sales of 6 @,@ 536 digital downloads . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 35 on the UK R & B Chart on November 27 , 2011 . It also debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 123 in the chart issue December 3 , 2011 . 
 = Washing Machine ( album ) = 
 Washing Machine is the ninth studio album by the American experimental rock band Sonic Youth , released on September 26 , 1995 by DGC Records . It was recorded at Easley Studios in Memphis , Tennessee and produced by the band and John Siket , who also engineered the band 's previous two albums . The album features more open @-@ ended pieces than its predecessors and contains some of the band 's longest songs , including the 20 @-@ minute ballad " The Diamond Sea " , which is the lengthiest track to feature on any of Sonic Youth 's studio albums . 
 Upon release , Washing Machine reached No. 58 on the US Billboard 200 chart and No. 39 on the UK Albums Chart . Two songs from the album , " The Diamond Sea " and " Little Trouble Girl " , were released as singles . The album received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised the band for exploring new challenges as well as the guitar playing of band members Thurston Moore and Lee Ranaldo . In 1996 , the album was ranked at No. 18 in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 1995 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Washing Machine is the follow @-@ up to Sonic Youth 's 1994 DGC album Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star . After Experimental Jet Set , the band decided to take a hiatus from performing live and concentrated on numerous side projects . Band member Kim Gordon played with Julia <unk> of Pussy Galore in Free Kitten , drummer Steve Shelley performed with Jad Fair in Mosquito , guitarist Lee Ranaldo played with free jazz drummer William Hooker and singer / guitarist Thurston Moore released his first solo album , Psychic Hearts . Moore and Gordon also had their first child , Coco . According to Moore , their daughter had provided a different perspective for the band : " I 'm more focused and level @-@ headed . There 's a sublime awareness factor of your spiritual place in the world . I feel more at ease with myself ... Babies are little Buddhas . They 're completely great " . 
 Unlike previous Sonic Youth albums , Washing Machine was recorded at Easley Studios in Memphis , where indie rock bands like Pavement , Guided by Voices and Grifters previously recorded albums . Moore remarked that the atmosphere in Memphis " lent itself to avoiding the reality of the record @-@ buying public . In the past we were always very aware of who was out there checking us out . This was the first record where we 've gotten this certain level of notoriety and we were just , like , ' fuck it ' " . He also felt that Washing Machine was conceived and recorded like some of the band 's earlier albums : " It hearkens back to records like Sister where we 'd write a bunch of songs , go into the studio for a month , put them down , then go on the road and play them for a year . By the end of the year they 'd mutate into something much more excited " . Gordon credited Memphis for its relaxed atmosphere and cited the album as one of her favorites . 
 The song " The Diamond Sea " is notable for its 19 : 35 duration . Moore explained the length of some of the album 's songs : " We all have different aesthetics as to how songs should work . I generally push for a lot of abandon while some people in the group are more interested in truncating things . If I was the leader as much as people say I am , every song would be 20 minutes long " . The unlisted ninth track , officially called " Becuz Coda " , was originally part of the song " Becuz " , but the record label felt they needed to cut the seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute track to make the album 's opening more accessible . The album was produced by Sonic Youth and John Siket , who also engineered the band 's previous two albums . Audio mixing took place at Greene Street Studios in New York City in June 1995 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Unlike Experimental Jet Set , which is often described as difficult and claustrophobic , Washing Machine was considerably more open @-@ ended and contains some of the band 's longest songs . It was also the first Sonic Youth album on which Gordon almost exclusively played guitar instead of bass , resulting in a three @-@ guitar and drums lineup . Trouser Press remarked that the album contains musical references to The Shangri @-@ Las and The Byrds and described its style as " [ veering ] between trance @-@ guitar experiments and more concise statements . " Entertainment Weekly described it thus : " These songs unfold over even @-@ tempered rhythms and guitars that linger rather than attack . A splatter of distortion may enter , but the effect is mostly languid and wonderfully hypnotic " . 
 Although Gordon 's lyrics on Experimental Jet Set addressed gender roles and stereotypes , her contributions to Washing Machine were considered more feminine and girl @-@ oriented . Tom Moon of Rolling Stone noted , " The title track is an odd , earnest love song ; ' Panty Lies ' is a playground taunt blown to absurd extremes ; and ' [ Little ] Trouble Girl ' , the Spector sendup , is a dramatic , earnest coming @-@ of @-@ age story " . The latter was described by David Browne of Entertainment Weekly as " a teen @-@ pregnancy lullaby " and features vocals by Gordon and Kim Deal ( of Pixies and The Breeders ) along with other musicians . Gordon felt that Deal had an ideal voice for the melodic part and explained that the song was about " wanting to be seen for who you really are , being able to express those parts of yourself that aren 't ' good girl ' but that are just as real and true " . Ranaldo contributed to two songs , " Saucer @-@ Like " and " Skip Tracer " . The latter was co @-@ written with Ranaldo 's wife Leah Singer and inspired by a performance that the couple attended of riot grrrl duo Mecca Normal . The song alludes to the band 's special relationship with the major labels . 
 The track " Junkie 's Promise " , sung by Moore , was described as a " heroin vignette " . It was originally interpreted by many as a tribute to Kurt Cobain of Nirvana . However , Moore later clarified that the song " is purely about the emotional relationship between friends , one of which is a user . Any individual involved with drug addiction will lie to his friends for the self @-@ serving need . It 's the cruelest truth of the situation . Kurt may fit this profile and he was surely in my mind as I wrote but the song is not a specific dedication to him " . Other songs such as " Becuz " and " No Queen Blues " were built upon " numb grooves with slivers of melody , power , and gorgeously crafted noise " . The final track on the album , " The Diamond Sea " , was described as a " Neil Young @-@ esque ballad billowing into an epic noise excursion " . It is considered the longest track on any Sonic Youth album , excluding Sonic Youth Recordings releases . Due to its long duration , the song was edited down to 5 : 15 for release as a single , which also included an alternative 25 @-@ minute version as an additional track . 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 The album cover consists of a cropped Polaroid photograph of two unidentified fans taken at a Sonic Youth show in Amherst , Massachusetts in April 1995 , during a short tour undertaken while the album was still in production . The fans are depicted wearing T @-@ shirts that were sold as merchandise during that tour ; early in 1995 , the band was toying with the idea of changing their name to Washing Machine . Visible on the shirt on the left are signatures by Thalia Zedek and Chris Brokaw of the tour 's opening band Come . The photo was taken by Gordon , who believed it could be used as the album cover . The band liked the shot , but the record label did not want to use it without permission from the fans . As the band did not have any way to contact them , their faces had to be cut off . 
 Washing Machine was released on vinyl , CD and cassette formats on September 26 , 1995 by DGC , shortly after the group concluded their stint headlining the 1995 Lollapalooza music festival . During the festival , the band previewed some tracks from the album in addition to playing several songs from Daydream Nation , Dirty , and Experimental Jet Set . In Germany , the record was also released with a bonus disc containing four live songs that were recorded in Paris on September 12 , 1995 . Upon release , Washing Machine reached No. 58 on the US Billboard 200 chart and No. 39 on the UK Albums Chart . The album also charted in several other countries , including Australia , New Zealand , The Netherlands and Belgium . Two singles and music videos for " The Diamond Sea " and " Little Trouble Girl " were released in 1995 and 1996 respectively . As of 2005 , the album had sold 159 @,@ 000 copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Washing Machine received generally positive reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic opined that the album is " easily [ the band 's ] most adventurous , challenging and best record since Daydream Nation ... Not only are the songs more immediate than most of the material on their earlier records , the sound here is warm and open , making Washing Machine their most mature and welcoming record to date ... Washing Machine encompasses everything that made Sonic Youth innovators , and shows that they can continue to grow , finding new paths inside their signature sound " . Similarly , Peter Margasak of CMJ New Music Monthly described the album as a " powerful consolidation of the band 's accomplishments , but a distillation that looks forwards " . He also highlighted the song " The Diamond Sea " as the album 's centerpiece , stating that it was one of Moore 's " most ambitious excursions into pure sonic colors , textures , and tension " . 
 Writing for Rolling Stone , Tom Moon called Washing Machine " a sardonic , wise @-@ ass , indulgent and totally captivating album " , declaring that it was " anti @-@ hook " and " disavows ( and sometimes mocks ) the conventional post @-@ Nirvana wisdom " . He highlighted Ranaldo and Moore 's guitar interplay on every track , commenting that " they 've developed an attack that is astonishingly intricate and <unk> in its extreme flexibility " . Prominent music critic Robert Christgau also praised the album and compared some songs favorably to the Grateful Dead and The Fleetwoods . Los Angeles Times writer Lorraine Ali stated that the album " finds Sonic Youth taking no radical new steps but instead holding onto its original groundbreaking formula and watching the big pop world come to it " . In contrast , David Browne of Entertainment Weekly felt that the band explored new challenges and wrote that Washing Machine was their " most audacious step yet " . 
 In a mixed review , Spin reviewer Erik Davis criticized the album for its aimless structure , stating that each of the band 's members " wanders off in a different direction " . Despite this , he heavily praised " The Diamond Sea " , calling it " a gorgeous tapestry buried in Washing Machine 's uneven load " . He wrote that the band " drifts into a beautiful ambient sea glittering with overtones . Then a metallic storm brews on the horizon , before a string of four riveting notes unleashes a festival of Hendrix necromancy ... It 's easy to make guitar noise harsh and grating — but Sonic Youth can make it glow . It 's easy to use noise as an orgasmic peak — but Sonic Youth can make it plateau , restraining their distortion only to intensify its monstrous serenity " . He also said that the song showed that Sonic Youth " may get better the farther out they go " , while NME magazine remarked that it " is probably the best song Sonic Youth have ever written " . In 1996 , the album was ranked at No. 18 in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 1995 . Similarly , editors for NME placed the album at No. 31 in their albums of the year list for 1995 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Sonic Youth unless otherwise noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = Lusitano = 
 The Lusitano , also known as the Pure Blood Lusitano or PSL ( Puro Sangue Lusitano ) , is a Portuguese horse breed , closely related to the Spanish Andalusian horse . Both are sometimes called Iberian horses , as the breeds both developed on the Iberian peninsula , and until the 1960s they were considered one breed , under the Andalusian name . Horses were known to be present on the Iberian Peninsula as far back as 20 @,@ 000 BC , and by 800 BC the region was renowned for its war horses . When the Muslims invaded Iberia in 711 AD , they brought Barb horses with them that were crossed with the native horses , developing a horse that became useful for war , dressage and bull fighting . In 1966 , the Portuguese and Spanish stud books split , and the Portuguese strain of the Iberian horse was named the Lusitano , after the word Lusitania , the ancient Roman name for Portugal . There are three main breed lineages within the breed today , and characteristics differ slightly between each line . There is also the Alter Real strain of Lusitano , bred only at the Alter Real State Stud . 
 Lusitanos can be any solid color , although they are generally gray , bay or chestnut . Horses of the Alter Real strain are always bay . Members of the breed are of Baroque type , with convex facial profiles , heavy muscling , intelligent and willing natures , with agile and elevated movement . Originally bred for war , dressage and bullfighting , Lusitanos are still used today in the latter two . They have competed in several Olympics and World Equestrian Games as part of the Portuguese and Spanish dressage teams . They have also made a showing in driving competitions , with a Belgian team of Lusitanos winning multiple international titles . Members of the breed are still used in bloodless bullfighting today , where it is expected that neither horse or bull will be injured . 
 = = History = = 
 Horses were known to humans on what is now the Iberian Peninsula as far back as 25 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 BC , as shown by cave paintings in the area . Among the local wild horses originally used by humans were the probable ancestors of the modern Lusitano , as studies comparing ancient and modern horse DNA indicate that the modern " Lusitano C " group contains maternal lineages also present in wild Iberian horses from the Early Neolithic period . These ancient horses were used for war , with clear evidence of their use by Phoenicians around 1100 BC and Celts around 600 BC . It is believed that these invaders also brought horses with them , contributing outside blood to the ancestry of the modern Iberian breeds . By 800 BC , the alliance known as <unk> had been formed by the Iberians and Celts , and from this point on the horses bred in this area were renowned as war horses . Xenophon , writing around 370 BC , admired the advanced horsemanship and riding techniques used by Iberian horsemen in war , made possible in part by their agile horses . Legend claimed that mares of the area were sired by the wind ( hence their amazing swiftness , passed onto their foals ) , and one modern hypothesis suggests that the bond between Iberian humans and horses was the initial inspiration for the centaur , which was believed to come from the area of the Tagus River . Later invasions into the area by Carthaginians and Romans resulted in these civilizations establishing stud farms that bred cavalry horses for the Roman army from local stock . 
 When the Umayyad Muslims invaded the Iberian peninsula in 711 AD , their invasion brought Barb horses , which were crossed with native Iberian horses . The cross between these two breeds produced a war horse superior even to the original Iberian horse , and it was this new type that the Conquistadors introduced to the Americas . Called the Iberian war horse , this ancestor of the Lusitano was used both on the battlefield and in major riding academies throughout Europe . Bullfighting on horseback and displays of high school dressage were common entertainment for the Portuguese gentry . 
 Mitochondrial DNA studies of the closely related modern Andalusian horse , compared to the Barb horse of North Africa , present convincing evidence that Barbs and Iberian horses crossed the Strait of Gibraltar in each direction , were crossbred with each other , and thus each influenced the other 's maternal bloodlines . While Portuguese historian Ruy d 'Andrade hypothesized that the ancient Sorraia breed was an ancestor of the Southern Iberian breeds , including the Lusitano , genetic studies using mitochondrial DNA show that the Sorraia is part of a genetic cluster that is largely separated from most Iberian breeds . One maternal lineage is shared with the Lusitano , however , Sorraia lineages in Iberian breeds are relatively recent , dating to the Middle Ages , making the Sorraia an unlikely prehistoric ancestor of the Lusitano . 
 Prior to modern times , horse breeds throughout Europe were known primarily by the name of the region where they were bred . The Lusitano takes its name from Lusitania , an ancient Roman name for the region that today is Portugal . A very similar horse , the Spanish Andalusian , originally described the horses of distinct quality that came from Andalusia in Spain . Some sources state that the Andalusian and the Lusitano are genetically the same breed , and the only difference is the country in which individual horses are born . The Lusitano is also known as the Portuguese , Peninsular , National or <unk> @-@ <unk> horse . 
 During the 16th and 17th centuries , horses moved continually between Spain and Portugal , and horses from the studs of Andalusia were used to improve the Portuguese cavalry . Portugal 's successful restoration war against Spain ( 1640 – 1668 ) was in part based on mounted troops riding war horses of Spanish blood . During the reign of Philip III of Portugal ( also Philip IV of Spain ) , Portuguese horse breeding reached its lowest point . The Spanish passed laws to halt the country 's production of cavalry horses , and what stud farms did exist were run in secrecy with horses smuggled or stolen from Spain . These secret farms , however , provided the base for the modern Lusitano . In 1662 , when Charles II of England married Catherine of Braganza of Portugal , the royal dowry included Portugal 's Tangier and Bombay garrisons . These garrisons included large groups of Portuguese cavalry , mounted on Iberian horses . 
 Prior to the 1960s , the Iberian @-@ type horse was called the Andalusian in both Portugal and Spain . In 1966 , the Lusitano name was adopted by Portugal after a studbook separation by the two countries . The revolutions of Portugal 's African colonies resulted in the near economic collapse of Portugal . The landed class attracted political agitators , estates were vacated , and stud farms were broken up and their horses sold to Spain . However , the best lines were saved through the efforts of breeders , and breeding soon increased . Today , Lusitanos are bred mainly in Portugal and Brazil , but maintain a presence in many other countries throughout the world , including Australia , the United States , Great Britain , South Africa , and other European countries . Crossbred horses of partial Lusitano blood are popular , especially when crossed with Andalusian , Arabian or Thoroughbred blood . 
 = = = Strains and sub @-@ types = = = 
 The Portuguese stud book recognizes six horses ( five stallions and one mare ) that are called the " heads of lineage " . These six horses are the foundation horses of the three main breed lineages : Andrade , Veiga and <unk> Nacional ( Portuguese State Stud ) . Although each line meets breed standards , they differ from each other in individual characteristics . The six foundation horses are : 
 <unk> , a 1931 Veiga stallion , out of <unk> , by <unk> 
 <unk> , a 1927 <unk> Hermanos stallion , out of <unk> II , by <unk> 
 <unk> , a 1930 <unk> Hermanos stallion , out of <unk> , by Alegre II 
 <unk> II , a 1930 Antonio Fontes Pereira de Melo stallion , out of <unk> , by <unk> 
 <unk> , a 1923 Alter Real stallion , out of <unk> , by <unk> 
 <unk> , a 1943 <unk> Nacional mare , out of <unk> , by Cartujano 
 = = = = Alter Real = = = = 
 The Alter Real is a strain of the Lusitano which is bred only at the Alter Real State Stud in Portugal . The stud was founded in 1748 by the Portuguese royal family to provide horses for the national riding academy and royal use . The Portuguese School of Equestrian Art ( Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre ) uses these horses exclusively in their performances . The strain was developed from 300 Iberian mares imported from Spain in 1747 . When Napoleon invaded Spain in the early 19th century , the Alter Real strain deteriorated due to the introduction of Arabian , Thoroughbred , Spanish @-@ Norman and Hanoverian blood . However , in the 19th and 20th centuries the strain was re @-@ established with the further introduction of Spanish blood . In the early 20th century , with the 1910 revolution that ended the monarchy , the Alter Real strain faced extinction , as records were burned , stallions were gelded and the stud discontinued . Ruy d 'Andrade , a specialist in Iberian horse breeds , saved two stallions and several mares , and was able to re @-@ establish the strain , turning his herd over to the Portuguese Ministry of Agriculture in 1942 , when the stud was reopened . The Portuguese state has maintained ownership of the stud , and continues to produce horses for use in high school dressage . 
 = = Registration = = 
 Today , outside of Portugal and Spain , breeding , showing and registration of both Lusitanos and Andalusians are often closely linked . One example is the Australasian Lusitano Horse Association of Australasia ( LHAA ) , which shares responsibility for the Purebred Iberian Horse ( an Andalusian / Lusitano cross ) with the Australasia Andalusian Association , as well as hosting a combined National Show for the two breeds in Australia . The LHAA was formed in 2003 to register and promote the Lusitano breed in Australia and New Zealand , and in June 2005 signed an agreement with their parent organization , the Portuguese Associação Portuguesa de Criadores do <unk> Puro Sangue Lusitano , to follow that association 's rules and regulations . The LHAA maintains two studbooks ( for the purebred Lusitano and the purebred Iberian ) and a crossbred registry for horses with one Lusitano parent . An example of a combined registry is the International Andalusian and Lusitano Horse Association ( IALHA ) . 
 = = Characteristics and uses = = 
 Lusitanos are generally gray , bay or chestnut , though they can be of any solid color , including black , dun and palomino . Only bays are bred at the Alter Real stud . They usually stand 15 @.@ 2 and 15 @.@ 3 hands ( 62 and 63 inches , 157 and 160 cm ) high , although some stand over 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) . Members of the breed have narrow , but well @-@ proportioned , heads with profiles that are slightly convex . The necks are thick and arched , leading to well defined withers , shoulders that are muscular and sloping and a deep , broad chest . The horses have short , strong backs and rounded , sloped croups , leading to a low @-@ set tail . The legs are sturdy and muscled . Lusitanos are known as powerful horses , noted for their intelligence and willing nature . The breed 's gaits are agile and elevated , but generally comfortable to ride . The Lusitano differs from the Andalusian through having a more sloped croup , a lower @-@ set tail , and a more convex head profile . The mane and tail are extremely thick in both breeds . 
 The ancestors of the Lusitano were originally used for classical dressage , driving and bullfighting on horseback . Today , Lusitanos are seen in Olympic disciplines , including high @-@ level combined driving competition . In 1995 , a four @-@ in @-@ hand team driven by Belgian Felix Brasseur won the FEI Driving World Cup , and took the World Championships in 1996 . In 2002 , there was a Lusitano on the World Equestrian Games bronze @-@ winning dressage team that went on to collect a silver medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics . In 2006 , the entire Portuguese dressage team rode Lusitanos at the World Equestrian Games , as did one Spanish dressage competitor . The Belgian Brasseur took the gold medal in four @-@ in @-@ hand driving at the same competition with a team composed solely of Lusitanos . They are still used for mounted bullfighting today , in a form where the bull is not killed and it is considered a disgrace to the rider if the horse is injured . Horses bred for this sport must be agile and calm , remaining in the control of the rider even when confronted by a bull . Between 1980 and 1987 , Lusitanos were used for breeding Colorado Ranger horses , although these crosses are no longer allowed by the breed registry . An Alter Real stallion , taken to Brazil prior to Napoleon 's invasion , was a foundation stallion of the Mangalarga Marchador breed . 
 = The Beatles = 
 The Beatles were an English rock band , formed in Liverpool in 1960 . With members John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison and Ringo Starr , they became widely regarded as the foremost and most influential act of the rock era . Rooted in skiffle , beat , and 1950s rock and roll , the Beatles later experimented with several musical styles , ranging from pop ballads and Indian music to psychedelia and hard rock , often incorporating classical elements in innovative ways . In the early 1960s , their enormous popularity first emerged as " Beatlemania " , but as the group 's music grew in sophistication , led by primary songwriters Lennon and McCartney , they came to be perceived as an embodiment of the ideals shared by the counterculture of the 1960s . 
 The Beatles built their reputation playing clubs in Liverpool and Hamburg over a three @-@ year period from 1960 , with Stuart Sutcliffe initially serving as bass player . The core of Lennon , McCartney and Harrison went through a succession of drummers , most notably Pete Best , before asking Starr to join them . Manager Brian Epstein moulded them into a professional act , and producer George Martin guided and developed their recordings , greatly expanding their popularity in the United Kingdom after their first hit , " Love Me Do " , in late 1962 . They acquired the nickname " the Fab Four " as Beatlemania grew in Britain the next year , and by early 1964 became international stars , leading the " British Invasion " of the United States pop market . From 1965 onwards , the Beatles produced increasingly innovative recordings , including the widely influential albums Rubber Soul ( 1965 ) , Revolver ( 1966 ) , Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1967 ) , The Beatles ( commonly known as the White Album , 1968 ) and Abbey Road ( 1969 ) . 
 After their break @-@ up in 1970 , they each enjoyed successful musical careers of varying lengths . McCartney and Starr , the surviving members , remain musically active . Lennon was shot and killed in December 1980 , and Harrison died of lung cancer in November 2001 . 
 According to the RIAA , the Beatles are the best @-@ selling music artists in the United States , with 178 million certified units . They have had more number @-@ one albums on the British charts and sold more singles in the UK than any other act . In 2008 , the group topped Billboard magazine 's list of the all @-@ time most successful " Hot 100 " artists ; as of 2016 , they hold the record for most number @-@ one hits on the Hot 100 chart with twenty . They have received ten Grammy Awards , an Academy Award for Best Original Song Score and fifteen Ivor Novello Awards . Collectively included in Time magazine 's compilation of the twentieth century 's 100 most influential people , they are the best @-@ selling band in history , with estimated sales of over 600 million records worldwide . The group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 , and all four were inducted individually from 1994 to 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1957 – 62 : Formation , Hamburg , and UK popularity = = = 
 In March 1957 , John Lennon , then aged sixteen , formed a skiffle group with several friends from Quarry Bank school . They briefly called themselves the Blackjacks , before changing their name to the Quarrymen after discovering that a respected local group was already using the other name . Fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Paul McCartney joined as a rhythm guitarist shortly after he and Lennon met that July . In February 1958 , McCartney invited his friend George Harrison to watch the band . The fourteen @-@ year @-@ old auditioned for Lennon , impressing him with his playing , but Lennon initially thought Harrison was too young to join them . After a month of Harrison 's persistence , they enlisted him as their lead guitarist . By January 1959 , Lennon 's Quarry Bank friends had left the group , and he began studies at the Liverpool College of Art . The three guitarists , billing themselves at least three times as Johnny and the Moondogs , were playing rock and roll whenever they could find a drummer . Lennon 's art school friend Stuart Sutcliffe , who had recently sold one of his paintings and was persuaded to purchase a bass guitar , joined in January 1960 , and it was he who suggested changing the band 's name to <unk> , as a tribute to Buddy Holly and the Crickets . They used the name until May , when they became the Silver Beetles , before undertaking a brief tour of Scotland as the backing group for pop singer and fellow Liverpudlian Johnny Gentle . By early July , they had changed their name to the Silver Beatles and by the middle of August to the Beatles . 
 Allan Williams , the Beatles ' unofficial manager , arranged a residency for them in Hamburg , but lacking a full @-@ time drummer they auditioned and hired Pete Best in mid @-@ August 1960 . The band , now a five @-@ piece , left four days later , contracted to club owner Bruno Koschmider for what would be a 3 ½ <unk> residency . Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn writes : " They pulled into Hamburg at dusk on 17 August , the time when the red @-@ light area comes to life ... flashing neon lights screamed out the various entertainment on offer , while scantily clad women sat unabashed in shop windows waiting for business opportunities . " 
 Koschmider had converted a couple of strip clubs in the district into music venues , and he initially placed the Beatles at the Indra Club . After closing the Indra due to noise complaints , he moved them to the Kaiserkeller in October . When he learned they had been performing at the rival Top Ten Club in breach of their contract , he gave the band one month 's termination notice , and reported the underage Harrison , who had obtained permission to stay in Hamburg by lying to the German authorities about his age . The authorities arranged for Harrison 's deportation in late November . One week later , Koschmider had McCartney and Best arrested for arson after they set fire to a condom in a concrete corridor ; the authorities deported them . Lennon returned to Liverpool in early December , while Sutcliffe remained in Hamburg through late February with his German fiancée Astrid Kirchherr , who took the first semi @-@ professional photos of the Beatles . 
 During the next two years , the Beatles were resident for periods in Hamburg , where they used Preludin both recreationally and to maintain their energy through all @-@ night performances . In 1961 , during their second Hamburg engagement , Kirchherr cut Sutcliffe 's hair in the " <unk> " ( existentialist ) style , later adopted by the other Beatles . When Sutcliffe decided to leave the band early that year and resume his art studies in Germany , McCartney took up the bass . Producer Bert Kaempfert contracted what was now a four @-@ piece group through June 1962 , and he used them as Tony Sheridan 's backing band on a series of recordings for Polydor Records . As part of the sessions , the Beatles were signed to Polydor for one year . Credited to " Tony Sheridan & the Beat Brothers " , the single " My Bonnie " , recorded in June 1961 and released four months later , reached number 32 on the <unk> chart . 
 After the Beatles completed their second Hamburg residency , they enjoyed increasing popularity in Liverpool with the growing Merseybeat movement . However , they were also growing tired of the monotony of numerous appearances at the same clubs night after night . In November 1961 , during one of the group 's frequent performances at the Cavern Club , they encountered Brian Epstein , a local record @-@ store owner and music columnist . He later recalled : " I immediately liked what I heard . They were fresh , and they were honest , and they had what I thought was a sort of presence ... [ a ] star quality . " Epstein courted the band over the next couple of months , and they appointed him as their manager in January 1962 . Throughout early and mid @-@ 1962 , Epstein sought to free the Beatles from their contractual obligations to Bert Kaempfert Productions . He eventually negotiated a one @-@ month @-@ early release from their contract in exchange for one last recording session in Hamburg . Tragedy greeted them on their return to Germany in April , when a distraught Kirchherr met them at the airport with news of Sutcliffe 's death the previous day from what would later be determined to have been a brain hemorrhage . Epstein began negotiations with record labels for a recording contract . In order to secure a UK record contract , Epstein negotiated an early end to the band 's contract with Polydor , in exchange for more recordings backing Tony Sheridan . After a New Year 's Day audition , Decca Records rejected the band with the comment " Guitar groups are on the way out , Mr. Epstein . " However , three months later , producer George Martin signed the Beatles to EMI 's Parlophone label . 
 Martin 's first recording session with the Beatles took place at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in London on 6 June 1962 . Martin immediately complained to Epstein about Best 's poor drumming and suggested they use a session drummer in his place . Already contemplating Best 's dismissal , the Beatles replaced him in mid @-@ August with Ringo Starr , who left Rory Storm and the Hurricanes to join them . A 4 September session at EMI yielded a recording of " Love Me Do " featuring Starr on drums , but a dissatisfied Martin hired drummer Andy White for the band 's third session a week later , which produced recordings of " Love Me Do " , " Please Please Me " and " P.S. I Love You " . Martin initially selected the Starr version of " Love Me Do " for the band 's first single , though subsequent re @-@ pressings featured the White version , with Starr on tambourine . Released in early October , " Love Me Do " peaked at number seventeen on the Record Retailer chart . Their television debut came later that month with a live performance on the regional news programme People and Places . After Martin suggested rerecording " Please Please Me " at a faster tempo , a studio session in late November yielded that recording , of which Martin accurately predicted , " You 've just made your first No.1. " 
 In December 1962 , the Beatles concluded their fifth and final Hamburg residency . By 1963 , they had agreed that all four band members would contribute vocals to their albums – including Starr , despite his restricted vocal range , to validate his standing in the group . Lennon and McCartney had established a songwriting partnership , and as the band 's success grew , their dominant collaboration limited Harrison 's opportunities as a lead vocalist . Epstein , in an effort to maximise the Beatles ' commercial potential , encouraged them to adopt a professional approach to performing . Lennon recalled him saying , " Look , if you really want to get in these bigger places , you 're going to have to change – stop eating on stage , stop swearing , stop smoking ... " Lennon said : " We used to dress how we liked , on and off stage . He 'd tell us that jeans were not particularly smart and could we possibly manage to wear proper trousers , but he didn 't want us suddenly looking square . He 'd let us have our own sense of individuality . " 
 = = = 1963 – 66 : Beatlemania and touring years = = = 
 = = = = Please Please Me and With the Beatles = = = = 
 On 11 February 1963 , the Beatles recorded ten songs during a single studio session for their debut LP , Please Please Me . The album was supplemented by the four tracks already released on their first two singles . Martin originally considered recording the Beatles ' debut LP live at the Cavern Club , but after deciding that the building 's acoustics were inadequate , he elected to simulate a " live " album with minimal production in " a single marathon session at Abbey Road " . After the moderate success of " Love Me Do " , the single " Please Please Me " met with a more emphatic reception . Released in January 1963 , two months ahead of the album of the same name , the song reached number one on every chart in London except Record Retailer , where it stalled at number two . Recalling how the Beatles " rushed to deliver a debut album , bashing out Please Please Me in a day " , AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine comments , " Decades after its release , the album still sounds fresh , precisely because of its intense origins . " Lennon said little thought went into composition at the time ; he and McCartney were " just writing songs à la Everly Brothers , à la Buddy Holly , pop songs with no more thought of them than that – to create a sound . And the words were almost irrelevant . " 
 Released in March 1963 , the album initiated a run during which eleven of their twelve studio albums released in the United Kingdom through 1970 reached number one . The band 's third single , " From Me to You " , came out in April and was also a chart @-@ topping hit , starting an almost unbroken string of seventeen British number @-@ one singles for the Beatles , including all but one of the eighteen they released over the next six years . Issued in August , the band 's fourth single , " She Loves You " , achieved the fastest sales of any record in the UK up to that time , selling three @-@ quarters of a million copies in under four weeks . It became their first single to sell a million copies , and remained the biggest @-@ selling record in the UK until 1978 , when " Mull of Kintyre " , by McCartney 's post @-@ Beatles band Wings , surpassed it in sales . Their commercial success brought increased media exposure , to which the Beatles responded with an irreverent and comical attitude that defied the expectations of pop musicians at the time , inspiring even more interest . The band toured the UK three times in the first half of the year : a four @-@ week tour that began in February , the Beatles 's first nationwide , preceded three @-@ week tours in March and May – June . As their popularity spread , a frenzied adulation of the group took hold . Greeted with riotous enthusiasm by screaming fans , the press dubbed the phenomenon " Beatlemania " . Although not billed as tour leaders , the Beatles overshadowed American acts Tommy Roe and Chris Montez during the February engagements and assumed top billing " by audience demand " , something no British act had previously accomplished while touring with artists from the US . A similar situation arose during their May – June tour with Roy Orbison . 
 In late October , the Beatles began a five @-@ day tour of Sweden , their first time abroad since the final Hamburg engagement of December 1962 . On their return to the UK on 31 October , according to Lewisohn , " several hundred screaming fans " greeted them in heavy rain at Heathrow Airport . Around 50 to 100 journalists and photographers as well as representatives from the BBC also joined the airport reception , the first of more than 100 such events . The next day , the band began its fourth tour of Britain within nine months , this one scheduled for six weeks . In mid @-@ November , as Beatlemania intensified , police resorted to using high @-@ pressure water hoses to control the crowd before a concert in Plymouth . 
 Please Please Me maintained the top position on the Record Retailer chart for 30 weeks , only to be displaced by its follow @-@ up , With the Beatles . On 22 November EMI released With the Beatles to record advance orders of 270 @,@ 000 copies , and the LP topped a half @-@ million albums sold in one week . Recorded between July and October , With the Beatles made better use of studio production techniques than its predecessor . It held the top spot for 21 weeks with a chart life of 40 weeks . Erlewine described the LP as " a sequel of the highest order – one that betters the original " . In a reversal of then standard practice , EMI released the album ahead of the impending single " I Want to Hold Your Hand " , with the song excluded to maximise the single 's sales . The album caught the attention of music critic William Mann of The Times , who suggested that Lennon and McCartney were " the outstanding English composers of 1963 " . The newspaper published a series of articles in which Mann offered detailed analyses of the music , lending it respectability . With the Beatles became the second album in UK chart history to sell a million copies , a figure previously reached only by the 1958 South Pacific soundtrack . When writing the sleeve notes for the album , the band 's press officer , Tony Barrow , used the superlative the " fabulous foursome " , which the media widely adopted as " the Fab Four " . 
 = = = = " British Invasion " = = = = 
 EMI 's American subsidiary , Capitol Records , hindered the Beatles ' releases in the United States for more than a year by initially declining to issue their music , including their first three singles . Concurrent negotiations with the independent US label Vee @-@ Jay led to the release of some of the songs in 1963 , but not all . Vee @-@ Jay finished preparation for the album Introducing ... The Beatles , culled from most of the songs of Parlophone 's Please Please Me , but a management shake @-@ up led to the album not being released . Then when it surfaced that the label did not report royalties on their sales , the licence Vee @-@ Jay signed with EMI was voided . A new licence was granted to the Swan label for the single " She Loves You " , but legal issues with royalties and publishing rights proved an obstacle to the successful marketing of the group in the US . American chart success began after Epstein arranged for a $ 40 @,@ 000 US marketing campaign and secured the support of disc jockey Carrol James , who first played the band 's records in mid @-@ December 1963 . Late that same month , the Beatles were introduced in the Tidewater area of Virginia by Gene Loving of radio station <unk> , accompanied by a full marketing campaign , including Beatles shirt giveaways . Within days , almost every other song played on the station was a Beatles recording . It was not until the end of first week of January 1964 that their records were played in New York City ( also accompanied by a major marketing campaign and with similar play frequency ) , and then the rest of the country , initiating their music 's spread across US radio . This caused an increase in demand , leading Capitol to rush @-@ release " I Want to Hold Your Hand " later that month . Issued on 26 December 1963 , with the band 's previously scheduled debut there just weeks away , " I Want to Hold Your Hand " sold a million copies , becoming a number @-@ one hit in the US by mid @-@ January . In its wake , Vee @-@ Jay released Introducing ... The Beatles to go along with Capitol 's debut album , Meet the Beatles ! , while Swan reactivated production of " She Loves You " . 
 On 7 February 1964 , the Beatles left the United Kingdom with an estimated 4000 fans gathered at Heathrow , waving and screaming as the aircraft took off . Upon landing at New York 's John F. Kennedy Airport , an uproarious crowd estimated at 3000 greeted them . They gave their first live US television performance two days later on The Ed Sullivan Show , watched by approximately 73 million viewers in over 23 million households , or 34 per cent of the American population . Biographer Jonathan Gould writes that , according to the Nielsen rating service , it was " the largest audience that had ever been recorded for an American television program " . The next morning , the Beatles awoke to a negative critical consensus in the US , but a day later their first US concert saw Beatlemania erupt at Washington Coliseum . Back in New York the following day , the Beatles met with another strong reception during two shows at Carnegie Hall . The band then flew to Florida and appeared on the weekly Ed Sullivan Show a second time , before another 70 million viewers , before returning to the UK on 22 February . 
 = = = = A Hard Day 's Night = = = = 
 Capitol Records ' lack of interest throughout 1963 had not gone unnoticed , and a competitor , United Artists Records , encouraged their film division to offer the group a three @-@ motion @-@ picture deal , primarily for the commercial potential of the soundtracks . Directed by Richard Lester , A Hard Day 's Night involved the band for six weeks in March – April 1964 as they played themselves in a mock @-@ documentary . The film premiered in London and New York in July and August , respectively , and was an international success , with some critics drawing comparison with the Marx Brothers . According to Erlewine , the accompanying soundtrack album , A Hard Day 's Night , saw them " truly coming into their own as a band . All of the disparate influences on their first two albums had coalesced into a bright , joyous , original sound , filled with ringing guitars and irresistible melodies . " That " ringing guitar " sound was primarily the product of Harrison 's 12 @-@ string electric Rickenbacker , a prototype given to him by the manufacturer , which made its debut on the record . 
 During the week of 4 April 1964 , the Beatles held twelve positions on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart , including the top five . Their popularity generated unprecedented interest in British music , and a number of other UK acts subsequently made their own American debuts , successfully touring over the next three years in what was termed the British Invasion . Their hairstyle , unusually long for the era and mocked by many adults , became an emblem of rebellion to the burgeoning youth culture . 
 Touring internationally in June and July , the Beatles staged 37 shows over 27 days in Denmark , the Netherlands , Hong Kong , Australia and New Zealand . In August they returned to the US , with a 30 @-@ concert tour of 23 cities . Generating intense interest once again , the month @-@ long tour attracted between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 fans to each 30 @-@ minute performance in cities from San Francisco to New York . 
 In August , journalist Al Aronowitz arranged for the Beatles to meet Bob Dylan . Visiting the band in their New York hotel suite , Dylan introduced them to cannabis . Gould points out the musical and cultural significance of this meeting , before which the musicians ' respective fanbases were " perceived as inhabiting two separate subcultural worlds " : Dylan 's audience of " college kids with artistic or intellectual leanings , a dawning political and social idealism , and a mildly bohemian style " contrasted with their fans , " veritable ' <unk> ' – kids in high school or grade school whose lives were totally wrapped up in the commercialised popular culture of television , radio , pop records , fan magazines , and teen fashion . They were seen as idolaters , not idealists . " Within six months of the meeting , Gould writes , " Lennon would be making records on which he openly imitated Dylan 's nasal drone , brittle strum , and introspective vocal persona " . Within a year , Dylan would " proceed , with the help of a five @-@ piece group and a Fender Stratocaster electric guitar , to shake the monkey of folk authenticity permanently off his back ... the distinctions between the folk and rock audiences would have nearly evaporated [ and the group 's ] audience ... [ was ] showing signs of growing up . " 
 = = = = Beatles for Sale , Help ! and Rubber Soul = = = = 
 According to Gould , Beatles for Sale , the Beatles ' fourth studio LP , evidenced a growing conflict between the commercial pressures of their global success and their creative ambitions . They had intended the album , recorded between August and October 1964 , to continue the format established by A Hard Day 's Night which , unlike the group 's first two LPs , contained only original songs . The band had nearly exhausted their backlog of songs on the previous album , however , and given the challenges constant international touring posed to their songwriting efforts , Lennon admitted , " Material 's becoming a hell of a problem " . As a result , six covers from their extensive repertoire were chosen to complete the album . Released in early December , its eight original compositions stood out , demonstrating the growing maturity of the Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership . 
 In early 1965 , while they were his guests for dinner , Lennon and Harrison 's dentist secretly added LSD to their coffee . Lennon described the experience : " It was just terrifying , but it was fantastic . I was pretty stunned for a month or two . " He and Harrison subsequently became regular users of the drug , joined by Starr on at least one occasion . McCartney was initially reluctant to try it , but eventually did so in late 1966 . He became the first Beatle to discuss LSD publicly , declaring in a magazine interview that " it opened my eyes " and " made me a better , more honest , more tolerant member of society " . 
 Controversy erupted in June 1965 when Queen Elizabeth II appointed all four Beatles Members of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) after Prime Minister Harold Wilson nominated them for the award . In protest – the honour was at that time primarily bestowed upon military veterans and civic leaders – some conservative MBE recipients returned their own insignia . 
 Released in July , the Beatles ' second film , Help ! , was again directed by Lester . Described as " mainly a relentless spoof of Bond " , it inspired a mixed response among both reviewers and the band . McCartney said : " Help ! was great but it wasn 't our film – we were sort of guest stars . It was fun , but basically , as an idea for a film , it was a bit wrong . " The soundtrack was dominated by Lennon , who wrote and sang lead on most of its songs , including the two singles : " Help ! " and " Ticket to Ride " . The accompanying album , the group 's fifth studio LP , contained all original material save for two covers , " Act Naturally " and " Dizzy Miss Lizzy " ; they were the last covers the band would include on an album , with the exception of Let It Be 's brief rendition of the traditional Liverpool folk song " Maggie Mae " . The band expanded their use of vocal overdubs on Help ! and incorporated classical instruments into some arrangements , notably a string quartet on the pop ballad " Yesterday " . Composed by McCartney , " Yesterday " would inspire the most recorded cover versions of any song ever written . 
 The group 's third US tour opened with a performance before a world @-@ record crowd of 55 @,@ 600 at New York 's Shea Stadium on 15 August 1965 – " perhaps the most famous of all Beatles ' concerts " , in Lewisohn 's description . A further nine successful concerts followed in other American cities . At a show in Atlanta , the Beatles gave one of the first live performances ever to make use of a <unk> system of on @-@ stage monitor speakers . Towards the end of the tour , they met with Elvis Presley , a foundational musical influence on the band , who invited them to his home in Beverly Hills . September saw the launch of an American Saturday @-@ morning cartoon series , The Beatles , that echoed A Hard Day 's Night 's slapstick antics over its two @-@ year original run . The series was a historical milestone as the first weekly television series to feature animated versions of real , living people . 
 In mid @-@ October 1965 , the Beatles entered the recording studio ; for the first time when making an album , they had an extended period without other major commitments . Until this time , according to George Martin , " we had been making albums rather like a collection of singles . Now we were really beginning to think about albums as a bit of art on their own . " Released in December , Rubber Soul has been hailed by critics as a major step forward in the maturity and complexity of the band 's music . Their thematic reach was beginning to expand as they embraced deeper aspects of romance and philosophy . Biographers Peter Brown and Steven Gaines attribute the new musical direction to " the Beatles ' now habitual use of marijuana " , an assertion confirmed by the band – Lennon referred to it as " the pot album " , and Starr said : " Grass was really influential in a lot of our changes , especially with the writers . And because they were writing different material , we were playing differently . " After Help ! ' s foray into the world of classical music with flutes and strings , Harrison 's introduction of a sitar on " Norwegian Wood ( This Bird Has Flown ) " marked a further progression outside the traditional boundaries of popular music . As their lyrics grew more artful , fans began to study them for deeper meaning . Of " Norwegian Wood " Lennon commented : " I was trying to be sophisticated in writing about an affair ... but in such a smokescreen way that you couldn 't tell . " 
 While many of Rubber Soul 's more notable songs were the product of Lennon and McCartney 's collaborative songwriting , it also featured distinct compositions from each , though they continued to share official credit . The song " In My Life " , of which each later claimed lead authorship , is considered a highlight of the entire Lennon – McCartney catalogue . Harrison called Rubber Soul his " favourite album " and Starr referred to it as " the departure record " . McCartney has said , " We 'd had our cute period , and now it was time to expand . " However , recording engineer Norman Smith later stated that the studio sessions revealed signs of growing conflict within the group – " the clash between John and Paul was becoming obvious " , he wrote , and " as far as Paul was concerned , George could do no right " . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked Rubber Soul fifth among " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , and AllMusic 's Richie Unterberger describes it as " one of the classic folk @-@ rock records " . 
 = = = 1966 – 70 : Controversy , studio years and break @-@ up = = = 
 = = = = Events leading up to final tour = = = = 
 Capitol Records , from December 1963 when it began issuing Beatles recordings for the US market , exercised complete control over format , compiling distinct US albums from the band 's recordings and issuing songs of their choosing as singles . It was not until Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band in 1967 that a Beatles album was released with identical track listings in both the UK and the US . In June 1966 , Yesterday and Today , one of Capitol 's compilation albums , caused an uproar with its cover , which portrayed the grinning Beatles dressed in butcher 's overalls , accompanied by raw meat and mutilated plastic baby dolls . It has been incorrectly suggested that this was meant as a satirical response to the way Capitol had " butchered " the US versions of their albums . Thousands of copies of the LP had a new cover pasted over the original ; an <unk> " first @-@ state " copy fetched $ 10 @,@ 500 at a December 2005 auction . In England , meanwhile , Harrison met sitar maestro Ravi Shankar , who agreed to train him on the instrument . 
 During a tour of the Philippines the month after the Yesterday and Today furore , the Beatles unintentionally snubbed the nation 's first lady , Imelda Marcos , who had expected them to attend a breakfast reception at the Presidential Palace . When presented with the invitation , Epstein politely declined on the band members ' behalf , as it had never been his policy to accept such official invitations . They soon found that the Marcos regime was unaccustomed to taking no for an answer . The resulting riots endangered the group and they escaped the country with difficulty . Immediately afterwards , the band members visited India for the first time . 
 Almost as soon as they returned home , the Beatles faced a fierce backlash from US religious and social conservatives ( as well as the Ku Klux Klan ) over a comment Lennon had made in a March interview with British reporter Maureen Cleave . " Christianity will go , " Lennon had said . " It will vanish and shrink . I needn 't argue about that ; I 'm right and I will be proved right . We 're more popular than Jesus now ; I don 't know which will go first , rock ' n ' roll or Christianity . Jesus was alright but his disciples were thick and ordinary . It 's them twisting it that ruins it for me . " The comment went virtually unnoticed in England , but when US teenage fan magazine Datebook printed it five months later – on the eve of the group 's August US tour – it sparked a controversy with Christians in the American " Bible Belt " . The Vatican issued a protest , and bans on Beatles ' records were imposed by Spanish and Dutch stations and South Africa 's national broadcasting service . Epstein accused Datebook of having taken Lennon 's words out of context ; at a press conference Lennon pointed out , " If I 'd said television was more popular than Jesus , I might have got away with it . " Lennon claimed that he was referring to how other people viewed their success , but at the prompting of reporters , he concluded : " If you want me to apologise , if that will make you happy , then okay , I 'm sorry . " 
 As preparations were made for the US tour , the Beatles knew that their music would hardly be heard . Having originally used Vox AC30 amplifiers , they later acquired more powerful 100 @-@ watt amplifiers , specially designed by Vox for them as they moved into larger venues in 1964 , but these were still inadequate . Struggling to compete with the volume of sound generated by screaming fans , the band had grown increasingly bored with the routine of performing live . Recognising that their shows were no longer about the music , they decided to make the August tour their last . 
 = = = = Revolver and Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band = = = = 
 Rubber Soul had marked a major step forward ; Revolver , released in August 1966 a week before the Beatles ' final tour , marked another . Pitchfork 's Scott Plagenhoef identifies it as " the sound of a band growing into supreme confidence " and " redefining what was expected from popular music " . Revolver featured sophisticated songwriting , studio experimentation , and a greatly expanded repertoire of musical styles , ranging from innovative classical string arrangements to psychedelic rock . Abandoning the customary group photograph , its cover – designed by Klaus Voormann , a friend of the band since their Hamburg days – " was a stark , arty , black @-@ and @-@ white collage that caricatured the Beatles in a pen @-@ and @-@ ink style beholden to Aubrey Beardsley " , in Gould 's description . The album was preceded by the single " Paperback Writer " , backed by " Rain " . Short promotional films were made for both songs ; described by cultural historian Saul Austerlitz as " among the first true music videos " , they aired on The Ed Sullivan Show and Top of the Pops in June 1966 . 
 Among the experimental songs that Revolver featured was " Tomorrow Never Knows " , the lyrics for which Lennon drew from Timothy Leary 's The Psychedelic Experience : A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead . Its creation involved eight tape decks distributed about the EMI building , each staffed by an engineer or band member , who randomly varied the movement of a tape loop while Martin created a composite recording by sampling the incoming data . McCartney 's " Eleanor Rigby " made prominent use of a string octet ; Gould describes it as " a true hybrid , conforming to no recognisable style or genre of song " . Harrison was developing as a songwriter , and three of his compositions earned a place on the record . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked Revolver as the third greatest album of all time . During the US tour that followed its release , however , the band performed none of its songs . As Chris Ingham writes , they were very much " studio creations ... and there was no way a four @-@ piece rock ' n ' roll group could do them justice , particularly through the desensitising wall of the fans ' screams . ' Live Beatles ' and ' Studio Beatles ' had become entirely different beasts . " The band 's final concert at San Francisco 's Candlestick Park on 29 August was their last commercial concert . It marked the end of a four @-@ year period dominated by almost nonstop touring that included over 1 @,@ 400 concert appearances internationally . 
 Freed from the burden of touring , the Beatles embraced an increasingly experimental approach as they recorded Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , beginning in late November 1966 . According to engineer Geoff Emerick , the album 's recording took over 700 hours . He recalled the band 's insistence " that everything on Sgt. Pepper had to be different . We had microphones right down in the bells of brass instruments and headphones turned into microphones attached to violins . We used giant primitive oscillators to vary the speed of instruments and vocals and we had tapes chopped to pieces and stuck together upside down and the wrong way around . " Parts of " A Day in the Life " featured a 40 @-@ piece orchestra . The sessions initially yielded the non @-@ album double A @-@ side single " Strawberry Fields Forever " / " Penny Lane " in February 1967 ; the Sgt. Pepper LP followed in June . 
 The musical complexity of the records , created using relatively primitive four @-@ track recording technology , astounded contemporary artists . For Beach Boys leader Brian Wilson , then in the midst of a personal crisis and struggling at the time to complete the ambitious Smile , hearing " Strawberry Fields " was reported as one of many elements that contributed to the project 's collapse . Among music critics , acclaim for the album was virtually universal . Gould writes : 
 The overwhelming consensus is that the Beatles had created a popular masterpiece : a rich , sustained , and overflowing work of collaborative genius whose bold ambition and startling originality dramatically enlarged the possibilities and raised the expectations of what the experience of listening to popular music on record could be . On the basis of this perception , Sgt. Pepper became the catalyst for an explosion of mass enthusiasm for album @-@ formatted rock that would revolutionise both the aesthetics and the economics of the record business in ways that far outstripped the earlier pop explosions triggered by the Elvis phenomenon of 1956 and the Beatlemania phenomenon of 1963 . 
 Sgt. Pepper was the first major pop / rock LP to include its complete lyrics , which appeared on the back cover . Those lyrics were the subject of critical analysis ; for instance , in late 1967 the album was the subject of a scholarly inquiry by American literary critic and professor of English Richard Poirier , who observed that his students were " listening to the group 's music with a degree of engagement that he , as a teacher of literature , could only envy " . Poirier identified what he termed its " mixed <unk> " : " It 's unwise ever to assume that they 're doing only one thing or expressing themselves in only one style ... one kind of feeling about a subject isn 't enough ... any single induced feeling must often exist within the context of seemingly contradictory alternatives . " McCartney said at the time : " We write songs . We know what we mean by them . But in a week someone else says something about it , and you can 't deny it . ... You put your own meaning at your own level to our songs . " In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked it number one on its list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . 
 Sgt. Pepper 's elaborate cover also attracted considerable interest and study . A collage designed by pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth , it depicted the group as the fictional band referred to in the album 's title track standing in front of a crowd of famous people . The heavy moustaches worn by the group reflected the growing influence of hippie style , while cultural historian Jonathan Harris describes their " brightly coloured parodies of military uniforms " as a knowingly " anti @-@ authoritarian and anti @-@ establishment " display . 
 On 25 June 1967 , the Beatles performed their forthcoming single , " All You Need Is Love " , to an estimated 350 million viewers on Our World , the first live global television link . Released a week later , during the Summer of Love , the song was adopted as a flower power anthem . Two months later , the group suffered a loss that threw their career into turmoil . Having been introduced to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi only the previous night in London , on 25 August they travelled to Bangor for his Transcendental Meditation retreat . Two days later , their manager 's assistant , Peter Brown , phoned to inform them that Epstein had died . The coroner ruled the death an accidental <unk> overdose , although it was widely rumoured to be a suicide . Epstein had been in a fragile emotional state , stressed by personal issues and concern that the band might not renew his management contract , due to expire in October , over discontent with his supervision of business matters , particularly regarding Seltaeb , the company that handled their US merchandising rights . His death left the group disoriented and fearful about the future . Lennon recalled : " We collapsed . I knew that we were in trouble then . I didn 't really have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music , and I was scared . I thought , ' We 've had it now . ' " 
 = = = = Magical Mystery Tour , the White Album and Yellow Submarine = = = = 
 Magical Mystery Tour , the soundtrack to a forthcoming Beatles television film , was released in the UK as a six @-@ track double extended play disc ( EP ) in early December 1967 . In the United States , the six songs were issued on an identically titled LP that also included five tracks from the band 's recent singles . Unterberger says of the US Magical Mystery Tour , " the psychedelic sound is very much in the vein of Sgt. Pepper , and even spacier in parts ( especially the sound collages of ' I Am the Walrus ' ) " and he calls its five songs culled from the band 's 1967 singles " huge , glorious , and innovative " . In its first three weeks , the album set a record for the highest initial sales of any Capitol LP , and it is the only Capitol compilation later to be adopted in the band 's official canon of studio albums . First aired on Boxing Day , the Magical Mystery Tour film , largely directed by McCartney , brought the group their first major negative UK press . It was dismissed as " blatant rubbish " by the Daily Express ; the Daily Mail called it " a colossal conceit " ; and The Guardian labelled the film " a kind of fantasy morality play about the grossness and warmth and stupidity of the audience " . Gould describes it as " a great deal of raw footage showing a group of people getting on , getting off , and riding on a bus " . Although the viewership figures were respectable , its slating in the press led US television networks to lose interest in broadcasting the film . 
 In January 1968 , the Beatles filmed a cameo for the animated movie Yellow Submarine , which featured cartoon versions of the band members and a soundtrack with eleven of their songs , including four unreleased studio recordings that made their debut in the film . Released in June 1968 , the film was praised by critics for its music , humour and innovative visual style . It would be seven months , however , before the film 's soundtrack album appeared . 
 In the interim came The Beatles , a double LP commonly known as the White Album for its virtually featureless cover . Creative inspiration for the album came from a new direction : without Epstein 's guiding presence , the group had briefly turned to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi as their guru . At his ashram in Rishikesh , India , a " Guide Course " scheduled for three months marked one of their most prolific periods , yielding numerous songs including a majority of the 30 included on the album . However , Starr left after only ten days , likening it to Butlins , and McCartney eventually grew bored and departed a month later . For Lennon and Harrison , creativity turned to questioning when an electronics technician known as Magic Alex suggested that the Maharishi was attempting to manipulate them . When he alleged that the Maharishi had made sexual advances to women attendees , a persuaded Lennon left abruptly just two months into the course , bringing an unconvinced Harrison and the remainder of the group 's entourage with him . In anger , Lennon wrote a scathing song titled " Maharishi " , renamed " Sexy Sadie " to avoid potential legal issues . McCartney said , " We made a mistake . We thought there was more to him than there was . " 
 During recording sessions for the White Album , which stretched from late May to mid @-@ October 1968 , relations between the Beatles grew openly divisive . Starr quit for two weeks , and McCartney took over the drum kit for " Back in the U.S.S.R. " ( on which Harrison and Lennon drummed as well ) and " Dear Prudence " . Lennon had lost interest in collaborating with McCartney , whose contribution " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " he scorned as " granny music shit " . Tensions were further aggravated by Lennon 's romantic preoccupation with avant @-@ garde artist Yoko Ono , whom he insisted on bringing to the sessions despite the group 's well @-@ established understanding that girlfriends were not allowed in the studio . Describing the double album , Lennon later said : " Every track is an individual track ; there isn 't any Beatle music on it . [ It 's ] John and the band , Paul and the band , George and the band . " McCartney has recalled that the album " wasn 't a pleasant one to make " . Both he and Lennon identified the sessions as the start of the band 's break @-@ up . 
 Issued in November , the White Album was the band 's first Apple Records album release , although EMI continued to own their recordings . The new label was a subsidiary of Apple Corps , which Epstein had formed as part of his plan to create a tax @-@ effective business structure . The record attracted more than 2 million advance orders , selling nearly 4 million copies in the US in little over a month , and its tracks dominated the playlists of American radio stations . Despite its popularity , it did not receive flattering reviews at the time . According to Gould : 
 The critical response ... ranged from mixed to flat . In marked contrast to Sgt. Pepper , which had helped to establish an entire genre of literate rock criticism , the White Album inspired no critical writing of any note . Even the most sympathetic reviewers ... clearly didn 't know what to make of this shapeless outpouring of songs . Newsweek 's Hubert Saal , citing the high proportion of parodies , accused the group of getting their tongues caught in their cheeks . 
 General critical opinion eventually turned in favour of the White Album , and in 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked it as the tenth greatest album of all time . Pitchfork 's Mark Richardson describes it as " large and sprawling , overflowing with ideas but also with indulgences , and filled with a hugely variable array of material ... its failings are as essential to its character as its triumphs . " Erlewine comments : " The [ band 's ] two main songwriting forces were no longer on the same page , but neither were George and Ringo " , yet " Lennon turns in two of his best ballads " , McCartney 's songs are " stunning " , Harrison had become " a songwriter who deserved wider exposure " , and Starr 's composition was " a delight " . 
 The Yellow Submarine LP , issued in January 1969 , contained only the four previously unreleased songs that had debuted in the film , along with the title track ( already issued on Revolver ) , " All You Need Is Love " ( already issued as a single and on the US Magical Mystery Tour LP ) and seven instrumental pieces composed by Martin . Because of the paucity of new Beatles music , AllMusic 's Unterberger and Bruce Eder suggest the album might be " inessential " but for Harrison 's " It 's All Too Much " : " the jewel of the new songs ... resplendent in swirling Mellotron , larger @-@ than @-@ life percussion , and tidal waves of feedback guitar ... a virtuoso excursion into otherwise hazy psychedelia " . 
 = = = = Abbey Road , Let It Be , and break @-@ up = = = = 
 Although Let It Be was the Beatles ' final album release , it was largely recorded before Abbey Road . The project 's impetus came from an idea Martin attributes to McCartney , who suggested they " record an album of new material and rehearse it , then perform it before a live audience for the very first time – on record and on film " . Originally intended for a one @-@ hour television programme to be called Beatles at Work , much of the album 's content came from extensive rehearsals filmed by director Michael Lindsay @-@ Hogg at Twickenham Film Studios , beginning in January 1969 . Martin has said that the project was " not at all a happy recording experience . It was a time when relations between the Beatles were at their lowest ebb . " Lennon described the largely impromptu sessions as " hell ... the most miserable ... on Earth " , and Harrison , " the low of all @-@ time " . Irritated by both McCartney and Lennon , Harrison walked out for five days . Upon returning , he threatened to leave the band unless they " abandon [ ed ] all talk of live performance " and instead focused on finishing a new album , initially titled Get Back , using songs recorded for the TV special . He also demanded they cease work at Twickenham and relocate to the newly finished Apple Studio . The other band members agreed , and the idea came about to salvage the footage shot for the TV production for use in a feature film . 
 In an effort to alleviate tensions within the band and improve the quality of their live sound , Harrison invited keyboardist Billy Preston to participate in the last nine days of sessions . Preston received label billing on the " Get Back " single – the only musician ever to receive that acknowledgment on an official Beatles release . At the conclusion of the rehearsals , the band could not agree on a location to film a concert , rejecting several ideas , including a boat at sea , a lunatic asylum , the Tunisian desert , and the Colosseum . Ultimately , what would be their final live performance was filmed on the rooftop of the Apple Corps building at 3 Savile Row , London , on 30 January 1969 . Five weeks later , engineer Glyn Johns , whom Lewisohn describes as Get Back 's " uncredited producer " , began work assembling an album , given " free rein " as the band " all but washed their hands of the entire project " . 
 New strains developed between the band members regarding the appointment of a financial adviser , the need for which had become evident without Epstein to manage business affairs . Lennon , Harrison and Starr favoured Allen Klein , who had managed the Rolling Stones and Sam Cooke ; McCartney wanted Lee and John Eastman – father and brother , respectively , of Linda Eastman , whom McCartney married on 12 March . Agreement could not be reached , so both Klein and the Eastmans were temporarily appointed : Klein as the Beatles ' business manager and the Eastmans as their lawyers . Further conflict ensued , however , and financial opportunities were lost . On 8 May , Klein was named sole manager of the band , the Eastmans having previously been dismissed as the Beatles ' attorneys . McCartney refused to sign the management contract with Klein , but he was out @-@ voted by the other Beatles . 
 Martin stated that he was surprised when McCartney asked him to produce another album , as the Get Back sessions had been " a miserable experience " and he had " thought it was the end of the road for all of us " . The primary recording sessions for Abbey Road began on 2 July 1969 . Lennon , who rejected Martin 's proposed format of a " continuously moving piece of music " , wanted his and McCartney 's songs to occupy separate sides of the album . The eventual format , with individually composed songs on the first side and the second consisting largely of a medley , was McCartney 's suggested compromise . On 4 July , the first solo single by a Beatle was released : Lennon 's " Give Peace a Chance " , credited to the Plastic Ono Band . The completion and mixing of " I Want You ( She 's So Heavy ) " on 20 August 1969 was the last occasion on which all four Beatles were together in the same studio . Lennon announced his departure to the rest of the group on 20 September , but agreed to withhold a public announcement to avoid undermining sales of the forthcoming album . 
 Released six days after Lennon 's declaration , Abbey Road sold 4 million copies within three months and topped the UK charts for a total of seventeen weeks . Its second track , the ballad " Something " , was issued as a single – the only Harrison composition ever to appear as a Beatles A @-@ side . Abbey Road received mixed reviews , although the medley met with general acclaim . Unterberger considers it " a fitting swan song for the group " , containing " some of the greatest harmonies to be heard on any rock record " . Musicologist and author Ian MacDonald calls the album " erratic and often hollow " , despite the " semblance of unity and coherence " offered by the medley . Martin has singled it out as his personal favourite of all the band 's albums ; Lennon said it was " competent " but had " no life in it " . Recording engineer Emerick notes that the replacement of the studio 's valve mixing console with a transistorised one yielded a less punchy sound , leaving the group frustrated at the thinner tone and lack of impact and contributing to its " kinder , gentler " feel relative to their previous albums . 
 For the still unfinished Get Back album , one last song , Harrison 's " I Me Mine " , was recorded on 3 January 1970 . Lennon , in Denmark at the time , did not participate . In March , rejecting the work Johns had done on the project , now retitled Let It Be , Klein gave the session tapes to American producer Phil Spector , who had recently produced Lennon 's solo single " Instant Karma ! " In addition to remixing the material , Spector edited , spliced and overdubbed several of the recordings that had been intended as " live " . McCartney was unhappy with the producer 's approach and particularly dissatisfied with the lavish orchestration on " The Long and Winding Road " , which involved a fourteen @-@ voice choir and 36 @-@ piece instrumental ensemble . McCartney 's demands that the alterations to the song be reverted were ignored , and he publicly announced his departure from the band on 10 April 1970 , a week before the release of his first , self @-@ titled solo album . 
 On 8 May , the Spector @-@ produced Let It Be was released . Its accompanying single , " The Long and Winding Road " , was the Beatles ' last ; it was released in the United States , but not Britain . The Let It Be documentary film followed later that month , and would win the 1970 Academy Award for Best Original Song Score . Sunday Telegraph critic Penelope Gilliatt called it " a very bad film and a touching one ... about the breaking apart of this reassuring , geometrically perfect , once apparently ageless family of siblings " . Several reviewers stated that some of the performances in the film sounded better than their analogous album tracks . Describing Let It Be as the " only Beatles album to occasion negative , even hostile reviews " , Unterberger calls it " on the whole underrated " ; he singles out " some good moments of straight hard rock in ' I 've Got a Feeling ' and ' Dig a Pony ' " , and praises " Let It Be " , " Get Back " , and " the folky ' Two of Us ' , with John and Paul harmonising together " . McCartney filed suit for the dissolution of the Beatles ' contractual partnership on 31 December 1970 . Legal disputes continued long after their break @-@ up , and the dissolution was not formalised until 29 December 1974 . 
 = = = 1970 – present : After the break @-@ up = = = 
 = = = = 1970s = = = = 
 Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr all released solo albums in 1970 . Their solo records sometimes involved one or more of the others ; Starr 's Ringo ( 1973 ) was the only album to include compositions and performances by all four ex @-@ Beatles , albeit on separate songs . With Starr 's participation , Harrison staged the Concert for Bangladesh in New York City in August 1971 . Other than an unreleased jam session in 1974 , later bootlegged as A Toot and a Snore in ' 74 , Lennon and McCartney never recorded together again . 
 Two double @-@ LP sets of the Beatles ' greatest hits , compiled by Klein , 1962 – 1966 and 1967 – 1970 , were released in 1973 , at first under the Apple Records imprint . Commonly known as the Red Album and Blue Album , respectively , each have earned a Multi @-@ Platinum certification in the United States and a Platinum certification in the United Kingdom . Between 1976 and 1982 , EMI / Capitol released a wave of compilation albums without input from the ex @-@ Beatles , starting with the double @-@ disc compilation Rock ' n ' Roll Music . The only one to feature previously unreleased material was The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl ( 1977 ) ; the first officially issued concert recordings by the group , it contained selections from two shows they played during their 1964 and 1965 US tours . 
 The music and enduring fame of the Beatles has been commercially exploited in various other ways , again often outside their creative control . In April 1974 , the musical John , Paul , George , Ringo … and Bert , written by Willy Russell and featuring singer Barbara Dickson , opened in London . It included , with permission from Northern Songs , eleven Lennon @-@ McCartney compositions and one by Harrison , " Here Comes the Sun " . Displeased with the production 's use of his song , Harrison withdrew his permission to use it . Later that year , the off @-@ Broadway musical Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band on the Road opened . All This and World War II ( 1976 ) was an unorthodox nonfiction film that combined newsreel footage with covers of Beatles songs by performers ranging from Elton John and Keith Moon to the London Symphony Orchestra . The Broadway musical Beatlemania , an unauthorised nostalgia revue , opened in early 1977 and proved popular , spinning off five separate touring productions . In 1979 , the band sued the producers , settling for several million dollars in damages . Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1978 ) , a musical film starring the Bee Gees and Peter Frampton , was a commercial failure and an " artistic fiasco " , according to Ingham . 
 = = = = 1980s = = = = 
 After the December 1980 murder of Lennon , Harrison rewrote the lyrics to his song " All Those Years Ago " in Lennon 's honour . With Starr on drums and McCartney and his wife , Linda , contributing backing vocals , the song was released as a single in May 1981 . McCartney 's own tribute , " Here Today " , appeared on his Tug of War album in April 1982 . In 1987 , Harrison 's Cloud Nine album included " When We Was Fab " , a song about the Beatlemania era . 
 When the Beatles ' studio albums were released on CD by EMI and Apple Corps in 1987 , their catalogue was standardised throughout the world , establishing a canon of the twelve original studio LPs as issued in the UK plus the US LP version of Magical Mystery Tour ( 1967 ) . All the remaining material from the singles and EPs which had not appeared on the original studio albums was gathered on the two @-@ volume compilation Past Masters ( 1988 ) . Except for the Red and Blue albums , EMI deleted all its other Beatles compilations – including the Hollywood Bowl record – from its catalogue . 
 In 1988 , the Beatles were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , their first year of eligibility . Harrison and Starr attended the ceremony with Lennon 's widow , Yoko Ono , and his two sons , Julian and Sean . McCartney declined to attend , citing unresolved " business differences " that would make him " feel like a complete hypocrite waving and smiling with them at a fake reunion " . The following year , EMI / Capitol settled a decade @-@ long lawsuit filed by the band over royalties , clearing the way to commercially package previously unreleased material . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 Live at the BBC , the first official release of unissued Beatles performances in seventeen years , appeared in 1994 . That same year McCartney , Harrison and Starr collaborated on the Anthology project . Anthology was the culmination of work begun in 1970 , when Apple Corps director Neil Aspinall , their former road manager and personal assistant , had started to gather material for a documentary with the working title The Long and Winding Road . Documenting their history in the band 's own words , the Anthology project included the release of several unissued Beatles recordings . McCartney , Harrison and Starr also added new instrumental and vocal parts to two songs recorded as demos by Lennon in the late 1970s . 
 During 1995 – 96 , the project yielded a television miniseries , an eight @-@ volume video set , and three two @-@ CD / three @-@ LP box sets featuring artwork by Klaus Voormann . The two songs based on Lennon demos , " Free as a Bird " and " Real Love " , were issued as new Beatles singles . The releases were commercially successful and the television series was viewed by an estimated 400 million people . In 1999 , to coincide with the re @-@ release of the 1968 film Yellow Submarine , a new soundtrack compilation CD / LP , Yellow Submarine Songtrack , was issued . 
 = = = = 2000s = = = = 
 The Beatles ' 1 , a compilation album of the band 's British and American number @-@ one hits , was released on 13 November 2000 . It became the fastest @-@ selling album of all time , with 3 @.@ 6 million sold in its first week and 13 million within a month . It topped albums charts in at least 28 countries , including the UK and US . As of April 2009 , the compilation had sold 31 million copies globally , and was the best @-@ selling album of the decade in the United States . 
 Harrison died from metastatic lung cancer in November 2001 . McCartney and Starr were among the musicians who performed at the Concert for George , organised by Eric Clapton and Harrison 's widow , Olivia . The tribute event took place at the Royal Albert Hall on the first anniversary of Harrison 's death . In addition to songs he composed for the group and during his solo career , the concert included a celebration of Indian classical music , which had significantly influenced Harrison . 
 In 2003 , Let It Be ... Naked , a reconceived version of the Let It Be album , with McCartney supervising production , was released . One of the main differences with the Spector @-@ produced version was the omission of the original string arrangements . It was a top ten hit in both Britain and America . The US album configurations from 1964 – 65 were released as box sets in 2004 and 2006 – The Capitol Albums , Volume 1 and Volume 2 included both stereo and mono versions based on the mixes that were prepared for vinyl at the time of the music 's original American release . 
 As a soundtrack for Cirque du Soleil 's Las Vegas Beatles stage revue , Love , George Martin and his son Giles remixed and blended 130 of the band 's recordings to create what Martin called " a way of re @-@ living the whole Beatles musical lifespan in a very condensed period " . The show premiered in June 2006 , and the Love album was released that November when McCartney discussed his hope that " Carnival of Light " , a fourteen @-@ minute experimental recording made at Abbey Road in 1967 , would receive an official release . A rare live performance involving two ex @-@ Beatles took place in April 2009 at a benefit concert organised by McCartney at New York 's Radio City Music Hall , where he was joined by Starr for three songs . 
 On 9 September 2009 , the Beatles ' entire back catalogue was reissued following an extensive digital remastering process that lasted four years . Stereo editions of all twelve original UK studio albums , along with Magical Mystery Tour and the Past Masters compilation , were released on compact disc both individually and as a box set . Comparing the new releases with the 1987 CDs , which had been widely criticised for their lack of clarity and dynamism , Mojo 's Danny Eccleston wrote , " the remastered vocals are purer , more natural @-@ sounding and give the illusion of sitting slightly higher in the mix . " A second collection , The Beatles in Mono , included remastered versions of every Beatles album released in true mono along with the original 1965 stereo mixes of Help ! and Rubber Soul ( which Martin had remixed for the 1987 editions ) . The Beatles : Rock Band , a music video game in the Rock Band series , was issued on the same day . In December 2009 , the band 's catalogue was officially released in FLAC and MP3 format in a limited edition of 30 @,@ 000 USB flash drives . 
 = = = = 2010s = = = = 
 Owing to a long @-@ running royalty disagreement , the Beatles were among the last major artists to sign deals with online music services . Residual disagreement emanating from Apple Corps ' dispute with Apple , Inc . , iTunes ' owners , over the use of the name " Apple " was also partly responsible for the delay , although in 2008 , McCartney stated that the main obstacle to making the Beatles ' catalogue available online was that EMI " want [ s ] something we 're not prepared to give them " . In 2010 , the official canon of thirteen Beatles studio albums , Past Masters , and the Red and Blue greatest @-@ hits albums were made available on iTunes . 
 In 2012 , EMI 's recorded music operations were sold to Universal Music Group . In order for Universal Music to acquire EMI , the European Union , for antitrust reasons , forced EMI to spin off assets including Parlophone . Universal was allowed to keep the Beatles ' recorded music catalogue , managed by Capitol Records under its Capitol Music Group division . Also in 2012 , the entire original Beatles album catalogue was reissued on vinyl , available either individually or as a box set . 
 Announced on October 2013 , The estate of John Lennon , Downtown Music Publishing will serve as U.S. administrator for the first two Beatles singles , which consisted of four songs : “ Please Please Me , ” “ Ask Me Why , ” “ Love Me Do ” and “ P.S. I Love You . ” The deal also includes the band ’ s lone post @-@ breakup song , “ Free as a Bird . ” 
 In 2013 , a second volume of BBC recordings entitled On Air – Live at the BBC Volume 2 was released . December of that year saw the release of another 59 Beatles recordings on iTunes . The set , titled The Beatles Bootleg Recordings 1963 , had the opportunity to gain a 70 @-@ year copyright extension conditional on the songs being published at least once before the end of 2013 . Apple Records released the recordings on 17 December to prevent them from going into the public domain and had them taken down from iTunes later that same day . Fan reactions to the release were mixed , with one blogger saying " the hardcore Beatles collectors who are trying to obtain everything will already have these . " 
 On 26 January 2014 , Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr performed McCartney 's " Queenie Eye " in Los Angeles at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards , held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles . The following day , The Night That Changed America : A Grammy Salute to The Beatles television special was taped in the Los Angeles Convention Center 's West Hall . It aired on 9 February , the exact date of – and at the same time , and on the same network as – the original broadcast of the Beatles ' first US television appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show , 50 years earlier . The special included performances of Beatles songs by current artists as well as by McCartney and Starr , archival footage , and Paul and Ringo being interviewed by David Letterman at the Ed Sullivan Theater , site of The Ed Sullivan Show . 
 In December 2015 the Beatles released their catalogue for streaming on various streaming music services . 
 = = Musical style and development = = 
 In Icons of Rock : An Encyclopedia of the Legends Who Changed Music Forever , Scott Schinder and Andy Schwartz describe the Beatles ' musical evolution : 
 In their initial incarnation as cheerful , wisecracking <unk> , the Fab Four revolutionised the sound , style , and attitude of popular music and opened rock and roll 's doors to a tidal wave of British rock acts . Their initial impact would have been enough to establish the Beatles as one of their era 's most influential cultural forces , but they didn 't stop there . Although their initial style was a highly original , irresistibly catchy synthesis of early American rock and roll and R & B , the Beatles spent the rest of the 1960s expanding rock 's stylistic frontiers , consistently staking out new musical territory on each release . The band 's increasingly sophisticated experimentation encompassed a variety of genres , including folk @-@ rock , country , psychedelia , and baroque pop , without sacrificing the effortless mass appeal of their early work . 
 In The Beatles as Musicians , Walter Everett describes Lennon and McCartney 's contrasting motivations and approaches to composition : " McCartney may be said to have constantly developed – as a means to entertain – a focused musical talent with an ear for counterpoint and other aspects of craft in the demonstration of a universally agreed @-@ upon common language that he did much to enrich . Conversely , Lennon 's mature music is best appreciated as the daring product of a largely unconscious , searching but undisciplined artistic sensibility . " 
 Ian MacDonald describes McCartney as " a natural melodist – a creator of tunes capable of existing apart from their harmony " . His melody lines are characterised as primarily " vertical " , employing wide , consonant intervals which express his " extrovert energy and optimism " . Conversely , Lennon 's " sedentary , ironic personality " is reflected in a " horizontal " approach featuring minimal , dissonant intervals and repetitive melodies which rely on their harmonic accompaniment for interest : " Basically a realist , he instinctively kept his melodies close to the rhythms and cadences of speech , colouring his lyrics with bluesy tone and harmony rather than creating tunes that made striking shapes of their own . " MacDonald praises Harrison 's lead guitar work for the role his " characterful lines and textural colourings " play in supporting Lennon and McCartney 's parts , and describes Starr as " the father of modern pop / rock drumming " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The band 's earliest influences include Elvis Presley , Carl Perkins , Little Richard and Chuck Berry . During the Beatles ' co @-@ residency with Little Richard at the Star @-@ Club in Hamburg , from April to May 1962 , he advised them on the proper technique for performing his songs . Of Presley , Lennon said , " Nothing really affected me until I heard Elvis . If there hadn 't been Elvis , there would not have been the Beatles . " 
 Other early influences include Buddy Holly , Eddie Cochran , Roy Orbison and the Everly Brothers . The Beatles continued to absorb influences long after their initial success , often finding new musical and lyrical avenues by listening to their contemporaries , including Bob Dylan , Frank Zappa , the Lovin ' Spoonful , the Byrds and the Beach Boys , whose 1966 album Pet Sounds amazed and inspired McCartney . Referring to the Beach Boys ' creative leader , Martin later stated : " No one made a greater impact on the Beatles than Brian [ Wilson ] . " Ravi Shankar , with whom Harrison studied for six weeks in India in late 1966 , had a significant effect on his musical development during the band 's later years . 
 = = = Genres = = = 
 Originating as a skiffle group , the Beatles quickly embraced 1950s rock and roll and helped pioneer the Merseybeat genre , and their repertoire ultimately expanded to include a broad variety of pop music . Reflecting the range of styles they explored , Lennon said of Beatles for Sale , " You could call our new one a Beatles country @-@ and @-@ western LP " , while Gould credits Rubber Soul as " the instrument by which legions of folk @-@ music enthusiasts were coaxed into the camp of pop " . 
 Although the 1965 song " Yesterday " was not the first pop record to employ orchestral strings , it marked the group 's first recorded use of classical music elements . Gould observes : " The more traditional sound of strings allowed for a fresh appreciation of their talent as composers by listeners who were otherwise allergic to the din of drums and electric guitars . " They continued to experiment with string arrangements to various effect ; Sgt. Pepper 's " She 's Leaving Home " , for instance , is " cast in the mold of a sentimental Victorian ballad " , Gould writes , " its words and music filled with the clichés of musical melodrama " . 
 The band 's stylistic range expanded in another direction with their 1966 B @-@ side " Rain " , described by Martin Strong as " the first overtly psychedelic Beatles record " . Other psychedelic numbers followed , such as " Tomorrow Never Knows " ( recorded before " Rain " ) , " Strawberry Fields Forever " , " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " I Am the Walrus " . The influence of Indian classical music was evident in Harrison 's " The Inner Light " , " Love You To " and " Within You Without You " – Gould describes the latter two as attempts " to replicate the raga form in miniature " . 
 Innovation was the most striking feature of their creative evolution , according to music historian and pianist Michael Campbell : " ' A Day in the Life ' encapsulates the art and achievement of the Beatles as well as any single track can . It highlights key features of their music : the sound imagination , the persistence of tuneful melody , and the close coordination between words and music . It represents a new category of song – more sophisticated than pop ... and uniquely innovative . There literally had never before been a song – classical or vernacular – that had blended so many disparate elements so imaginatively . " Philosophy professor Bruce Ellis Benson agrees : " the Beatles ... give us a wonderful example of how such far @-@ ranging influences as Celtic music , rhythm and blues , and country and western could be put together in a new way . " 
 Author Dominic Pedler describes the way they crossed musical styles : " Far from moving sequentially from one genre to another ( as is sometimes conveniently suggested ) the group maintained in parallel their mastery of the traditional , catchy chart hit while simultaneously forging rock and dabbling with a wide range of peripheral influences from country to vaudeville . One of these threads was their take on folk music , which would form such essential groundwork for their later collisions with Indian music and philosophy . " As the personal relationships between the band members grew increasingly strained , their individual tastes became more apparent . The minimalistic cover artwork for the White Album contrasted with the complexity and diversity of its music , which encompassed Lennon 's " Revolution 9 " , whose musique concrète approach was influenced by Yoko Ono ; Starr 's country song " Don 't Pass Me By " ; Harrison 's rock ballad " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " ; and the " proto @-@ metal roar " of McCartney 's " Helter Skelter " . 
 = = = Contribution of George Martin = = = 
 George Martin 's close involvement in his role as producer made him one of the leading candidates for the informal title of the " fifth Beatle " . He applied his classical musical training in various ways , and functioned as " an informal music teacher " to the progressing songwriters , according to Gould . Martin suggested to a sceptical McCartney that the arrangement of " Yesterday " should feature a string quartet accompaniment , thereby introducing the Beatles to a " hitherto unsuspected world of classical instrumental colour " , in MacDonald 's description . Their creative development was also facilitated by Martin 's willingness to experiment in response to their suggestions , such as adding " something baroque " to a particular recording . In addition to scoring orchestral arrangements for recordings , Martin often performed on them , playing instruments including piano , organ and brass . 
 Collaborating with Lennon and McCartney required Martin to adapt to their different approaches to songwriting and recording . MacDonald comments , " while [ he ] worked more naturally with the conventionally articulate McCartney , the challenge of catering to Lennon 's intuitive approach generally spurred him to his more original arrangements , of which ' Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! ' is an outstanding example . " Martin said of the two composers ' distinct songwriting styles and his own stabilising influence : 
 Compared with Paul 's songs , all of which seemed to keep in some sort of touch with reality , John 's had a psychedelic , almost mystical quality ... John 's imagery is one of the best things about his work – ' tangerine trees ' , ' marmalade skies ' , ' cellophane flowers ' ... I always saw him as an aural Salvador Dalí , rather than some drug @-@ ridden record artist . On the other hand , I would be stupid to pretend that drugs didn 't figure quite heavily in the Beatles ' lives at that time ... they knew that I , in my <unk> role , didn 't approve ... Not only was I not into it myself , I couldn 't see the need for it ; and there 's no doubt that , if I too had been on dope , Pepper would never have been the album it was . Perhaps it was the combination of dope and no dope that worked , who knows ? 
 Harrison echoed Martin 's description of his stabilising role : " I think we just grew through those years together , him as the straight man and us as the <unk> ; but he was always there for us to interpret our madness – we used to be slightly avant @-@ garde on certain days of the week , and he would be there as the anchor person , to communicate that through the engineers and on to the tape . " 
 = = = In the studio = = = 
 Making innovative use of technology while expanding the possibilities of recorded music , the Beatles urged experimentation by Martin and his recording engineers . Seeking ways to put chance occurrences to creative use , accidental guitar feedback , a resonating glass bottle , a tape loaded the wrong way round so that it played backwards – any of these might be incorporated into their music . Their desire to create new sounds on every new recording , combined with Martin 's arranging abilities and the studio expertise of EMI staff engineers Norman Smith , Ken Townsend and Geoff Emerick , all contributed significantly to their records from Rubber Soul and , especially , Revolver onwards . Along with innovative studio techniques such as sound effects , unconventional microphone placements , tape loops , double tracking and vari @-@ speed recording , the Beatles augmented their songs with instruments that were unconventional in rock music at the time . These included string and brass ensembles as well as Indian instruments such as the sitar in " Norwegian Wood " and the swarmandal in " Strawberry Fields Forever " . They also used early electronic instruments such as the Mellotron , with which McCartney supplied the flute voices on the " Strawberry Fields Forever " intro , and the <unk> , an electronic keyboard that created the unusual oboe @-@ like sound on " Baby , You 're a Rich Man " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Former Rolling Stone associate editor Robert Greenfield compared the Beatles to Picasso , as " artists who broke through the constraints of their time period to come up with something that was unique and original ... [ I ] n the form of popular music , no one will ever be more revolutionary , more creative and more distinctive ... " The British poet Philip Larkin described their work as " an enchanting and intoxicating hybrid of Negro rock @-@ and @-@ <unk> with their own adolescent romanticism " , and " the first advance in popular music since the War " . They not only sparked the British Invasion of the US , they became a globally influential phenomenon as well . From the 1920s , the United States had dominated popular entertainment culture throughout much of the world , via Hollywood movies , jazz , the music of Broadway and Tin Pan Alley and , later , the rock and roll that first emerged in Memphis , Tennessee . 
 Their musical innovations and commercial success inspired musicians worldwide . Many artists have acknowledged the Beatles ' influence and enjoyed chart success with covers of their songs . On radio , their arrival marked the beginning of a new era ; in 1968 the programme director of New York 's WABC radio station forbade his DJs from playing any " pre @-@ Beatles " music , marking the defining line of what would be considered oldies on American radio . They helped to redefine the album as something more than just a few hits padded out with " filler " , and they were primary innovators of the modern music video . The Shea Stadium show with which they opened their 1965 North American tour attracted an estimated 55 @,@ 600 people , then the largest audience in concert history ; Spitz describes the event as a " major breakthrough ... a giant step toward reshaping the concert business " . Emulation of their clothing and especially their hairstyles , which became a mark of rebellion , had a global impact on fashion . 
 According to Gould , the Beatles changed the way people listened to popular music and experienced its role in their lives . From what began as the Beatlemania fad , the group 's popularity grew into what was seen as an embodiment of sociocultural movements of the decade . As icons of the 1960s counterculture , Gould continues , they became a catalyst for bohemianism and activism in various social and political arenas , fuelling movements such as women 's liberation , gay liberation and environmentalism . According to Peter Lavezzoli , after the " more popular than Jesus " controversy in 1966 , the Beatles felt considerable pressure to say the right things and " began a concerted effort to spread a message of wisdom and higher consciousness " . 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 In 1965 , Queen Elizabeth II appointed Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr Members of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) . The film Let It Be ( 1970 ) won the 1971 Academy Award for Best Original Song Score . The recipients of seven Grammy Awards and fifteen Ivor Novello Awards , the Beatles have been awarded six Diamond albums , as well as 24 Multi @-@ Platinum albums , 39 Platinum albums and 45 Gold albums in the United States . In the UK , the Beatles have four Multi @-@ Platinum albums , four Platinum albums , eight Gold albums and one Silver album . They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 . 
 The best @-@ selling band in history , the Beatles have sold between 600 million and ( at EMI estimates ) over 1 billion units worldwide . They have had more number @-@ one albums on the British charts , fifteen , and sold more singles in the UK , 21 @.@ 9 million , than any other act . In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked the Beatles as the best artist of all time . They ranked number one on Billboard magazine 's list of the all @-@ time most successful Hot 100 artists , released in 2008 to celebrate the US singles chart 's 50th anniversary . As of 2016 , they hold the record for most number @-@ one hits on the Billboard Hot 100 , with twenty . The Recording Industry Association of America certifies that the Beatles have sold 178 million units in the US , more than any other artist . They were collectively included in Time magazine 's compilation of the twentieth century 's 100 most influential people . In 2014 , they received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . 
 = = Members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Original UK LPs 
 Please Please Me ( 1963 ) 
 With the Beatles ( 1963 ) 
 A Hard Day 's Night ( 1964 ) 
 Beatles for Sale ( 1964 ) 
 Help ! ( 1965 ) 
 Rubber Soul ( 1965 ) 
 Revolver ( 1966 ) 
 Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1967 ) 
 The Beatles ( " The White Album " , 1968 ) 
 Yellow Submarine ( 1969 ) 
 Abbey Road ( 1969 ) 
 Let It Be ( 1970 ) 
 When the above albums were reissued on CDs in 1988 , the American Magical Mystery Tour album ( 1967 ) and the double @-@ CD compilation set Past Masters were included so the full set would contain every track commercially released in the band 's lifetime . 
 See also 
 John Lennon discography 
 Paul McCartney discography 
 George Harrison discography 
 Ringo Starr discography 
 Collaborations between ex @-@ Beatles 
 = = Song catalogue = = 
 Through 1969 , the Beatles ' catalogue was published almost exclusively by Northern Songs Ltd . , a company formed in February 1963 by music publisher Dick James specifically for Lennon and McCartney , though it later acquired songs by other artists . The company was organised with James and his partner , Emmanuel Silver , owning a controlling interest , variously described as 51 % or 50 % plus one share . McCartney had 20 % . Reports again vary concerning Lennon 's portion – 19 or 20 % – and Brian Epstein 's – 9 or 10 % – which he received in lieu of a 25 % band management fee . 
 In 1965 , the company went public . Five million shares were created , of which the original principals retained 3 @.@ 75 million . James and Silver each received 937 @,@ 500 shares ( 18 @.@ 75 % of 5 million ) ; Lennon and McCartney each received 750 @,@ 000 shares ( 15 % ) ; and Epstein 's management company , NEMS Enterprises , received 375 @,@ 000 shares ( 7 @.@ 5 % ) . Of the 1 @.@ 25 million shares put up for sale , Harrison and Starr each acquired 40 @,@ 000 . At the time of the stock offering , Lennon and McCartney renewed their three @-@ year publishing contracts , binding them to Northern Songs until 1973 . 
 Harrison created Harrisongs to represent his Beatles compositions , but signed a three @-@ year contract with Northern Songs that gave it the copyright to his work through March 1968 , which included " Taxman " and " Within You Without You " . The songs on which Starr received co @-@ writing credit before 1968 , such as " What Goes On " and " Flying " , were also Northern Songs copyrights . Harrison did not renew his contract with Northern Songs when it ended , signing instead with Apple Publishing while retaining the copyright to his work from that point on . Harrisongs thus owns the rights to his later Beatles songs such as " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and " Something " . That year , as well , Starr created Startling Music , which holds the rights to his Beatles compositions , " Don 't Pass Me By " and " Octopus 's Garden " . 
 In March 1969 , James arranged to sell his and his partner 's shares of Northern Songs to the British broadcasting company Associated Television ( ATV ) , founded by impresario Lew Grade , without first informing the Beatles . The band then made a bid to gain controlling interest by attempting to work out a deal with a consortium of London brokerage firms that had accumulated a 14 % holding . The deal collapsed over the objections of Lennon , who declared , " I 'm sick of being fucked about by men in suits sitting on their fat <unk> in the City . " By the end of May , ATV had acquired a majority stake in Northern Songs , controlling nearly the entire Lennon – McCartney catalogue , as well as any future material until 1973 . In frustration , Lennon and McCartney sold their shares to ATV in late October 1969 . 
 In 1981 , financial losses by ATV 's parent company , ACC , led it to attempt to sell its music division . According to authors Brian Southall and Rupert Perry , Grade contacted McCartney , offering ATV Music and Northern Songs for $ 30 million . According to an account McCartney gave in 1995 , he met with Grade and explained he was interested solely in the Northern Songs catalogue , if Grade were ever willing to " separate off " that portion of ATV Music . Soon afterwards , Grade offered to sell him Northern Songs for £ 20 million , giving the ex @-@ Beatle " a week or so " to decide . By McCartney 's account , he and Ono countered with a £ 5 million bid that was rejected . According to reports at the time , Grade refused to separate Northern Songs , and turned down an offer of £ 21 – 25 million from McCartney and Ono for ATV Music . In 1982 , ACC as a whole was sold to Australian business magnate Robert Holmes à Court for £ 60 million . 
 Three years later , Michael Jackson purchased ATV for a reported $ 47 @.@ 5 million . The acquisition gave him control over the publishing rights to more than 200 Beatles songs , as well as 40 @,@ 000 other copyrights . In 1995 , in a deal that earned him a reported $ 110 million , Jackson merged his music publishing business with Sony , creating a new company , Sony / ATV Music Publishing , in which he held a 50 % stake . The merger made the new company , then valued at over half a billion dollars , the third largest music publisher in the world . 
 Despite the lack of publishing rights to most of their songs , Lennon 's estate and McCartney continue to receive their respective shares of the writers ' royalties , which together are 33 ⅓ % of total commercial proceeds in the US and which vary elsewhere around the world between 50 and 55 % . Two of Lennon and McCartney 's earliest songs – " Love Me Do " and " P.S. I Love You " – were published by an EMI subsidiary , Ardmore & Beechwood , before they signed with James . McCartney acquired their publishing rights from Ardmore in the mid @-@ 1980s , and they are the only two Beatles songs owned by McCartney 's company MPL Communications . 
 = Kusumoto Ine = 
 Kusumoto Ine ( <unk> <unk> , 31 May 1827 – 27 August 1903 ; born Shiimoto Ine <unk> <unk> ) was a Japanese physician . She was the daughter of Kusumoto Taki , who was a courtesan from Nagasaki ; and the German physician Philipp Franz von Siebold , who worked on Dejima , an island foreigners were restricted to during Japan 's long period of seclusion from the world . Ine was also known as O @-@ Ine and later in life took the name <unk> ( <unk> ) . In Japanese she is often called <unk> O @-@ Ine ( " Dutch O @-@ Ine " ) for her association with Dejima and its Dutch @-@ language Western learning . She was the first female doctor of Western medicine in Japan . 
 Siebold was banished from Japan in 1829 but managed to provide for Ine and her mother and arranged for his students and associates to care for them . Ine 's reputation grew after she became a doctor of Western medicine , and she won the patronage of the feudal lord Date Munenari . She studied in various parts of Japan under numerous teachers , one of whom impregnated her — likely having raped her — resulting in her only daughter ; she never married . She settled in Tokyo after the country ended its seclusion , and assisted in the birth by one of Emperor Meiji 's concubines in 1873 . Since her death Ine has been the subject of novels , plays , comics , and musicals in Japan . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Shiimoto Ine was born on 31 May 1827 in the city of Nagasaki . The surname Shiimoto came from a Japanese rendering of the surname of her German father , the physician Philipp Franz von Siebold , who was living on Dejima , an artificial island off Nagasaki to where foreign trade was restricted during the more than two centuries of Japan 's near @-@ total self @-@ seclusion from the world . There he played a role in introducing Western medical techniques to Japan . Ine 's mother was Kusumoto Taki , a courtesan sent at 16 from the Nagasaki pleasure district Maruyama in 1823 to be Siebold 's concubine . 
 Ine lived with her parents on Dejima until Siebold was banished on 22 October 1829 for allegedly exporting restricted information illicitly gathered from the geographer Takahashi <unk> . He was accused of smuggling items including maps which it was believed could fall into the hands of Japan 's enemies , such as Russia , which posed a threat on Japan 's northern borders . Taki and the two @-@ year @-@ old Ine were not permitted to leave Japan ; they waved him goodbye from a small boat in the harbour as his ship left . Taki soon after married a man named <unk> . 
 The wealthy Siebold left Taki and Ine with a stockpile of valuable sugar to support themselves and arranged for his associates to watch over them . He sent Ine books of Dutch grammar , important for Western studies at the time in Japan , and students of Siebold 's contributed to her education . An apocryphal story tells of Ine running away at age 14 or 15 to study medicine with one of them , Ninomiya Keisaku , in Uwajima Domain , where he had been placed under house arrest for his involvement in the Siebold Affair . 
 = = = Education and early career = = = 
 Ine 's medical training got an official start in 1845 when she began studying obstetrics in Okayama Domain under another of Siebold 's students , Ishii Sōken , through the introduction of Ninomiya Keisaku . She cut her studies with Sōken short when in 1851 he impregnated her . She returned to Nagasaki , where she gave birth in 1852 to a daughter , whom she named Tada , meaning " free " , symbolizing that heaven had granted her this child " for free " . Her account of her mother 's life is amongst those that assert Ine 's pregnancy resulted from Sōken having raped her , though hard evidence is lacking . Ine was to rebuff Sōken 's attempts to become involved in Tada 's life . 
 Ine continued her studies in Nagasaki under Abe Roan . In 1854 she left Tada with her mother and went with Ninomiya Keisaku 's nephew Mise Shūzō to study under Keisaku in Uwajima , whose lord , the daimyo Date Munenari , enthusiastically promoted Western learning . After he suffered a stroke in 1856 , Keisaku returned to Nagasaki with Ine and Shūzō . 
 Japan 's seclusion came to an end in 1854 and in 1859 Nagasaki was opened as a treaty port and the Dutch abandoned Dejima for a consulate in the capital city Edo ( modern Tokyo ) . Siebold received a pardon and returned to Nagasaki 4 August that year with his 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Alexander , from his German marriage . Shūzō became Siebold 's student , translator , and personal assistant , and Alexander 's Japanese teacher . Ine lived at first in her father 's house , but the relationship was strained , in part over her command of Dutch , and in part over Siebold 's impregnating a maid ; Ine soon moved out . She worked closely with Shūzō , who assisted her communications with his advanced Dutch ability . Her father 's reputation helped her gain patients of her own . In April 1862 Siebold was made to return to Europe again and never returned to Japan . 
 Ine continued to learn from Dutch physicians in the Nagasaki community such as J. L. C. Pompe van Meerdervoort , who lauded her skills in print . Van Meerdervoort founded in 1861 the first Western @-@ style hospital and medical school in Japan , the Nagasaki <unk> , with the support of the military government , and Ine attended classes in the women 's ward and assisted in operations there . She was the first woman in Japan to witness the dissection of a human corpse , carried out by Van Meerdervoort . 
 Her reputation and connections in the Western @-@ learning community won Ine the patronage of Date Munenari , whose favour extended to her daughter , now named Takako . As her mixed German – Japanese blood could lead her to suffer discrimination , Munenari had her change her name to Kusumoto <unk> . He extended a modest official rice stipend to Ine , and she was expected to be ready to serve in the women 's quarters at the castle ; she was one of three doctors present when Munenari 's wife Yoshiko gave birth in 1867 . Ine had a busy practice in Uwajima and made frequent travel between Nagasaki and Uwajima during the 1860s . Munenari made effort on behalf of her father and Shūzō , who were arrested in 1861 in Edo by anti @-@ foreign factions . Shūzō was released in 1865 and returned to Uwajima , where in 1866 he married Takako . 
 Ine 's mother died in 1869 . About this time Ine studied obstetrics in Nagasaki with Antonius Bauduin , who pioneered <unk> there and was appointed to the <unk> national medical school in Tokyo , which had just been renamed from Edo and where the Emperor had moved after his restoration . After other moves Ine also settled in Tokyo . There she became acquainted with Takako 's half @-@ brother Ishii <unk> , the son of Ishii Sōken . Ine maintained contact in Tokyo with her half @-@ brother Alexander , who worked for the British legation , and another half @-@ brother Heinrich , who had worked there as an interpreter for the Austro @-@ Hungarian legation since 1869 . 
 = = = Later career and death = = = 
 <unk> and Shūzō won prestigious appointments in the capital , and in 1873 , through her connections with Fukuzawa <unk> and other Western scholars , she attended the birth of the child of Emperor Meiji 's concubine <unk> Mitsuko ; the child was stillborn and Mitsuko died four days later . Ine received the considerable sum of 100 yen for her effort . Shūzō and Takako moved to Osaka in 1876 , where Shūzō worked for the Osaka Hospital . In 1877 he became sick and died there . Takako became pregnant from an acquaintance and gave birth to a boy in 1879 , whom Ine adopted as her heir and named Shūzō . Takako married the doctor <unk> <unk> , with whom she had a further three children before his death in 1886 . 
 Ine returned to Nagasaki , where she earned her midwife 's license in 1884 . She returned to Tokyo in 1889 and may have retired by 1895 , at which time the family moved into a Western @-@ style house Heinrich had had built in Azabu . She died there on 27 August 1903 after eating freshwater eel and watermelon , which are said to have given her food poisoning . She enjoyed the social support of the Western @-@ style medical and scholarly communities , the high regard of her students and fellow practitioners , and the financial support of her father . 
 Ine was said to have had fair skin , somewhat curly brown hair , and blue eyes . She never married . In later life she preferred not to reveal her mixed ancestry . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ine appears as a leading character in the novels Kashin ( 1972 ) by Ryōtarō Shiba and Akira Yoshimura Von Siebold no <unk> ( 1979 ) , and in the television dramas <unk> no Ine ( " Ine of Holland " ) in 1970 , Kashin in 1977 ( based on Shiba 's novel ) , and O @-@ Ine : Chichi no na wa Siebold ( " O @-@ Ine : Her Father 's Name is Siebold " ) in 2000 . Musicals based on Ine 's life include Bakumatsu Gāru : <unk> O @-@ Ine Monogatari ( " Bakumatsu Girl : The Tale of Doktor O @-@ Ine " ) , which opened in Ehime in 2012 . 
 A volume written by Hamada Keiko and illustrated by Takashi <unk> titled Nihon de Hajimete no Joi : Kusumoto Ine ( " The First Woman Doctor in Japan : Kusumoto Ine " ) appeared in 1992 as part of the Denki : <unk> ni <unk> ( " Biography : Learn from People " ) series of biographies for youths . The cartoonist Maki Masaki adapted Ine 's story to comics in Siebold O @-@ Ine in 1995 ; Masaki depicts Ine with red @-@ tinted hair and focuses the story on Ine 's strength of will in the face of the trials she underwent both as a female medical student and an ai no ko ( " love child " ) , a derogatory term for a mixed @-@ race child . 
 = Utah State Route 101 = 
 State Route 101 ( SR @-@ 101 ) is a 21 @.@ 811 @-@ mile ( 35 @.@ 101 km ) long state highway located in the U.S. state of Utah . The route serves as a spur route into the Uinta @-@ Wasatch @-@ Cache National Forest through the cities of Wellsville and Hyrum , with an intermediate intersection with U.S. Route 89 ( US @-@ 89 ) and US @-@ 91 . SR @-@ 101 starts at an intersection of Main Street and SR @-@ 23 ( Center Street ) . Heading generally eastward , the highway terminates at the Hardware Ranch Wildlife Management Area . SR @-@ 101 was first designated in 1931 as a loop off SR @-@ 1 from Logan , south to Hyrum , and west to Wellsville . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Located entirely in Cache County , SR @-@ 101 starts at an intersection of Main Street and SR @-@ 23 ( Center Street ) . The highway heads easterly for the first 0 @.@ 4 mi ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) before it turns northeasterly , crossing the Little Bear River and intersects US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 at a traffic light controlled at @-@ grade interchange . After the interchange , SR @-@ 101 turns to the southeast after entering Wellsville city limits . At 400 West , SR @-@ 101 turns south for 3 blocks before turning back to the east , and intersecting SR @-@ 165 . 
 After leaving Hyrum , SR @-@ 101 dips to the southeast again , entering the Uinta @-@ Wasatch @-@ Cache National Forest and a canyon formed by the Blacksmith Fork River . The final 13 @.@ 9 mi ( 22 @.@ 4 km ) are inside the forest , serving as an access route to several campgrounds , as well as a diversion dam , and electric plant . The route comes to an end at the Hardware Ranch Wildlife Management Area , a working ranch owned and run by the state of Utah . 
 For the year 2007 , a daily average of 5 @,@ 075 cars traveled along SR @-@ 101 at the intersection with US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 . This represents only a slight growth from previous years ( in 2006 , the average was 5 @,@ 005 ; in 2005 , 4 @,@ 620 ) . Nineteen percent of this traffic was composed of trucks . The lowest amount of traffic is accounted for on the final stretch of the highway through the Uinta @-@ Wasatch @-@ Cache National Forest , with an average of 670 cars per day traveling to the Hardware Ranch visitors center . This represents a small increase from previous years , with an average of 635 cars per day in 2006 and 585 cars per day in 2005 traveling to the visitors center . 
 = = History = = 
 SR @-@ 101 was formed in 1931 as a loop off SR @-@ 1 ( now US @-@ 91 ) from Logan south to Hyrum and west to Wellsville . The road from Hyrum east to the Hardware Ranch was added to the state highway system in 1949 as State Route 242 , and that route was extended south to SR @-@ 39 in 1965 . The legislature redefined the Hyrum @-@ area routes in 1969 , taking SR @-@ 101 east from Wellsville to the Hardware Ranch over former SR @-@ 242 , and returning the extension to SR @-@ 39 to local control . The leg of former SR @-@ 101 from Hyrum north to Logan became part of a new SR @-@ 165 at that time . On March 17 , 1972 , the roadway connecting the Hardware Ranch Visitors Center to SR @-@ 101 was added to the state route system as an addition to SR @-@ 101 . The connector road was previously designated Collector Road 311 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Cache County . 
 = Nicholas de Balmyle = 
 Nicholas de Balmyle ( d . 1319 × 1320 ) , also called Nicholas of St Andrews , was a Scottish administrator and prelate in the late 13th century and early 14th century . A graduate of an unknown university , he served his earliest years as a clergyman at St Andrews , moving on to hold churches in Lothian as well as deputising ( as Official ) to two archdeacons of Lothian . 
 In the late summer and in the autumn of 1296 , between the death of Bishop William Fraser and the arrival of the new Bishop of St Andrews William de Lamberton , Nicholas was placed in charge of the diocese of St Andrews as Official . Nicholas thereafter can be found exercising a senior role in Scottish affairs , and by early 1301 he was Chancellor of Scotland . In his late 60s or ( more probably ) his 70s by this stage , Nicholas was an extremely old man , yet in 1307 he became Bishop of Dunblane . He held this position until his death in either 1319 or 1320 . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 It is highly unlikely that Nicholas was born later than the 1230s , as he was styled Magister by 1259 , indicating that by that date he possessed a Master 's degree . It was rare for someone under twenty years old or even older to have such a qualification in this period . The university or universities he attended are not known . 
 Until 1295 , Nicholas was referred to as Nicholas of St Andrews ( de Sancto Andrea ) , but in February of that year he began to be called de Balmyle , one source referring to him as de <unk> <unk> de Sancto Andrea ( de Balmyle called de <unk> ) . It is probable that he adopted de Sancto Andrea when he finished training at St Andrews and went elsewhere , and that he dropped it in 1295 when he moved back . 
 Nicholas ' apparent surname , de Balmyle , points to an association with Balmyle near <unk> , in the region where Gowrie and Angus border , though that is only one of two possible locations . 
 = = Early career = = 
 As a graduate , Nicholas is first found active at St Andrews in the entourage of Gamelin , Bishop of St Andrews , in 1259 . He does not appear very often in any witness lists during the following few decades , but does appear along with other St Andrews clerics witnessing a charter of William , Earl of Mar at Falkland on 21 January 1268 . 
 He disappeared from the records until found as Official to the Archdeacon of Lothian ( 1283 × 1285 ) . It is possible that in this period he left Scotland for further study . The position of Official was held under the absentee Archdeacon of Lothian , Adam de Gullane , and afterwards , Archdeacon William Frere , and was probably held along with the post of vicar of Haddington ; the latter he definitely held by 1295 . Nicholas is found as Official in a document dating certainly between 1273 and 1285 , a document which can probably be more precisely dated to between 1283 and 1285 . 
 He was pastor of the church of Calder Comitis , Midlothian , by September 1296 . Both churches were indirectly under the patronage of the Bishop of St Andrews , William Fraser . The rector of Haddington was St Andrews Cathedral Priory and although the church of Calder Comitis was normally under the patronage of the Mormaer of Fife , at that point in time the wardship of the young mormaer 's lands was being held by the Bishop of St Andrews . 
 On 6 November 1292 , he acted as a substitute auditor on behalf of John de Balliol at Berwick in the Great Cause . The latter was the legal process by which Edward I , King of the English , mediated the succession dispute to the Scottish throne , the end result of which Balliol was selected by King Edward to be king on condition of open subordination . 
 Nicholas attended King John 's first parliament in February 1293 at Scone . He is found witnessing a charter at Newbattle Abbey on 20 November 1293 , as Archdeacon William Frere 's Official , and on 20 December is mentioned by Frere as a commissary of the Official of the diocese of St Andrews appointed to adjudicate on 4 January 1294 , a case involving Kelso Abbey . He witnessed a charter along with Archdeacon Frere and Bishop William Fraser at <unk> on 13 February 1295 . 
 = = Nicholas and the wars of Scottish independence = = 
 In 1296 , the agreement that had followed from the Great Cause between King Edward I and the King of the Scots , John Balliol , broke down . King Edward resolved to depose King John , invading the kingdom and beginning the Wars of Scottish Independence . Nicholas , as pastor of Calder @-@ Comitis , swore fealty to King Edward at Berwick on 28 August 1296 . His lands were restored thereafter , on 2 September , Edward having notionally confiscated all the lands of the Scottish clergy earlier in the year pending homage . 
 In the following year , William Fraser , the Bishop of St Andrews , died , and it was Nicholas who was chosen to be Official of the diocese and to administer it during the vacancy . He performed this function until the return to Scotland from France of the new bishop , William de Lamberton . 
 After his return in August 1299 , Lamberton was Guardian of Scotland and Nicholas became his close associate . Nicholas can be seen to have benefited as a result . He became Chancellor of Scotland by 30 January 1301 . Balmyle 's pension for being Chancellor was to be paid by Arbroath Abbey , for which the abbey later fell into arrears . 
 Later in the year , in April , he was one of four Scottish envoys sent to Canterbury for abortive talks with the English and French . In the next few years , Nicholas ' activities are difficult to trace , but he was probably involved in much diplomatic activity , including perhaps having a hand in drawing up the brief which Baldred Bisset would later deliver to the pope in the interests of Scottish independence . It was probably in this time too that Nicholas became a clerk at Arbroath Abbey and perhaps a canon of Dunblane Cathedral . 
 Nicholas may have remained as Chancellor until 1305 . His accession as Chancellor by 1301 corresponded with a renewed emphasis on the authority of King John in government documents . Becoming Chancellor by 1301 , in the words of Geoffrey Barrow , meant that he became " one of the handful of key men who directed the national struggle " . 
 = = Episcopal election = = 
 Following the death of his namesake Nicholas , Bishop of Dunblane ( and former Abbot of Arbroath ) , Nicholas de Balmyle was among the canons of Dunblane with the responsibility of selecting a successor . Bishop Nicholas had died sometime between 1306 ( after his last attestation on 26 January ) and late 1307 . The election was done by compromissarii ( a short @-@ list of canons delegated to perform election ) , with John , Abbot of Arbroath excluded from the vote , perhaps because of his known pro @-@ English tendencies . 
 The seven compromissarii were the dean ( name not known ) , Maurice , Abbot of Inchaffray , William , Abbot of Lindores , Michael , Abbot of Cambuskenneth , William de <unk> , Henry de Stirling , and Nicholas de Balmyle . They were instructed to elect from among themselves , and their decision was the promotion of Nicholas de Balmyle . Nicholas , Bishop @-@ elect of Dunblane , travelled to the Apostolic See along with proctors of the cathedral chapter . After the election was confirmed by Pope Clement V , Nicholas was consecrated by Nicholas , Cardinal @-@ Bishop of Ostia at Poitiers on 11 December 1307 . 
 It was Geoffrey Barrow 's belief , supported by Donald Watt , that their decision was the result of pressure from the new Scottish king , Robert de Brus , who may have valued Balmyle 's experience and trusted his political record . The usual secular patron of the diocese was the Mormaer of Strathearn , but the incumbent Maol <unk> III was at that stage a prisoner @-@ exile at Rochester in England , thus allowing Robert to take his place . 
 = = Bishop of Dunblane = = 
 When Nicholas returned to Scotland , and the exact nature of his activities over the next few years , remain unclear matters . His episcopal rank makes it likely that he attended the parliaments and took part in the affairs of the kingdom during the early years of his episcopate , but direct proof is lacking . 
 He witnessed a charter of Cambuskenneth Abbey along with John de <unk> , Bishop of Brechin , on 12 September 1311 . He is found witnessing many ecclesiastical and royal documents through 1312 , 1313 and beyond . He witnessed royal acts at <unk> and Dundee in April 1312 , at Ayr on 27 May 1315 , at Edinburgh on 9 March 1317 , at Scone on 14 June that year , at Melrose on 24 July 1317 , again at Scone on 3 December 1318 and at Arbroath on 8 February 1319 . 
 On 6 October 1312 , he came to an agreement with Bernard , Abbot of Arbroath , which resolved Nicholas ' complaints concerning the non payment of his pension as well as more official disputes between the bishopric of Dunblane and the abbey . In the following year he was in a dispute with Dunfermline Abbey regarding the church of Logie @-@ <unk> in Stirlingshire , a dispute which was never resolved during Nicholas ' episcopate . 
 On 9 May 1315 , he is found at Perth assisting William de Sinclair , Bishop of Dunkeld , in a judgment regarding Donnchadh de Strathearn . On 27 March 1318 he was named as papal mandatory to oversee the provision of the Italian Robert <unk> of Florence to the deanery of Glasgow Cathedral . 
 It is not known exactly when Bishop Nicholas died . The see of Dunblane is first known to have been vacant on 30 January 1320 and Bishop Nicholas ' last appearance in the records was witnessing a charter of Coupar Angus Abbey at Arbroath on 8 February 1318 : his death therefore fell between these two points . 
 = Five Short Graybles = 
 " Five Short Graybles " is the second episode of the fourth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich , Skyler Page , and Cole Sanchez , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on April 9 , 2012 . The episode guest stars Emo Philips as Cuber . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . This episode is a series of short stories — concerning BMO ( voiced by Niki Yang ) , Finn and Jake , Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Hynden Walch ) , the Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) , and Lumpy Space Princess ( voiced by Pendleton Ward ) — all centered on a common theme of the five senses , hosted by a mysterious man named Cuber from the future . 
 The episode 's premise was conceived when Ward was forced to cut a scene involving a high @-@ five from a previous script . Ward enjoyed the scene so much that he decided to write an entire episode based around high @-@ fives . Originally , it was planned for live action footage of Ward to appear in the episode , introducing each clip . This , however , was later scrapped in favor of the character of Cuber . " Five Short Graybles " , along with other episodes of Cartoon Network programming , helped make the network the number one television destination for boys aged 2 – 11 , 6 @-@ 11 , and 9 @-@ 14 on Monday nights , according to Nielsen ratings , and Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club applauded the various elements that the show was able to include in only an 11 @-@ minute episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a futuristic character named Cuber ( voiced by Emo Philips ) announcing to the audience that they will be watching five short vignettes that are all unified by one theme . Cuber challenges the audience to then guess the theme . 
 The first short focuses on BMO ( voiced by Niki Yang ) , who talks to itself in the mirror , pretending as if it is talking to another character called " Football " . BMO insists that it is a real , living boy , and attempts to demonstrate this to Football by brushing its teeth and using the toilet . Unbeknownst to BMO , Finn and Jake are watching the activity from outside a window . The focus then shifts to Finn and Jake , who attempt to experience the ultimate high five . Eventually , Finn places himself in a catapult , and Jake stretches himself into a slingshot , and the two launch themselves across Ooo . 
 The next vignette focuses on Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Hynden Walch ) as she tries to create the perfect sandwich using bizarre science . After exhausting herself going to extreme and ridiculous lengths to produce and combine all the ingredients perfectly , she offers the sandwich to Cinnamon Bun ( voiced by Dee Bradley Baker ) , who merely shoves it into his pastry body and belches foodstuff onto the princess . The action then shifts to the Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) , who smells a stench in his ice castle . After mistakenly assuming that the smell was being caused by Gunter the penguin 's flatulence , the Ice King realizes that his armpits are actually the source of the smell . After taking a shower , he ponders aloud as to how he got so smelly . Gunter then proceeds to <unk> underneath his arms . 
 The final vignette focuses on Lumpy Space Princess ( voiced by Pendleton Ward ) as she attempts to win a talent show by singing a song entitled " These Lumps " . Before she can perform , however , a group of candy citizens steal her song . Lumpy Space Princess becomes enraged and throws a basketball into the audience , which hits an audience member and accidentally makes a basket in the process . Due to the impressiveness of this action , Peppermint Butler ( voiced by Steve Little ) names her the winner . Just then , Finn and Jake collide in mid @-@ air , producing a high five that reverberates across Ooo . The duo are named the winner , much to Lumpy Space Princess ' chagrin . 
 The episode comes to a close with Cuber revealing that the theme was the five senses : BMO saw Football in the mirror , Finn and Jake touched each other 's hands , Princess Bubblegum made a tasty sandwich , Ice King smelled something foul , and Lumpy Space Princess heard music . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Five Short Graybles " was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich , Skyler Page , and Cole Sanchez , from a story developed by series creator Pendleton Ward , Patrick McHale , and Kent Osborne . The episode was directed by Larry Leichliter . This was the first episode that Page worked on for the series ; he was so excited to be working on the series that after he finished the storyboard , he traveled to Hawaii as a personal reward . The episode can trace its genesis to a short , but humorous scene involving a high five that Ward had been forced to cut from an episode . Ward was unhappy about the edit , and later jokingly said via his Twitter that he would make an episode entirely about high @-@ fives . Although Ward was being facetious , the idea of using a high five as an overarching plot point was then used in " Five Short Graybles " . 
 Sanchez storyboarded the scenes with Ice King , as well as the scenes with Lumpy Space Princess . He later noted that the two sections were united by the fact that they both featured characters who were " being a little bit mean " to others . Originally , it was planned for live action footage of Ward to appear in the episode ; he would have introduced each clip , serving as a framing device . This idea , however , was eventually vetoed . Herpich came up with the idea to replace Ward with a futuristic man named Cuber , as well as the idea to give him dialogue so that he would sound like he was speaking a " dialect from thousand of years in the future " . According to Herpich , the word " <unk> " is a supposed distortion of the word " fables " . 
 The episode guest stars Emo Philips as Cuber . He would later reprise his role for the fifth season episodes " Five More Short Graybles " , " Another Five More Short Graybles " , and the sixth season episode " Graybles 1000 + " . Every one of Philips 's voice recording takes was so different that Nate Cash , one of the series ' creative directors , had to piece together disparate recordings to make the final composition . The episode also contains the short song " These Lumps " , sung by Lumpy Space Princess . Ward himself had a difficult time singing this song was because he was trying to both sing the song on pitch and retain Lumpy Space Princess 's accent . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Five Short Graybles " first aired on Cartoon Network on April 9 , 2012 . Together with other episodes of Cartoon Network programming , the episodes helped make the network the number one television destination for boys aged 2 – 11 , 6 @-@ 11 , and 9 @-@ 14 on Monday nights , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode first saw physical release as part of the eponymous 2012 DVD , Jake vs. Me @-@ Mow , which included 16 episodes from the series ' first four seasons . It was later re @-@ released as part of the complete fourth season DVD in October 2014 . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " , describing it as " very weird " and " bizarre " . Sava wrote that it is " unbelievable that all of [ the activity in the episode ] happens in 10 minutes , which goes to show just how much material is packed into every episode of this series . " He also noted that Cuber revealing the uniting theme was " a reminder to all the adults in the audience that the show that ’ s making them laugh so hard is targeted to kids in grade school " . 
 = Scott Smith ( American politician ) = 
 Scott Smith ( born 1956 ) is an American businessman and politician , elected as the 38th mayor of Mesa , Arizona , on May 20 , 2008 . He took office on June 2 , 2008 and served until April 16 , 2014 , when he resigned to run for Governor of Arizona in the Republican Primary . In 2013 @-@ 14 , he served as president of the United States Conference of Mayors . His previous employment includes serving as president of both Great Western Homes and K. <unk> Homes . He also has financial and business consulting experience as well as a history of involvement in community organizations . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Smith spent his early childhood in Tucson , Arizona then grew up in Mesa after his family moved there in 1967 , when his father assumed the role of superintendent of Mesa Public Schools . He was a star basketball player at Westwood High School and graduated in 1974 . He obtained a BS in accounting in 1980 from the Brigham Young University Marriott School of Management . He subsequently attended Arizona State University where he obtained an MBA in 1985 and a juris doctorate in 1996 from the Arizona State University College of Law . 
 = = Business career = = 
 Prior to his time in office , Smith held various professional positions . Between 1988 and 1993 he was an accounting and finance instructor at the University of Phoenix . He held leadership roles in home building companies : from 1994 to 2003 he was president of Great Western Homes , and from 2003 to 2007 he was a regional president for K. <unk> Homes . Before and during the time that he held these aforementioned positions he was active as a financial and business consultant at <unk> , Ltd . Smith also held a variety of quasi @-@ public roles , such as the 2006 – 07 campaign chairman for the Mesa United Way and as a member of the citizens tax initiative committee . 
 = = 2008 election for mayor of Mesa = = 
 Smith launched his campaign for mayor on May 1 , 2007 , with former U.S. Congressman Matt Salmon as his campaign chairman . Incumbent Keno Hawker was term limited . The primary election had two other candidates : restaurant businessman / three term city councilman Rex Griswold and vice @-@ mayor / two term city councilwoman Claudia Walters . Smith ranked first with 39 % of the vote , qualifying for the run @-@ off election . Griswold ranked second with 33 % of the vote and Walters was last with 28 % of the vote . 
 Walters endorsed Smith . In the May run @-@ off election , Smith defeated Griswold 56 % <unk> % . It was the first time that a candidate defeated someone who had resigned from the City Council to run for mayor in more than a generation . Al Brooks was successful in 1983 and Willie Wong was successful in 1991 . His first attempt at public office , Smith was the first person since 1966 to be elected mayor of Mesa without having first served on the Mesa City Council . 
 = = Mayor of Mesa ( 2008 @-@ present ) = = 
 = = = First term = = = 
 Smith 's first term of office ran from June 2 , 2008 to January 22 , 2013 . Mesa , which is in Maricopa County , Arizona , along with Phoenix , is part of the Phoenix metropolitan area . It is the thirty @-@ ninth most populous city in the United States and the third most populous city in the state of Arizona ( after Phoenix and Tucson ) according to 2010 United States Census Bureau estimates . It is the largest of seven incorporated areas with populations of 100 @,@ 000 or more ( followed by Glendale , Chandler , Scottsdale , Gilbert , Tempe and Peoria ) that surround Phoenix in its metropolitan area . 
 On August 6 , 2008 , after two months as mayor , Smith served as ceremonial driver for the first run of METRO Light Rail , a new light rail transit for Phoenix , Mesa and Tempe . The 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) light rail system had its grand opening on December 27 , 2008 . 
 Economic development has been a key aspect of Smith 's administration . During his first term , two major citywide elections involving economic development opportunities were brought to the voters . First , in March 2009 , Smith led the charge for a development deal that would bring a 1 @,@ 200 room Gaylord Hotel and Resort to the Mesa Proving Grounds . Proposition 300 , passed by the largest margin in the history of the city with 84 % of voters approving . 
 In November 2011 , voters in Mesa were asked to approve an incentive package that would build the Chicago Cubs a new spring training facility . The Cubs , who had trained in Mesa for over 50 years , had offers to move their operations to Naples , Florida . Taking the lead again , Smith helped Proposition 420 pass with 63 % of the vote . <unk> of the planned stadium , and accompanying " <unk> West " entertainment district were released prior to the election and it is expected that the stadium will be complete by the 2014 spring training season . In August 2011 , it was reported that the Arizona State University baseball team would join the Cubs and move their facilities to the new stadium upon completion instead of renovating Packard Stadium , however they later moved to Phoenix Municipal Stadium . 
 Smith has pushed his <unk> initiative to focus on industries of opportunity that Mesa has had success in . <unk> is an acronym for healthcare , education , aerospace and tourism / technology . 
 Smith played a significant role in the Air Force Research Lab ( AFRL ) agreement , which allows Mesa to lease the facility and eventually own it while maintaining its highly classified status . The AFRL site is the only such secured facility in Arizona and is one of just a handful in the United States . 
 In January 2011 Smith unveiled <unk> , an initiative designed to invigorate Mesa through transformative community projects . Leveraging technology for civic engagement , <unk> is a grassroots improvement effort where residents submit , vote and comment on ideas that will transform the community . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 Smith was unopposed in his election for a second four @-@ year term on August 28 , 2012 . His second term of office runs from January 22 , 2013 to January 23 , 2017 . Smith is term limited . 
 He was president of the United States Conference of Mayors ( USCM ) . He is the first Arizona mayor to serve as president of the organization . 
