 The Wall Street Journal , Politico and the Arizona Republic have run op @-@ ed pieces about the national debt crisis co @-@ authored by Smith , then USCM president Antonio Villaraigosa ( mayor of Los Angeles ) and USCM vice president Michael Nutter ( mayor of Philadelphia ) . Smith has also been featured on Bloomberg TV , MSNBC with Andrea Mitchell , CNBC 's The <unk> Report and in the Washington Post . 
 = = 2014 election for governor = = 
 After much speculation throughout 2013 , Mayor Smith announced that he would run for Arizona Governor on January 9 , 2014 . 
 He was endorsed by Governor Jan Brewer on August 6 , 2014 , adding energy to his campaign ahead of the Republican primary . However , he placed second to Doug <unk> in the Republican gubernatorial primary . 
 = = National news coverage = = 
 Smith published an article in The Ripon Forum in 2013 discussing his successes as a mayor . Smith implemented a reorganization of city government , saving nearly 20 % of the total budget in doing so . He began commercial airline service at Phoenix @-@ Mesa Gateway Airport . Additionally , Smith oversaw the development of five new fire stations , two new police stations and over $ 150 million in street and road improvements , and oversaw development of a three @-@ mile extension of the Mesa light rail . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He has raised his children in Mesa . 
 = Texas Revolution = 
 The Texas Revolution ( October 2 , 1835 – April 21 , 1836 ) began when colonists ( primarily from the United States ) in the Mexican province of Texas rebelled against the increasingly centralist Mexican government . After a decade of political and cultural clashes between the Mexican government and the increasingly large population of American settlers in Texas , hostilities erupted in October 1835 . Texians ( English @-@ speaking settlers ) disagreed on whether the ultimate goal was independence or a return to the Mexican Constitution of 1824 . While delegates at the Consultation ( provisional government ) debated the war 's motives , Texians and a flood of volunteers from the United States defeated the small garrisons of Mexican soldiers by mid @-@ December 1835 . 
 The Consultation declined to declare independence and installed an interim government , whose infighting led to political paralysis and a dearth of effective governance in Texas . An ill @-@ conceived proposal to invade Matamoros siphoned much @-@ needed volunteers and provisions from the fledgling Texas army . In March 1836 , a second political convention declared independence and appointed leadership for the new Republic of Texas . 
 Determined to avenge Mexico 's honor , President Antonio López de Santa Anna vowed to personally retake Texas . His Army of Operations entered Texas in mid @-@ February 1836 and found the Texians completely unprepared . Mexican General José de Urrea led a contingent of troops on the Goliad Campaign up the Texas coast , defeating all Texian troops in his path and executing most of those who surrendered . Santa Anna led a larger force to San Antonio de Béxar ( or Béxar ) , where his troops defeated the Texian garrison in the Battle of the Alamo , killing almost all of the defenders . 
 For the next month , a newly created Texian army under the command of Sam Houston steadily retreated towards the border with Louisiana ; terrified civilians fled with the army , in a melee known as the Runaway Scrape . On March 31 , Houston paused his men at Groce 's Landing on the Brazos River , and for the next two weeks , the Texians received rigorous military training . Becoming complacent and underestimating the strength of his foes , Santa Anna further subdivided his troops . On April 21 , Houston 's army staged a surprise assault on Santa Anna and his vanguard force at the Battle of San Jacinto . The Mexican troops were quickly routed , and vengeful Texians executed many who tried to surrender . Santa Anna was taken hostage ; in exchange for his life , he ordered the Mexican army to retreat south of the Rio Grande . Mexico refused to recognize the Republic of Texas , and intermittent conflicts between the two countries continued into the 1840s . The annexation of Texas as the 28th state of the United States , in 1845 , led directly to the Mexican – American War . 
 = = Background = = 
 After a failed attempt by France to colonize Texas in the late 17th century , Spain developed a plan to settle the region . On its southern edge , along the Medina and Nueces Rivers , Spanish Texas was bordered by the province of Coahuila . On the east , Texas bordered Louisiana . Following the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 , the United States also claimed the land west of the Sabine River , all the way to the Rio Grande . Although the United States officially renounced that claim as part of the Transcontinental Treaty with Spain in 1819 , many Americans continued to believe that Texas should belong to their nation , and over the next decade the United States made several offers to purchase the region . 
 Following the Mexican War of Independence , Texas became part of Mexico . Under the Constitution of 1824 , which defined the country as a federal republic , the provinces of Texas and Coahuila were combined to become the state Coahuila y Tejas . Texas was granted only a single seat in the state legislature , which met in Saltillo , hundreds of miles away . After months of grumbling by Tejanos ( Mexican @-@ born residents of Texas ) outraged at the loss of their political autonomy , state officials agreed to make Texas a department of the new state , with a de facto capital in San Antonio de Béxar . 
 Texas was very sparsely populated , with fewer than 3 @,@ 500 residents , and only about 200 soldiers , which made it extremely vulnerable to attacks by native tribes and American filibusters . In the hopes that an influx of settlers could control the Indian raids , the bankrupt Mexican government liberalized immigration policies for the region . Finally able to settle legally in Texas , Anglos from the United States soon vastly outnumbered the Tejanos . Most of the immigrants came from the southern United States . Many were slave owners , and most brought with them significant prejudices against other races , attitudes often applied to the Tejanos , . Mexico 's official religion was Roman Catholicism , yet the majority of the immigrants were Protestants who distrusted Catholics . 
 Mexican authorities became increasingly concerned about the stability of the region . The colonies teetered at the brink of revolt in 1829 , after Mexico abolished slavery . In response , President Anastasio Bustamante implemented the Laws of April 6 , 1830 , which , among other things , prohibited further immigration to Texas from the United States , increased taxes , and reiterated the ban on slavery . Settlers simply circumvented or ignored the laws . By 1834 , an estimated 30 @,@ 000 Anglos lived in Coahuila y Tejas , compared to only 7 @,@ 800 Mexican @-@ born residents . 
 In 1832 , Antonio López de Santa Anna led a revolt to overthrow Bustamante . Texians , or English @-@ speaking settlers , used the rebellion as an excuse to take up arms . By mid @-@ August , all Mexican troops had been expelled from east Texas . Buoyed by their success , Texians held two political conventions to persuade Mexican authorities to weaken the Laws of April 6 , 1830 . In November 1833 the Mexican government attempted to address some of the concerns , repealing some sections of the law and granting the colonists further concessions , including increased representation in the state legislature . Stephen F. Austin , who had brought the first American settlers to Texas , wrote to a friend that " Every evil complained of has been remedied . " Mexican authorities were quietly watchful , concerned that the colonists were maneuvering towards secession . 
 Santa Anna soon revealed himself to be a centralist , transitioning the Mexican government to a centralized government . In 1835 , the 1824 Constitution was overturned ; state legislatures were dismissed , militias disbanded . Federalists throughout Mexico were appalled . Citizens in the states of Oaxaca and Zacatecas took up arms . After Santa Anna 's troops subdued the rebellion in Zacatecas in May , he gave his troops two days to pillage the city ; over 2 @,@ 000 noncombatants were killed . The governor of Coahuila y Tejas , Agustín Viesca , refused to dissolve the legislature , instead ordering that the session reconvene in Béxar , further from the influence of the Mexican army . Although prominent Tejano Juan Seguín raised a militia company to assist the governor , the Béxar ayuntamiento ( city council ) ordered him not to interfere , and Viesca was arrested before he reached Texas . 
 Public opinion in Texas was divided . Editorials in the United States began advocating complete independence for Texas . After several men staged a minor revolt against customs duties in Anahuac in June , local leaders began calling for a public meeting to determine whether a majority of settlers favored independence , a return to federalism , or the status quo . Although some leaders worried that Mexican officials would see this type of gathering as a step towards revolution , by the end of August most communities had agreed to send delegates to the Consultation , scheduled for October 15 . 
 As early as April 1835 , military commanders in Texas began requesting reinforcements , fearing the citizens would revolt . Mexico was ill @-@ prepared for a large civil war , but continued unrest in Texas posed a significant danger to the power of Santa Anna and of Mexico . If the people of Coahuila also took up arms , Mexico faced losing a large portion of its territory . Without the northeastern province to act as a buffer , it was likely that United States influence would spread , and the Mexican territories of Nuevo Mexico and Alta California would be at risk of future American encroachment . Santa Anna had no wish to tangle with the United States , and he knew that the unrest needed to be subdued before the United States could be convinced to become involved . In early September , Santa Anna ordered his brother @-@ in @-@ law , General Martín Perfecto de Cos , to lead 500 soldiers to Texas to quell any potential rebellion . Cos and his men landed at the port of Copano on September 20 . Austin called on all municipalities to raise militias to defend themselves . 
 = = Texian offensive : October – December 1835 = = 
 = = = Gonzales = = = 
 In the early 1830s , the army loaned the citizens of Gonzales a small cannon for protection against Indian raids . After a Mexican soldier bludgeoned a Gonzales resident on September 10 , 1835 , tensions rose even further , and Mexican authorities felt it unwise to leave the settlers with a weapon . Colonel Domingo de Ugartechea , commander of all Mexican military forces in Texas , sent a small detachment of troops to retrieve the cannon . After settlers escorted the group from town without the cannon , Ugartechea sent 100 dragoons with Lieutenant Francisco de Castañeda to demand compliance , with orders to avoid force if possible . 
 Many of the settlers believed Mexican authorities were manufacturing an excuse to attack the town and eliminate the militia . Texians stalled Castañeda 's attempts to negotiate the cannon 's return for several days as they waited for reinforcements from other colonies . In the early hours of October 2 , approximately 140 Texian volunteers attacked Castañeda 's force . After a brief skirmish , Castañeda requested a meeting with Texian leader John Henry Moore . Castañeda revealed that he shared their federalist leanings , but that he was honor @-@ bound to follow orders . As Moore returned to camp , the Texians raised a homemade white banner with an image of the cannon painted in black in the center , over the words " Come and Take It " . Realizing that he was outnumbered and outgunned , Castañeda led his troops back to Béxar . In this first battle of the revolution , two Mexican soldiers were killed , and one Texian was injured when he fell off his horse . Although the event was , as characterized by historian William C. Davis , " an inconsequential skirmish in which one side did not try to fight " , Texians soon declared it a victory over Mexican troops . News of the skirmish spread throughout the United States , encouraging many adventurers to come to Texas to join the fight . 
 Volunteers continued to arrive in Gonzales . On October 11 , the troops unanimously elected Austin , who had no official military experience , the leader of the group he had dubbed the Army of the People . From the beginning , the volunteer army proved to have little discipline . Austin 's first official order was to remind his men that they were expected to obey their commanding officers . Buoyed by their victory , the Texians were determined to drive the Mexican army out of Texas , and they began preparing to march to Béxar . 
 = = = Gulf Coast campaign = = = 
 After learning that Texian troops had attacked Castañeda at Gonzales , Cos made haste for Béxar . Unaware of his departure , on October 6 , Texians in Matagorda marched on Presidio La Bahía in Goliad to kidnap him and steal the $ 50 @,@ 000 that was rumored to accompany him . On October 10 , approximately 125 volunteers , including 30 Tejanos , stormed the presidio . The Mexican garrison surrendered after a thirty @-@ minute battle . One or two Texians were wounded and three Mexican soldiers were killed with seven more wounded . 
 The Texians established themselves in the presidio , under the command of Captain Philip Dimmitt , who immediately sent all the local Tejano volunteers to join Austin on the march to Béxar . At the end of the month , Dimmitt sent a group of men under Ira Westover to engage the Mexican garrison at Fort Lipantitlán , near San Patricio . Late on November 3 , the Texians took the undermanned fort without firing a shot . After dismantling the fort , they prepared to return to Goliad . The remainder of the Mexican garrison , which had been out on patrol , approached . The Mexican troops were accompanied by 15 – 20 loyal centralists from San Patricio , including all members of the ayuntamiento . After a thirty @-@ minute skirmish , the Mexican soldiers and Texian centralists retreated . With their departure , the Texian army controlled the Gulf Coast , forcing Mexican commanders to send all communication with the Mexican interior overland . The slower land journey left Cos unable to quickly request or receive reinforcements or supplies . 
 On their return to Goliad , Westover 's group encountered Governor Viesca . After being freed by sympathetic soldiers , Viesca had immediately traveled to Texas to recreate the state government . Dimmitt welcomed Viesca but refused to recognize his authority as governor . This caused an uproar in the garrison , as many supported the governor . Dimmitt declared martial law and soon alienated most of the local residents . Over the next few months , the area between Goliad and Refugio descended into civil war . Goliad native Carlos de la Garza led a guerrilla warfare campaign against the Texian troops . According to historian Paul Lack , the Texian " <unk> tactics did too little to crush out opposition but quite enough to sway the uncommitted toward the centralists . " 
 = = = Siege of Béxar = = = 
 While Dimmitt supervised the Texian forces along the Gulf Coast , Austin led his men towards Béxar to engage Cos and his troops . Confident that they would quickly rout the Mexican troops , many Consultation delegates chose to join the military . Unable to reach a quorum , the Consultation was postponed until November 1 . On October 16 , the Texians paused 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Béxar . Austin sent a messenger to Cos giving the requirements the Texians would need to lay down their arms and " avoid the sad consequences of the Civil War which unfortunately threatens Texas " . Cos replied that Mexico would not " yield to the dictates of foreigners " . 
 The approximately 650 Mexican troops quickly built barricades throughout the town . Within days the Texian army , about 450 strong , initiated a siege of Béxar , and gradually moved their camp nearer Béxar . On October 27 , an advance party led by James Bowie and James Fannin chose Mission Concepción as the next campsite and sent for the rest of the Texian army . On learning that the Texians were temporarily divided , Ugartechea led troops to engage Bowie and Fannin 's men . The Mexican cavalry was unable to fight effectively in the wooded , riverbottom terrain , and the weapons of the Mexican infantry had a much shorter range than those of the Texians . After three Mexican infantry attacks were repulsed , Ugartechea called for a retreat . One Texian soldier had died , and between 14 and 76 Mexican soldiers were killed . Although Texas Tech University professor emeritus Alwyn Barr noted that the battle of Concepción " should have taught ... lessons on Mexican courage and the value of a good defensive position " , Texas history expert Stephen Hardin believes that " the relative ease of the victory at Concepción instilled in the Texians a reliance on their long rifles and a contempt for their enemies " . 
 As the weather turned colder and rations grew smaller , groups of Texians began to leave , most without permission . Morale was boosted on November 18 , when the first group of volunteers from the United States , the New Orleans Greys , joined the Texian army . Unlike the majority of the Texian volunteers , the Greys looked like soldiers , with uniforms , well @-@ maintained rifles , adequate ammunition , and some semblance of discipline . 
 After Austin resigned his command to become a commissioner to the United States , soldiers elected Edward Burleson as their new commander . On November 26 , Burleson received word that a Mexican pack train of mules and horses , accompanied by 50 – 100 Mexican soldiers , was within 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of Béxar . After a near mutiny , Burleson sent Bowie and William H. Jack with cavalry and infantry to intercept the supplies . In the subsequent skirmish , the Mexican forces were forced to retreat to Béxar , leaving their cargo behind . To the disappointment of the Texians , the saddlebags contained only fodder for the horses ; for this reason the battle was later known as the Grass Fight . Although the victory briefly uplifted the Texian troops , morale continued to fall as the weather turned colder and the men grew bored . After several proposals to take Béxar by force were voted down by the Texian troops , on December 4 Burleson proposed that the army lift the siege and retreat to Goliad until spring . In a last effort to avoid a retreat , Colonel Ben Milam personally recruited units to participate in an attack . The following morning , Milam and Colonel Frank W. Johnson led several hundred Texians into the city . Over the next four days , Texians fought their way from house to house towards the fortified plazas near the center of town . 
 Cos received 650 reinforcements on December 8 , but to his dismay most of them were raw recruits , including many convicts still in chains . Instead of being helpful , the reinforcements were mainly a drain on the dwindling food supplies . Seeing few other options , on December 9 , Cos and the bulk of his men withdrew into the Alamo Mission on the outskirts of Béxar . Cos presented a plan for a counterattack ; cavalry officers believed that they would be surrounded by Texians and refused their orders . Possibly 175 soldiers from four of the cavalry companies left the mission and rode south ; Mexican officers later claimed the men misunderstood their orders and were not deserting . The following morning , Cos surrendered . Under the terms of the surrender , Cos and his men would leave Texas and no longer fight against supporters of the Constitution of 1824 . With his departure , there was no longer an organized garrison of Mexican troops in Texas , and many of the Texians believed that the war was over . Burleson resigned his leadership of the army on December 15 and returned to his home . Many of the men did likewise , and Johnson assumed command of the 400 soldiers who remained . 
 According to Barr , the large number of American volunteers in Béxar " contributed to the Mexican view that Texan opposition stemmed from outside influences " . In reality , of the 1 @,@ 300 men who volunteered to fight for the Texian army in October and November 1835 , only 150 – 200 arrived from the United States after October 2 . The rest were residents of Texas with an average immigration date of 1830 . Volunteers came from every municipality , including those that were partially occupied by Mexican forces . However , as residents returned to their homes following Cos 's surrender , the Texian army composition changed dramatically . Of the volunteers serving from January through March 1836 , 78 percent had arrived from the United States after October 2 , 1835 . 
 = = Regrouping : November 1835 – February 1836 = = 
 = = = Texas Consultation and the Matamoros Expedition = = = 
 The Consultation finally convened on November 3 in San Felipe with 58 of the 98 elected delegates . After days of bitter debate , the delegates voted to create a provisional government based on the principles of the Constitution of 1824 . Although they did not declare independence , the delegates insisted they would not rejoin Mexico until federalism had been reinstated . The new government would consist of a governor and a General Council , with one representative from each municipality . Under the assumption that these two branches would cooperate , there was no system of checks and balances . 
 On November 13 , delegates voted to create a regular army and named Sam Houston its commander @-@ in @-@ chief . In an effort to attract volunteers from the United States , soldiers would be granted land bounties . This provision was significant , as all public land was owned by the state or the federal government , indicating that the delegates expected Texas to eventually declare independence . Houston was given no authority over the volunteer army led by Austin , which predated the Consultation . Houston was also appointed to the Select Committee on Indian Affairs . Three men , including Austin , were asked to go to the United States to gather money , volunteers , and supplies . The delegates elected Henry Smith as governor . On November 14 , the Consultation adjourned , leaving Smith and the Council in charge . 
 The new Texas government had no funds , so the military was granted the authority to impress supplies . This policy soon resulted in an almost universal hatred of the Council , as food and supplies became scarce , especially in the areas around Goliad and Béxar , where Texian troops were stationed . Few of the volunteers agreed to join Houston 's regular army . The Telegraph and Texas Register noted that " some are not willing , under the present government , to do any duty ... That our government is bad , all acknowledge , and no one will deny . " 
 Leaders in Texas continued to debate whether the army was fighting for independence or a return to federalism . On December 22 , Texian soldiers stationed at La Bahía issued the Goliad Declaration of Independence . Unwilling to decide the matter themselves , the Council called for another election , for delegates to the Convention of 1836 . The Council specifically noted that all free white males could vote , as well as Mexicans who did not support centralism . Smith tried to veto the latter requirement , as he believed even Tejanos with federalist leanings should be denied suffrage . 
 Leading federalists in Mexico , including former governor Viesca , Lorenzo de Zavala , and José Antonio Mexía , were advocating a plan to attack centralist troops in Matamoros . Council members were taken with the idea of a Matamoros Expedition . They hoped it would inspire other federalist states to revolt and keep the bored Texian troops from deserting the army . Most importantly , it would move the war zone outside Texas . The Council officially approved the plan on December 25 , and on December 30 Johnson and his aide Dr. James Grant took the bulk of the army and almost all of the supplies to Goliad to prepare for the expedition . Historian Stuart Reid posits that Grant was a British secret agent , and that his plan to take Matamoros , and thus tie Texas more tightly to Mexico , may have been an unofficial scheme to advance British interests in the region . 
 Petty bickering between Smith and the Council members increased dramatically , and on January 9 , 1836 , Smith threatened to dismiss the Council unless they agreed to revoke their approval of the Matamoros Expedition . Two days later the Council voted to impeach Smith and named James W. Robinson the Acting Governor . It was unclear whether either side actually had the authority to dismiss the other . By this point , Texas was essentially in anarchy . 
 Under orders from Smith , Houston successfully dissuaded all but 70 men from continuing to follow Johnson . With his own authority in question following Smith 's impeachment , Houston washed his hands of the army and journeyed to Nacogdoches to negotiate a treaty with Cherokee leaders . Houston vowed that Texas would recognize Cherokee claims to land in East Texas as long as the Indians refrained from attacking settlements or assisting the Mexican army . In his absence , Fannin , as the highest @-@ ranking officer active in the regular army , led the men who did not want to go to Matamoros to Goliad . 
 The Council had neglected to provide specific instructions on how to structure the February vote for convention delegates , leaving it up to each municipality to determine how to balance the desires of the established residents against those of the volunteers newly arrived from the United States . Chaos ensued ; in Nacogdoches , the election judge turned back a company of 40 volunteers from Kentucky who had arrived that week . The soldiers drew their weapons ; Colonel Sidney Sherman announced that he " had come to Texas to fight for it and had as soon commence in the town of Nacogdoches as elsewhere " . Eventually , the troops were allowed to vote . With rumors that Santa Anna was preparing a large army to advance into Texas , rhetoric degenerated into framing the conflict as a race war between Anglos defending their property against , in the words of David G. Burnet , a " mongrel race of degenerate Spaniards and Indians more depraved than they " . 
 = = = Mexican Army of Operations = = = 
 News of the armed uprising at Gonzales reached Santa Anna on October 23 . Aside from the ruling elite and members of the army , few in Mexico knew or cared about the revolt . Those with knowledge of the events blamed the Anglos for their unwillingness to conform to the laws and culture of their new country . Anglo immigrants had forced a war on Mexico , and Mexican honor insisted that the usurpers be defeated . Santa Anna transferred his presidential duties to Miguel Barragán in order to personally lead troops to put an end to the Texian revolt . Santa Anna and his soldiers believed that the Texians would be quickly cowed . The Mexican Secretary of War , José María Tornel , wrote : " The superiority of the Mexican soldier over the mountaineers of Kentucky and the hunters of Missouri is well known . Veterans seasoned by 20 years of wars can 't be intimidated by the presence of an army ignorant of the art of war , incapable of discipline , and renowned for insubordination . " 
 At this time , there were only 2 @,@ 500 soldiers in the Mexican interior . This was not enough to crush a rebellion and provide security — from attacks by both Indians and federalists — throughout the rest of the country . With funds loaned by the Roman Catholic Church specifically to finance the war in Texas , Santa Anna began to assemble a new army , which he dubbed the Army of Operations in Texas . A majority of the troops had been conscripted or were convicts who chose service in the military over jail . The Mexican officers knew that the Brown Bess muskets they carried lacked the range of the Texian weapons , but Santa Anna was convinced that his superior planning would nonetheless result in an easy victory . Corruption was rampant , and supplies were not plentiful . Almost from the beginning , rations were short , and there were no medical supplies or doctors . Few troops were issued heavy coats or blankets for the winter . 
 In late December , at Santa Anna 's behest , the Mexican Congress passed the Tornel Decree , declaring that any foreigners fighting against Mexican troops " will be deemed pirates and dealt with as such , being citizens of no nation presently at war with the Republic and fighting under no recognized flag . " In the early nineteenth century , captured pirates were executed immediately . The resolution thus gave the Mexican army permission to take no prisoners in the war against the Texians . This information was not widely distributed , and it is unlikely that most of the American recruits serving in the Texian army were aware that there would be no prisoners @-@ of @-@ war . 
 By December 1835 , 6 @,@ 019 soldiers had begun their march towards Texas . Progress was slow . There were not enough mules to transport all of the supplies , and many of the teamsters , all civilians , quit when their pay was delayed . The large number of <unk> — women and children who followed the army — reduced the already scarce supplies . In Saltillo , Cos and his men from Béxar joined Santa Anna 's forces . Santa Anna regarded Cos 's promise not to take up arms in Texas as meaningless because it had been given to rebels . 
 From Saltillo , the army had three choices : advance along the coast on the Atascocita Road from Matamoros to Goliad , or march on Béxar from the south , along the Laredo road , or from the west , along the Camino Real . Santa Anna ordered General José de Urrea to lead 550 troops to Goliad . Although several of Santa Anna 's officers argued that the entire army should advance along the coast , where supplies could be gained via sea , Santa Anna instead focused on Béxar , the political center of Texas and the site of Cos 's defeat . His brother @-@ in @-@ law 's surrender was seen as a blow to the honor of his family and to Mexico ; Santa Anna was determined to restore both . Santa Anna may also have thought Béxar would be easier to defeat , as his spies had informed him that most of the Texian army was along the coast , preparing for the Matamoros Expedition . Santa Anna led the bulk of his men up the Camino Real to approach Béxar from the west , confounding the Texians , who had expected any advancing troops to approach from the south . On February 17 , they crossed the Nueces River , officially entering Texas . 
 Temperatures reached record lows , and by February 13 an estimated 15 – 16 inches ( 38 – 41 cm ) of snow had fallen . A large number of the new recruits were from the tropical climate of the Yucatán and had been unable to acclimate to the harsh winter conditions . Some of them died of hypothermia , and others contracted dysentery . Soldiers who fell behind were sometimes killed by Comanche raiding parties . Nevertheless , the army continued to march towards Béxar . As they progressed , settlers in their path in South Texas evacuated northward . The Mexican army ransacked and occasionally burned the vacant homes . Santa Anna and his commanders received timely intelligence on Texian troop locations , strengths , and plans , from a network of Tejano spies organized by de la Garza . 
 = = Santa Anna 's offensive : February – March 1836 = = 
 = = = Alamo = = = 
 Fewer than 100 Texian soldiers remained at the Alamo Mission in Béxar , under the command of Colonel James C. Neill . Unable to spare the number of men necessary to mount a successful defense of the sprawling facility , in January Houston sent Bowie with 30 men to remove the artillery and destroy the complex . In a letter to Governor Smith , Bowie argued that " the salvation of Texas depends in great measure on keeping Béxar out of the hands of the enemy . It serves as the frontier picquet guard , and if it were in the possession of Santa Anna , there is no stronghold from which to repel him in his march towards the Sabine . " The letter to Smith ended , " Colonel Neill and myself have come to the solemn resolution that we will rather die in these ditches than give it up to the enemy . " Few reinforcements were authorized ; cavalry officer William B. Travis arrived in Béxar with 30 men on February 3 and five days later , a small group of volunteers arrived , including the famous frontiersman Davy Crockett . On February 11 , Neill left to recruit additional reinforcements and gather supplies . In his absence , Travis and Bowie shared command . 
 When scouts brought word on February 23 that the Mexican advance guard was in sight , the unprepared Texians gathered what food they could find in town and fell back to the Alamo . By late afternoon , Béxar was occupied by about 1 @,@ 500 Mexican troops , who quickly raised a blood @-@ red flag signifying no quarter . For the next 13 days , the Mexican army besieged the Alamo . Several small skirmishes gave the defenders much @-@ needed optimism , but had little real impact . Bowie fell ill on February 24 , leaving Travis in sole command of the Texian forces . The same day , Travis sent messengers with a letter To the People of Texas & All Americans in the World , begging for reinforcements and vowing " victory or death " ; this letter was reprinted throughout the United States and much of Europe . Texian and American volunteers began to gather in Gonzales , waiting for Fannin to arrive and lead them to reinforce the Alamo . After days of indecision , on February 26 Fannin prepared to march his 300 troops to the Alamo ; they turned back the next day , having traveled less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . Fewer than 100 Texian reinforcements reached the fort . 
 Approximately 1 @,@ 000 Mexican reinforcements arrived on March 3 . The following day , a local woman , likely Bowie 's relative Juana Navarro Alsbury , was rebuffed by Santa Anna when she attempted to negotiate a surrender for the Alamo defenders . This visit increased Santa Anna 's impatience , and he scheduled an assault for early on March 6 . Many of his officers were against the plan ; they preferred to wait until the artillery had further damaged the Alamo 's walls and the defenders were forced to surrender . Santa Anna was convinced that a decisive victory would improve morale and sound a strong message to those still agitating in the interior and elsewhere in Texas . 
 In the early hours of March 6 , the Mexican army attacked the fort . Troops from Béxar were excused from the front lines , so that they would not be forced to fight their families and friends . In the initial moments of the assault the Mexican troops were at a disadvantage . Although their column formation allowed only the front rows of soldiers to fire safely , inexperienced recruits in the back also discharged their weapons ; many Mexican soldiers were unintentionally killed by their own comrades . As Mexican soldiers swarmed over the walls , at least 80 Texians fled the Alamo and were cut down by Mexican cavalry . Within an hour , almost all of the Texian defenders , estimated at 182 – 257 men , were killed . Between four and seven Texians , possibly including Crockett , surrendered . Although General Manuel Fernández Castrillón attempted to intercede on their behalf , Santa Anna insisted that the prisoners be executed immediately . 
 Most Alamo historians agree that 400 – 600 Mexicans were killed or wounded . This would represent about one @-@ third of the Mexican soldiers involved in the final assault , which historian Timothy Todish remarks is " a tremendous casualty rate by any standards " . The battle was militarily insignificant , but had an enormous political impact . Travis had succeeded in buying time for the Convention of 1836 , scheduled for March 1 , to meet . If Santa Anna had not paused in Béxar for two weeks , he would have reached San Felipe by March 2 and very likely would have captured the delegates or caused them to flee . 
 The survivors , primarily women and children , were questioned by Santa Anna and then released . Susanna Dickinson was sent with Travis 's slave Joe to Gonzales , where she lived , to spread the news of the Texian defeat . Santa Anna assumed that knowledge of the disparity in troop numbers and the fate of the Texian soldiers at the Alamo would quell the resistance , and that Texian soldiers would quickly leave the territory . 
 = = = Goliad Campaign = = = 
 Urrea reached Matamoros on January 31 . A committed federalist himself , he soon convinced other federalists in the area that the Texians ' ultimate goal was secession and their attempt to spark a federalist revolt in Matamoros was just a method of diverting attention from themselves . Mexican double agents continued to assure Johnson and Grant that they would be able to take Matamoros easily . While Johnson waited in San Patricio with a small group of men , Grant and between 26 and 53 others roamed the area between the Nueces River and Matamoros . Although they were ostensibly searching for more horses , it is likely Grant was also attempting to contact his sources in Matamoros to further coordinate an attack . 
 Just after midnight on February 27 , Urrea 's men surprised Johnson 's forces . Six Texians , including Johnson , escaped ; the remainder were captured or killed . After learning of Grant 's whereabouts from local spies , Mexican dragoons ambushed the Texians at Agua Dulce Creek on March 2 . Twelve Texians were killed , including Grant , four were captured , and six escaped . Although Urrea 's orders were to execute those captured , he instead sent them to Matamoros as prisoners . 
 On March 11 , Fannin sent Captain Amon B. King to help evacuate settlers from the mission in Refugio . King and his men instead spent a day searching local ranches for centralist sympathizers . They returned to the mission on March 12 and were soon besieged by Urrea 's advance guard and de la Garza 's Victoriana <unk> . That same day , Fannin received orders from Houston to destroy Presidio La Bahía ( by then renamed Fort Defiance ) and march to Victoria . Unwilling to leave any of his men behind , Fannin sent William Ward with 120 men to help King 's company . Ward 's men drove off the troops besieging the church , but rather than return to Goliad , they delayed a day to conduct further raids on local ranches . 
 Urrea arrived with almost 1 @,@ 000 troops on March 14 . At the battle of Refugio , an engagement markedly similar to the battle of Concepción , the Texians repulsed several attacks and inflicted heavy casualties , relying on the greater accuracy and range of their rifles . By the end of the day , the Texians were hungry , thirsty , tired , and almost out of ammunition . Ward ordered a retreat , and under cover of darkness and rain the Texian soldiers slipped through Mexican lines , leaving several severely wounded men behind . Over the next several days , Urrea 's men , with the help of local centralist supporters , rounded up many of the Texians who had escaped . Most were executed , although Urrea pardoned a few after their wives begged for their lives , and Mexican Colonel Juan José Holzinger insisted that all of the non @-@ Americans be spared . 
 By the end of the day on March 16 , the bulk of Urrea 's forces began marching to Goliad to corner Fannin . Still waiting for word from King and Ward , Fannin continued to delay his evacuation from Goliad . As they prepared to leave on March 18 , Urrea 's advance guard arrived . For the rest of the day , the two cavalries skirmished aimlessly , succeeding only in exhausting the Texian oxen , which had remained hitched to their wagons with no food or water throughout the day . 
 The Texians began their retreat on March 19 . The pace was unhurried , and after travelling only 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , the group stopped for an hour to rest and allow the oxen to graze . Urrea 's troops caught up to the Texians later that afternoon , while Fannin and his force of about 300 men were crossing a prairie . Having learned from the fighting at Refugio , Urrea was determined that the Texians would not reach the cover of timber approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) ahead , along Coleto Creek . As Mexican forces surrounded them , the Texians formed a tight hollow square for defense . They repulsed three charges during this battle of Coleto , resulting in about nine Texians killed and 51 wounded , including Fannin . Urrea lost 50 men , with another 140 wounded . Texians had little food , no water , and declining supplies of ammunition , but voted to not try to break for the timber , as they would have had to leave the wounded behind . 
 The following morning , March 20 , Urrea paraded his men and his newly arrived artillery . Seeing the hopelessness of their situation , the Texians with Fannin surrendered . Mexican records show that the Texians surrendered at discretion ; Texian accounts claim that Urrea promised the Texians would be treated as prisoners @-@ of @-@ war and granted passage to the United States . Two days later , a group of Urrea 's men surrounded Ward and the last of his group less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Victoria . Over Ward 's vehement objections , his men voted to surrender , later recalling they were told they would be sent back to the United States . 
 On Palm Sunday , March 27 , Fannin , Ward , Westover , and their men were marched out of the presidio and shot . Mexican cavalry were stationed nearby to chase down any who tried to escape . Approximately 342 Texians died , and 27 either escaped or were spared by Mexican troops . Several weeks after the Goliad massacre , the Mexican Congress granted an official reprieve to any Texas prisoners who had incurred capital punishment . 
 = = = Texas Convention of 1836 = = = 
 The Convention of 1836 in Washington @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Brazos on March 1 attracted 45 delegates , representing 21 municipalities . Within an hour of the convention 's opening , George C. Childress submitted a proposed Texas Declaration of Independence , which passed overwhelmingly on March 2 . On March 6 , hours after the Alamo had fallen , Travis 's final dispatch arrived . His distress was evident ; delegate Robert Potter immediately moved that the convention be adjourned and all delegates join the army . Houston convinced the delegates to remain , and then left to take charge of the army . With the backing of the Convention , Houston was now commander @-@ in @-@ chief of all regular , volunteer , and militia forces in Texas . 
 Over the next ten days , delegates prepared a constitution for the Republic of Texas . Parts of the document were copied verbatim from the United States Constitution ; other articles were paraphrased . The new nation 's government was structured similarly to that of the United States , with a bicameral legislature , a chief executive , and a supreme court . In a sharp departure from its model , the new constitution expressly permitted impressment of goods and forced housing for soldiers . It also explicitly legalized slavery and recognized the people 's right to revolt against government authority . After adopting the constitution on March 17 , delegates elected interim officers to govern the country and then adjourned . David G. Burnet , who had not been a delegate , was elected president . The following day , Burnet announced the government was leaving for Harrisburg . 
 = = Retreat : March – May 1836 = = 
 = = = Texian retreat : The Runaway Scrape = = = 
 On March 11 , Santa Anna sent one column of troops to join Urrea , with instructions to move to Brazoria once Fannin 's men had been neutralized . A second set of 700 troops under General Antonio Gaona would advance along the Camino Real to Mina , and then on to Nacogdoches . General Joaquín Ramírez y Sesma would take an additional 700 men to San Felipe . The Mexican columns were thus moving northeast on roughly parallel paths , separated by 40 – 50 miles ( 64 – 80 km ) . 
 The same day that Mexican troops departed Béxar , Houston arrived in Gonzales and informed the 374 volunteers ( some without weapons ) gathered there that Texas was now an independent republic . Just after 11 p.m. on March 13 , Susanna Dickinson and Joe brought news that the Alamo garrison had been defeated and the Mexican army was marching towards Texian settlements . A hastily convened council of war voted to evacuate the area and retreat . The evacuation commenced at midnight and happened so quickly that many Texian scouts were unaware the army had moved on . Everything that could not be carried was burned , and the army 's only two cannon were thrown into the Guadalupe River . When Ramírez y Sesma reached Gonzales the morning of March 14 , he found the buildings still smoldering . 
 Most citizens fled on foot , many carrying their small children . A cavalry company led by Seguín and Salvador Flores were assigned as rear guard to evacuate the more isolated ranches and protect the civilians from attacks by Mexican troops or Indians . The further the army retreated , the more civilians joined the flight . For both armies and the civilians , the pace was slow ; torrential rains had flooded the rivers and turned the roads into mud pits . 
 As news of the Alamo 's fall spread , volunteer ranks swelled , reaching about 1 @,@ 400 men on March 19 . Houston learned of Fannin 's defeat on March 20 and realized his army was the last hope for an independent Texas . Concerned that his ill @-@ trained and ill @-@ disciplined force would only be good for one battle and aware that his men could easily be outflanked by Urrea 's forces , Houston continued to avoid engagement , to the immense displeasure of his troops . By March 28 , the Texian army had retreated 120 miles ( 190 km ) across the Navidad and Colorado Rivers . Many troops deserted ; those who remained grumbled that their commander was a coward . 
 On March 31 , Houston paused his men at Groce 's Landing , roughly 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of San Felipe . Two companies that refused to retreat further than San Felipe were assigned to guard the crossings on the Brazos River . For the next two weeks , the Texians rested , recovered from illness , and , for the first time , began practicing military drills . While there , two cannon , known as the Twin Sisters , arrived from Cincinnati , Ohio . Interim Secretary of War Thomas Rusk joined the camp , with orders from Burnet to replace Houston if he refused to fight . Houston quickly persuaded Rusk that his plans were sound . Secretary of State Samuel P. Carson advised Houston to continue retreating all the way to the Sabine River , where more volunteers would likely flock from the United States and allow the army to counterattack . Unhappy with everyone involved , Burnet wrote to Houston : " The enemy are laughing you to scorn . You must fight them . You must retreat no further . The country expects you to fight . The salvation of the country depends on your doing so . " Complaints within the camp became so strong that Houston posted notices that anyone attempting to usurp his position would be court @-@ martialed and shot . 
 Santa Anna and a smaller force had remained in Béxar . After receiving word that the acting president , Miguel Barragán , had died , Santa Anna seriously considered returning to Mexico City to solidify his position . Fear that Urrea 's victories would position him as a political rival convinced Santa Anna to remain in Texas to personally oversee the final phase of the campaign . He left on March 29 to join Ramírez y Sesma , leaving only a small force to hold Béxar . At dawn on April 7 , their combined force marched into San Felipe and captured a Texian soldier , who informed Santa Anna that the Texians planned to retreat further if the Mexican army crossed the Brazos River . Unable to cross the Brazos due to the small company of Texians barricaded at the river crossing , on April 14 a frustrated Santa Anna led a force of about 700 troops to capture the interim Texas government . Government officials fled mere hours before Mexican troops arrived in Harrisburg , and Santa Anna sent Colonel Juan Almonte with 50 cavalry to intercept them in New Washington . Almonte arrived just as Burnet shoved off in a rowboat , bound for Galveston Island . Although the boat was still within range of their weapons , Almonte ordered his men to hold their fire so as not to endanger Burnet 's family . 
 At this point , Santa Anna believed the rebellion was in its final death throes . The Texian government had been forced off the mainland , with no way to communicate with its army , which had shown no interest in fighting . He determined to block the Texian army 's retreat and put a decisive end to the war . Almonte 's scouts incorrectly reported that Houston 's army was going to Lynchburg Crossing , on Buffalo Bayou , in preparation for joining the government in Galveston , so Santa Anna ordered Harrisburg burned and pressed on towards Lynchburg . 
 The Texian army had resumed their march eastward . On April 16 , they came to a crossroads ; one road led north towards Nacogdoches , the other went to Harrisburg . Without orders from Houston and with no discussion amongst themselves , the troops in the lead took the road to Harrisburg . They arrived on April 18 , not long after the Mexican army 's departure . That same day , Deaf Smith and Henry Karnes captured a Mexican courier carrying intelligence on the locations and future plans of all of the Mexican troops in Texas . Realizing that Santa Anna had only a small force and was not far away , Houston gave a rousing speech to his men , exhorting them to " Remember the Alamo " and " Remember Goliad " . His army then raced towards Lynchburg . Out of concern that his men might not differentiate between Mexican soldiers and the Tejanos in Seguín 's company , Houston originally ordered Seguín and his men to remain in Harrisburg to guard those who were too ill to travel quickly . After loud protests from Seguín and Antonio <unk> , the order was rescinded , provided the Tejanos wear a piece of cardboard in their hats to identify them as Texian soldiers . 
 = = = San Jacinto = = = 
 The area along Buffalo Bayou had many thick oak groves , separated by marshes . This type of terrain was familiar to the Texians and quite alien to the Mexican soldiers . Houston 's army , comprising 900 men , reached Lynch 's Ferry mid @-@ morning on April 20 ; Santa Anna 's 700 @-@ man force arrived a few hours later . The Texians made camp in a wooded area along the bank of Buffalo Bayou ; while the location provided good cover and helped hide their full strength , it also left the Texians no room for retreat . Over the protests of several of his officers , Santa Anna chose to make camp in a vulnerable location , a plain near the San Jacinto River , bordered by woods on one side , marsh and lake on another . The two camps were approximately 500 yards ( 460 m ) apart , separated by a grassy area with a slight rise in the middle . Colonel Pedro Delgado later wrote that " the camping ground of His Excellency 's selection was in all respects , against military rules . Any youngster would have done better . " 
 Over the next several hours , two brief skirmishes occurred . Texians won the first , forcing a small group of dragoons and the Mexican artillery to withdraw . Mexican dragoons then forced the Texian cavalry to withdraw . In the melee , Rusk , on foot to reload his rifle , was almost captured by Mexican soldiers , but was rescued by newly arrived Texian volunteer Mirabeau B. Lamar . Over Houston 's objections , many infantrymen rushed onto the field . As the Texian cavalry fell back , Lamar remained behind to rescue another Texian who had been thrown from his horse ; Mexican officers " reportedly applauded " his bravery . Houston was irate that the infantry had disobeyed his orders and given Santa Anna a better estimate of their strength ; the men were equally upset that Houston hadn 't allowed a full battle . 
 Throughout the night , Mexican troops worked to fortify their camp , creating breastworks out of everything they could find , including saddles and brush . At 9 a.m. on April 21 , Cos arrived with 540 reinforcements , bringing the Mexican force to 1 @,@ 200 men , which outnumbered the Texians . Cos 's men were raw recruits rather than experienced soldiers , and they had marched steadily for more than 24 hours , with no rest and no food . As the morning wore on with no Texian attack , Mexican officers lowered their guard . By afternoon , Santa Anna had given permission for Cos 's men to sleep ; his own tired troops also took advantage of the time to rest , eat , and bathe . 
 Not long after the Mexican reinforcements arrived , Houston ordered Smith to destroy Vince 's Bridge , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) away , to slow down any further Mexican reinforcements . At 4 p.m. the Texians began creeping quietly through the tall grass , pulling the cannon behind them . The Texian cannon fired at 4 : 30 , beginning the battle of San Jacinto . After a single volley , Texians broke ranks and swarmed over the Mexican breastworks to engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . Mexican soldiers were taken completely by surprise . Santa Anna , Castrillón , and Almonte yelled often conflicting orders , attempting to organize their men into some form of defense . Within 18 minutes , Mexican soldiers abandoned their campsite and fled for their lives . The killing lasted for hours . 
 Many Mexican soldiers retreated through the marsh to Peggy Lake . Texian riflemen stationed themselves on the banks and shot at anything that moved . Many Texian officers , including Houston and Rusk , attempted to stop the slaughter , but they were unable to gain control of the men . Texians continued to chant " Remember the Alamo ! Remember Goliad ! " while frightened Mexican infantry yelled " Me no Alamo ! " and begged for mercy to no avail . In what historian Davis called " one of the most one @-@ sided victories in history " , 650 Mexican soldiers were killed and 300 captured . Eleven Texians died , with 30 others , including Houston , wounded . 
 Although Santa Anna 's troops had been thoroughly vanquished , they did not represent the bulk of the Mexican army in Texas . An additional 4 @,@ 000 troops remained under the commands of Urrea and General Vicente Filisola . Texians had won the battle due to mistakes made by Santa Anna , and Houston was well aware that his troops would have little hope of repeating their victory against Urrea or Filisola . As darkness fell , a large group of prisoners were led into camp . Houston initially mistook the group for Mexican reinforcements and shouted out that all was lost . 
 = = = Mexican retreat = = = 
 Santa Anna had successfully escaped towards Vince 's Bridge . Finding the bridge destroyed , he hid in the marsh and was captured the following day . He was brought before Houston , who had been shot in the ankle and badly wounded . Texian soldiers gathered around , calling for the Mexican general 's immediate execution . Bargaining for his life , Santa Anna suggested that he order the remaining Mexican troops to stay away . In a letter to Filisola , who was now the senior Mexican official in Texas , Santa Anna wrote that " yesterday evening [ we ] had an unfortunate encounter " and ordered his troops to retreat to Béxar and await further instructions . 
 Urrea urged Filisola to continue the campaign . He was confident that he could successfully challenge the Texian troops . According to Hardin , " Santa Anna had presented Mexico with one military disaster ; Filisola did not wish to risk another . " Spring rains ruined the ammunition and rendered the roads almost impassable , with troops sinking to their knees in mud . Mexican troops were soon out of food , and began to fall ill from dysentery and other diseases . Their supply lines had completely broken down , leaving no hope of further reinforcements . Filisola later wrote that " Had the enemy met us under these cruel circumstances , on the only road that was left , no alternative remained but to die or surrender at discretion " . 
 For several weeks after San Jacinto , Santa Anna continued to negotiate with Houston , Rusk , and then Burnet . Santa Anna suggested two treaties , a public version of promises made between the two countries , and a private version that included Santa Anna 's personal agreements . The Treaties of Velasco required that all Mexican troops retreat south of the Rio Grande and that all private property — code for slaves — be respected and restored . Prisoners @-@ of @-@ war would be released unharmed , and Santa Anna would be given passage to Veracruz immediately . He secretly promised to persuade the Mexican Congress to acknowledge the Republic of Texas and to recognize the Rio Grande as the border between the two countries . 
 When Urrea began marching south in mid @-@ May , many families from San Patricio who had supported the Mexican army went with him . When Texian troops arrived in early June , they found only 20 families remaining . The area around San Patricio and Refugio suffered a " noticeable depopulation " in the Republic of Texas years . Although the treaty had specified that Urrea and Filisola would return any slaves their armies had sheltered , Urrea refused to comply . Many former slaves followed the army to Mexico , where they could be free . By late May the Mexican troops had crossed the Nueces . Filisola fully expected that the defeat was temporary and that a second campaign would be launched to retake Texas . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Military = = = 
 When Mexican authorities received word of Santa Anna 's defeat at San Jacinto , flags across the country were lowered to half staff and draped in mourning . Denouncing any agreements signed by a prisoner , Mexican authorities refused to recognize the Republic of Texas . Filisola was derided for leading the retreat and quickly replaced by Urrea . Within months , Urrea gathered 6 @,@ 000 troops in Matamoros , poised to reconquer Texas . His army was redirected to address continued federalist rebellions in other regions . 
 Most in Texas assumed the Mexican army would return quickly . So many American volunteers flocked to the Texian army in the months after the victory at San Jacinto that the Texian government was unable to maintain an accurate list of enlistments . Out of caution , Béxar remained under martial law throughout 1836 . Rusk ordered that all Tejanos in the area between the Guadalupe and Nueces Rivers migrate either to east Texas or to Mexico . Some residents who refused to comply were forcibly removed . New Anglo settlers moved in and used threats and legal maneuvering to take over the land once owned by Tejanos . Over the next several years , hundreds of Tejano families resettled in Mexico . 
 For years , Mexican authorities used the reconquering of Texas as an excuse for implementing new taxes and making the army the budgetary priority of the impoverished nation . Only sporadic skirmishes resulted . Larger expeditions were postponed as military funding was consistently diverted to other rebellions , out of fear that those regions would ally with Texas and further fragment the country . The northern Mexican states , the focus of the Matamoros Expedition , briefly launched an independent Republic of the Rio Grande in 1839 . The same year , the Mexican Congress considered a law to declare it treasonous to speak positively of Texas . In June 1843 , leaders of the two nations declared an armistice . 
 = = = Republic of Texas = = = 
 On June 1 , Santa Anna boarded a ship to travel back to Mexico . For the next two days , crowds of soldiers , many of whom had arrived that week from the United States , gathered to demand his execution . Lamar , by now promoted to Secretary of War , gave a speech insisting that " Mobs must not intimidate the government . We want no French Revolution in Texas ! " , but on June 4 soldiers seized Santa Anna and put him under military arrest . According to Lack , " the shock of having its foreign policy overturned by popular rebellion had weakened the interim government irrevocably " . A group of soldiers staged an unsuccessful coup in mid @-@ July . In response , Burnet called for elections to ratify the constitution and elect a Congress , the sixth set of leaders for Texas in a twelve @-@ month period . Voters overwhelmingly chose Houston the first president , ratified the constitution drawn up by the Convention of 1836 , and approved a resolution to request annexation to the United States . Houston issued an executive order sending Santa Anna to Washington , D.C. , and from there he was soon sent home . 
 During his absence , Santa Anna had been deposed . Upon his arrival , the Mexican press wasted no time in attacking him for his cruelty towards those executed at Goliad . In May 1837 , Santa Anna requested an inquiry into the event . The judge determined the inquiry was only for fact @-@ finding and took no action ; press attacks in both Mexico and the United States continued . Santa Anna was disgraced until the following year , when he became a hero of the Pastry War . 
 The first Texas Legislature declined to ratify the treaty Houston had signed with the Cherokee , declaring he had no authority to make any promises . Although the Texian interim governments had vowed to eventually compensate citizens for goods that were impressed during the war efforts , for the most part livestock and horses were not returned . Veterans were guaranteed land bounties ; in 1879 , surviving Texian veterans who served more than three months from October 1 , 1835 through January 1 , 1837 were guaranteed an additional 1 @,@ 280 acres ( 520 ha ) in public lands . Over 1 @.@ 3 million acres ( 559 thousand ha ) of land were granted ; some of this was in Greer County , which was later determined to be part of Oklahoma . 
 Republic of Texas policies changed the status of many living in the region . The constitution forbade free blacks from living in Texas permanently . Individual slaves could only be freed by congressional order , and the newly emancipated person would then be forced to leave Texas . Women also lost significant legal rights under the new constitution , which substituted English common law practices for the traditional Spanish law system . Under common law , the idea of community property was eliminated , and women no longer had the ability to act for themselves legally – to sign contracts , own property , or sue . Some of these rights were restored in 1845 , when Texas added them to the new state constitution . During the Republic of Texas years , Tejanos likewise faced much discrimination . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Mexican authorities blamed the loss of Texas on United States intervention . Although the United States remained officially neutral , 40 percent of the men who enlisted in the Texian army from October 1 through April 21 arrived from the United States after hostilities began . More than 200 of the volunteers were members of the United States Army ; none were punished when they returned to their posts . American individuals also provided supplies and money to the cause of Texian independence . For the next decade , Mexican politicians frequently denounced the United States for the involvement of its citizens . 
 The United States agreed to recognize the Republic of Texas in March 1837 but declined to annex the territory . The fledgling republic now attempted to persuade European nations to agree to recognition . In late 1839 France recognized the Republic of Texas after being convinced it would make a fine trading partner . 
 For several decades , official British policy was to maintain strong ties with Mexico in the hopes that the country could stop the United States from expanding further . When the Texas Revolution erupted , Great Britain had declined to become involved , officially expressing confidence that Mexico could handle its own affairs . In 1840 , after years in which the Republic of Texas was neither annexed by the United States nor reabsorbed into Mexico , Britain signed a treaty to recognize the nation and act as a mediator to help Texas gain recognition from Mexico . 
 The United States voted to annex Texas as the 28th state in March 1845 . Two months later , Mexico agreed to recognize the Republic of Texas as long as there was no annexation to the United States . On July 4 , 1845 , Texans voted for annexation . This prompted the Mexican – American War , in which Mexico lost almost 55 percent of its territory to the United States and formally relinquished its claim on Texas . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although no new fighting techniques were introduced during the Texas Revolution , casualty figures were quite unusual for the time . Generally in 19th @-@ century warfare , the number of wounded outnumbered those killed by a factor of two or three . From October 1835 through April 1836 , approximately 1 @,@ 000 Mexican and 700 Texian soldiers died , while the wounded numbered 500 Mexican and 100 Texian . The deviation from the norm was due to Santa Anna 's decision to label Texian rebels as traitors and to the Texian desire for revenge . 
 During the revolution , Texian soldiers gained a reputation for courage and <unk> . Lack points out that fewer than five percent of the Texian population enrolled in the army during the war , a fairly low rate of participation . Texian soldiers recognized that the Mexican cavalry was far superior to their own . Over the next decade , the Texas Rangers borrowed Mexican cavalry tactics and adopted the Spanish saddle and spurs , the <unk> , and the bandana . 
 The Texas Veterans Association , composed solely of revolutionary veterans living in Texas , was active from 1873 through 1901 and played a key role in convincing the legislature to create a monument to honor the San Jacinto veterans . In the late 19th century , the Texas Legislature purchased the San Jacinto <unk> , which is now home to the San Jacinto Monument , the tallest stone column monument in the world . In the early 20th century , the Texas Legislature purchased the Alamo Mission , now an official state shrine . In front of the church , in the center of Alamo Plaza , stands a cenotaph designed by Pompeo Coppini which commemorates the defenders who died during the battle . More than 2 @.@ 5 million people visit the Alamo every year . 
 The Texas Revolution has been the subject of poetry and of many books , plays and films . Most English @-@ language treatments reflect the perspectives of the Anglos and are centered primarily on the battle of the Alamo . From the first novel depicting events of the revolution , 1838 's Mexico versus Texas , through the mid @-@ 20th century , most works contained themes of anticlericalism and racism , depicting the battle as a fight for freedom between good ( Anglo Texian ) and evil ( Mexican ) . In both English- and Spanish @-@ language literature , the Alamo is often compared to the battle of Thermopylae . The 1950s Disney miniseries Davy Crockett , which was largely based on myth , created a worldwide craze for everything Alamo @-@ related . Within several years , John Wayne directed and starred in one of the best @-@ known and perhaps least historically accurate film versions , The Alamo ( 1960 ) . Notably , this version made the first attempt to leave behind racial stereotypes ; it was still banned in Mexico . In the late 1970s , works about the Alamo began to explore Tejano perspectives , which had been all but extinguished even from textbooks about the revolution , and to explore the revolution 's links to slavery . 
 = Japanese serow = 
 The Japanese serow ( Capricornis crispus ) is a Japanese goat @-@ antelope , an even @-@ toed ungulate mammal . It is found in dense woodland in Japan , primarily in northern and central Honshu . The animal is seen as a national symbol of Japan and is subject to protection in conservation areas . 
 Adult Japanese serow stand about 81 centimetres ( 32 in ) tall and weigh 30 – 45 kilograms ( 66 – 99 lb ) . They are black to whitish , and colouring lightens in summer . The fur is very bushy , especially the tail . Both sexes have short , backwards @-@ curving horns and are difficult to distinguish by sight . Japanese serow are found in dense mountain forests where they eat leaves , shoots , and acorns . They are diurnal and feed in early mornings and late afternoons . <unk> are solitary , or gather in couples or small family groups . The animal marks its territory with sweet @-@ and @-@ sour @-@ smelling preorbital gland secretions , and males and females have separate territories that may overlap . 
 In the mid @-@ 20th century the Japanese serow was hunted to near @-@ extinction . In 1955 the Japanese government passed a law designating it a " Special National Monument " to protect it from poachers . Populations have since grown so greatly that IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals ranks it " least concern " . Complaints from foresters and farmers led in 1979 to the 1955 law 's repeal . Since then the serow has had protected status in 13 designated protected areas over 23 prefectures , and has been subject to culling as a pest outside conservation areas . Conservationists have labelled it a " living national treasure of the forest " . Athletes with superior agility and speed draw comparisons with the serow , and the Yamaha Motor Company has marketed the XT 225 <unk> motorcycle as the Yamaha Serow . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Coenraad Jacob Temminck first described the Japanese serow in 1836 , and named it Antilope <unk> . John Edward Gray gave it its current name in 1846 . Pierre Marie <unk> proposed many new genera and species in a system published in 1898 ; Capricornis became <unk> , which included crispus , <unk> , and saxicola . The system did not find acceptance . 
 There is no fossil record of the Japanese serow ; its evolutionary history and the closeness of its relation to the Taiwan serow ( Capricornis swinhoei ) are speculative Its taxonomic position has led to its being called a " living fossil " . Karyotype studies indicate it was the earliest species to split from the common Capricornis ancestor . The closest relative to the Japanese Serow is the Taiwan serow ( Capricornis swinhoei ) . Genetically , there is little difference between Japanese and Taiwan serows ; their karyotype is essentially the same : 2n = 50 , FN = 60 . The Taiwan serow is smaller and shorter @-@ haired , with browner fur and a white patch under the chin and throat . 
 Phylogenetically Capricornis is closer to goats and sheep than cattle . The nomenclature and status of Capricornis taxa are not completely resolved . Some researchers have considered Capricornis a junior synonym of <unk> , a classification that includes gorals ; molecular analysis has not supported this classification . Capricornis has a lower canine , which <unk> species usually do not . 
 In Japan , the serow is widely thought of as a kind of deer , though deer and serows are not even of the same infraclass . In the past , the Japanese word kamoshika was written using the Chinese character for <unk> , meaning " deer " . Today , when written using Chinese characters , the characters for " antelope " and " sheep " are used . Sometimes the serow is mistaken for a wild boar . 
 = = Appearance and anatomy = = 
 The Japanese serow is a small bovid whose displayed morphology is primitive in relation to other bovids . It has a stocky body whose size varies little between sexes or geographic location ; it stands about 70 – 85 centimetres ( 28 – 33 in ) tall ( 70 – 75 centimetres ( 28 – 30 in ) at the shoulder ) and weighs 30 – 45 kilograms ( 66 – 99 lb ) . The hoof is cloven . Compared to mainland serow , the ears are shorter and the coat is typically longer and <unk> — about 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) on the body . It has a bushy tail of 6 – 6 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) and no mane . 
 Its fur is whitish around the neck and on the body may be black , black with dorsal white spot , dark brown , or whitish ; the coat lightens in summer . There are three well @-@ developed skin glands : large preorbital glands in both sexes , which increase in size as the animal ages ; poorly developed interdigital glands in all four legs , and preputial glands . The adult 's 32 permanent teeth form by 30 months , and have a dental formula of 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 . The inner sides of the teeth become blackened with a hard @-@ to @-@ remove substance , likely tree resin . The tongue has a V @-@ shaped apex . 
 Differentiation between the sexes is not well developed ; body size , growth , survival , and feeding habits show negligible difference . Both sexes have short , backwards @-@ curving horns measuring 12 – 16 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) ; the sheaths have a series of transverse rings . Horns begin to develop at about four months and continue to grow throughout the lifespan . 
 Environment affects the size of the first growth ring . Size , curvature , and thickness and number of transverse rings are indicative of age . Up to two years , there are thicker transverse rings , of greater length and flexion than in adults . Into adulthood , thinner horn rings force the thick transverse rings upward . Growth increment slows earlier in maturation in females than in males . Researchers use genitalia and sexual behaviour to distinguish the sexes . Females have two pairs of mammae . 
 Hearing is sensitive and eyesight is strong — the serow is able to detect and react to movement from a distance , and it can see well in low lighting . Sense of smell is also strong , and the serow can be observed raising its head and sniffing the air around it . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and behaviour = = 
 Capricornis crispus is the only wild bovine ruminant in Japan , and is endemic to three of the four main islands of Japan : primarily northern and central Honshu , and small areas in Shikoku and Kyushu . It can tolerate colder , <unk> climates than mainland serows . The animal is found solitary , in pairs , or in small family groups in open grassland and forests at an elevation of about 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , and uses caves to rest in . It prefers temperate deciduous forest , but also lives in broad @-@ leaved or subalpine coniferous forest made up of Japanese beech Japanese oak , alpine meadow , and coniferous plantations . Population density is low , at an average of 2 @.@ 6 per square kilometre ( 6 @.@ 7 / sq mi ) , and no greater than 20 per square kilometre ( 52 / sq mi ) . 
 C. crispus is philopatric and territorial , and marks trees with sweet @-@ sour @-@ smelling preorbital gland secretions to indicate its territory . Males and females establish separate , overlapping ranges , typically 10 – 15 hectares ( 25 – 37 acres ) , the male 's typically larger than the female 's . Aggression is rare , but the serow may react with hostility to territorial breaches . The animal has few predators , as Japanese wolves have become extinct ; bears may prey on the serow . It flees with a whistling snort when it detects danger . It is an agile , sure @-@ footed mountain dweller that is able to sprint up mountains and to jump from cliff to cliff to safety , an agility hunters have likened to the ninja . 
 The diurnal Japanese serow is a browser that feeds in early morning and late afternoon , primarily on fleshy or coniferous leaves , plant shoots , and acorns . It feeds on alder , sedge , Japanese witch @-@ hazel ( <unk> Japonica ) , and Japanese cedar . It adjusts its diet to what food is locally available , and as a ruminant , the serow has a four @-@ chambered stomach . Studies indicate that even severe winters have negligible impact on the serow 's food intake , suggesting that , given its solitary social structure , it selects its territory to ensure sufficient food supply . <unk> occurs in set locations . 
 Life expectancies may be up to 20 – 25 years . <unk> is common , though rarely fatal ; Infection causes <unk> and nodular lesions . There have been epidemics of contagious pustular dermatitis . Bacteria such as E. coli and Lyme <unk> are common , and Toxoplasma gondii has been reported . C. crispus is susceptible to numerous parasites , such as the nematode Trichuris discolor and the <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Capricornis crispus is socially monogamous . Females reach sexual maturity at 30 months . First breeding takes place at age 2 @.@ 5 – 3 years ; breeding occurs once a year , between September and January . In a courtship ritual resembling that of goats or gazelles , the male Japanese serow licks the female 's mouth , strikes her on the hind legs with his forelegs , and rubs her genitalia with his horns . Both sexes display Flehmen responses . 
 Birth takes place between June and August after a gestation period of about 210 – 220 days . It takes about half an hour , as the female walks about . The single fawn is 30 centimetres ( 1 ft ) tall and reaches adult height in a year . The fawn stays with its mother for a year or two . It then moves gradually from its mother 's range until it establishes its own . Young that do not disperse on their own may be chased away by the mother . 
 ' ' C. crispus ' ' in its natural habitat 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The earliest record of human contact with the serow is of a small number of prehistoric Jōmon period bones unearthed by archaeologists , primarily in mountainous regions . It is speculated the serow was hunted for its hide and for food . What is believed to be the earliest written record appears in the Nihon Shoki ( 720 ) : the Emperor <unk> ( r . 672 – 686 ) sent the hides of a <unk> to senior statesmen ; this <unk> likely refers to the serow , and recurs elsewhere in the Nihon Shoki . 
 The 8th @-@ century Man 'yōshū contains a waka poem by <unk> no <unk> that mentions a group of <unk> ; a number of writers have concluded this animal is the serow , but others have pointed out the serow is normally solitary . Heian period ( 794 – 1185 ) documents record gifts of serow horns brought to the capital . Japan 's earliest extant medical work , the <unk> ( 808 ) , appears to record the use of serow horn and flesh for medicinal purposes . 
 For centuries following the Heian period mention of the serow becomes scarce . There is some belief that it was still hunted for medicinal use . The Edo period ( 1603 – 1868 ) saw records increase . The <unk> <unk> <unk> encyclopaedia of 1712 contains an illustrated entry on the serow . Laws prohibiting hunting came into effect , but exception were made where animals damaged crops . Following the Meiji Restoration in 1868 , realistic depictions appeared of the serow , beginning with one in Keisuke Ito 's Fauna Japonica ( 1870 ) . 
 = = = Hunting and conservation = = = 
 The serow has long been hunted in Japan , especially in northern Japan where , along with bear @-@ hunting , serow @-@ hunting was strongly associated with <unk> culture . Throughout Japan 's mountainous regions the serow has been a valued catch , its various body parts used without waste . Prized in particular its meat — until the mid @-@ 20th century serow meat was so widely eaten in these regions the animal itself was known as " meat " . Its waterproof hides were used for rafters ' <unk> , its horns were ground as a preventative against diseases such as beriberi , and a cure for <unk> was made from the serow 's small intestines and gall bladder . 
 An animal that once inhabited deep forests far from populated areas , the Japanese serow has increasingly penetrated the outskirts of villages . In western Honshū , it had become extinct by the 20th century . Elsewhere it had been hunted to such a severe degree that the Japanese government declared it a " Non @-@ Game Species " in a 1925 hunting law . In 1934 the Law for Protection of Cultural Properties designated it a " Natural Monument Species " . 
 Poaching continued , so in 1955 the government declared the Japanese serow a " Special Natural Monument " , at which point overhunting had brought its numbers to 2000 – 3000 . Populations grew as the police put an end to poaching , and post @-@ War monoculture conifer plantations created favourable environments for the animal . By the 1980s , population estimates had grown to up to 100 @,@ 000 and serow range had reached 40 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 15 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Between 1978 and 2003 , its distribution increased 170 % , and population had stabilized . 
 Conflicts with agriculture and forestry led to a 1978 repeal of the full protection the animal received under the 1955 designation . Thenceforth 13 designated protection areas were established over 23 prefectures . They cover about 20 % of the serow range , have a total area of 11 @,@ 800 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 600 sq mi ) , and range in size from 143 square kilometres ( 55 sq mi ) to 2 @,@ 180 square kilometres ( 840 sq mi ) . Culling removed 20 @,@ 000 outside of conservation areas between 1978 and 2005 . 
 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals ranked the Japanese serow as " Least Concern " in 2008 , as it has wide distribution in Japan , and a large , stable or increasing population . The Law for Protection of Cultural Properties and Wildlife Protection and Hunting Law provide for the legal management of the Japanese serow . In 1979 the Agency for Cultural Affairs , Environmental Agency , and Forestry Agency reached an agreement on serow management measures , such as the establishment of protection areas and culling as pest control . The measures met with resistance from conservationists , naturalist organizations , and some biologists , as the animal had previously been fully protected . A 1999 amendment to the Wildlife Protection and Hunting Law allowed prefectures to manage wildlife populations ; by 2007 seven plans had been established for serow management outside of conservation areas . 
 Foresters have raised concerns that the rising serow populations have interfered with post @-@ War mountainside reforestation efforts , as the animal feeds on the saplings of Japanese cypress , Japanese cedar , and Japanese red pine , species with commercial significance . Serow have caused damage to farm crops in mountain villages , and the villagers have objected to conservationists ' efforts . Damage by serows to forests has been characterized in parts of Japan in criminal or martial terms : the media have referred to the problems as <unk> to <unk> no sensō ( " the war between humans and deer " ) and kamoshika sensō , ( " serow war " ) . 
 Frustration with government and conservationists led 400 foresters to launch a lawsuit in the 1980s over serow damage to timber plantations . Foresters in Gifu Prefecture have justified the shooting of serows in the legs , as such shooting would not be fatal . Estimating accurate population numbers has been difficult . Foresters see the serow as a harmful animal , and resent government interference in controlling serow @-@ hunting . They have accused the government and wildlife experts of <unk> serows , while conservationists have <unk> that foresters may inflate population numbers and levels of forestry damage to promote their own interests . 
 Conservationists such as Shin Gotō believe that the increased visibility is due not to an absolute increase in populations , but to deforestation which has driven the animal further from its traditional home . <unk> close to populated areas may feed on farms and cypress , including saplings . Clearcutting practices may also contribute to the problem , as clearcut forests create areas of rapid herbaceous growth ideal for herbivores , who see population increases . The situation is temporary , though , and after regrowth of trees leads to the forest canopy closing over after 15 – 20 years , the herbivore populations are displaced as the herbaceous growth ceases to flourish . 
 In the 1990s , as the number of young plantations decreased , so did forestry damage from serows . Concern instead turned to damage caused by sika deer , wild boars , and Japanese macaques . In Kyushu in particular , increased grazing and browsing competition from sika deer may be slowing growth of serow populations . 
 = = = Conservation areas = = = 
 = = = Cultural significance = = = 
 Labelled a " living national treasure of the forest " , the Japanese serow has achieved emblematic status in Japan with national associations . It is seen as a relic species harking back to the formation of the Japanese archipelago as distinct from mainland Asia . In a symbolic gesture in 1973 , the Chinese government gifted Japan a giant panda , to which the Japanese government returned two Japanese serow . Municipalities and other regions of Japan have adopted the serow as a local symbol . 
 In Japan , the Japanese serow is most commonly known as kamoshika or <unk> . It has historically been given a variety of names , often based on its appearance , some of which translate as " mountain sheep " , " wool deer " , " nine tail cow " , and " cow demon " . Regional names abound , some of which translate as " dancing beast " , " foolish beast " , or " idiot " . Japanese people often characterize the serow as " weird " or " abnormal " , and it is seen as a " phantom animal " as it tends to live alone in the depths of distant forests , and appears to observe forest workers from areas high in the mountains . 
 The serow has a reputation in Japan for its speed and agility . Superior athletes are compared to the serow , as it is known not only for its agility , but also its sprinting ability . The Yamaha Motor Company has marketed the XT 225 sport motorcycle as the Yamaha Serow , and the title character of the Miyazaki @-@ directed animated film Princess Mononoke ( 1997 ) uses a serow @-@ like creature as a mount . In Japanese , the word <unk> means both " to fail an exam " and " to fall " ; as the serow is known for its sure @-@ footedness on mountain cliffs , students can buy <unk> charms marked with a serow <unk> in the hope it will help them pass exams . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Walrus = 
 The walrus ( Odobenus rosmarus ) is a large <unk> marine mammal with a discontinuous distribution about the North Pole in the Arctic Ocean and subarctic seas of the Northern Hemisphere . The walrus is the only living species in the family Odobenidae and genus Odobenus . This species is subdivided into three subspecies : the Atlantic walrus ( O. r. rosmarus ) which lives in the Atlantic Ocean , the Pacific walrus ( O. r. divergens ) which lives in the Pacific Ocean , and O. r. <unk> , which lives in the Laptev Sea of the Arctic Ocean . 
 Adult walruses are easily recognized by their prominent tusks , whiskers , and bulkiness . Adult males in the Pacific can weigh more than 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) and , among pinnipeds , are exceeded in size only by the two species of elephant seals . Walruses live mostly in shallow waters above the continental shelves , spending significant amounts of their lives on the sea ice looking for benthic bivalve mollusks to eat . Walruses are relatively long @-@ lived , social animals , and they are considered to be a " keystone species " in the Arctic marine regions . 
 The walrus has played a prominent role in the cultures of many indigenous Arctic peoples , who have hunted the walrus for its meat , fat , skin , tusks , and bone . During the 19th century and the early 20th century , walruses were widely hunted and killed for their blubber , walrus ivory , and meat . The population of walruses dropped rapidly all around the Arctic region . Their population has rebounded somewhat since then , though the populations of Atlantic and Laptev walruses remain fragmented and at low levels compared with the time before human interference . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the word walrus is thought by J.R.R. Tolkien to derive from a Germanic language , and it has been attributed largely to either the Dutch language or Old Norse . Its first part is thought to derive from a word such as Dutch <unk> ' whale ' . Its second part has also been hypothesized to come from the Old Norse word for ' horse ' . For example , the Old Norse word <unk> means ' horse @-@ whale ' and is thought to have been passed in an inverted form to both Dutch and the dialects of northern Germany as <unk> and <unk> . An alternate theory is that is comes from the Dutch words wal ' shore ' and reus ' giant ' . 
 The species name rosmarus is Scandinavian . The Norwegian manuscript <unk> , thought to date from around AD 1240 , refers to the walrus as " <unk> " in Iceland and " <unk> " in Greenland ( walruses were by now extinct in Iceland and Norway , while the word evolved on in Greenland ) . Several place names in Iceland , Greenland and Norway may originate from walrus sites : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> to name some , all being typical walrus breeding grounds . 
 The archaic English word for walrus — morse — is widely thought to have come from the Slavic languages , which in turn borrowed it from Finno @-@ Ugric languages . Compare <unk> ( <unk> ) in Russian , <unk> in Finnish , <unk> in Northern Saami , and morse in French . Olaus Magnus , who depicted the walrus in the Carta Marina in 1539 , first referred to the walrus as the ros <unk> , probably a Latinization of <unk> , and this was adopted by Linnaeus in his binomial nomenclature . 
 The coincidental similarity between morse and the Latin word <unk> ( " a bite " ) supposedly contributed to the walrus 's reputation as a " terrible monster " . 
 The compound Odobenus comes from odous ( Greek for ' tooth ' ) and <unk> ( Greek for ' walk ' ) , based on observations of walruses using their tusks to pull themselves out of the water . The term divergens in Latin means ' turning apart ' , referring to their tusks . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The walrus is a mammal in the order Carnivora . It is the sole surviving member of the family Odobenidae , one of three lineages in the suborder Pinnipedia along with true seals ( Phocidae ) and eared seals ( Otariidae ) . While there has been some debate as to whether all three lineages are monophyletic , i.e. descended from a single ancestor , or <unk> , recent genetic evidence suggests all three descended from a <unk> ancestor most closely related to modern bears . Recent multigene analysis indicates the <unk> and otariids diverged from the phocids about 20 – 26 million years ago , while the <unk> and the otariids separated 15 – 20 million years ago . Odobenidae was once a highly diverse and widespread family , including at least twenty species in the subfamilies <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The key distinguishing feature was the development of a squirt / suction feeding mechanism ; tusks are a later feature specific to <unk> , of which the modern walrus is the last remaining ( relict ) species . 
 Two subspecies of walrus are widely recognized : the Atlantic walrus , O. r. rosmarus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) and the Pacific walrus , O. r. divergens ( Illiger , 1815 ) . Fixed genetic differences between the Atlantic and Pacific subspecies indicate very restricted gene flow , but relatively recent separation , estimated at 500 @,@ 000 and 785 @,@ 000 years ago . These dates coincide with the hypothesis derived from fossils that the walrus evolved from a tropical or subtropical ancestor that became isolated in the Atlantic Ocean and gradually adapted to colder conditions in the Arctic . From there , it presumably recolonized the North Pacific Ocean during high glaciation periods in the Pleistocene via the Central American Seaway . 
 An isolated population in the Laptev Sea is considered by some authorities , including many Russian biologists and the canonical Mammal Species of the World , to be a third subspecies , O. r. <unk> ( <unk> , 1940 ) , and is managed as such in Russia . Where the subspecies separation is not accepted , whether to consider it a subpopulation of the Atlantic or Pacific subspecies remained under debate until 2009 , when multiple lines of molecular evidence showed it to represent the westernmost population of the Pacific walrus . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 While some outsized Pacific males can weigh as much as 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) , most weigh between 800 and 1 @,@ 700 kg ( 1 @,@ 800 and 3 @,@ 700 lb ) . An occasional male of the Pacific subspecies far exceeds normal dimensions . In 1909 , a walrus hide weighing 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) was collected from an enormous bull in Franz Josef Land , while in August 1910 , Jack Woodson shot a 4 @.@ 9 m ( 16 ft ) long walrus , harvesting its 450 kg ( 1 @,@ 000 lb ) hide . Since a walrus 's hide usually accounts for about 20 % of its body weight , the total body mass of these two giants is estimated to have been at least 2 @,@ 300 kg ( 5 @,@ 000 lb ) . The Atlantic subspecies weighs about 10 – 20 % less than the Pacific subspecies . Male Atlantic walrus weigh an average of 900 kg ( 2 @,@ 000 lb ) . The Atlantic walrus also tends to have relatively shorter tusks and somewhat more flattened snout . Females weigh about two @-@ thirds as much as males , with the Atlantic females averaging 560 kg ( 1 @,@ 230 lb ) , sometimes weighing as little as 400 kg ( 880 lb ) , and the Pacific female averaging 800 kg ( 1 @,@ 800 lb ) . Length typically ranges from 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 6 m ( 7 @.@ 2 to 11 @.@ 8 ft ) . Newborn walruses are already quite large , averaging 33 to 85 kg ( 73 to 187 lb ) in weight and 1 to 1 @.@ 4 m ( 3 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 6 ft ) in length across both sexes and subspecies . All told , the walrus is the third largest pinniped species , after the two elephant seals . Walruses maintain such a high body weight because of the blubber stored underneath their skin . This blubber keeps them warm and the fat provides energy to the walrus . 
 The walrus 's body shape shares features with both sea lions ( eared seals : Otariidae ) and seals ( true seals : Phocidae ) . As with otariids , it can turn its rear flippers forward and move on all fours ; however , its swimming technique is more like that of true seals , relying less on flippers and more on sinuous whole body movements . Also like phocids , it lacks external ears . 
 The <unk> muscles of the walrus are well @-@ developed . This and its lack of orbital roof allow it to protrude its eyes and see in both a frontal and dorsal direction . However , vision in this species appears to be more suited for short @-@ range . 
 = = = Tusks and dentition = = = 
 The most prominent feature of the walrus is its long tusks . These are elongated canines , which are present in both male and female walruses and can reach a length of 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) and weigh up to 5 @.@ 4 kg ( 12 lb ) . Tusks are slightly longer and thicker among males , which use them for fighting , dominance and display ; the strongest males with the largest tusks typically dominate social groups . Tusks are also used to form and maintain holes in the ice and aid the walrus in climbing out of water onto ice . Tusks were once thought to be used to dig out prey from the seabed , but analyses of abrasion patterns on the tusks indicate they are dragged through the sediment while the upper edge of the snout is used for digging . While the dentition of walruses is highly variable , they generally have relatively few teeth other than the tusks . The maximal number of teeth is 38 with dentition formula : 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 23 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 2 , but over half of the teeth are rudimentary and occur with less than 50 % frequency , such that a typical dentition includes only 18 teeth 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 00 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 0 
 = = = Vibrissae = = = 
 Surrounding the tusks is a broad mat of stiff bristles ( ' mystacial vibrissae ' ) , giving the walrus a characteristic whiskered appearance . There can be 400 to 700 vibrissae in 13 to 15 rows reaching 30 cm ( 12 in ) in length , though in the wild they are often worn to much shorter lengths due to constant use in foraging . The vibrissae are attached to muscles and are supplied with blood and nerves , making them highly sensitive organs capable of differentiating shapes 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) thick and 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) wide . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 Aside from the vibrissae , the walrus is sparsely covered with fur and appears bald . Its skin is highly wrinkled and thick , up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) around the neck and shoulders of males . The blubber layer beneath is up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Young walruses are deep brown and grow paler and more cinnamon @-@ colored as they age . Old males , in particular , become nearly pink . Because skin blood vessels constrict in cold water , the walrus can appear almost white when swimming . As a secondary sexual characteristic , males also acquire significant nodules , called " bosses " , particularly around the neck and shoulders . 
 The walrus has an air sac under its throat which acts like a floatation bubble and allows it to bob vertically in the water and sleep . The males possess a large baculum ( penis bone ) , up to 63 cm ( 25 in ) in length , the largest of any land mammal , both in absolute size and relative to body size . 
 = = Life history = = 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Walruses live to about 20 – 30 years old in the wild . The males reach sexual maturity as early as seven years , but do not typically mate until fully developed at around 15 years of age . They rut from January through April , decreasing their food intake dramatically . The females begin ovulating as soon as four to six years old . The females are polyestrous , coming into heat in late summer and also around February , yet the males are fertile only around February ; the potential fertility of this second period is unknown . Breeding occurs from January to March , peaking in February . Males aggregate in the water around ice @-@ bound groups of estrous females and engage in competitive vocal displays . The females join them and copulate in the water . 
 Gestation lasts 15 to 16 months . The first three to four months are spent with the blastula in suspended development before it implants itself in the uterus . This strategy of delayed implantation , common among pinnipeds , presumably evolved to optimize both the mating season and the birthing season , determined by ecological conditions that promote newborn survival . Calves are born during the spring migration , from April to June . They weigh 45 to 75 kg ( 99 to 165 lb ) at birth and are able to swim . The mothers nurse for over a year before weaning , but the young can spend up to five years with the mothers . Walrus milk contains higher amounts of fats and protein compared to land animals but lower compared to phocid seals . This lower fat content in turn causes a slower growth rate among calves and a longer nursing investment for their mothers . Because ovulation is suppressed until the calf is weaned , females give birth at most every two years , leaving the walrus with the lowest reproductive rate of any pinniped . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 The rest of the year ( late summer and fall ) , walruses tend to form massive aggregations of tens of thousands of individuals on rocky beaches or outcrops . The migration between the ice and the beach can be long @-@ distance and dramatic . In late spring and summer , for example , several hundred thousand Pacific walruses migrate from the Bering Sea into the Chukchi Sea through the relatively narrow Bering Strait . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Range and habitat = = = 
 The majority of the population of the Pacific walrus spends its summers north of the Bering Strait in the Chukchi Sea of the Arctic Ocean along the northern coast of eastern Siberia , around Wrangel Island , in the Beaufort Sea along the north shore of Alaska , and in the waters between those locations . Smaller numbers of males summer in the Gulf of Anadyr on the southern coast of the Siberian Chukchi Peninsula , and in Bristol Bay off the southern coast of Alaska , west of the Alaska Peninsula . In the spring and fall , walruses congregate throughout the Bering Strait , reaching from the western coast of Alaska to the Gulf of Anadyr . They winter over in the Bering Sea along the eastern coast of Siberia south to the northern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula , and along the southern coast of Alaska . A 28 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old fossil walrus was dredged up from the bottom of San Francisco Bay , indicating Pacific walruses ranged that far south during the last ice age . There were roughly 200 @,@ 000 Pacific walruses according to the most recent ( 1990 ) census @-@ based estimate . 
 The much smaller population of Atlantic walruses ranges from the Canadian Arctic , across Greenland , Svalbard , and the western part of Arctic Russia . There are eight hypothetical subpopulations of walruses , based largely on their geographical distribution and movements : five west of Greenland and three east of Greenland . The Atlantic walrus once ranged south to Cape Cod , Massachusetts , and as late as the eighteenth century was found in large numbers in the greater Gulf of St. Lawrence region , sometimes in colonies of up to 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 individuals . This population was nearly eradicated by commercial harvest ; their current numbers , though difficult to estimate , probably remain below 20 @,@ 000 . In April 2006 , the Canadian Species at Risk Act listed the population of the northwest Atlantic walrus in Quebec , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Newfoundland and Labrador as having been eradicated in Canada . 
 The isolated population of Laptev walruses is confined year @-@ round to the central and western regions of the Laptev Sea , the <unk> regions of the Kara Sea , and the westmost regions of the East Siberian Sea . The current population of these walruses has been estimated to be between 5 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The limited diving abilities of walruses brings them to depend on shallow waters ( and the nearby ice floes ) for reaching their food supply . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Walruses prefer shallow shelf regions and forage primarily on the sea floor , often from sea ice platforms . They are not particularly deep divers compared to other pinnipeds ; their deepest recorded dives are around 80 m ( 260 ft ) . They can remain submerged for as long as half an hour . 
 The walrus has a diverse and opportunistic diet , feeding on more than 60 genera of marine organisms , including shrimp , crabs , tube worms , soft corals , tunicates , sea cucumbers , various mollusks , and even parts of other pinnipeds . However , it prefers benthic bivalve mollusks , especially clams , for which it forages by grazing along the sea bottom , searching and identifying prey with its sensitive vibrissae and clearing the murky bottoms with jets of water and active flipper movements . The walrus sucks the meat out by sealing its powerful lips to the organism and withdrawing its piston @-@ like tongue rapidly into its mouth , creating a vacuum . The walrus palate is uniquely vaulted , enabling effective suction . 
 Aside from the large numbers of organisms actually consumed by the walrus , its foraging has a large peripheral impact on benthic communities . It disturbs ( <unk> ) the sea floor , releasing nutrients into the water column , encouraging mixing and movement of many organisms and increasing the patchiness of the benthos . 
 Seal tissue has been observed in fairly significant proportion of walrus stomachs in the Pacific , but the importance of seals in the walrus diet is under debate . There have been isolated observations of walruses preying on seals up to the size of a 200 kg ( 440 lb ) bearded seal . Rarely , incidents of walruses preying on seabirds , particularly the Brünnich 's guillemot ( Uria <unk> ) , have been documented . Walruses may occasionally prey on ice @-@ entrapped narwhals and scavenge on whale carcasses but there is little evidence to prove this . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Due to its great size and tusks , the walrus has only two natural predators : the killer whale ( orca ) and the polar bear . The walrus does not , however , comprise a significant component of either predator 's diets . Both the orca and the polar bear are also most likely to prey on walrus calves . The polar bear often hunts the walrus by rushing at beached aggregations and consuming the individuals crushed or wounded in the sudden exodus , typically younger or infirm animals . The bears also isolate walruses when they overwinter and are unable to escape a charging bear due to inaccessible diving holes in the ice . However , even an injured walrus is a formidable opponent for a polar bear , and direct attacks are rare . Walruses have been known to fatally injure polar bears in battles if the latter follows the other into the water where the bear is at a disadvantage . Polar bear – walrus battles are often extremely protracted and exhausting , and bears have been known to forgo the attack after injuring a walrus . Orcas regularly attack walrus , although walruses are believed to have successfully defended themselves via counterattack against the larger cetacean . However , orcas have been observed successfully attacking walruses with few or no injuries . 
 = = Relation to humans = = 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 In the 18th and 19th centuries , the walrus was heavily exploited by American and European sealers and whalers , leading to the near extirpation of the Atlantic population . Commercial walrus harvesting is now outlawed throughout its range , although Chukchi , Yupik and Inuit peoples continue to kill small numbers towards the end of each summer . 
 Traditional hunters used all parts of the walrus . The meat , often preserved , is an important winter nutrition source ; the flippers are fermented and stored as a delicacy until spring ; tusks and bone were historically used for tools , as well as material for handicrafts ; the oil was rendered for warmth and light ; the tough hide made rope and house and boat coverings ; and the intestines and gut linings made waterproof <unk> . While some of these uses have faded with access to alternative technologies , walrus meat remains an important part of local diets , and tusk carving and engraving remain a vital art form . 
 According to Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld , European hunters and Arctic explorers found walrus meat not particularly tasty , and only ate it in case of necessity ; however walrus tongue was a delicacy . 
 Walrus hunts are regulated by resource managers in Russia , the United States , Canada , and Denmark , and representatives of the respective hunting communities . An estimated four to seven thousand Pacific walruses are harvested in Alaska and in Russia , including a significant portion ( about 42 % ) of struck and lost animals . Several hundred are removed annually around Greenland . The sustainability of these levels of harvest is difficult to determine given uncertain population estimates and parameters such as fecundity and mortality . The Boone and Crockett Big Game Record book has entries for Atlantic and Pacific walrus . The recorded largest tusks are just over 30 inches and 37 inches long respectively . 
 The effects of global climate change are another element of concern . The extent and thickness of the pack ice has reached unusually low levels in several recent years . The walrus relies on this ice while giving birth and aggregating in the reproductive period . Thinner pack ice over the Bering Sea has reduced the amount of resting habitat near optimal feeding grounds . This more widely separates lactating females from their calves , increasing nutritional stress for the young and lower reproductive rates . Reduced coastal sea ice has also been implicated in the increase of stampeding deaths crowding the shorelines of the Chukchi Sea between eastern Russia and western Alaska . However , there are insufficient climate data to make reliable predictions on population trends . 
 Currently , two of the three walrus subspecies are listed as " least @-@ concern " by the IUCN , while the third is " data deficient " . The Pacific walrus is not listed as " depleted " according to the Marine Mammal Protection Act nor as " threatened " or " endangered " under the Endangered Species Act . The Russian Atlantic and Laptev Sea populations are classified as Category 2 ( decreasing ) and Category 3 ( rare ) in the Russian Red Book . Global trade in walrus ivory is restricted according to a CITES Appendix 3 listing . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The walrus plays an important role in the religion and folklore of many Arctic peoples . Skin and bone are used in some ceremonies , and the animal appears frequently in legends . For example , in a Chukchi version of the widespread myth of the Raven , in which Raven recovers the sun and the moon from an evil spirit by seducing his daughter , the angry father throws the daughter from a high cliff and , as she drops into the water , she turns into a walrus – possibly the original walrus . According to various legends , the tusks are formed either by the trails of mucus from the weeping girl or her long braids . This myth is possibly related to the Chukchi myth of the old walrus @-@ headed woman who rules the bottom of the sea , who is in turn linked to the Inuit goddess Sedna . Both in Chukotka and Alaska , the aurora borealis is believed to be a special world inhabited by those who died by violence , the changing rays representing deceased souls playing ball with a walrus head . 
 Because of its distinctive appearance , great bulk , and immediately recognizable whiskers and tusks , the walrus also appears in the popular cultures of peoples with little direct experience with the animal , particularly in English children 's literature . Perhaps its best @-@ known appearance is in Lewis Carroll 's whimsical poem " The Walrus and the Carpenter " that appears in his 1871 book Through the Looking @-@ Glass . In the poem , the eponymous antiheroes use trickery to consume a great number of oysters . Although Carroll accurately portrays the biological walrus 's appetite for bivalve mollusks , oysters , primarily nearshore and intertidal inhabitants , in fact comprise an insignificant portion of its diet , even in captivity . 
 The " walrus " in the cryptic Beatles song " I Am the Walrus " is a reference to the Lewis Carroll poem . 
 Another appearance of the walrus in literature is in the story " The White Seal " in Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book , where it is the " old Sea <unk> — the big , ugly , bloated , pimpled , fat @-@ necked , long @-@ tusked walrus of the North Pacific , who has no manners except when he is asleep " . 
 = Jerry Voorhis = 
 Horace Jeremiah " Jerry " Voorhis ( April 6 , 1901 – September 11 , 1984 ) was a Democratic politician from California . He served five terms in the United States House of Representatives from 1937 to 1947 , representing the 12th Congressional district in Los Angeles County . He was the first political opponent of Richard Nixon , who defeated Voorhis for re @-@ election in 1946 in a campaign cited as an example of Nixon 's use of red @-@ baiting during his political rise . 
 Voorhis was born in Kansas , but the family relocated frequently in his childhood . He earned a bachelor 's degree from Yale University ( where he was elected to the academic honor society Phi Beta Kappa ) and a master 's degree in education from Claremont Graduate School . In 1928 , he founded the Voorhis School for Boys and became its headmaster . He retained the post into his congressional career . 
 In the House of Representatives , Voorhis was a loyal supporter of the New Deal and compiled a liberal voting record . His major legislative achievement was the Voorhis Act of 1940 requiring registration of certain organizations controlled by foreign powers . After being re @-@ elected by comfortable margins four times , he faced Nixon in 1946 in a bitter campaign in which Voorhis ' supposed endorsement by groups linked to the Communist Party was made into a major issue . Nixon won the Republican @-@ leaning district by over 15 @,@ 000 votes and Voorhis refused to run against Nixon in 1948 . 
 During a writing career spanning a half @-@ century , Voorhis penned several books . Following his defeat by Nixon , he retired from politics and worked for almost twenty years as an executive in the cooperative movement . He died in a California retirement home in 1984 at the age of 83 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Voorhis was born in Ottawa , Kansas , on April 6 , 1901 , to Charles Brown Voorhis , of Dutch descent , and Ella Ward ( Smith ) Voorhis . Jerry was the grandson ( and future biographer ) of Aurelius Lyman Voorhis , who had " ventured out to the frontier in western Kansas " as merchant , land agent , and self @-@ taught lawyer , and had scraped to send his son to college until he was forced , halfway through , to give his son the only two dollars he could spare and advise him to get a job . Charles Voorhis took work in an investment company and as a semi @-@ professional baseball player and rose to become an executive of the Kingman Plow Company . When that company dissolved , Charles Voorhis became an executive of the Oakland Motor Car Company , which became the Pontiac division of General Motors , and finally of the Nash Motor Company before his 1925 retirement . Jerry Voorhis began school in Ottawa , but also attended school in Oklahoma City , Peoria , Illinois and Pontiac , Michigan . He attended The Hotchkiss School , an elite boys ' boarding school in Connecticut with close ties to Yale University , and subsequently attended Yale , graduating in 1923 . Voorhis was elected as a member of Phi Beta Kappa , was president of the Christian Association , and was greatly influenced by the Social Gospel movement . 
 Voorhis resisted all encouragement toward a business or management career , much to his father 's disappointment . While attending Yale , he came to believe that " the Christian Gospel is to be taken seriously , and that needless poverty and suffering on the one hand and special privilege and inordinate power on the other are entirely contrary to its precepts " . He later stated that he lacked the faith in his own judgment to leave Yale and get a job in " the real world [ which ] lay beyond the college walls " . However , once he graduated , Voorhis engaged a room at a boarding house and went to work as a receiving clerk , a job he soon exchanged for one as a freight handler . Later in 1923 , he was laid off . In 1923 and 1924 , he served as a traveling representative for the YMCA in Germany , though his stay was cut short by illness . Suffering from pneumonia , Voorhis spent six weeks recovering in a London nursing home . 
 Charles Voorhis 's job with Nash had taken him to a new home in Kenosha , Wisconsin ; Jerry Voorhis joined his parents there on his return from Europe . As part of his recovery from his illness , he spent several weeks in northwestern Wyoming , working on a ranch . In Kenosha , he met a social worker named Alice Louise Livingston and married her on November 27 , 1924 , in her hometown of Washington , Iowa . Resuming his blue @-@ collar career after his marriage , Voorhis moved to North Carolina with his wife and went to work in a Ford plant in Charlotte until being offered work as a teacher in an Illinois school for underprivileged boys , teaching three grades , coaching sports , and giving religious talks in the school 's chapel each morning . This was followed by a year in Laramie , Wyoming , where the <unk> founded and ran an orphanage for boys . 
 In 1927 , the now @-@ retired Charles Voorhis offered his son an opportunity to found a boys academy near the elder Voorhis 's home in Pasadena , California . Jerry Voorhis responded by moving to California . In 1928 , he founded and became headmaster of the Voorhis School for Boys in San Dimas , California , a post he retained after his election to Congress . In addition to academic tutelage , the Voorhis School 's boys received training in farming , mechanical work , and other manual vocations . Charles and Jerry Voorhis would put much of the family fortune into the school . After Voorhis 's election to Congress , the school would be closed down , with the land and buildings donated to California State Polytechnic University , Pomona ( Cal Poly Pomona ) , later serving as the university 's Southern California campus until it moved in 1950 to Pomona . Voorhis remained in close touch with his school 's alumni . 
 Voorhis also involved himself in the local community . He organized cooperatives among the local ranchers and farmers . When strikes occurred , he would walk the picket lines with the workers . Voorhis gave lectures at Pomona College from 1930 until 1935 . He began publishing articles , writing in 1933 , " We could produce plenty for all , but we don 't do it ... we will do it only when all producing wealth is owned publicly . ... Incidentally , we would then be living in the kingdom of God . " 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Congressional service = = = 
 Voorhis was a candidate for the California State Assembly in 1934 , changing his registration from Socialist to Democrat , but was defeated by popular incumbent Herbert Evans despite receiving the backing of writer and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Upton Sinclair . Two years later , he challenged incumbent John Hoeppel for the 12th district Democratic nomination . Hoeppel was weakened by a recent conviction for attempting to sell a nomination to West Point and Voorhis won the Democratic nomination , with Hoeppel finishing in third place . Running as a " Progressive Roosevelt @-@ Democrat " , Voorhis easily defeated Republican nominee Frederick F. Houser in the general election . 
 Voorhis was reelected to Congress four times and had one of Congress 's most liberal voting records . He supported New Deal initiatives , including Franklin Roosevelt 's controversial court packing plan . 
 In January 1937 , Voorhis 's first legislative initiative was to propose a dramatic increase in spending for the Works Progress Administration in order to increase employment . While this effort was unsuccessful , Congress , faced with an economic downturn the following year , increased WPA spending beyond the level which Voorhis had sought . While the 75th Congress had in excess of 300 Democrats , many of them were conservative , and Voorhis emerged as a leader of a progressive caucus of some 50 representatives . Voorhis advocated the purchase by the Federal Government of the stock in the Federal Reserve Banks , which was held by the member banks , as a way of financing government expenditures and briefly got President Roosevelt to support the measure until the President 's advisers caused Roosevelt to change his mind . Voorhis later allied with future House Banking Committee chairman Wright Patman to force Federal Reserve Banks to pay most of the interest they earned on federal securities to the U.S. Government , rather than to the bank stockholders . 
 In the run @-@ up to World War II , Voorhis urged neutrality . He proposed enactment of a law which would require a national referendum on whether to go to war . According to Voorhis , laws banning the sale of munitions to foreign nations and forbidding Americans from making loans to other nations for war preparations would keep the United States out of war . In September 1939 , when interviewed by The New York Times for his reaction to the President calling Congress into special session to consider amendments to the Neutrality Act , Voorhis stated that a special session should quickly increase relief to the working poor . In early November 1939 , however , Voorhis announced his support for repealing the arms embargo mandated by the Act , at the same time urging that the country remain neutral . Voorhis also opposed a peacetime draft , and supported " lend @-@ lease " legislation . 
 Once war was declared , Voorhis supported the internment of Japanese @-@ Americans , though he suggested that the evacuations be done in as voluntary a manner as possible and that officials be appointed to administer their property to avoid forced sales at bargain prices . During the war , Voorhis advocated more efficiently taxing higher incomes and war profits , planning against postwar unemployment , and planning for the nutritional needs of Americans . Voorhis also opposed dominance of big business in the war effort . Congress , for the most part , ignored Voorhis 's pleas . 
 Voorhis often opposed the petroleum industry , questioning the need for the oil depletion allowance . In 1943 , he was told by a Pasadena attorney that the Navy Department was planning to grant Standard Oil exclusive free drilling rights in the vast Elk Hills naval reserve in central California , then thought to be the richest oil reserve outside the Arabian Peninsula . The congressman in a speech from the House floor in May 1943 exposed the deal , which was soon cancelled . The Washington Post hailed him as a hero , and House Naval Affairs Committee Chairman Carl Vinson of Georgia stated that Voorhis had performed " the greatest kind of service " . However , the Los Angeles Times suggested that Voorhis had harmed the war effort by depriving the people of California of gasoline . In 1945 , Voorhis fought a bill which would have given oil companies offshore drilling rights . The petroleum industry journal Second Issue blamed the defeat of the bill on Voorhis . Nixon biographer Roger Morris suggested that these stands led oil companies to give Nixon substantial , but surreptitious , financial assistance during the 1946 campaign against Voorhis . 
 = = = Record and campaigns = = = 
 Voorhis " temperamentally and philosophically loathed " Communism . He sponsored the Voorhis Act of 1940 , which required political organizations which were controlled by a foreign power or which engaged in military activities to subvert the American government to register with the Justice Department . Voorhis also served as a member of the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) though Time magazine stated he could be " counted upon ... to temper rightist blasts for leftist lambs " . 
 Voorhis was generally highly regarded by his colleagues and others in Washington . Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois considered Voorhis " a political saint " , and said of Voorhis that " [ d ] riven by conscience , he had a compulsion to master every subject that came before the House , and having mastered it , he spoke his mind . " Voorhis would make five @-@ minute speeches in the House of Representatives at any opportunity , on matters ranging from local concerns in his district to international monetary issues . The press nicknamed him " Kid Atlas " , seeming to carry the weight of the world on his shoulders . The press corps also voted him the most honest congressman , and the fifth most intelligent . However , Interior Secretary Harold Ickes described Voorhis 's 1943 resignation from HUAC as the representative being " [ w ] <unk> as usual " . 
 Voorhis 's 12th district leaned Republican , the more so after Voorhis survived an attempt , in 1941 , to gerrymander him out of office by removing strong Democratic precincts from the 12th during the decennial redistricting . Nevertheless , Voorhis was re @-@ elected by 13 @,@ 000 votes in 1942 , and by a similar margin two years later . Despite the Republican leanings of his district , Voorhis had not faced any strong opposition prior to 1946 . Elected as part of the Roosevelt landslide of 1936 , in 1938 he faced an opponent so shy that Voorhis had to introduce him to the crowd at a joint appearance . In 1940 , he faced a military school principal , and his 1942 opponent , radio preacher and former Prohibition Party gubernatorial candidate Robert P. Shuler , " even embarrassed GOP regulars " . In 1944 , the 12th district Republicans were bitterly divided , and Voorhis easily triumphed . 
 Voorhis was a conscientious congressman towards his constituents , careful to remember births , anniversaries , and in @-@ district events . In fact , after the birth of Tricia Nixon near the start of the 1946 campaign , Voorhis 's office sent the Nixon family a copy of a government publication called Infant Care , of which congressmen received 150 a month . On April 1 , 1946 , Richard Nixon sent Voorhis a thank you letter for the pamphlet . 
 Aside from the act named for him , Voorhis succeeded in enacting few new laws , a fact Nixon used against him in 1946 when he argued that Voorhis 's legislation had only " transferred jurisdiction over the raising of rabbits from one government department to another " . The New York Times wrote of him in 1947 , " He was ineffectual in terms of practical results . " 
 = = = = 1946 campaign = = = = 
 As Voorhis served his fifth term in the House , local Republicans searched for a candidate capable of defeating him . Richard Nixon answered the call . Nixon , who was still in the Navy when approached , wrote of Voorhis , " His ' conservative ' reputation must be blasted . But my main efforts are being directed toward building up a positive , progressive group of speeches that tell what we want to do , not what the Democrats have failed to do ... I 'm really hopped up over this deal , and I believe we can win . " However , " wheelhorse " Republicans deemed Nixon 's campaign hopeless . 
 As was usual in California at the time , both Nixon and Voorhis cross @-@ filed in the other party 's primary , a practice Voorhis had long adopted . Winning both primaries virtually assured election . Each candidate won his own party 's primary , with Voorhis garnering a considerable number of votes in the Republican primary , and outpolling Nixon by 7 @,@ 000 votes overall . Nixon gained momentum , however , when the newspapers pointed out that Voorhis 's total percentage of the vote had decreased from 60 % in 1944 to 53 @.@ 5 % . 
 Voorhis had the advantage of incumbency , but this was balanced by other factors favoring Nixon . Due to the press of Congressional business , Voorhis was able to devote only two months to the campaign , while Nixon campaigned in the district for ten months . Voorhis 's time was further limited when , while en route to California from Washington D.C. in August , he was forced to have surgery for hemorrhoids in Ogden , Utah . He spent two weeks in an Ogden hotel recuperating from the operation . 
 Nixon alleged that a vote against Voorhis was " a vote against the P.A.C. Political Action Committee , affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations ( CIO ) , its Communist principles , and its gigantic slush fund . " The Nixon campaign distributed 25 @,@ 000 thimbles labeled " Nixon for Congress / Put the needle in the P.A.C. " 
 Voorhis 's supposed involvement with and endorsement by the CIO 's P.A.C. , which was believed to be a Communist front organization , was a major issue in the campaign . Nixon 's campaign manager claimed to have proof of Voorhis 's involvement with the group . On September 13 , the two candidates met at a debate at South Pasadena Junior High School . When Nixon was challenged to produce proof of the allegation , Nixon took from his pocket a local bulletin of the National Citizens Political Action Committee that contained an endorsement of Voorhis . This was a different group , also affiliated with the CIO . While Voorhis 's staff was aware of this endorsement , no one had told the representative . Voorhis , confronted with the bulletin , noted that these were two different groups . Nixon responded by reading the names of the boards of directors of the two groups , with many names in common . After the debate , Voorhis asked Congressman Chester E. Holifield for his view of how it had gone , and Holifield responded , " Jerry , he cut you to pieces . " Voorhis had been successfully linked with " the PAC " , though he had refused to accept the endorsement of any PAC unless it renounced Communist influence . Nixon defeated Voorhis by over 15 @,@ 000 votes and Time magazine praised the future president for " politely avoid [ ing ] personal attacks on his opponent " . 
 The day after the election , Voorhis issued a concession statement , " I have given the best years of my life to serving this district in Congress . By the will of the people , that work is ended . I have no regrets about the record I have written . " In his 1947 book , Confessions of a Congressman , Voorhis attributed his defeat to tremendous amounts of money supposedly spent by the Nixon forces . When Nixon read the book , he commented , " What I am wondering is where all the money went that we were supposed to have had ! " 
 Nixon 's defeat of Voorhis has been cited as the start of a number of red @-@ baiting campaigns by the future president that later elevated him to the Senate and the Vice @-@ Presidency and eventually put him in position to run for president . Voorhis later deemed himself " the first victim of the Nixon @-@ Chotiner formula for political success . " In 1958 , Voorhis alleged that voters had received anonymous phone calls alleging that he was a Communist , that newspapers had stated that he was a fellow traveler , and that when Nixon got angry , he would " do anything " . 
 In spite of any hard feelings , Voorhis sent Nixon a letter of congratulations in early December 1946 . The two men met for an hour at Voorhis 's office and parted , according to Voorhis , as friends . Voorhis 's final letter as a congressman , on December 31 , was to his father , who had been his political adviser throughout his congressional career , " It has been primarily due to your help , your confidence , your advice ... above all to a feeling I have always had that your hand was on my shoulder . Thanks ... God bless you . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 After leaving office , Voorhis remained in his Alexandria , Virginia , house , completing his book , Confessions of a Congressman . In early 1947 , he was offered the job of executive director of the Cooperative League of the USA . The Voorhis family relocated to Winnetka , Illinois , near the League 's Chicago headquarters . The League , which included both consumer and producer cooperatives , had fallen on hard times in the postwar period . Under his leadership , the League 's financial position gradually improved and some major cooperatives that had remained aloof from the League were persuaded to join . The League expanded its purview , founding the Group Health Association of America and the National Association of Housing Cooperatives . 
 Voorhis was urged to run again for Congress against Nixon in 1948 by Stephen Zetterberg , who , when Voorhis declined ( in part due to health reasons ) , himself ran in the Democratic primary . Nixon , facing no opposition in the Republican primary , entered and won the Democratic poll , eliminating Zetterberg from the race and ensuring his re @-@ election . 
 In 1954 , the former congressman led the U.S. delegation to the International Cooperative Alliance congress in Paris , successfully opposing Soviet plans to give greater representation to Eastern European countries , which was seen as a means of eventual communist control of the organization . Voorhis occasionally testified before Congressional committees , usually in opposition to bills which would tax cooperatives . He shut down the League 's moribund New York office and opened an office in Los Angeles . Voorhis encouraged the forming of cooperatives in Latin America and in 1963 , the first hemisphere @-@ wide conference of cooperatives took place in Montevideo , Uruguay . Stanley Dreyer , Voorhis 's eventual successor as executive director , was put in charge of these international operations . In January 1967 , Voorhis retired from the League . 
 Five days after Nixon 's defeat in the 1962 California gubernatorial election , Voorhis appeared on TV as a Nixon detractor , with Murray Chotiner and Republican Michigan Congressman Gerald Ford defending the former vice @-@ president on Howard K. Smith 's ABC News and Comment program , " The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon " . Voorhis complained about the way Nixon had conducted himself in the 1946 race. but was overshadowed by fellow detractor and Nixon nemesis Alger Hiss . Hiss 's participation led to such an uproar that sponsors pulled back from underwriting the program , and News and Comment left the air in the spring of 1963 . 
 Having spent 23 years in Winnetka , Voorhis moved back with his wife to the old 12th district to an apartment in Claremont . After almost a quarter century of silence on his defeat by Nixon , he wrote The Strange Case of Richard Milhous Nixon , a book in which he stated that Nixon was " quite a ruthless opponent " whose " one cardinal and unbreakable rule of conduct " was " to win , whatever it takes to do it " . " I did not expect my loyalty to America 's constitutional government to be attacked , " he wrote . 
 As the Nixon presidency slowly collapsed , Voorhis spoke out more frequently . In 1972 , he said , " Sour grapes to criticize the man who beat me , but I just wouldn 't be human if I said I liked spending the second half of my life as ' the man who Nixon beat ' " . After Nixon resigned as President , Voorhis , noted , " Here is the philosophy of doing @-@ anything @-@ to @-@ win receiving its just and proper reward . " Voorhis , believing he had been labeled a subversive by Nixon , " took some satisfaction " in stating that Nixon himself had been the subversive , seeking , according to Voorhis , to impose " a virtual dictatorship " on the country . 
 In 1972 , Voorhis and his wife entered a retirement home in Claremont . Nonetheless , he continued to work on a number of committees and advisory boards . His activities ranged from the California Commission on Aging ( appointed by Governor Jerry Brown ) to working as a teacher 's aide to Tom Hayden 's Campaign for Economic Democracy . Voorhis died at the retirement home from emphysema on September 11 , 1984 . In addition to his widow , he left two sons and a daughter . Fellow Nixon opponent and former California governor Pat Brown eulogized him , saying , " He was a great man . Not many like him these days . " Voorhis is buried in Mountain View Cemetery in Altadena , California . His papers are held by the Claremont Colleges ' <unk> @-@ Mudd Library Special Collections . 
 An elementary school in El Monte , California , is named for the former congressman . Cal Poly Pomona considers Voorhis one of its founders and has named a park and an ecological reserve for him . 
 = Shaktism = 
 Shaktism or Shaktidharma ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ् <unk> ; lit . , " doctrine of power " or " doctrine of the Goddess " ) is a denomination of Hinduism that focuses worship upon Shakti or Devi – the Hindu Divine Mother – as the absolute , ultimate Godhead . It is , along with Shaivism , Vaishnavism , and Smartism , one of the primary schools of devotional Hinduism and is especially popular in Bengal and Assam . 
 Shaktism regards Devi ( lit . , ' the Goddess ' ) as the Supreme Brahman itself , with all other forms of divinity , considered to be merely her diverse manifestations . In the details of its philosophy and practice , Shaktism resembles Shaivism . However , Shaktas ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ् त ) , practitioners of Shaktism , focus most or all worship on Shakti , as the dynamic feminine aspect of the Supreme Divine . Shiva , the masculine aspect of divinity , is considered solely transcendent , and his worship is usually relegated to an auxiliary role . 
 Cults of goddess worship are ancient in India . The branch of Hinduism that worships the goddess , known as Devi , is called Shaktism . Followers of Shaktism recognize Shakti as the power that underlies the male principle , and Devi is often depicted as Parvati the consort of Shiva or as Lakshmi the consort of Vishnu . She is also depicted in other guises , such as the fierce Kali or Durga . Shaktism is closely related with Tantric Hinduism , which teaches rituals and practices for purification of the mind and body . The Mother Goddess has many forms . Some are gentle , some are fierce . Shaktas use chants , real magic , holy diagrams , yoga and rituals to call forth cosmic forces . 
 Over the course of its history , Shaktism has inspired great works of Sanskrit literature and Hindu philosophy , and it continues to strongly influence popular Hinduism today . Shaktism is practiced throughout the Indian subcontinent and beyond , in numerous forms , both Tantric and non @-@ Tantric ; however , its two largest and most visible schools are the Srikula ( lit . , family of Sri ) , strongest in South India , and the Kalikula ( family of Kali ) , which prevails in northern and eastern India . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Shakti and Shiva = = = 
 Shaktas conceive the Goddess as the supreme , ultimate Godhead . She is considered to be simultaneously the source of all creation , as well as its embodiment and the energy that animates and governs it . It has been observed that " nowhere in the religious history of the world do we come across such a completely female @-@ oriented system . " 
 Shaktism 's focus on the Divine Feminine does not imply a rejection of Masculine or <unk> divinity . However , both are deemed to be inactive in the absence of Shakti . As set out in the first line of Adi Shankara 's renowned Shakta hymn , Saundaryalahari ( c . 800 CE ) : " If Shiva is united with Shakti , he is able to create . If he is not , he is incapable even of stirring . " This is the fundamental tenet of Shaktism , as emphasized in the widely known image of the goddess Kali striding atop the seemingly lifeless body of Shiva . 
 Broadly speaking , Shakti is considered to be the cosmos itself – she is the embodiment of energy and dynamism , and the motivating force behind all action and existence in the material universe . Shiva is her transcendent masculine aspect , providing the divine ground of all being . " There is no Shiva without Shakti , or Shakti without Shiva . The two [ ... ] in themselves are One . " 
 As expressed by the historian V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar ( here referring to Shiva as Brahman ) , " Shaktism is dynamic Hinduism . The excellence of Shaktism lies in its affirmation of Shakti as Consciousness and of the identity of Shakti and Brahman . In short , Brahman is static Shakti and Shakti is dynamic Brahman . " In religious art , this cosmic dynamic is powerfully expressed in the half @-@ Shakti , half @-@ Shiva deity known as <unk> . 
 Shaktism views the Devi as the source , essence and substance of virtually everything in creation , seen or unseen , including Shiva himself . In the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana , a central Shakta scripture , the Devi declares : 
 I am Manifest Divinity , <unk> Divinity , and Transcendent Divinity . I am Brahma , Vishnu and Shiva , as well as Saraswati , Lakshmi and Parvati . I am the Sun and I am the Stars , and I am also the Moon . I am all animals and birds , and I am the outcaste as well , and the thief . I am the low person of dreadful deeds , and the great person of excellent deeds . I am Female , I am Male in the form of Shiva . 
 In the above quote we see that the supreme <unk> declares herself as both the masculine Trimurti and the feminine <unk> , and that Divinity transcends the human notion of gender . 
 The religious scholar C. MacKenzie Brown explains that Shaktism " clearly insists that , of the two genders , the feminine represents the dominant power in the universe . Yet both genders must be included in the ultimate if it is truly ultimate . The masculine and the feminine are aspects of the divine , transcendent reality , which goes beyond but still encompasses them . Devi , in her supreme form as consciousness thus transcends gender , but her transcendence is not apart from her immanence . " 
 = = = Association with tantra = = = 
 A widely misunderstood aspect of Shaktism is its close association with Tantrism – an ambiguous , often provocative concept that suggests everything from orthodox temple worship in the south of India , to black magic and occult practices in North India , to ritualized sexual practices ( sometimes referred to as " <unk> " or " <unk> " ) in the West . In fact , not all forms of Shaktism are Tantric in nature , just as not all forms of Tantra are <unk> in nature . 
 When the term " Tantra " is used in relation to authentic Hindu Shaktism , it most often refers to a class of ritual manuals , and – more broadly – to an esoteric methodology of Goddess @-@ focused spiritual practice ( sadhana ) involving mantra , yantra , nyasa , mudra and certain elements of traditional kundalini yoga , all practiced under the guidance of a qualified guru after due initiation ( diksha ) and oral instruction to supplement various written sources . 
 In its social interactions , Shakta Tantra is " free from all sorts of caste and patriarchal prejudices . A woman or a <unk> is entitled to function in the role of guru . All women are regarded as manifestations of Shakti , and hence they are the object of respect and devotion . Whoever offends them incurs the wrath of the great goddess . Every [ male aspirant ] has to realize the latent Female Principle within himself , and only by [ thus ] ' becoming female ' is he entitled to worship the Supreme Being " . 
 More controversial ritual practices , such as the " Five Ms " or panchamakara , are employed under certain circumstances by some Tantric Shakta sects . However , these elements tend to be overemphasized and sensationalized by commentators ( both friendly and hostile ) who are ill @-@ informed regarding authentic doctrine and practice . Moreover , even within the tradition there are wide differences of opinion regarding the proper interpretation of the panchamakara , and some lineages reject them altogether . 
 In sum , the complex social and historical interrelations of Tantric and non @-@ Tantric elements in Shaktism – and Hinduism in general – are an extremely fraught and nuanced topic of discussion . However , as a general rule : 
 Ideas and practices that collectively characterize Tantrism pervade classical Hinduism [ and ] it would be an error to consider Tantrism apart from its complex interrelations with non @-@ Tantric traditions . Literary history demonstrates that Vedic @-@ oriented brahmins have been involved in Shakta Tantrism from its incipient stages of development , that is , from at least the sixth century . While Shakta Tantrism may have originated in [ pre @-@ Vedic , indigenous ] goddess cults , any attempt to distance Shakta Tantrism from the Sanskritic Hindu traditions [ ... ] will lead us astray . 
 = = Principal deities = = 
 Shaktas may approach the Devi in any of a vast number of forms ; however , they are all considered to be but diverse aspects of the one supreme goddess . 
 With the many names used to refer to her – <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Kālī , and a profusion of others – it is easy to forget that the Devi is indeed one . [ In the central Shakta scripture Devi Mahatmyam ] , the Devi reveals that she is one without a second , saying , " I am alone here in the world . Who else is there besides me ? " Following this proclamation of divine unity , which has been called the <unk> , or great dictum of <unk> , she explains that all [ other goddesses ] are but projections of her power , as are all the other forms she inhabits . 
 The primary Devi form worshiped by a Shakta is his or her <unk> @-@ devi . The selection of this deity can depend on many factors , including family tradition , regional practice , guru lineage , personal resonance and so on . There are literally thousands of goddess forms , many of them associated with particular temples , geographic features or even individual villages . 
 Nonetheless , several highly popular goddess forms are known and worshiped throughout the Hindu world , and virtually every female deity in Hinduism is believed to be a manifestation of one or more of these " basic " forms . The best @-@ known benevolent goddesses of popular Hinduism include : 
 Adi Parashakti ( Shree Bhagavathy ) : Para Brahman itself - the Goddess as Original , Transcendent Source of the Universe . 
 Durga ( Amba , Ambika ) : The Goddess as Mahadevi , Material Manifestation of Supreme Divinity ( Brahman ) 
 Lakshmi ( Sri ) : The Goddess of Material Fulfillment ( wealth , health , fortune , love , beauty , fertility , etc . ) ; consort ( shakti ) of Vishnu 
 Parvati ( Gauri , Uma ) : The Goddess of Spiritual Fulfillment ( divine love ; the <unk> [ i.e. having material qualities ] form of Adi @-@ Parashakti ) ; consort ( shakti ) of Shiva 
 Saraswati : The Goddess of Cultural Fulfillment ( knowledge / education , music , arts and sciences , etc . ) ; consort ( shakti ) of Brahma ; identified with the Sarasvati River 
 Gayatri : The Goddess as Mother of Mantras 
 Ganga : The Goddess as Divine River ; identified with the Ganges River 
 Sita : The Goddess as Rama 's consort 
 Radha : The Goddess as Krishna 's lover 
 Sati ( goddess ) ( <unk> ) : The Goddess of Marital relations ; original consort ( shakti ) of Shiva [ Incarnation of Adi Parashakti ] . 
 The majority of the worship is to Durga or Kali . Durga as such is rarely worshiped , Durga is rather a general terminology for mother goddess , mostly her deity are worshiped in temple the name of Bhagavathy or Mahadevi ( A generalized term used in temples for worshiping Mother Goddess ) etc . In that , most of the temples for doing rites assume certain forms of Durga as the deity , E.g. The Bhagavathy Temple of Kanyakumari is a Durga or Devi temple , but the Sankalpa is that of Devi Katyayani . Any of the Navadurga is considered as Sankalpa while worshiping Devi Durga . The Navadurga are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Katyayini , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ; these are the forms of Durga for worshiping . 
 Kali is directly worshiped as such in the form of Bhadrakali ( Translation : Mahamaya Kali ( ' <unk> ' means delusion or maya and ' dra ' is a superlative means the most or the mightiest ) ) in south India and Maha Kali in Bengal region . 
 = = = Tantric deities = = = 
 Goddess groups – such as the " Nine <unk> " ( Navadurga ) , " Eight <unk> " ( Ashta @-@ Lakshmi ) or the " Fifteen <unk> " – are very common in Hinduism . But perhaps no group reveals the elements of Shaktidharma better than the Ten Mahavidyas ( <unk> ) . Through them , Shaktas believe , " the one Truth is sensed in ten different facets ; the Divine Mother is adored and approached as ten cosmic personalities . " The Mahavidyas are considered Tantric in nature , and are usually identified as : 
 Kali : The Goddess beyond all forms , time and universe , Death or " Devourer " of Time ( Supreme Deity of Kalikula systems ) 
 Tara : The Goddess as Guide and Protector , or the Goddess as Savior 
 Lalita @-@ Tripurasundari ( <unk> ) : The Goddess Who is " Beautiful in the Three Worlds " ( Supreme Deity of Srikula systems ) ; the " Tantric Parvati " 
 Bhuvaneshvari : The Goddess as World Mother , or the Goddess Whose Body is the Earth / Cosmos 
 Bhairavi : The Fierce Goddess 
 Chhinnamasta : The Self @-@ Decapitated Goddess 
 Dhumavati : The Widow Goddess 
 Bagalamukhi : The Goddess Who <unk> Enemies 
 Matangi : The <unk> Goddess ( in Kalikula systems ) ; the Prime Minister of Lalita ( in Srikula systems ) ; the " Tantric Saraswati " 
 Kamala : The Lotus Goddess ; the " Tantric Lakshmi " 
 Other major goddess groups include the Sapta @-@ Matrika ( " Seven Little Mothers " ) , " who are the energies of different major gods , and described as assisting the great Shakta Devi in her fight with demons " , and the 64 Yoginis . 
 = = Historical and philosophical development = = 
 The beginnings of Shaktism are shrouded in the mists of prehistory . The earliest Mother Goddess figurine unearthed in India , belonging to the Upper Paleolithic , has been carbon @-@ dated to approximately 20 @,@ 000 BCE . Thousands of female statuettes dated as early as c . 5500 BCE have been recovered at Mehrgarh , one of the most important Neolithic sites in world archaeology . While it is impossible to reconstruct the spiritual beliefs of a civilization so distantly removed in time , current archaeological and anthropological evidence suggests that the religion of the great Indus Valley Civilization is probably a direct predecessor of modern Shaktism . 
 As the Indus Valley Civilization slowly declined and dispersed , its peoples mixed with other groups to eventually give rise to Vedic Civilization ( c . 1500 - 600 BCE ) . Shaktism as it exists today began with the literature of the Vedic Age ; further evolved during the formative period of the Hindu epics ; reached its full flower during the Gupta Age ( 300 @-@ 700 CE ) , and continued to expand and develop thereafter . 
 The most central and pivotal text in Shaktidharma is the Devi Mahatmya ( also known as the Durga Saptashati , Chandi or Chandi @-@ Path ) , composed some 1 @,@ 600 years ago . Here , for the first time , " the various mythic , cultic and theological elements relating to diverse female divinities were brought together in what has been called the ' crystallization of the Goddess tradition . ' " 
 Other important texts include the canonical Shakta Upanishads , as well as Shakta @-@ oriented Puranic literature such as the Devi Purana and Kalika Purana , the Lalita Sahasranama ( from the Brahmanda Purana ) , the Devi Gita ( from the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana ) , Adi Shankara 's Saundaryalahari and the Tantras . 
 Elements of Shaktism – most notably , the ubiquity of goddess worship in some form – has infused popular Hinduism . Its pervasive influence on the religion is also reflected in the Hindu adage , " When in public , be a Vaishnava . When among friends , be a Shaiva . But in private , always be a Shakta . " 
 Recent developments related to Shaktism include the emergence of Bharat Mata ( " Mother India " ) symbolism , the increasing visibility of Hindu female saints and gurus , and the prodigious rise of the " new " goddess Santoshi Mata following release of the Indian film Jai Santoshi Maa ( " Hail to the Mother of Satisfaction " ) in 1975 . Linda Johnsen in ' The Complete Idiot 's Guide to Hinduism ' notes : 
 Today just as 10 @,@ 000 years ago , images of the Goddess are everywhere in India . You 'll find them painted on the sides of trucks , pasted to the dashboards of taxis , <unk> on the walls of shops . You 'll often see a color painting of the Goddess prominently displayed in Hindu homes . Usually the picture is hung high on the wall so you have to crane your neck backward , looking up toward her feet . [ ... ] In India , Goddess worship is not a ' cult , ' it 's a religion , [ ... ] an extraordinarily spiritually and psychologically mature tradition . Millions of people turn every day with heartfelt yearning to the Mother of the Universe . " 
 = = Worship = = 
 Shaktism encompasses a nearly endless variety of beliefs and practices – from primitive animism to philosophical speculation of the highest order – that seek to access the Shakti ( Divine Energy or Power ) that is believed to be the Devi 's nature and form . Its two largest and most visible schools are the Srikula ( family of Sri ) , strongest in South India , and the Kalikula ( family of Kali ) , which prevails in northern and eastern India . 
 = = = Srikula : family of Sri = = = 
 The Srikula ( family of Sri ) tradition ( sampradaya ) focuses worship on Devi in the form of the goddess Lalita @-@ Tripura Sundari , who is regarded as the Great Goddess ( Mahadevi ) . Rooted in first @-@ millennium Uttarakhand , Himachal Pradesh and Kashmir Valley , Srikula became a force in South India no later than the seventh century , and is today the prevalent form of Shaktism practiced in South Indian regions such as Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Kerala , Tamil Nadu and Tamil areas of Sri Lanka . 
 The Srikula 's best @-@ known school is Srividya , " one of Shakta Tantrism 's most influential and theologically sophisticated movements . " Its central symbol , the Sri Chakra , is probably the most famous visual image in all of Hindu Tantric tradition . Its literature and practice is perhaps more systematic than that of any other Shakta sect . 
 Srividya largely views the Goddess as " benign [ <unk> ] and beautiful [ <unk> ] " ( in contrast to Kalikula 's focus on " terrifying [ ugra ] and horrifying [ <unk> ] " goddess forms such as Kali or Durga ) . In Srikula practice , moreover , every aspect of the Goddess – whether malignant or gentle – is identified with Lalita . 
 Srikula adepts most often worship Lalita using the abstract Sri Chakra yantra , which is regarded as her subtle form . The Sri Chakra can be visually rendered either as a two @-@ dimensional diagram ( whether drawn temporarily as part of the worship ritual , or permanently engraved in metal ) or in the three @-@ dimensional , pyramidal form known as the Sri Meru . It is not uncommon to find a Sri Chakra or Sri Meru installed in South Indian temples , because – as modern practitioners assert – " there is no disputing that this is the highest form of Devi and that some of the practice can be done openly . But what you see in the temples is not the <unk> worship you see when it is done privately . " 
 The Srividya <unk> can be further broadly subdivided into two streams , the Kaula ( a <unk> practice ) and the Samaya ( a <unk> practice ) . The Kaula or <unk> , first appeared as a coherent ritual system in the 8th century in central India , and its most revered theorist is the 18th @-@ century philosopher Bhaskararaya , widely considered " the best exponent of Shakta philosophy . " 
 The Samaya or <unk> finds its roots in the work of the 16th @-@ century commentator <unk> , and is " fiercely puritanical [ in its ] attempts to reform Tantric practice in ways that bring it in line with high @-@ caste <unk> norms . " Many Samaya practitioners explicitly deny being either Shakta or Tantric , though scholars argues that their cult remains technically both . The Samaya @-@ Kaula division marks " an old dispute within Hindu Tantrism , " and one that is vigorously debated to this day . 
 = = = Kalikula : family of Kali = = = 
 The Kalikula ( family of Kali ) form of Shaktism is most dominant in Nepal , northern and eastern India , and is most widely prevalent in West Bengal , Assam , Bihar and Odisha , as well as parts of Maharashtra , Bangladesh and some parts of Kerala . Kalikula lineages focus upon the Devi as the source of wisdom ( vidya ) and liberation ( moksha ) . They generally stand " in opposition to the <unk> tradition , " which they view as " overly conservative and denying the experiential part of religion . " 
 The main deities of Kalikula are Kali , Chandi and Durga . Other goddesses that enjoy veneration are Tara and all the other Mahavidyas as well as regional goddesses such as Manasa , the snake goddess , and Sitala , the smallpox goddess – all of them , again , considered aspects of the Divine Mother . 
 In Nepal devi is mainly worshipped as Kali , <unk> , Matrika and <unk> are many shakti peeth in Nepal including the main shakti peeth <unk> temple of <unk> Devi also called as <unk> <unk> on the bank of holy <unk> river . She is one of the important deity in <unk> . Two major centers of Shaktism in West Bengal are Kalighat in Calcutta and Tarapith in Birbhum district . In Calcutta , emphasis is on devotion ( bhakti ) to the goddess as Kali : 
 She is " the loving mother who protects her children and whose fierceness guards them . She is outwardly frightening – with dark skin , pointed teeth , and a necklace of skulls – but inwardly beautiful . She can guarantee a good rebirth or great religious insight , and her worship is often communal – especially at festivals , such as Kali Puja and Durga Puja . Worship may involve contemplation of the devotee 's union with or love of the goddess , visualization of her form , chanting [ of her ] mantras , prayer before her image or yantra , and giving [ of ] offerings . " 
 At Tarapith , Devi 's manifestation as Tara ( " She Who Saves " ) or <unk> ( " Fierce Tara " ) is ascendant , as the goddess who gives liberation ( <unk> ) . [ ... ] The forms of sadhana performed here are more yogic and tantric than devotional , and they often involve sitting alone at the [ cremation ] ground , surrounded by ash and bone . There are shamanic elements associated with the Tarapith tradition , including " conquest of the goddess ' , exorcism , trance , and control of spirits . " 
 The philosophical and devotional underpinning of all such ritual , however , remains a pervasive vision of the Devi as supreme , absolute divinity . As expressed by the nineteenth @-@ century saint Ramakrishna , one of the most influential figures in modern Bengali Shaktism : 
 Kali is none other than Brahman . That which is called Brahman is really Kali . She is the Primal Energy . When that Energy remains inactive , I call It Brahman , and when It creates , preserves , or destroys , I call It Shakti or Kali . What you call Brahman I call Kali . Brahman and Kali are not different . They are like fire and its power to burn : if one thinks of fire one must think of its power to burn . If one recognizes Kali one must also recognize Brahman ; again , if one recognizes Brahman one must recognize Kali . Brahman and Its Power are identical . It is Brahman whom I address as Shakti or Kali . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Shaktas celebrate most major Hindu festivals , as well as a huge variety of local , <unk> or deity @-@ specific observances . A few of the more important events are listed below : 
 = = = = Navratri = = = = 
 The most important Shakta festival is Navratri ( lit . , " Festival of Nine Nights " ) , also known as " Sharad Navratri " because it falls during the Hindu month of Sharad ( October / November ) . This festival – often taken together with the following tenth day , known as <unk> or Vijayadashami – celebrates the goddess Durga 's victory over a series of powerful demons in the Devi Mahatmya . In Bengal , the last four days of Navaratri are called Durga Puja , and mark one episode in particular : Durga 's iconic slaying of Mahishasura ( lit . , the " Buffalo Demon " ) . 
 While Hindus of all denominations celebrate the autumn Navratri festival , Shaktas also celebrate two additional <unk> – one in the spring and one in the summer . The spring festival is known as <unk> Navaratri or Chaitra <unk> , and celebrated in the Hindu month of Chaitra ( March / April ) . Srividya lineages dedicate this festival to Devi 's form as the goddess Lalita . The summer festival is called <unk> Navaratri , as it is held during the Hindu month of Ashadha ( June / July ) . The hugely popular Vaishno Devi temple in Jammu observes its major Navaratri celebration during this period . <unk> Navaratri , on the other hand , is considered particularly auspicious for devotees of the boar @-@ headed goddess Varahi , one of the seven Matrikas named in the Devi Mahatmya . 
 = = = = Vasant Panchami = = = = 
 Fifth day of Magha Gupta Navratri is very important for all branches of Shakta @-@ <unk> . Specially in <unk> <unk> <unk> , thousands of <unk> and other secret rituals performed this day to please <unk> . This is the festival of union of Shakti & Shiv ( Shiva @-@ Shiv ) . On the same basis Shiva @-@ Shiv <unk> is formed by <unk> <unk> at <unk> Ashram , <unk> in 1980 . 
 = = = = Diwali and others = = = = 
 Lakshmi Puja is observed by Shaktas and many other Hindus on the full moon night following the autumn Durga Puja . Lakshmi 's biggest festival , however , is Diwali ( or Deepavali ; the " Festival of Lights " ) , a major Hindu holiday celebrated across India and in Nepal as Tihar . In North India , Diwali marks the beginning of the traditional New Year , and is held on the night of the new moon in the Hindu month of Kartik ( usually October or November ) . Shaktas ( and many non @-@ Shaktas ) celebrate it as another Lakshmi Puja , placing small oil lamps outside their homes and praying for the goddess 's blessings . Diwali coincides with the celebration of Kali Puja , popular in Bengal , and some Shakta traditions focus their worship on Devi as Kali rather than Lakshmi . 
 Jagaddhatri Puja is celebrated on the last four days of the <unk> , following Kali Puja . It is very similar to Durga Puja in its details and observance , and is especially popular in Bengal and some other parts of Eastern India . 
 Gauri Puja is performed on the fifth day after Ganesh Chaturthi , during Ganesha Puja in Western India , to celebrate the arrival of Gauri , Mother of Ganesha , to come and bring her son back home . 
 There are variant dates for Saraswati Puja , depending upon region and local tradition . Commonly , on the fifth day of the Hindu month of Phalguna ( January – February ) , students offer their books and musical instruments to Saraswati and pray for her blessings in their studies . In some parts of India , Saraswati Puja is celebrated in the month of Magh ; in others , during the final three days of Navratri . 
 Major Shakta temple festivals are Meenakshi Kalyanam and <unk> Mela . Meenakshi Kalyanam observes the auspicious occasion of Devi 's marriage ( as Meenakshi ) to Lord <unk> ( Shiva ) is centered on the Meenakshi Amman Temple in Madurai , Tamil Nadu . It runs for 12 days , counting from the second day of the lunar month of Chaitra , in April or May . <unk> Mela is a celebration of the yearly menstruation of the goddess , held in June / July ( during the monsoon season ) at Kamakhya Temple , Guwahati , Assam . Here the Devi is worshiped in the form of a yoni @-@ like stone over which a naturally red @-@ tinted spring flows . 
 = = = Temples = = = 
 There are thousands of Shakti temples ; vast or tiny , famous or obscure . Moreover , countless cities , towns , villages and geographic landmarks are named for various forms of the Devi . " In this vast country , holy resorts of the goddess are innumerable and the popularity of her cult is proved even in the place @-@ names of India . " 
 At various times , different writers have attempted to organize some of these into lists of " Shakti Peethas " ; literally " Seats of the Devi " , or more broadly , " Places of Power " . Numbering anywhere from four to 51 ( in the most famous list , found in the Tantra <unk> ) , " the <unk> [ became ] a popular theme of the medieval writers , many of whom took the greatest liberty in fabricating the place names , the goddesses and their <unk> [ consorts ] . " 
 = = = Animal sacrifice = = = 
 Animals are sacrificed in all parts of India , mainly at temples of Goddesses such as Bhavani or Kali . 
 The Rajput of Rajasthan offer a sacrifice of buffalo or goat to their family Goddess ( Kuldevta ) during the festival of Navaratri . The ritual requires slaying of the animal with a single stroke . In the past it was considered a rite of passage for young men . The ritual is directed by a Brahmin priest . 
 Animal sacrifice is practiced in southern Indian states of Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh , and Tamil Nadu by local Hindu people . It is most notably done in front of local or clan deities . The ritual involves most caste members of the village with each caste performing different roles . In Karnataka , the Goddess receiving the sacrifice tends to be Renuka . The animal is either a male buffalo or a goat . 
 The <unk> or <unk> community of Maharashtra while observing the <unk> ceremony , after delivery of a child in the family , offer worship to their family Goddess <unk> with a sacrifice of a goat . Following this they hold the naming ceremony of the child on the 12th day . 
 In some sacred groves of India , particularly in Western Maharashtra , animal sacrifice is practiced to pacify female deities that are supposed to rule the groves . Animal sacrifice is also practiced by some caste Hindus in Maharashtra at temples of Goddess <unk> at Karla caves or <unk> Bhavani . 
 Animal sacrifices are performed at many temples in some eastern states of India and Nepal where the female nature of Brahman is worshiped in the form of Kali and Durga . This involves slaying of goats , chickens and sometimes male Water buffalos . A number Tantric Puranas specify the ritual for how the animal should be slayed . In Bengal , a priest recites the Gayatri Mantra in the ear of animal to be sacrificed , to free it from the cycle of life and death . 
 Animal sacrifice en masse occurs during the three @-@ day @-@ long <unk> festival in Nepal . In 2009 it was speculated that more than 250 @,@ 000 animals were killed while 5 million devotees attended the festival . 
 In India , ritual of animal sacrifice is practised in many villages before certain powerful and terrifying forms of the Devi . In this form of worship , animals , usually goats , are decapitated and the blood is offered to deity often by smearing some of it on a post outside the temple . For instance , <unk> Budhi is the reigning deity of <unk> in <unk> district of Orissa , India . Every year , animals like goat and fowl are sacrificed before the deity on the occasion of her annual Yatra / Jatra ( festival ) held in the month of <unk> ( September – October ) . The main attraction of <unk> Budhi Yatra is <unk> Puja . <unk> means a piglet , which is sacrificed to the goddess every three years . During the Bali Jatra , male goats are offered as a sacrifice to the goddess <unk> in her temple in <unk> , Orissa . 
 Bali Jatra of <unk> in Orissa , India is an annual festival celebrated in the month of <unk> ( September – October ) when animal sacrifice is an integral part of the ritual worship of deities : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Bali refers to animal sacrifice and hence this annual festival is called Bali Jatra . 
 = = Shaktism as a distinct tradition within Hinduism = = 
 Shaktism has at times been dismissed as a superstitious , black magic @-@ infested practice that hardly qualifies as a true religion at all . A representative criticism of this sort issued from an Indian scholar in the 1920s : 
 The Tantras are the Bible of Shaktism , identifying all Force with the female principle in nature and teaching an undue adoration of the wives of Shiva and Vishnu to the neglect of their male counterparts . It is certain that a vast number of the inhabitants of India are guided in their daily life by <unk> [ sic ] teaching , and are in bondage to the gross superstitions inculcated in these writings . And indeed it can scarcely be doubted that Shaktism is Hinduism arrived at its worst and most corrupt stage of development . " 
 Scholars variously attribute such criticism to ignorance , misunderstanding or sectarian bias on the part of some observers , as well as unscrupulous practices by some Shaktas . " It is in this context that many Hindus in India today deny the relevance of Tantra to their tradition , past or present , identifying what they call tantra @-@ mantra as so much mumbo @-@ jumbo . " 
 Within Hinduism , it is not uncommon to encounter assertions that the Shaiva and Vaishnava schools of Hinduism lead to moksha , or spiritual liberation , whereas Shaktism leads only to siddhis ( occult powers ) and <unk> ( material enjoyments ) – or , at best , to Shaivism . For example , the late Shaiva leader Satguru <unk> <unk> taught that worship of the feminine manifest is merely a vehicle for reaching the masculine unmanifest , or <unk> . <unk> 's successor , Satguru <unk> <unk> , recently published an essay on different Hindu approaches to God that did not discuss Shaktism at all . 
 Shakta theologians counter that each of the Divine Mother 's forms is a Brahma Vidya , or self @-@ contained path to supreme wisdom . The sadhaka of any one of these goddess forms " attains ultimately , if his aspiration is such , the supreme purpose of life – Self @-@ realisation and God @-@ realisation . " Mataji Devi Vanamali of the Vanamali ashram in Rishikesh summarizes the Shakta position as follows : 
 In her transcendental aspect she is Prakriti , the form of the absolute Brahman . Therefore , when we worship the Divine Mother , we are not only offering adoration to the supreme in its aspect of motherhood but also adoring the supreme absolute . She is that aspect of the supreme power by whose grace alone we shall ultimately released from the darkness of ignorance and the bondage of maya and taken to the abode of immortal knowledge , immortality , and bliss . " 
 = = Expansion beyond South Asia = = 
 The practice of Shaktism is no longer confined to South Asia . Traditional Shakta temples have sprung up across Southeast Asia , the Americas , Europe , Australia and elsewhere – some enthusiastically attended by non @-@ Indian as well as Indian diaspora Hindus . Examples in the United States include the Kali Mandir in Laguna Beach , California ; and Sri <unk> Peetam , a Srividya temple in rural Rush , New York . The Rush temple was the subject a 2006 in @-@ depth academic study exploring the " dynamics of diaspora Hinduism , " including the serious entry and involvement of non @-@ Indians in traditional Hindu religious practice . 
 Shaktism has become a focus of some Western spiritual seekers attempting to construct new Goddess @-@ centered faiths . An academic study of Western Kali enthusiasts noted that , " as shown in the histories of all cross @-@ cultural religious transplants , Kali devotionalism in the West must take on its own indigenous forms if it is to adapt to its new environment . " 
 Some writers and thinkers , " notably feminists and participants in New Age spirituality who are attracted to goddess worship " , have explored Kali in a new light . She is considered a " symbol of wholeness and healing , associated especially with repressed female power and sexuality . " These new interpretations mainly originate in " feminist sources , almost none of which base their interpretations on a close reading of Kali 's Indian background " and tend to demonstrate the difficulty of " import [ ing ] the worship of a goddess from another culture [ ... ] when the deep symbolic meanings embedded in the native culture are not available . " 
 Some Westerners believe that many central concepts of Shaktism – including aspects of kundalini yoga as well as goddess worship – were once " common to the Hindu , Chaldean , Greek and Roman civilizations , " but were largely superseded in the West , as well as the Near and Middle East , with the rise of the Abrahamic religions : 
 Of these four great ancient civilizations , working knowledge of the inner forces of enlightenment has survived on a mass scale only in India . Only in India has the inner tradition of the Goddess endured . This is the reason the teachings of India are so precious . They offer us a glimpse of what our own ancient wisdom must have been . The Indians have preserved our lost heritage . [ ... ] Today it is up to us to locate and restore the tradition of the living Goddess . We would do well to begin our search in India , where for not one moment in all of human history have the children of the living Goddess forgotten their Divine Mother . 
 = Ila ( Hinduism ) = 
 Ila ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) or Ilā ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) is an androgyne in Hindu mythology , known for their sex changes . As a man , he is known as Ila or Sudyumna and as a woman , is called Ilā . Ilā is considered the chief progenitor of the Lunar dynasty of Indian kings - also known as the Ailas ( " descendants of Ilā " ) . 
 While many versions of the tale exist , Ila is usually described as a daughter or son of <unk> Manu and thus the sibling of Ikshvaku , the founder of the Solar Dynasty . In versions in which Ila is born female , she changes into a male form by divine grace soon after her birth . After mistakenly entering a sacred grove as an adult , Ila is either cursed to change his / her gender every month or cursed to become a woman . As a woman , Ilā married Budha , the god of the planet Mercury and the son of the lunar deity Chandra ( Soma ) , and bore him a son called Pururavas , the father of the Lunar dynasty . After the birth of Pururavas , Ilā is transformed into a man again and fathered three sons . 
 In the Vedas , Ilā is praised as Idā ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) , goddess of speech , and described as mother of Pururavas . 
 The tale of Ila 's transformations is told in the Puranas as well as the Indian epic poems , the Ramayana and the Mahabharata . 
 = = Birth = = 
 According to the Linga Purana and the Mahabharata , Ilā was born as the eldest daughter of <unk> Manu , the progenitor of mankind , and his wife Shraddha . However , the parents desired a son and so prayed and performed austerities to propitiate the deities Mitra and Varuna , who changed Ilā 's sex . The boy was named Sudyumma . The Bhagavata Purana , the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana , the Kurma Purana , the Harivamsa , the Markandeya Purana and the Padma Purana ( referred to as " Bhagavata Purana et al. texts " further ) narrate a variant : Ila 's parents could not have any children for a long time and approached the sage Agastya for a solution . The sage performed a yajna ( fire sacrifice ) dedicated to Mitra and Varuna to attain a son for the couple . Due to either an error in the ritual , or a failure to offer the appropriate sacrifice , Mitra and Varuna instead sent a daughter to the couple . In one version , the couple <unk> the deities , who transformed Ilā 's gender . In another version , this transformation happens after the erroneous hymns are rectified and the son is called Ila . According to a variant , Shraddha wished for a daughter ; <unk> heeded her wish while performing the sacrifice and thus , a daughter was born . However , Manu desired a son so <unk> appealed to Vishnu to change the gender of his daughter . Ilā was renamed <unk> . The accounts describe Ila as either the eldest or the youngest child of Manu . As the child of Manu , Ila had nine brothers , the most notable was Ikshvaku , the founder of the Solar dynasty . As the son of Manu , Ila is the grandson of Surya . According to another account found in the Vayu Purana and the Brahmanda Purana , Ilā was born female and remained female . 
 In the Ramayana , Ila is born as a son of Kardama , the Prajapati born of the god Brahma 's shadow . Ila 's tale is told in the Uttara Kanda chapter of the Ramayana , while describing the greatness of the <unk> - the horse sacrifice . 
 = = Curse and marriage to Budha = = 
 In the Ramayana , the Linga Purana and the Mahabharata , Ila grows to become the king of <unk> . While hunting in a forest , Ila accidentally trespassed <unk> ( " Forest of Reeds " ) , the sacred grove of the goddess Parvati , the consort of the god Shiva . Upon entering <unk> , all male beings except for Shiva , including trees and animals , are transformed into females . In the Ramayana , even Shiva had assumed the form of a female to please the goddess . One legend tells that a female yakshini disguised herself as a deer and purposefully led Ila to the grove in order to save her husband from the king . The Linga Purana and the Mahabharata emphasize the sex change of Ila to be a deliberate act of Shiva to start the Lunar dynasty . The Bhagavata Purana et al. texts tell that Ila 's entire entourage as well as his horse also changed their genders . 
 According to the Ramayana , when Ila approached Shiva for help , Shiva laughed with scorn but the compassionate Parvati reduced the curse and allowed Ila to switch genders every month . However , as a male he would not remember his life as a female and vice versa . While Ilā roamed the forest in her new form with her female attendants , Budha , the god of the planet Mercury and the son of the moon @-@ god Chandra , noticed her . Although he had been practising asceticism , Ilā 's beauty caused him to fall in love with her at first sight . Budha turned Ilā 's attendants into <unk> ( hermaphrodite , lit . " is it a man ? " ) and ordered them to run away , promising that they would find mates as Ilā had . 
 Ilā married Budha and spent an entire month making love to him . However , Ilā woke one morning as Ila and remembered nothing about the past month . Budha told Ila that his retinue had been killed in a rain of stones and convinced Ila to stay with him for a year . During each month she spent as a woman , Ilā had pleasure with Budha . During each month as a man , Ila turned to pious ways and performed austerities under the guidance of Budha . In the ninth month , Ilā gave birth to Pururavas , who grew to become the first king of the Lunar dynasty . Then , as per the advice of Budha and Ila 's father Kardama , Ila pleased Shiva with a horse sacrifice and Shiva restored Ila 's masculinity permanently . 
 Another legend from the Vishnu Purana credits Vishnu of restoring Ilā 's manhood as Sudyumma . The Bhagavata Purana et al. texts tell that after Pururavas 's birth , the nine brothers of Ila - by horse sacrifice - or the sage Vasistha – the family priest of Ila – pleased Shiva to compel him to give the boon of alternate month manhood to Ila , turning him into a <unk> . The Linga Purana and the Mahabharata record the birth of Pururavas , but do not narrate the end of Ila 's alternating gender condition . In fact , the Mahabharata describes Ilā to be the mother as well as the father of Pururavas . According to another account found in the Vayu Purana and the Brahmanda Purana , Ilā was born female , married Budha , then was transformed into a male called Sudyumna . Sudyumna was then cursed by Parvati and transformed once again into a female , but became a man once again through Shiva 's boon . 
 In almost all versions of the tale , Ila wants to live as a man , but in the Skanda Purana , Ila desires to be a woman . The king Ela ( Ila ) entered Parvati 's grove at <unk> mountain and became the woman Ilā . Ilā wished to remain a woman and serve Parvati ( Gauri ) and Ganga , the goddess of the Ganges river . However , the goddesses dissuaded him and told him that life as a woman was a curse and full of sorrow . Ilā bathed in a sacred pool and returned as Ela , bearded and deep @-@ voiced . 
 = = Later life and descendents = = 
 The descendants of Ilā through Pururavas are known as Ailas after Ilā or as the Lunar Dynasty ( <unk> ) due to their descent from Budha , the son of the moon @-@ god Chandra . Most versions of tale call Ilā the father as well as the mother of the Ailas . The Linga Purana and the Mahabharata , in which Sudyumma 's curse does not end , state that as a male , Sudyumma also bore three sons named Utkala , Gaya and Vinatashva ( also known as <unk> and <unk> ) . The three sons ruled the kingdom for their father as Sudyumma was unable to do so himself due his alternating gender . The sons and their principalities are called the <unk> . Utkala , Gaya , and Vinatashva ruled Utkala country , Gaya , and eastern regions including northern Kurus respectively . With the assistance of the family priest Vasistha , Sudyumma regained control of the entire kingdom . He was succeeded by Pururavas . 
 In the Matsya Purana , Ila was disinherited after becoming a female or <unk> . Ila 's father passed his inheritance directly to Pururavas , ignoring the three sons Ila @-@ Sudyumma bore as a male . Pururavas ruled from <unk> ( present @-@ day Allahabad ) , where Ila stayed with him . The Ramayana says that having returned to manhood , Ila ruled <unk> while his son <unk> ruled over <unk> . The Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana tells that as a man Sudyumma governed the kingdom and as a woman remained indoors . His subjects were disturbed by his sex changes and did not respect him as they once had . When Pururavas attained adulthood , Sudyumma left his kingdom to Pururavas and went to the forest for penance . The sage Narada told Sudyumma a nine @-@ syllable mantra , <unk> , which would please the Supreme Goddess . Pleased with his austerities , the Goddess emerged before Sudyumma , who was in his female form Ilā . Sudyumma praised the Goddess , who merged the king 's soul with herself and thus , Ilā gained salvation . 
 The Bhagavata Purana , the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana and the Linga Purana declare that Ila ascended to heaven with both male and female anatomy . Ila is considered the chief progenitor of the Lunar Dynasty through Pururavas and of the Solar Dynasty through his brother <unk> and sons Utkala , Gaya , and Vinatashva . The marriage of Ilā , a descendant of the Sun , and Budha , the son of the Moon , is the first union of the solar and lunar races recorded in the scriptures . 
 = = In Vedic literature = = 
 In Vedic literature , Ilā is also known as Idā . Idā in the Rigveda , signifies food and refreshment , personified as the goddess of speech . Ilā @-@ Idā is also associated with Sarasvati , the goddess of knowledge . Ilā @-@ Idā is mentioned a number of times in the Rigveda , mostly in the hymns known as <unk> . She is often mentioned along with Sarasvati and Bharati ( or Mahi ) and Pururavas is described as her son . Idā is the instructor of Manu , in performing ritual sacrifices . According to Sayana - a commentator on the Vedas , she presides over the Earth . 
 In the Shatapatha Brahmana , Manu performed a fire @-@ sacrifice in order to have children . Idā emerged from the sacrifice . She was claimed by Mitra @-@ Varuna , but she lived with Manu and together they initiated the race of Manu . In this text , Idā is the goddess of the sacrificial meal . She is described as the <unk> ( daughter of Manu ) and <unk> ( with the ghee @-@ dripping foot ) and she is represented by a cow , also known as Idā during a sacrifice . Pururavas is mentioned as the son of Ilā in the text . 
 = M @-@ 143 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 143 , also known as Michigan Avenue , is a previously unsigned spur state trunkline highway in the south central region of the US state of Michigan . The M @-@ 143 portion of Michigan Avenue runs from the East Lansing city limit to a junction with M @-@ 43 at Grand River Avenue . This highway is the second time that there has been an M @-@ 143 in Michigan . The first was a connection to the original Cheboygan State Park . The current is a remnant of M @-@ 43 in the Lansing area . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Michigan Avenue travels through the Greater Lansing area on an east – west axis which runs through the Capitol Building in downtown Lansing . While disconnected between Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard and Capitol Avenue in the downtown area , the eastern portion of Michigan Avenue begins at the Capitol and runs easterly , ending in downtown East Lansing . For much of its length in the City of Lansing , Michigan Avenue is a five @-@ lane thoroughfare maintained by the city . Just west of US Highway 127 ( US 127 ) , the street transitions into a six @-@ lane boulevard and proceeds easterly to the East Lansing city limit . From that point easterly for about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to M @-@ 43 at Grand River Avenue in downtown East Lansing , Michigan Avenue is state @-@ maintained as a four- to six @-@ lane boulevard designated M @-@ 143 . Michigan Avenue here is the northern boundary of the main campus of Michigan State University near the Red Cedar River . This highway designation was not signed on Michigan Avenue for a number of years , even though the street was under the control of the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , MDOT 's traffic surveys showed that on average , between 19 @,@ 503 and 20 @,@ 308 vehicles used the trunkline daily . No section of M @-@ 143 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 The first usage of M @-@ 143 was designated from US 27 ( now M @-@ 27 ) south of Cheboygan eastward for about a mile on Lincoln Avenue to the original Cheboygan State Park in 1931 . The park was removed from the state park system during World War II . The highway along Lincoln Avenue was transferred back to local control in late 1960 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 In late 1962 , US 16 was decommissioned in the state of Michigan as Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) was completed . With the removal of US 16 , several highways were rerouted through Lansing . M @-@ 43 was rerouted along M @-@ 78 to Grand River Avenue and then along Grand River Avenue to replace US 16 east to Webberville . The former M @-@ 43 on Michigan Avenue east of Cedar and Larch streets was redesignated M @-@ 143 . 
 As part of the creation of the Capitol Loop , M @-@ 143 and Michigan Avenue in Lansing was partially transferred back to local control . The section between Cedar and Larch streets was retained as part of the new Capitol Loop and the remainder inside the city of Lansing was removed from the state trunkline highway system on October 13 , 1989 . At the time , M @-@ 143 in the City of East Lansing was not transferred , and MDOT removed the signage , creating an unsigned trunkline . 
 Since then , MDOT has used the trunkline 's designation on maps and in brochures related to a 2013 reconstruction project on Michigan Avenue in East Lansing . Signage has also been erected , and the highway has been restored to the official state map in 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Ingham County . 
 = Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell = 
 Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell is a 1908 lyrical poem book written by Jean Louis De Esque . The publication includes a preface by the author with two poetic works , " When I am Gone " and " Betelguese . " The latter poem has been called a " classic " work that utilized off @-@ beat language , considered to be a delight to the philologist . It has been compared to the poetic works of George Sterling and Kenneth Patchen . 
 The book was published during the height of the nature fakers controversy , and it has been suggested that De Esque elected to release Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell while Theodore Roosevelt was on a trip to Africa in an effort to avoid potential conflict that might have resulted from Roosevelt 's awareness of its content . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell was published by Connoisseur 's Press in Jersey City , New Jersey on July 1 , 1908 . An application for copyright was submitted on September 28 , 1907 . Two copies were received by the Library of Congress on August 28 , 1909 . For the publishing company , Betelguese was considered its first work of distinction after several years of modest publications . 
 The book features a frontispiece by painter Nicholas Briganti , an illustration of Typhon the Greek " Father of all monsters . " Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell opens with a prefatory note by De Esque written on September 22 , 1907 , in which he reveals that the writing of the poem began when he was " up at [ his ] desk mauling and drubbing the English language with a vengeance for thirty @-@ six consecutive hours , and that [ he ] awoke at 12 @.@ 30 A.M , " and began writing the poem " Betelguese , " continuing to work on it until the early morning . The writer later explained that he repeated this process over the next fifteen nights , completing the work at a total of <unk> words . The preface is succeeded with a photograph of Jean Louis De Esque and a short poem entitled " When I Am Gone . " Finally , the publication concludes with the eponymous poetic work " Betelguese , " making the length of Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell in total 104 pages . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 To promote Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell , Connoisseur 's Press took out advertisements months before its release in various literary publications . This included Publishers Weekly , The Bookseller , and The Bookman , which showcased Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell alongside three other works by De Esque which were published in the same year : The Flight of a Soul , The Seasons and other poems , and Silence , the latter which was published under the pseudonym " Stewart . " In these advertisements , Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell was listed as being printed on fine , handmade rag paper . The hardcover book featured a gold @-@ stamped title on maroon cloth , with a height of 19 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) . The book also included a color frontispiece and was printed in Cheltenham typeface . It sold for US $ 1 @.@ 25 . 
 The advertisement also called Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell a unique work with " absolutely nothing like it written since Dante 's Inferno . " 
 = = " Betelguese " = = 
 Betelguese is one of a number of historical variant spellings of Betelgeuse , a red supergiant in the constellation of Orion . 
 By his own admission , De Esque chose to place hell on this star , over placing hell on Earth , the Moon or the Sun because it was " a celestial pariah , an outcast , the largest of all known comets or outlawed suns in the universe . " The latter three were rejected by De Esque : the Sun because it was uninhabitable for animal or vegetable life , and the Moon because it was once part of the Earth . De Esque also describes Betelguese on pg . 77 with : 
 In full , the poem is rife with descriptions of the terrifying aspects of hell , those that dwell there , and the actions thereof . Among those in De Esque 's hell are Thomas Fortune Ryan , John Pierpont Morgan , August Belmont , Jr. and John D. Rockefeller . Also appearing regularly throughout " Betelguese " are many Greek mythological figures , including the subject of the frontispiece , Typhon . 
 Similar to what would be a recurring double @-@ quatrain , the rhyme scheme of most of " Betelguese " has four lines to a stanza , wherein the two successive stanzas , line one rhymes with line five , line two with line six and so on ; or , " ABCD @-@ ABCD . " The following sets of two stanzas have their own rhyming words . Additionally , " Betelguese " was written in an <unk> ( 8 @-@ syllable ) meter , where De Esque contracts typically multi @-@ syllable words , such as " cavern 'd " to be read as two syllables , as opposed to " poisoned " to be read as three syllables . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The main work , " Betelguese " , has been called a " study in unconscious parody " by the Manchester Literary Club , a " classic " by Bookseller and <unk> , and a " <unk> poem " by the Saturday Review . It has also been called an " <unk> poem " by Publishers Weekly . 
 Featured in the section " In the World of Books " of April 18 , 1909 edition of the Los Angeles Herald , Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell was likened to George Sterling 's poem " The Wine of Wizardry " . In comparing the two poetic works , the columnist felt that " Betelguese " had made " Mr. Sterling 's poor dragons look like small pink lizards , " stating that De Esque 's work had " immortalized the dreams of the opium eater . " In later years , it had also been compared to the poetic work of Kenneth Patchen . 
 On its verbose language , one editor at Manchester Literary Club felt that the " enthusiastic philologist " would " make heaven " of Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell . However , a review in March 28 , 1909 edition of the Salt Lake Tribune was mixed on De Esque 's off @-@ beat use of the English language , stating , " it is plentifully sprinkled with weird words without any particular meaning . " The Salt Lake Tribune columnist went on to say that " Betelguese was a " wild sort of rhapsody , which is less fierce than one might suppose from the subtitle . " 
 Betelguese , a Trip Through Hell was published during the nature fakers conflict ; the Los Angeles Herald columnist further suggests that the book was intentionally released during one of US President Theodore Roosevelt 's trips to Africa . According to them , lines such as " <unk> screes " and " poisoned skinks " would have shocked Roosevelt ; he goes on to say that he " hopes the poet will have ready an explanation before Colonel Roosevelt returns from Africa . " 
 = 1993 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1993 Atlantic hurricane season was a below average Atlantic hurricane season that produced ten tropical cyclones and tropical storms , four hurricanes , and one major hurricane . It officially started on June 1 and ended on November 30 , dates which conventionally delimit the period during which most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic Ocean . The first tropical cyclone , Tropical Depression One , developed on May 31 , while the final storm , Tropical Depression Ten , dissipated on September 30 , well before the average dissipation date of a season 's last tropical cyclone ; this represented the earliest end to the hurricane season in ten years . The most intense hurricane , Emily , was a Category 3 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale that paralleled close to the North Carolina coastline causing minor damage and a few deaths before moving out to sea . 
 The most significant named storm of the season was Hurricane Gert , a tropical cyclone that devastated several countries in Central America and Mexico . Throughout the impact areas , damage totaled to $ 170 million ( 1993 USD ) and 102 fatalities were reported . The remnants of Gert reached the Pacific Ocean and was classified as Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. Another significant system was Tropical Storm Bret , which resulted in 184 deaths and $ 25 million in losses as it tracked generally westward across Trinidad , Venezuela , Colombia , and Nicaragua . In the Pacific Ocean , the remnants of Bret were attributed to the development of Hurricane Greg . Three other tropical cyclones brought minor to moderate effects on land ; they were Tropical Depression One and Tropical Storms Arlene and Cindy . The storms of the 1993 Atlantic hurricane season collectively caused 339 fatalities and $ 319 million in losses . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) and the Weather Research Center ( WRC ) . A normal season as defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) has 12 @.@ 1 named storms , of which 6 @.@ 4 reach hurricane strength , and 2 @.@ 7 become major hurricanes . In December 1992 , Gray anticipated a near average season with 11 named storms , 6 hurricanes , and 3 major hurricanes . Another predication on April 16 , 1993 was unchanged from the previous forecast . In June , Gray revised the number of hurricanes to seven , though the forecast of named storms and major hurricanes remained the same . By August , the number hurricanes predicted was lowered back to six , matching the December 1992 and April forecasts . The sole prediction made by the WRC called for seven named storms and five hurricanes , though no forecast was made on the numbers of major hurricanes . 
 = = = Season activity = = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , those activity began a day early with the development of Tropical Depression One on May 31 . It was a below average season in which 10 tropical depressions formed . Eight of the depressions attained tropical storm status , and four of these attained hurricane status . In addition , one tropical cyclone eventually attained major hurricane status , which is below the 1981 – 2010 average of 2 @.@ 7 per season . The low amount of activity is attributed to abnormally strong wind shear across the Atlantic basin . Only one hurricanes and three tropical storm made landfall during the season ; Tropical Depression One and Hurricane Emily also caused land impacts . However , the storm collectively caused 339 deaths and $ 302 @.@ 7 million in damage . The last storm of the season , Tropical Depression Ten , became extratropical on September 30 , two months before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis in the 1993 Atlantic hurricane season began with the development of Tropical Depression One on May 31 . However , in the following two months , minimal activity occurred , with only one named storm , Arlene , in June . August was the most active month , with four tropical cyclones developing , including Tropical Storms Bret , Cindy , and Dennis , as well as Hurricane Emily . Although September is the climatological peak of hurricane season , only two system formed that month , which were Hurricane Floyd and Gert . Thereafter , activity briefly halted until Hurricane Harvey developed in October . The final tropical cyclone , Tropical Depression Ten , became extratropical on September 30 , two months before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 Overall , the season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 39 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression One near the Isle of Youth on May 31 . Due to strong wind shear and its proximity to land , the depression was unable to strengthen and struck western Cuba later that day . It emerged into the Straits of Florida early on June 1 and began to organize and intensify slightly further , but nonetheless remained below tropical storm intensity . Around that time , an approaching shortwave trough accelerated the depression northeastward across the western Bahamas . Thereafter , the wind field of the depression began expanding and lost all tropical characteristics while located northeast of The Bahamas on June 2 . 
 Heavy rainfall in Cuba caused flooding in the central and eastern portions of the country , forcing the evacuation of 40 @,@ 000 people , destroying 1 @,@ 860 homes and damaging an additional 16 @,@ 500 . Additionally , crops suffered severe impact from the flooding , just two months after significant agricultural damage in Cuba from the Storm of the Century in March . Overall , the depression left seven fatalities and another five people were listed as missing . In Haiti , flooding from the outerbands of the storm killed thousands of livestock and resulted in 13 deaths . Heavy precipitation in Florida peaked at nearly 10 in ( 250 mm ) , though it caused little impact other than bringing drought relief . Impact , if any in The Bahamas , is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Arlene = = = 
 A tropical wave was tracked in the Caribbean Sea beginning on June 9 and subsequently moved across Central America . Eventually , the system entered the Gulf of Mexico , though further development was interrupted by unfavorable wind shear . After conditions became somewhat more favorable , the wave developed into Tropical Depression Two on June 18 . The depression slowly strengthened as it tracked west @-@ northwestward and eventually north @-@ northwestward across the western Gulf of Mexico . By June 19 , the depression became Tropical Storm Arlene . At 09 : 00 UTC on the following day , Arlene made landfall on Padre Island , Texas with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . The storm quickly weakened inland and degenerated into a remnant low pressure area on June 21 . 
 In El Salvador , rainfall from the precursor tropical wave caused mudslides throughout the country , which in turn resulted in 20 fatalities . Immense amounts of precipitation in Mexico caused flooding in the states of Veracruz , Campeche , Yucatán , San Luis Potosí , Quintana Roo , Nuevo León , and Jalisco . Five deaths and $ 33 million in damage was reported in Mexico . Arlene also dropped torrential rainfall in Texas , peaking at 15 @.@ 26 in ( 388 mm ) Angleton , while precipitation amounts elsewhere was mainly between 9 and 11 in ( 230 and 280 mm ) . Throughout the state , numerous roads were inundated and more than 650 houses , including 25 mobile homes , suffered water damage . Agriculture losses in eastern Texas include 20 % of cantaloupe , 10 % of watermelon , and 18 % of tomatoes . One fatality occurred and damage in Texas reached $ 22 million . Overall , Tropical Storm Arlene caused 26 deaths and $ 55 million in losses . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bret = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Three while located about 1 @,@ 150 miles ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) west of Cape Verde on August 4 . The depression strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Bret on the following day . It strengthened slightly and reached winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and maintained that intensity until crossing Trinidad on August 7 . Later that day , Bret made landfall near <unk> , Venezuela , before briefly re @-@ emerging into the Caribbean Sea . Bret made another landfall in Venezuela on August 8 and crossed northern Colombia . It weakened over the mountainous terrain and fell to tropical depression intensity over the southwestern Caribbean Sea . Bret re @-@ strengthened to a 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) tropical storm before making landfall in southern Nicaragua on August 10 . It crossed into the Pacific Ocean and dissipated , although it later regenerated into Hurricane Greg . 
 In Trinidad , winds left 35 @,@ 000 people without electricity , while rainfall caused minor damage to crops and roads , with losses totaling to about $ 909 @,@ 000 . Rainfall in Venezuela reached 13 @.@ 3 in ( 340 mm ) in some areas . As a result , widespread mudslides were reported , which in turn destroyed 10 @,@ 000 houses and caused 173 deaths . One fatality was reported in neighboring Columbia . In Nicaragua , the storm destroyed 850 houses and damaged an additional 1 @,@ 500 . Overall , 35 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in that country . In addition , the destruction of 25 medical centers , 10 schools , and 10 churches occurred . Road infrastructure damage was also reported , with 12 bridges collapsing during the passage of Bret . There were 10 fatalities in Nicaragua , 9 of which were drowning victims after a Spanish vessel sank . Overall , Tropical Storm Bret caused 184 deaths and about $ 25 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cindy = = = 
 A tropical wave entered the Atlantic Ocean from northwest Africa on August 8 . It traversed the Atlantic and organized into Tropical Depression Four on August 14 , while located within 100 mi ( 160 km ) to the north of Barbados . After six hours , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cindy , while crossing the island of Martinique . Due to a poor upper @-@ level structure , Cindy barely intensified as it tracked west @-@ northwestward across the eastern Caribbean Sea . Nonetheless , the storm peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) on August 16 . However , interaction with the terrain of Hispaniola caused Cindy to weaken . Late on August 16 , the storm had been reduced to a tropical depression , around the time of landfall near Barahona , Dominican Republic . Cindy rapidly weakened inland and dissipated by early on August 17 . 
 The storm dropped torrential rainfall in Martinique , peaking at 15 @.@ 55 in ( 395 mm ) in Saint @-@ Joseph , which fell in only two hours . Further , 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) fell in just six minutes . Several rivers overflowed as a result , which in turn caused widespread flooding and mudslides . Several roads were washed out , numerous cars were swept away , and at least 150 houses were destroyed , leaving about 3 @,@ 000 people homeless . Overall , the storm caused two fatalities , 11 injuries , and ₣ 107 million ( US $ 19 million ) in damage . On other Lesser Antilles , the storm caused minimally impact , limited to mostly small amounts of precipitation , light winds , and minor beach erosion , especially on Puerto Rico . In Dominican Republic , street and minor river flooding was reported , which affected hundreds of residents . In addition , Cindy left two deaths in the Dominican Republic . 
 = = = Hurricane Emily = = = 
 A tropical wave passed through Cape Verde on August 17 . The system moved northwestward and slowly acquired a low @-@ level center of circulation . At 18 : 00 UTC on August 22 , Tropical Depression Six developed while located several hundred miles east @-@ northeast of the Lesser Antilles on August 22 . Initially , it headed northwestward while minimal intensification , though by August 25 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Emily . The storm then became nearly stationary while southeast of Bermuda and steadily strengthened during that time . Late on August 26 , Emily briefly became a hurricane , though it weakened back to a tropical storm early on the following day . However , by late on August 27 , Emily was a hurricane once again . The storm then moved northwestward and maintained Category 1 intensity until becoming a Category 2 hurricane on August 31 . By 18 : 00 UTC , Emily became a Category 3 hurricane while just offshore Cape Hatteras . 
 However , the storm veered out to sea later on August 29 and weakened , falling to tropical storm intensity while located northeast of Bermuda on September 3 . After curving southward and then back to the northeast , Emily weakened to a tropical depression on September 4 . The storm lost all tropical characteristics on September 6 , while located several hundred miles southeast of Newfoundland . The outerbands of Emily lashed the Outer Banks of North Carolina with heavy rainfall , high tides , and strong winds . The combination of those effects damaged 553 homes beyond repair . <unk> formed along North Carolina Highway 12 and strong winds uprooted trees , downed power lines , and tore off roofs . Further north , two fishermen near Nags Head drowned , while a 15 @-@ year @-@ old boy also drowned . Light rainfall was also reported in Maryland and Delaware . Losses reached $ 45 million , with all damage in North Carolina . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dennis = = = 
 A tropical wave and its associated low pressure area emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on August 21 . By the following day , two <unk> satellites indicated that the system had a distinct cyclonic rotation and increasing deep convection . At 12 : 00 UTC on August 23 , Tropical Depression Five developed while located about 415 mi ( 670 km ) west @-@ southwest of Brava , Cape Verde . Initially , a weak deep @-@ layer mean flow caused the depression to track west @-@ northwest . It is estimated that by 12 : 00 UTC on August 24 , the depression became Tropical Storm Dennis , based on satellite imagery . 
 Early on August 25 , Dennis attained its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . After peak intensity , a relatively strong mid- to upper @-@ level trough caused Dennis to turn north @-@ northwestward on August 26 . Thereafter , an increase in vertical wind shear and a decrease in sea surface temperatures caused the storm to begin weakening . Eventually , the low @-@ level circulation became nearly void of deep convection . On August 27 , Dennis was downgraded to a tropical depression . The storm later curved west @-@ southwestward , while located about midway between Bermuda and the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . 
 = = = Hurricane Floyd = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed the west coast of Africa on August 28 . Although had it a well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation , the system was not classified as a tropical cyclone . While tracking west , deep convection diminished and was nearly non @-@ existent by August 31 , though the cloud pattern began re @-@ developing on September 3 . Eventually , the system curved northwestward and remained well away from the Lesser Antilles . Because a reconnaissance flight into the system indicated a low @-@ level circulation with persistent deep convection , it is estimated that the system became Tropical Depression Seven at 12 : 00 UTC on September 7 , while located about 440 mi ( 710 km ) north @-@ northwest of San Juan , Puerto Rico . Only six hours after becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Floyd . Initially , strong southwesterly wind shear prevented further significant intensification . 
 The storm accelerated north @-@ northwestward after becoming embedded within fast air currents , which was as Floyd moved between a strong trough and a subtropical high pressure area . Later on September 8 , the storm passed about 230 mi ( 370 km ) west of Bermuda . By early on September 9 , convection developed along the once exposed low @-@ level circulation . After a buoy reported a two @-@ minute sustained wind speed of 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) and an eye appeared on satellite imagery , Floyd was upgraded to a hurricane at 18 : 00 UTC on September 9 . While accelerating at nearly 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) , the storm began losing tropical characteristics as a result of colder sea surface temperatures and became extratropical at 18 : 00 UTC on September 10 . The remnants of Floyd continued rapidly eastward and struck Brittany , France , at an intensity equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane . While passing southeast of Newfoundland , the storm produced light rainfall , peaking at about 0 @.@ 86 in ( 22 mm ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Gert = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 5 . The system slowly organize while tracking across the Atlantic Ocean and much of the Caribbean Sea . It developed into a tropical depression while located north of Panama on September 14 . On the following day , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Gert before moving ashore in Nicaragua . After weakening to a tropical depression , it proceeded into Honduras and reorganized into a tropical storm over the Gulf of Honduras on September 17 . Gert made landfall in Belize on the following day and again weakened to a depression while inland . After crossing the Yucatán Peninsula , Gert emerged over warm water in the Bay of Campeche , and strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane on September 20 . The hurricane then made landfall on the Gulf Coast of Mexico near Tuxpan , Veracruz , with winds of 100 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Rugged terrain quickly disrupted its structure and Gert entered the Pacific Ocean as a tropical depression from Nayarit on September 21 . Five days later , the depression dissipated near Baja California . 
 Because Gert had a broad wind circulation , it produced widespread and heavy rainfall across Central America , which , combined with saturated soil from Tropical Storm Bret a month earlier , caused significant flooding of property and crops . Although hurricane @-@ force winds occurred upon landfall in Mexico , the worst effects in the country were due to flooding and mudslides induced by torrential rain . Following the overflow of several rivers , deep flood waters submerged extensive parts of Veracruz and Tamaulipas and forced hundreds of thousands to evacuate , including 200 @,@ 000 in the Tampico area alone . The heaviest rainfall occurred further inland over the mountainous region of San Luis Potosí , where as much as 31 @.@ 41 in ( 798 mm ) of precipitation were measured . In the wake of the disaster , the road networks across the affected countries were severely disrupted and thousands of people became homeless . Extensive , but less severe flooding occurred in Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , and Nicaragua . Throughout the effected areas , flooding damaged or destroyed more than 40 @,@ 000 buildings . The storm caused at least 102 fatalities and more than $ 170 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Harvey = = = 
 A tropical wave passed south of Cape Verde on September 12 . By the following day , satellite imagery indicated a cloud system center . The system tracked northwestward across the Atlantic Ocean with slow further development . Due to interaction with an upper @-@ level low on September 18 , the system began to significantly organize . After a ship known as ELFS reported winds of 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) , it is estimated that Tropical Depression Nine developed at 18 : 00 UTC on September 18 , while located about 400 miles ( 640 km ) south @-@ southeast of Bermuda . The depression initially moved north @-@ northwest , though an approaching short @-@ wave trough eventually caused it to northeastward . 
 Convection remained disorganized and the low @-@ level circulation was exposed on September 19 . However , by the following day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Harvey . Thereafter , the storm began to rapidly intensify and developed an eye appeared on satellite imagery . While accelerating northeastward , Harvey was upgraded to a hurricane at 18 : 00 UTC on September 20 . However , decreasing sea surface temperatures caused Harvey to immediately weaken back to a tropical storm , while also losing tropical characteristics . At 18 : 00 UTC on September 20 , Harvey transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located well east of Newfoundland . Six hours later , the extratropical remnants of Harvey were absorbed into a frontal band . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Ten = = = 
 Tropical Depression Ten developed about 185 mi ( 300 km ) southeast of Bermuda at 18 : 00 UTC on September 29 . Initially , convection associated with the depression was confined to north and east of the center . The depression was difficult to track , though wind observations in Bermuda suggested that it passed just north of the island between 0300 and 07 : 00 UTC on September 30 . Although no intensification was predicted , the National Hurricane Center noted that interaction with the approaching cold front could result in baroclinic strengthening . The depression did not organize further and merged with the cold front at 00 : 00 UTC on October 1 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 Below is a list of names used for systems that reached at least tropical storm intensity in north Atlantic Ocean during the 1993 Atlantic hurricane season . This was the same list used for the 1987 season . Following the season , the World Meteorological Organization did not retire any names , resulting in the entire list being re @-@ used in the 1999 season . Names that were not assigned during the 1993 Atlantic hurricane season are marked in gray . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in the 1993 Atlantic hurricane season . It mentions all of the season 's storms and their names , landfall ( s ) , peak intensities , damages , and death totals . The damage and death totals in this list include impacts when the storm was a precursor wave or post @-@ tropical low , and all of the damage figures are in 1993 USD . 
 = Manchester City F.C. = 
 Manchester City Football Club is a football club in Manchester , England . Founded in 1880 as St. Mark 's ( West Gorton ) , they became Ardwick Association Football Club in 1887 and Manchester City in 1894 . The club moved to the City of Manchester Stadium in 2003 , having played at Maine Road since 1923 . 
 The club 's most successful period was in the late 1960s and early 1970s when they won the League Championship , FA Cup , League Cup and European Cup Winners ' Cup under the management team of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison . After losing the 1981 FA Cup Final , the club went through a period of decline , culminating in relegation to the third tier of English football for the only time in their history in 1998 . Having regained their Premier League status in the early 2000s , the club was purchased in 2008 by Abu Dhabi United Group and has become one of the wealthiest in the world . Since 2011 the club have won six major honours , including the Premier League in 2012 and 2014 . 
 By 2014 – 15 , Manchester City had the sixth @-@ highest revenue in the footballing world with an annual revenue of € 463 @.@ 5 million . In 2016 , Forbes magazine estimated they were the world 's sixth most valuable football club , worth $ 1 @.@ 92 billion . 
 = = History = = 
 City gained their first honours by winning the Second Division in 1899 ; with it came promotion to the highest level in English football , the First Division . They went on to claim their first major honour on 23 April 1904 , beating Bolton Wanderers 1 – 0 at Crystal Palace to win the FA Cup ; City narrowly missed out on a League and Cup double that season after finishing runners @-@ up in the League but City became the first club in Manchester to win a major honour . In the seasons following the FA Cup triumph , the club was dogged by allegations of financial irregularities , culminating in the suspension of seventeen players in 1906 , including captain Billy Meredith , who subsequently moved across town to Manchester United . A fire at Hyde Road destroyed the main stand in 1920 , and in 1923 the club moved to their new purpose @-@ built stadium at Maine Road in Moss Side . 
 In the 1930s , Manchester City reached two consecutive FA Cup finals , losing to Everton in 1933 , before claiming the Cup by beating Portsmouth in 1934 . During the 1934 cup run , Manchester City broke the record for the highest home attendance of any club in English football history , as 84 @,@ 569 fans packed Maine Road for a sixth round FA Cup tie against Stoke City in 1934 – a record which still stands to this day . The club won the First Division title for the first time in 1937 , but were relegated the following season , despite scoring more goals than any other team in the division . Twenty years later , a City team inspired by a tactical system known as the Revie Plan reached consecutive FA Cup finals again , in 1955 and 1956 ; just as in the 1930s , they lost the first one , to Newcastle United , and won the second . The 1956 final , in which Manchester City beat Birmingham City 3 – 1 , is one of the most famous finals of all @-@ time , and is remembered for City goalkeeper Bert Trautmann continuing to play on after unknowingly breaking his neck . 
 After relegation to the Second Division in 1963 , the future looked bleak with a record low home attendance of 8 @,@ 015 against Swindon Town in January 1965 . In the summer of 1965 , the management team of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison was appointed . In the first season under Mercer , City won the Second Division title and made important signings in Mike Summerbee and Colin Bell . Two seasons later , in 1967 – 68 , Manchester City claimed the League Championship for the second time , clinching the title on the final day of the season with a 4 – 3 win at Newcastle United and beating their close neighbours Manchester United into second place . Further trophies followed : City won the FA Cup in 1969 , before achieving European success by winning the European Cup Winners ' Cup in 1970 , beating Górnik Zabrze 2 – 1 in Vienna . City also won the League Cup that season , becoming the second English team to win a European trophy and a domestic trophy in the same season . 
 The club continued to challenge for honours throughout the 1970s , finishing one point behind the league champions on two occasions and reaching the final of the 1974 League Cup . One of the matches from this period that is most fondly remembered by supporters of Manchester City is the final match of the 1973 – 74 season against arch @-@ rivals Manchester United , who needed to win to have any hope of avoiding relegation . Former United player Denis Law scored with a backheel to give City a 1 – 0 win at Old Trafford and confirm the relegation of their rivals . The final trophy of the club 's most successful period was won in 1976 , when Newcastle United were beaten 2 – 1 in the League Cup final . 
 A long period of decline followed the success of the 1960s and 1970s . Malcolm Allison rejoined the club to become manager for the second time in 1979 , but squandered large sums of money on unsuccessful signings , such as Steve Daley . A succession of managers then followed – seven in the 1980s alone . Under John Bond , City reached the 1981 FA Cup final but lost in a replay to Tottenham Hotspur . The club were twice relegated from the top flight in the 1980s ( in 1983 and 1987 ) , but returned to the top flight again in 1989 and finished fifth in 1991 and 1992 under the management of Peter Reid . However , this was only a temporary respite , and following Reid 's departure Manchester City 's fortunes continued to fade . City were co @-@ founders of the Premier League upon its creation in 1992 , but after finishing ninth in its first season they endured three seasons of struggle before being relegated in 1996 . After two seasons in Division One , City fell to the lowest point in their history , becoming the second ever European trophy winners to be relegated to their country 's third league tier , after 1 . FC Magdeburg of Germany . 
 After relegation , the club underwent off @-@ the @-@ field upheaval , with new chairman David Bernstein introducing greater fiscal discipline . Under manager Joe Royle , City were promoted at the first attempt , achieved in dramatic fashion in a play @-@ off against Gillingham . A second successive promotion saw City return to the top division , but this proved to have been a step too far for the recovering club , and in 2001 City were relegated once more . Kevin Keegan replaced Royle as manager in the close season , and achieved an immediate return to the top division as the club won the 2001 – 02 Division One championship , breaking club records for the number of points gained and goals scored in a season in the process . The 2002 – 03 season was the last at Maine Road , and included a 3 – 1 derby victory over rivals Manchester United , ending a run of 13 years without a derby win . City also qualified for European competition for the first time in 25 years . In the 2003 close season the club moved to the new City of Manchester Stadium . The first four seasons at the stadium all resulted in mid @-@ table finishes . Former England manager Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson became the club 's first manager from overseas when appointed in 2007 . After a bright start performances faded in the second half of the season , and Eriksson was sacked in June 2008 . Eriksson was replaced by Mark Hughes two days later on 4 June 2008 . 
 By 2008 , the club was in a financially precarious position . Thaksin Shinawatra had taken control of the club a year before , but his political travails saw his assets frozen . Then , in August 2008 , the club was purchased by the Abu Dhabi United Group . The takeover was immediately followed by a flurry of bids for high @-@ profile players ; the club broke the British transfer record by signing Brazilian international Robinho from Real Madrid for £ 32 @.@ 5 million . Performances were not a huge improvement on the previous season despite the influx of money however , with the team finishing tenth , although they did well to reach the quarter @-@ finals of the UEFA Cup . During the summer of 2009 , the club took transfer spending to an unprecedented level , with an outlay of over £ 100 million on players Gareth Barry , Roque Santa Cruz , Kolo Touré , Emmanuel Adebayor , Carlos Tevez and Joleon Lescott . In December 2009 , Mark Hughes – who had been hired shortly before the change in ownership but was originally retained by the new board – was replaced as manager by Roberto Mancini . City finished the season in fifth position in the Premier League , narrowly missing out on a place in the Champions League , and competed in the UEFA Europa League in season 2010 – 11 . 
 Continued investment in players followed in successive seasons , and results began to match the upturn in player quality . City reached the 2011 FA Cup Final , their first major final in over thirty years , after defeating derby rivals Manchester United in the semi @-@ final , the first time they had knocked their rival out of a cup competition since 1975 . They defeated Stoke City 1 – 0 in the final , securing their fifth FA Cup , the club 's first major trophy since winning the 1976 League Cup . In the same week , the club qualified for the UEFA Champions League for the first time since 1968 with a 1 – 0 Premier League win over Tottenham Hotspur . On the last day of the 2010 – 11 season , City passed Arsenal for third place in the Premier League , thereby securing qualification directly into the Champions League group stage . 
 Strong performances continued to follow in the 2011 – 12 season , with the club beginning the following season in commanding form , including beating Tottenham 5 – 1 at White Hart Lane and humbling Manchester United by a 6 – 1 scoreline in United 's own stadium . Although the strong form waned half @-@ way through the season , and City at one point fell eight points behind their arch rivals with only six games left to play , a slump by United allowed the blue side of Manchester to draw back level with two games to go , setting up a thrilling finale to the season with both teams going into the last day equal on points . Despite City only needing a home win against a team in the relegation zone , they fell a goal behind by the end of normal time , leading some of United 's players to finish their game celebrating in the belief that they had won the league . Two goals in injury time – including one scored almost five minutes after normal time had elapsed – resulted in an almost @-@ literal last @-@ minute title victory , City 's first in 44 years , and became only the fifth team to win the Premier League since its creation in 1992 . In the aftermath that followed , the event was described by media sources from the UK and around the world as the greatest moment in Premier League history . The game was also notable for former player Joey Barton 's sending off , where he committed three separate red card @-@ able incidents on three different players in the space of only a few seconds , resulting in a 12 @-@ game ban . 
 The following season City failed to capitalise on the gains made in the first two full seasons of Mancini 's reign . While City rarely seemed likely to drop below second in the table , they posed little title challenge all season . In the UEFA Champions League , the club was eliminated at the group stage for a second successive season , while a second FA Cup final in three seasons ended in a 1 – 0 defeat to relegated Wigan Athletic . Mancini was dismissed two days later , ostensibly as he had failed to reach his targets for the season , but BBC Sports Editor David Bond reported that he had been sacked for his poor communication and relationships with players and executives . In his place was appointed the Chilean Manuel Pellegrini . In Pellegrini 's first season , City won the League Cup and regained the Premier League title on the last day of the season . 
 L1 
 = Level 1 of the football league system ; L2 = 
 Level 2 of the football league system ; L3 = Level 3 of the football league system . 
 = = Club badge and colours = = 
 Manchester City 's home colours are sky blue and white . Traditional away kit colours have been either maroon or ( from the 1960s ) red and black ; however , in recent years several different colours have been used . The origins of the club 's home colours are unclear , but there is evidence that the club has worn blue since 1892 or earlier . A booklet entitled Famous Football Clubs – Manchester City published in the 1940s indicates that West Gorton ( St. Marks ) originally played in scarlet and black , and reports dating from 1884 describe the team wearing black jerseys bearing a white cross , showing the club 's origins as a church side . The red and black away colours used infrequently yet recurrently come from former assistant manager Malcolm Allison , who believed that adopting the colours of A.C. Milan would inspire City to glory . Allison 's theory worked , with City winning the 1969 FA Cup Final , 1970 League Cup Final and the 1970 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final in red and black stripes as opposed to the club 's home kit of sky blue . 
 City have previously worn three other badges on their shirts , prior to their current badge which was implemented in 2016 . The first , introduced in 1970 , was based on designs which had been used on official club documentation since the mid @-@ 1960s . It consisted of a circular badge which used the same shield as the current badge , inside a circle bearing the name of the club . In 1972 , this was replaced by a variation which replaced the lower half of the shield with the red rose of Lancashire . On occasions when Manchester City plays in a major cup final , the usual badge has not been used ; instead shirts bearing a badge of the arms of the City of Manchester are used , as a symbol of pride in representing the city of Manchester at a major event . This practice originates from a time when the players ' shirts did not normally bear a badge of any kind , but has continued throughout the history of the club . For the 2011 FA Cup Final , City used the usual badge with a special legend , but the Manchester coat of arms was included as a small monochrome logo in the numbers on the back of players ' shirts . 
 A new club badge was adopted in 1997 , as a result of the previous badge being ineligible for registration as a trademark . This badge was based on the arms of the city of Manchester , and consisted of a shield in front of a golden eagle . The eagle is an old heraldic symbol of the city of Manchester ; a golden eagle was added to the city 's badge in 1958 ( but has since been removed ) , representing the growing aviation industry . The shield features a ship on its upper half representing the Manchester Ship Canal , and three diagonal stripes in the lower half symbolise the city 's three rivers – the Irwell , the Irk and the Medlock . The bottom of the badge bears the motto <unk> in <unk> , which translates as Pride in Battle in Latin . Above the eagle and shield are three stars , which are purely decorative . 
 On 15 October 2015 , following years of criticism from the fans over the design of the 1997 badge , the club announced that they intended to carry out a fan consultation on whether to disregard the club badge and institute a new design . After the consultation , the club announced in late November 2015 that the current club badge would be replaced in due course by a new version which would be designed in the style of the older , circular variants . A design purporting to be the new badge was unintentionally leaked two days early prior to the official unveiling on 26 December 2015 by the IPO when the design was trademarked on 22 December . The new design was officially unveiled at the club 's home match on 26 December against Sunderland . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors = = = 
 Manchester City 's shirts have been sponsored by Etihad Airways since 2009 . Previous sponsors have been Saab ( 1982 – 84 ) , Philips ( 1984 – 87 ) , Brother ( 1987 – 99 ) , Eidos ( 1999 – 2002 ) , First Advice ( 2002 – 04 ) , and Thomas Cook ( 2004 – 07 ) . Their kits have been manufactured by Nike since 2013 . Prior manufacturers have been Umbro ( 1974 – 97 , 2009 – 13 ) , Kappa ( 1997 – 99 ) , Le Coq Sportif ( 1999 – 2003 , 2007 – 09 ) , and Reebok ( 2003 – 07 ) . 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 1 July 2016 . 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = On loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 23 Marc @-@ Vivien <unk> , Midfielder ( 2002 – 03 ) – posthumous honour . 
 Since 2003 , Manchester City have not issued the squad number 23 . It was retired in memory of Marc @-@ Vivien <unk> , who was on loan to the club from Lyon at the time of his death on the field of play whilst playing for Cameroon in the 2003 Confederations Cup . 
 = = = Player of the Year = = = 
 = = Halls of Fame = = 
 = = = Manchester City Hall of Fame = = = 
 The following former Manchester City players and managers are inductees in the Manchester City F.C. Hall of Fame , and are listed according to the year of their induction : 
 Last updated : 31 March 2011 . 
 Source : list of <unk> Hall of Fame inductees 
 = = = National Football Museum Hall of Fame = = = 
 The following former Manchester City players and managers are inductees in the English Football Hall of Fame ( a.k.a. the National Football Museum Hall of Fame ) and are listed according to the year of their induction within the various categories : 
 Last updated : 1 May 2014 . 
 Source : list of <unk> Hall of Fame inductees 
 = = = Scottish Football Museum Hall of Fame = = = 
 The following former Manchester City players and managers are inductees in the Scottish Football Hall of Fame ( a.k.a. the Scottish Football Museum Hall of Fame ) and are listed according to the year of their induction within the various categories : 
 Last updated : 30 March 2011 . 
 Source : list of SFM Hall of Fame inductees 
 = = = Welsh Sports Hall of Fame = = = 
 The following former Manchester City players are inductees in the Welsh Sports Hall of Fame and are listed according to the year of their induction : 
 = = Non @-@ playing staff = = 
 = = = Corporate hierarchy = = = 
 = = = Management hierarchy = = = 
 = = = Notable managers = = = 
 Table correct as of 6 July 2015 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Manchester City has a large fanbase in relation to its comparative lack of success on the pitch . Since moving to the City of Manchester Stadium , Manchester City 's average attendances have been in the top six in England , usually in excess of 40 @,@ 000 . Even in the late 1990s , when the club were relegated twice in three seasons and playing in the third tier of English football ( then Division Two , now Football League One ) , home attendances were in the region of 30 @,@ 000 , compared to an average for the division of fewer than 8 @,@ 000 . Research carried out by Manchester City in 2005 estimates a fanbase of 886 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom and a total in excess of 2 million worldwide , although since the purchase of the club by Sheikh Mansour and the club 's recent trophies , that figure has ballooned to many times that size . 
 Manchester City 's officially recognised supporters club is the Manchester City FC Supporters Club ( 1949 ) , formed from a merger of two existing organisations in 2010 : the Official Supporters Club ( OSC ) and the Centenary Supporters Association ( CSA ) . There have been several fanzines published by supporters ; the longest running is King of the Kippax and it is the only one still published . The City fans ' song of choice is a rendition of " Blue Moon " , which despite its melancholic theme is belted out with gusto as though it were a heroic anthem . City supporters tend to believe that unpredictability is an inherent trait of their team , and label unexpected results " typical City " . Events that fans regard as " typical City " include City 's being the only reigning English champions ever to be relegated ( in 1938 ) , the only team to score and concede over 100 goals in the same season ( 1957 – 58 ) , or the more recent example that City were the only team to beat Chelsea in the 2004 – 05 Premier League , yet in the same season City were knocked out of the FA Cup by Oldham Athletic , a team two divisions lower . 
 Manchester City 's biggest rivalry is with neighbours Manchester United , against whom they contest the Manchester derby . Before the Second World War , when travel to away games was rare , many Mancunian football fans regularly watched both teams even if considering themselves " supporters " of only one . This practice continued into the early 1960s but as travel became easier , and the cost of entry to matches rose , watching both teams became unusual and the rivalry intensified . A common stereotype is that City fans come from Manchester proper , while United fans come from elsewhere . A 2002 report by a researcher at Manchester Metropolitan University found that while it was true that a higher proportion of City season ticket holders came from Manchester postcode areas ( 40 % compared to United 's 29 % ) , there were more United season ticket holders , the lower percentage being due to United 's higher overall number of season ticket holders ( 27 @,@ 667 compared to City 's 16 @,@ 481 ) ; not highlighted in the report was that within the City of Manchester itself , there were more City season ticket holders ( approximately 4 for every 3 United ) . The report noted that since the compiling of data in 2001 , the number of both City and United season ticket holders had risen ; expansion of United 's ground and City 's move to the City of Manchester Stadium have caused season ticket sales to increase further . 
 In the late 1980s , City fans started a craze of bringing inflatable objects to matches , primarily oversized bananas . One disputed explanation for the craze is that in a match against West Bromwich Albion chants from fans calling for the introduction of Imre <unk> as a substitute mutated into " Imre Banana " . Terraces packed with inflatable @-@ waving supporters became a frequent sight in the 1988 – 89 season as the craze spread to other clubs ( inflatable fish were seen at Grimsby Town ) , with the phenomenon reaching a peak at City 's match at Stoke City on 26 December 1988 , a match declared by fanzines as a fancy dress party . In August 2006 , the club became the first to be officially recognised as a " gay @-@ friendly " employer by campaign group Stonewall ( UK ) . In 2010 , City supporters adopted an exuberant dance , dubbed The Poznań , from fans of Polish club Lech Poznań . 
 = = Ownership and finances = = 
 The holding company of Manchester City F.C. , Manchester City Limited , is a private limited company , with approximately 54 million shares in issue . The club has been in private hands since 2007 , when the major shareholders agreed to sell their holdings to UK Sports Investments Limited ( UKSIL ) , a company controlled by former Thailand prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra . UKSIL then made a formal offer to buy the shares held by several thousand small shareholders . 
 Prior to the Thaksin takeover , the club was listed on the specialist independent equity market PLUS ( formerly OFEX ) , where it had been listed since 1995 . On 6 July 2007 , having acquired 75 % of the shares , Thaksin de @-@ listed the club and re @-@ registered it as a private company . By August UKSIL had acquired over 90 % of the shares , and exercised its rights under the Companies Act to " squeeze out " the remaining shareholders , and acquire the entire shareholding . Thaksin Shinawatra became chairman of the club and two of Thaksin 's children , <unk> and Oak <unk> also became directors . Former chairman John Wardle stayed on the board for a year , but resigned in July 2008 following Nike executive Garry Cook 's appointment as executive chairman in May . The club made a pre @-@ tax loss of £ 11m in the year ending 31 May 2007 , the final year for which accounts were published as a public company . 
 Thaksin 's purchase prompted a period of transfer spending at the club , spending in around £ 30 million , whereas over the previous few seasons net spending had been among the lowest in the division . A year later , this investment was itself dwarfed by larger sums . On 1 September 2008 , Abu Dhabi @-@ based Abu Dhabi United Group Investment and Development Limited completed a takeover of Manchester City . The deal , worth a reported £ 200 million , was announced on the morning of 1 September . It sparked various transfer " deadline @-@ day " rumours and bids such as the club 's attempt to <unk> Manchester United 's protracted bid to sign Dimitar Berbatov from Tottenham Hotspur for a fee in excess of £ 30 million . Minutes before the transfer window closed , the club signed Robinho from Real Madrid for a British record transfer fee of £ 32 @.@ 5 million . The wealth of the new owners meant that in the summer of 2009 , the club was able to finance the purchase of several experienced international players prior to the new season , spending more than any other club in the Premier League . 
 = = = City Football Group = = = 
 Created in the 2013 – 14 season to manage the global footballing interests of Abu Dhabi United Group , the City Football Group is an umbrella corporation owning stakes in a network of global clubs for the purposes of resource sharing , academy networking and marketing . Through the City Football Group , City owns stakes in a number of clubs : 
 Melbourne City FC ( 2014 – present ) 
 On 23 January 2014 it was announced that Manchester City had partnered with the Australian rugby league franchise Melbourne Storm , purchasing a majority stake in A @-@ League team Melbourne City FC . 
 Yokohama F. Marinos ( 2014 – present ) 
 On 20 May 2014 it was announced that Manchester City had partnered with the Japanese Automotive company Nissan to become a minority shareholder in Yokohama based J @-@ League side , Yokohama F. Marinos . 
 New York City FC ( 2015 – present ) 
 On 21 May 2013 it was announced that Manchester City had partnered with the American baseball franchise the New York Yankees to introduce the 20th Major League Soccer expansion team , New York City FC as its majority shareholder . The club began play in the 2015 Major League Soccer season . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Manchester City 's stadium is the City of Manchester Stadium , also known as Eastlands and the Etihad Stadium since July 2011 because of sponsorship commitments . The stadium is situated in East Manchester and is part of a 200 @-@ year operating lease from Manchester City Council after the 2002 Commonwealth Games . The stadium has been City 's home since the end of the 2002 – 03 season , when the club moved from Maine Road . Before moving to the stadium , Manchester City spent in excess of £ 30 million to convert it to football use . The field of play was lowered by several metres , adding another tier of seating around the entire pitch . A new North Stand was also built . The inaugural match at the new stadium was a 2 – 1 win over FC Barcelona in a friendly match . The current capacity as of summer 2013 stands at 47 @,@ 405 after various stadium renovations under the new owners since 2008 . 
 Manchester City have used several grounds during their history : after playing home matches at five stadiums between 1880 and 1887 , the club settled at Hyde Road Football Stadium , its home for 36 years . After a fire destroyed the Main Stand in 1920 , the club started to seek a new site and moved to the 84 @-@ 000 capacity Maine Road three years later . Maine Road , nicknamed the " Wembley of the North " by its designers , hosted the largest @-@ ever crowd at an English club ground when 84 @,@ 569 attended an FA Cup tie against Stoke City on 3 March 1934 . Though Maine Road was redeveloped several times over its 80 @-@ year lifespan , by 1995 its capacity was restricted to 32 @,@ 000 , prompting the search for a new ground which culminated in the move to the City of Manchester Stadium in 2003 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 = = = = Leagues = = = = 
 First Division / Premier <unk> ( 4 ) : 1936 – 37 , 1967 – 68 , 2011 – 12 , 2013 – 14 
 Second Division / First <unk> ( 7 ) : 1898 – 99 , 1902 – 03 , 1909 – 10 , 1927 – 28 , 1946 – 47 , 1965 – 66 , 2001 – 02 
 Third Division Play @-@ offs 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1998 – 99 
 = = = = Cups = = = = 
 FA Cup 
 Winners ( 5 ) : 1903 – 04 , 1933 – 34 , 1955 – 56 , 1968 – 69 , 2010 – 11 
 Football League Cup 
 Winners ( 4 ) : 1969 – 70 , 1975 – 76 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 FA Community Shield 
 Winners ( 4 ) : 1937 , 1968 , 1972 , 2012 
 = = = European = = = 
 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1969 – 70 
 = = = Doubles = = = 
 1969 – 70 : League Cup and UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 
 2013 – 14 : League and League Cup 
 = = Club records = = 
 Record League victory – 11 – 3 v. Lincoln City ( 23 March 1895 , most goals scored ) 10 – 0 v. Darwen ( 18 February 1899 , widest margin of victory ) 
 Record FA Cup victory – 12 – 0 v. Liverpool Stanley ( 4 October 1890 ) 
 Record League defeat – 0 – 8 v. Burton Wanderers ( 26 December 1894 ) , 0 – 8 v. Wolverhampton Wanderers ( 23 December 1933 ) , 1 – 9 v. Everton ( 3 September 1906 ) , 2 – 10 v. Small Heath ( 17 March 1893 ) 
 Record FA Cup defeat – 0 – 6 v. Preston North End ( 30 January 1897 ) , 2 – 8 v. Bradford Park Avenue ( 30 January 1946 ) 
 Highest home attendance – 84 @,@ 569 v. Stoke City ( 3 March 1934 ) ( remains the record home attendance in English football ) 
 Most League appearances – 561 + 3 sub , Alan Oakes 1958 – 76 
 Most appearances overall – 676 + 4 sub , Alan Oakes 1958 – 76 
 Most goals scored overall – 177 , Eric Brook 1928 – 40 
 Most goals scored in a season – 38 , Tommy Johnson 1928 – 29 
 Record transfer fee paid – £ 55 million to VfL Wolfsburg for Kevin De Bruyne , Aug 2015 He made his debut for the team in the Premier League on 12 September against Crystal Palace , replacing injured Sergio Agüero in the 25th minute . 
 Record transfer fee received – £ 22 million from Valencia for Álvaro Negredo , July 2015 
 = Becket Hill State Park Reserve = 
 Becket Hill State Park Reserve is a public recreation area lying adjacent to Nehantic State Forest in the town of Lyme , Connecticut , United States . The state park is listed by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection as an undeveloped , walk @-@ in park totaling 260 acres ( 110 ha ) with no officially listed activities . The park 's name is sometimes misspelled as Beckett Hill . 
 = = History = = 
 Becket Hill State Park Reserve is named for an early settler of the area named Becket and the land was part of the Nehantic tribe 's territory . This state park was acquired by the State of Connecticut in order to preserve the hill , but unlike the abutting Nehantic State Forest , Becket Hill has accessibility problems and is returning to its natural state . In 1961 , the land for the Becket Hill State Park Reserve was given to the State of Connecticut by the George Dudley Seymour Trust . Beckett Hill was first listed on the Connecticut Register and Manual for 1962 with its present 260 acres of undeveloped land . The Becket Hill State Park Reserve is the 76th designated Connecticut State Park . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The reserve is an undeveloped , walk @-@ in park with access through the Lyme section of Nehantic State Forest , which is entered from Connecticut Route 156 . <unk> is required as no roads or trails cross from the forest to the state park reserve . The reserve 's boundary with the state forest is created by 69 @-@ acre ( 28 ha ) Uncas Lake and Falls Brook , a stream that connects Uncas Lake with 30 @-@ acre ( 12 ha ) Norwich Pond . Boat launches for non @-@ motorized craft are located on each . The waters are stocked with brook , brown and rainbow trout by the State of Connecticut and other fish include largemouth bass , yellow perch and sunfish . 
 = Rosetta Stone = 
 The Rosetta Stone is a rock stele , found in 1799 , inscribed with a decree issued at Memphis , Egypt , in 196 BC on behalf of King Ptolemy V. The decree appears in three scripts : the upper text is Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs , the middle portion is Demotic script , and the lowest is Ancient Greek . Because it presents essentially the same text in all three scripts ( with some minor differences among them ) , the stone provided the key to the modern understanding of Egyptian hieroglyphs . 
 The stone , carved in black granodiorite , is believed to have originally been displayed within a temple , possibly at nearby Sais . It was probably moved during the early Christian or medieval period , and was eventually used as building material in the construction of Fort Julien near the town of Rashid ( Rosetta ) in the Nile Delta . It was rediscovered there in July 1799 by a soldier named Pierre @-@ François Bouchard of the Napoleonic expedition to Egypt . It was the first Ancient Egyptian bilingual text recovered in modern times , and it aroused widespread public interest with its potential to decipher this previously untranslated hieroglyphic language . <unk> copies and plaster casts began circulating among European museums and scholars . Meanwhile , British troops defeated the French in Egypt in 1801 , and the original stone came into British possession under the Capitulation of Alexandria and was transported to London . It has been on public display at the British Museum almost continuously since 1802 . It is the most @-@ visited object in the British Museum . 
 Study of the decree was already under way when the first full translation of the Greek text appeared in 1803 . It was 20 years , however , before the transliteration of the Egyptian scripts was announced by Jean @-@ François Champollion in Paris in 1822 ; it took longer still before scholars were able to read Ancient Egyptian inscriptions and literature confidently . Major advances in the decoding were recognition that the stone offered three versions of the same text ( 1799 ) ; that the demotic text used phonetic characters to spell foreign names ( 1802 ) ; that the hieroglyphic text did so as well , and had pervasive similarities to the demotic ( Thomas Young , 1814 ) ; and that , in addition to being used for foreign names , phonetic characters were also used to spell native Egyptian words ( Champollion , 1822 – 1824 ) . 
 Ever since its rediscovery , the stone has been the focus of nationalist rivalries , including its transfer from French to British possession during the Napoleonic Wars , a long @-@ running dispute over the relative value of Young and Champollion 's contributions to the decipherment , and , since 2003 , demands for the stone 's return to Egypt . 
 Two other fragmentary copies of the same decree were discovered later , and several similar Egyptian bilingual or trilingual inscriptions are now known , including two slightly earlier Ptolemaic decrees ( the Decree of Canopus in 238 BC , and the Memphis decree of Ptolemy IV , ca . 218 BC ) . The Rosetta Stone is , therefore , no longer unique , but it was the essential key to modern understanding of Ancient Egyptian literature and civilization . The term Rosetta Stone is now used in other contexts as the name for the essential clue to a new field of knowledge . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Rosetta Stone is listed as " a stone of black granite , bearing three inscriptions ... found at Rosetta " in a contemporary catalogue of the artifacts discovered by the French expedition and surrendered to British troops in 1801 . At some period after its arrival in London , the inscriptions on the stone were coloured in white chalk to make them more legible , and the remaining surface was covered with a layer of <unk> wax designed to protect the Rosetta Stone from visitors ' fingers . This gave a dark colour to the stone that led to its mistaken identification as black basalt . These additions were removed when the stone was cleaned in 1999 , revealing the original dark grey tint of the rock , the sparkle of its crystalline structure , and a pink vein running across the top left corner . Comparisons with the Klemm collection of Egyptian rock samples showed a close resemblance to rock from a small granodiorite quarry at Gebel <unk> on the west bank of the Nile , west of Elephantine in the region of Aswan ; the pink vein is typical of granodiorite from this region . 
 The Rosetta Stone is currently 112 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 3 ft 8 in ) high at its highest point , 75 @.@ 7 cm ( 2 ft 5 @.@ 8 in ) wide , and 28 @.@ 4 cm ( 11 in ) thick . It weighs approximately 760 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 680 lb ) . It bears three inscriptions : the top register in Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs , the second in the Egyptian demotic script , and the third in Ancient Greek . The front surface is polished and the inscriptions lightly incised on it ; the sides of the stone are smoothed , but the back is only roughly worked , presumably because this would have not been visible when it was erected . 
 = = = Original stele = = = 
 The Rosetta Stone is a fragment of a larger stele . No additional fragments were found in later searches of the Rosetta site . Owing to its damaged state , none of the three texts is absolutely complete . The top register , composed of Egyptian hieroglyphs , suffered the most damage . Only the last 14 lines of the hieroglyphic text can be seen ; all of them are broken on the right side , and 12 of them on the left . The following register of demotic text has survived best ; it has 32 lines , of which the first 14 are slightly damaged on the right side . The final register of Greek text contains 54 lines , of which the first 27 survive in full ; the rest are increasingly fragmentary due to a diagonal break at the bottom right of the stone . 
 = = Memphis decree and its context = = 
 The stele was erected after the coronation of King Ptolemy V and was inscribed with a decree that established the divine cult of the new ruler . The decree was issued by a congress of priests who gathered at Memphis . The date is given as " 4 <unk> " in the Macedonian calendar and " 18 <unk> " in the Egyptian calendar , which corresponds to March 27 , 196 BC . The year is stated as the ninth year of Ptolemy V 's reign ( equated with 197 / 196 BC ) , and it is confirmed by naming four priests who officiated in that same year : <unk> son of <unk> was priest of the divine cults of Alexander the Great and the five Ptolemies down to Ptolemy V himself ; his three colleagues , named in turn in the inscription , led the worship of Berenice <unk> ( wife of Ptolemy III ) , Arsinoe <unk> ( wife and sister of Ptolemy II ) , and Arsinoe Philopator , mother of Ptolemy V. However , a second date is also given in the Greek and hieroglyphic texts , corresponding to 27 November 197 BC , the official anniversary of Ptolemy 's coronation . The inscription in demotic conflicts with this , listing consecutive days in March for the decree and the anniversary . It is uncertain why such discrepancies exist , but it is clear that the decree was issued in 196 BC and that it was designed to re @-@ establish the rule of the Ptolemaic kings over Egypt . 
 The decree was issued during a turbulent period in Egyptian history . Ptolemy V Epiphanes reigned from 204 to 181 BC , the son of Ptolemy IV Philopator and his wife and sister Arsinoe . He had become ruler at the age of five after the sudden death of both of his parents , who were murdered in a conspiracy that involved Ptolemy IV 's mistress <unk> , according to contemporary sources . The conspirators effectively ruled Egypt as Ptolemy V 's guardians until a revolt broke out two years later under general Tlepolemus , when <unk> and her family were lynched by a mob in Alexandria . Tlepolemus , in turn , was replaced as guardian in 201 BC by <unk> of <unk> , who was chief minister at the time of the Memphis decree . 
 Political forces beyond the borders of Egypt exacerbated the internal problems of the Ptolemaic kingdom . Antiochus III the Great and Philip V of Macedon had made a pact to divide Egypt 's overseas possessions . Philip had seized several islands and cities in Caria and Thrace , while the Battle of Panium ( 198 BC ) had resulted in the transfer of Coele @-@ Syria , including Judea , from the Ptolemies to the Seleucids . Meanwhile , in the south of Egypt , there was a long @-@ standing revolt that had begun during the reign of Ptolemy IV , led by <unk> and by his successor <unk> . Both the war and the internal revolt were still ongoing when the young Ptolemy V was officially crowned at Memphis at the age of 12 ( seven years after the start of his reign ) , and the Memphis decree issued . 
 The stele is a late example of a class of donation stelae , which depicts the reigning monarch granting a tax exemption to the resident priesthood . Pharaohs had erected these stelae over the previous 2 @,@ 000 years , the earliest examples dating from the Egyptian Old Kingdom . In earlier periods , all such decrees were issued by the king himself , but the Memphis decree was issued by the priests , as the maintainers of traditional Egyptian culture . The decree records that Ptolemy V gave a gift of silver and grain to the temples . It also records that there was particularly high Flooding of the Nile in the eighth year of his reign , and he had the excess waters dammed for the benefit of the farmers . In return for these concessions , the priesthood pledged that the king 's birthday and coronation days would be celebrated annually , and that all the priests of Egypt would serve him alongside the other gods . The decree concludes with the instruction that a copy was to be placed in every temple , inscribed in the " language of the gods " ( hieroglyphs ) , the " language of documents " ( demotic ) , and the " language of the Greeks " as used by the Ptolemaic government . 
 Securing the favour of the priesthood was essential for the Ptolemaic kings to retain effective rule over the populace . The High Priests of Memphis — where the king was crowned — were particularly important , as they were the highest religious authority of the time and had influence throughout the kingdom . Given that the decree was issued at Memphis , the ancient capital of Egypt , rather than Alexandria , the centre of government of the ruling Ptolemies , it is evident that the young king was anxious to gain their active support . Hence , although the government of Egypt had been Greek @-@ speaking ever since the conquests of Alexander the Great , the Memphis decree , like the two preceding decrees in the series , included texts in Egyptian to display its relevance to the general populace by way of the literate Egyptian priesthood . 
 There exists no one definitive English translation of the decree because of the minor differences between the three original texts , and because modern understanding of the ancient languages continues to develop . An up @-@ to @-@ date translation by R. S. Simpson appears on the British Museum website , based on the demotic text . It can be compared with Edwyn R. Bevan 's full translation in The House of Ptolemy ( 1927 ) , based on the Greek text with footnote comments on variations between this and the two Egyptian texts . 
 The stele almost certainly did not originate in the town of Rashid ( Rosetta ) where it was found , but more likely came from a temple site farther inland , possibly the royal town of Sais . The temple from which it originally came was probably closed around AD 392 when Eastern Roman emperor Theodosius I ordered the closing of all non @-@ Christian temples of worship . The original stele broke at some point , its largest piece becoming what we now know as the Rosetta Stone . Ancient Egyptian temples were later used as quarries for new construction , and the Rosetta Stone probably was re @-@ used in this manner . Later it was incorporated in the foundations of a fortress constructed by the <unk> Sultan Qaitbay ( ca . 1416 / 18 – 1496 ) to defend the <unk> branch of the Nile at Rashid . There it lay for at least another three centuries until its rediscovery . 
 Two other inscriptions of the Memphis decrees have been found since the discovery of the Rosetta Stone : the <unk> Stele , and an inscription found at the Temple of Philae ( on the Philae obelisk ) . Unlike the Rosetta Stone , their hieroglyphic inscriptions were relatively intact . The inscriptions on the Rosetta Stone had been deciphered long before the discovery of the other copies of the decree , but subsequent Egyptologists , including Wallis Budge , used these other inscriptions to further refine the actual hieroglyphs that must have been used in the lost portions of the hieroglyphic register on the Rosetta Stone . 
 = = Rediscovery = = 
 On Napoleon 's 1798 campaign in Egypt , the expeditionary army was accompanied by the Commission des Sciences et des Arts , a corps of 167 technical experts ( savants ) . On July 15 , 1799 , French soldiers under the command of Colonel d 'Hautpoul were strengthening the defences of Fort Julien , a couple of miles north @-@ east of the Egyptian port city of Rosetta ( Modern day Rashid ) . Lieutenant Pierre @-@ François Bouchard spotted a slab with inscriptions on one side that the soldiers had uncovered . He and d 'Hautpoul saw at once that it might be important and informed general Jacques @-@ François Menou , who happened to be at Rosetta . The find was announced to Napoleon 's newly founded scientific association in Cairo , the Institut d 'Égypte , in a report by Commission member Michel Ange Lancret noting that it contained three inscriptions , the first in hieroglyphs and the third in Greek , and rightly suggesting that the three inscriptions would be versions of the same text . Lancret 's report , dated July 19 , 1799 , was read to a meeting of the Institute soon after July 25 . Bouchard , meanwhile , transported the stone to Cairo for examination by scholars . Napoleon himself inspected what had already begun to be called la Pierre de Rosette , the Rosetta Stone , shortly before his return to France in August 1799 . 
 The discovery was reported in September in Courrier de l 'Égypte , the official newspaper of the French expedition . The anonymous reporter expressed a hope that the stone might one day be the key to deciphering hieroglyphs . In 1800 , three of the Commission 's technical experts devised ways to make copies of the texts on the stone . One of these experts was Jean @-@ Joseph Marcel , a printer and gifted linguist , who is credited as the first to recognise that the middle text was written in the Egyptian demotic script , rarely used for stone inscriptions and seldom seen by scholars at that time , rather than Syriac as had originally been thought . It was artist and inventor Nicolas @-@ Jacques <unk> who found a way to use the stone itself as a printing block . A slightly different method for reproducing the inscriptions was adopted by Antoine Galland . The prints that resulted were taken to Paris by General Charles Dugua . Scholars in Europe were now able to see the inscriptions and attempt to read them . 
 After Napoleon 's departure , French troops held off British and Ottoman attacks for another 18 months . In March 1801 , the British landed at Aboukir Bay . General Jacques @-@ François Menou had been one of the first to see the stone in 1799 , and he was now in command of the French expedition . His troops , including the Commission , marched north towards the Mediterranean coast to meet the enemy , transporting the stone along with other antiquities of all kinds . Menou was defeated in battle , and the remnant of his army retreated to Alexandria where they were surrounded and besieged , the stone now inside the city . He admitted defeat and surrendered on August 30 . 
 = = From French to British possession = = 
 After the surrender , a dispute arose over the fate of French archaeological and scientific discoveries in Egypt , including a group of artifacts , biological specimens , notes , plans , and drawings collected by the members of the commission . Menou refused to hand them over , claiming that they belonged to the Institute . British General John Hely @-@ Hutchinson refused to relieve the city until Menou gave in . Scholars Edward Daniel Clarke and William Richard Hamilton , newly arrived from England , agreed to examine the collections in Alexandria and claimed to have found many artifacts that the French had not revealed . In a letter home , Clarke said that " we found much more in their possession than was represented or imagined " . 
 Hutchinson claimed that all materials were property of the British Crown , but French scholar Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire said to Clarke and Hamilton that they would rather burn all their discoveries than turn them over , referring ominously to the destruction of the Library of Alexandria . Clarke and Hamilton pleaded the French scholars ' case and Hutchinson finally agreed that items such as natural history specimens would be the scholars ' private property . Menou quickly claimed the stone , too , as his private property ; had this been accepted , he would have been able to take it to France . General Hutchinson was equally aware of the stone 's unique value , and he rejected Menou 's claim . Eventually an agreement was reached , and the transfer of the objects was incorporated into the Capitulation of Alexandria signed by representatives of the British , French , and Ottoman forces . 
 It is not clear exactly how the stone was transferred into British hands , as contemporary accounts differ . Colonel <unk> <unk> Turner was to escort it to England , but he claimed later that he had personally seized it from Menou and carried it away on a gun @-@ carriage . In a much more detailed account , Edward Daniel Clarke stated that a French " officer and member of the Institute " had taken him , his student John Cripps , and Hamilton secretly into the back streets behind Menou 's residence and revealed the stone hidden under protective carpets among Menou 's baggage . According to Clarke , their informant feared that the stone might be stolen if French soldiers saw it . Hutchinson was informed at once and the stone was taken away — possibly by Turner and his gun @-@ carriage . 
 Turner brought the stone to England aboard the captured French frigate HMS <unk> , landing in Portsmouth in February 1802 . His orders were to present it and the other antiquities to King George III . The King , represented by War Secretary Lord Hobart , directed that it should be placed in the British Museum . According to Turner 's narrative , he and Hobart agreed that the stone should be presented to scholars at the Society of Antiquaries of London , of which Turner was a member , before its final deposit in the museum . It was first seen and discussed there at a meeting on March 11 , 1802 . 
 During the course of 1802 , the Society created four plaster casts of the inscriptions , which were given to the universities of Oxford , Cambridge , and Edinburgh and to Trinity College Dublin . Soon afterwards , prints of the inscriptions were made and circulated to European scholars . Before the end of 1802 , the stone was transferred to the British Museum , where it is located today . New inscriptions painted in white on the left and right edges of the slab stated that it was " Captured in Egypt by the British Army in 1801 " and " Presented by King George III " . 
 The stone has been exhibited almost continuously in the British Museum since June 1802 . During the middle of the 19th century , it was given the inventory number " EA 24 " , " EA " standing for " Egyptian Antiquities " . It was part of a collection of ancient Egyptian monuments captured from the French expedition , including a sarcophagus of Nectanebo II ( EA 10 ) , the statue of a high priest of Amun ( EA 81 ) , and a large granite fist ( EA 9 ) . The objects were soon discovered to be too heavy for the floors of Montagu House ( the original building of The British Museum ) , and they were transferred to a new extension that was built onto the mansion . The Rosetta Stone was transferred to the sculpture gallery in 1834 shortly after Montagu House was demolished and replaced by the building that now houses the British Museum . According to the museum 's records , the Rosetta Stone is its most @-@ visited single object , and a simple image of it has been the museum 's best selling postcard for several decades . 
 The Rosetta Stone was originally displayed at a slight angle from the horizontal , and rested within a metal cradle that was made for it , which involved shaving off very small portions of its sides to ensure that the cradle fit securely . It originally had no protective covering , and it was found necessary by 1847 to place it in a protective frame , despite the efforts of attendants to ensure that it was not touched by visitors . Since 2004 , the conserved stone has been on display in a specially built case in the centre of the Egyptian Sculpture Gallery . A replica of the Rosetta Stone is now available in the King 's Library of the British Museum , without a case and free to touch , as it would have appeared to early 19th @-@ century visitors . 
 The museum was concerned about heavy bombing in London toward the end of the First World War in 1917 , and the Rosetta Stone was moved to safety , along with other portable objects of value . The stone spent the next two years 15 m ( 50 ft ) below ground level in a station of the Postal Tube Railway at Mount Pleasant near Holborn . Other than during wartime , the Rosetta Stone has left the British Museum only once : for one month in October 1972 , to be displayed alongside Champollion 's Lettre at the Louvre in Paris on the 150th anniversary of its publication . Even when the Rosetta Stone was undergoing conservation measures in 1999 , the work was done in the gallery so that it could remain visible to the public . 
 = = Reading the Rosetta Stone = = 
 There had been no understanding of the Ancient Egyptian language and script , before the discovery of the Rosetta Stone and its eventual decipherment , since shortly before the fall of the Roman Empire . The usage of the hieroglyphic script had become increasingly specialised even in the later Pharaonic period ; by the 4th century AD , few Egyptians were capable of reading hieroglyphs . Monumental use of hieroglyphs ceased after the closing of all non @-@ Christian temples in 391 by Roman Emperor Theodosius I ; the last known inscription is dated to 24 August 396 AD , found at Philae and known as the Graffito of <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Hieroglyphs retained their pictorial appearance , and classical authors emphasised this aspect , in sharp contrast to the Greek and Roman alphabets . For example , in the 5th century the priest <unk> wrote <unk> , an explanation of almost 200 glyphs . His work was believed to be authoritative , yet it was misleading in many ways , and this and other works were a lasting impediment to the understanding of Egyptian writing . Later attempts at deciphering hieroglyphs were made by Arab historians in medieval Egypt during the 9th and 10th centuries . Dhul @-@ Nun al @-@ Misri and Ibn Wahshiyya were the first historians to study this ancient script , by relating them to the contemporary Coptic language used by Coptic priests in their time . The study of hieroglyphs continued with fruitless attempts at decipherment by European scholars , notably Johannes <unk> <unk> in the 16th century , Athanasius Kircher in the 17th , and Georg Zoëga in the 18th . The discovery of the Rosetta Stone in 1799 provided critical missing information , gradually revealed by a succession of scholars , that eventually allowed Jean @-@ François Champollion to determine the nature of this mysterious script . 
 = = = Greek text = = = 
 The Greek text on the Rosetta Stone provided the starting point . Ancient Greek was widely known to scholars , but they were not familiar with details of its use in the Hellenistic period as a government language in Ptolemaic Egypt ; large @-@ scale discoveries of Greek papyri were a long way in the future . Thus , the earliest translations of the Greek text of the stone show the translators still struggling with the historical context and with administrative and religious jargon . Stephen Weston verbally presented an English translation of the Greek text at a Society of Antiquaries meeting in April 1802 . 
 Meanwhile , two of the lithographic copies made in Egypt had reached the Institut de France in Paris in 1801 . There , librarian and antiquarian Gabriel de La Porte du <unk> set to work on a translation of the Greek , but he was dispatched elsewhere on Napoleon 's orders almost immediately , and he left his unfinished work in the hands of colleague Hubert @-@ Pascal Ameilhon . Ameilhon produced the first published translations of the Greek text in 1803 , in both Latin and French to ensure that they would circulate widely . At Cambridge , Richard Porson worked on the missing lower right corner of the Greek text . He produced a skillful suggested reconstruction , which was soon being circulated by the Society of Antiquaries alongside its prints of the inscription . At almost the same moment , Classical historian Christian Gottlob Heyne in Göttingen was working from one of these prints , and he made a new Latin translation of the Greek text that was more reliable than Ameilhon 's , first published in 1803 . It was reprinted by the Society of Antiquaries in a special issue of its journal Archaeologia in 1811 , alongside Weston 's previously unpublished English translation , Colonel Turner 's narrative , and other documents . 
 = = = Demotic text = = = 
 At the time of the stone 's discovery , Swedish diplomat and scholar Johan David Åkerblad was working on a little @-@ known script of which some examples had recently been found in Egypt , which came to be known as Demotic . He called it " cursive Coptic " because he was convinced that it was used to record some form of the Coptic language ( the direct descendant of Ancient Egyptian ) , although it had few similarities with the later Coptic script . French Orientalist Antoine @-@ Isaac Silvestre de Sacy had been discussing this work with Åkerblad when he received one of the early lithographic prints of the Rosetta Stone in 1801 from Jean @-@ Antoine Chaptal , French minister of the interior . He realised that the middle text was in this same script . He and Åkerblad set to work , both focusing on the middle text and assuming that the script was alphabetical . They attempted to identify the points where Greek names ought to occur within this unknown text , by comparing it with the Greek . In 1802 , Silvestre de Sacy reported to Chaptal that he had successfully identified five names ( " Alexandros " , " <unk> " , " Ptolemaios " , " Arsinoe " , and Ptolemy 's title " Epiphanes " ) , while Åkerblad published an alphabet of 29 letters ( more than half of which were correct ) that he had identified from the Greek names in the demotic text . They could not , however , identify the remaining characters in the Demotic text , which , as is now known , included ideographic and other symbols alongside the phonetic ones . 
 = = = Hieroglyphic text = = = 
 Silvestre de Sacy eventually gave up work on the stone , but he was to make another contribution . In 1811 , prompted by discussions with a Chinese student about Chinese script , Silvestre de Sacy considered a suggestion made by Georg Zoëga in 1797 that the foreign names in Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions might be written phonetically ; he also recalled that as long ago as 1761 , Jean @-@ Jacques Barthélemy had suggested that the characters enclosed in cartouches in hieroglyphic inscriptions were proper names . Thus , when Thomas Young , foreign secretary of the Royal Society of London , wrote to him about the stone in 1814 , Silvestre de Sacy suggested in reply that in attempting to read the hieroglyphic text , Young might look for cartouches that ought to contain Greek names and try to identify phonetic characters in them . 
 Young did so , with two results that together paved the way for the final decipherment . In the hieroglyphic text , he discovered the phonetic characters " p t o l m e s " ( in today 's transliteration " p t w l m y s " ) that were used to write the Greek name " Ptolemaios " . He also noticed that these characters resembled the equivalent ones in the Demotic script , and went on to note as many as 80 similarities between the hieroglyphic and demotic texts on the stone , an important discovery because the two scripts were previously thought to be entirely different from one another . This led him to deduce correctly that the demotic script was only partly phonetic , also consisting of ideographic characters imitated from hieroglyphs . Young 's new insights were prominent in the long article " Egypt " that he contributed to the Encyclopædia Britannica in 1819 . He could get no further , however . 
 In 1814 Young first exchanged correspondence about the stone with Jean @-@ François Champollion , a teacher at Grenoble who had produced a scholarly work on ancient Egypt . Champollion saw copies of the brief hieroglyphic and Greek inscriptions of the Philae obelisk in 1822 , on which William John Bankes had tentatively noted the names " Ptolemaios " and " <unk> " in both languages . From this , Champollion identified the phonetic characters k l e o p a t r a ( in today 's transliteration q l i <unk> w p <unk> d r <unk> ) . On the basis of this and the foreign names on the Rosetta Stone , he quickly constructed an alphabet of phonetic hieroglyphic characters , which appears in his " Lettre à M. Dacier " , printed from his hand @-@ drawn chart , addressed at the end of 1822 to Bon @-@ Joseph Dacier , secretary of the Paris Académie des Inscriptions et Belles @-@ Lettres and immediately published by the Académie . This " Letter " marks the real breakthrough to reading Egyptian hieroglyphs — for the alphabet chart , the main text , and also the postscript in which Champollion notes that similar phonetic characters seemed to occur in Greek names and also native Egyptian names . During 1823 he confirmed this , identifying the names of pharaohs Ramesses and Thutmose written in cartouches in far older hieroglyphic inscriptions that had been copied by Bankes at Abu Simbel and sent on to Champollion by Jean @-@ Nicolas Huyot . From this point , the stories diverge of the Rosetta Stone and the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs , as Champollion drew on many other texts to develop an Ancient Egyptian grammar and a hieroglyphic dictionary , both of which were published after his death in 1832 . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 Work on the stone now focused on fuller understanding of the texts and their contexts by comparing the three versions with one another . In 1824 Classical scholar Antoine @-@ Jean Letronne promised to prepare a new literal translation of the Greek text for Champollion 's use . Champollion in return promised an analysis of all the points at which the three texts seemed to differ . Following Champollion 's sudden death in 1832 , his draft of this analysis could not be found , and Letronne 's work stalled . François Salvolini , Champollion 's former student and assistant , died in 1838 , and this analysis and other missing drafts were found among his papers . This discovery incidentally demonstrated that Salvolini 's own publication on the stone , published in 1837 , was plagiarism . Letronne was at last able to complete his commentary on the Greek text and his new French translation of it , which appeared in 1841 . During the early 1850s , German Egyptologists Heinrich <unk> and Max <unk> produced revised Latin translations based on the demotic and hieroglyphic texts . The first English translation followed in 1858 , the work of three members of the Philomathean Society at the University of Pennsylvania . 
 Whether one of the three texts was the standard version , from which the other two were originally translated , is a question that has remained controversial . Letronne attempted to show in 1841 that the Greek version was the original , produced by the Egyptian government under its Ptolemaic dynasty . Among recent authors , John Ray has stated that " the hieroglyphs were the most important of the scripts on the stone : they were there for the gods to read , and the more learned of their priesthood " . Philippe <unk> and Heinz Josef <unk> have argued that all three versions were composed simultaneously , while Stephen Quirke sees in the decree " an intricate coalescence of three vital textual traditions " . Richard Parkinson points out that the hieroglyphic version strays from archaic formalism and occasionally lapses into language closer to that of the demotic register that the priests more commonly used in everyday life . The fact that the three versions cannot be matched word for word helps to explain why its decipherment has been more difficult than originally expected , especially for those original scholars who were expecting an exact bilingual key to Egyptian hieroglyphs . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 Even before the Salvolini affair , disputes over precedence and plagiarism punctuated the decipherment story . Thomas Young 's work is acknowledged in Champollion 's 1822 Lettre à M. Dacier , but incompletely , according to British critics : for example , James Browne , a sub @-@ editor on the Encyclopædia Britannica ( which had published Young 's 1819 article ) , anonymously contributed a series of review articles to the Edinburgh Review in 1823 , praising Young 's work highly and alleging that the " unscrupulous " Champollion plagiarised it . These articles were translated into French by Julius Klaproth and published in book form in 1827 . Young 's own 1823 publication reasserted the contribution that he had made . The early deaths of Young ( 1829 ) and Champollion ( 1832 ) did not put an end to these disputes . The authoritative work on the stone by British Museum curator E. A. Wallis Budge ( 1904 ) gives special emphasis to Young 's contribution by contrast with Champollion 's . In the early 1970s , French visitors complained that the portrait of Champollion was smaller than one of Young on an adjacent information panel ; English visitors complained that the opposite was true . Both portraits were in fact the same size . 
 = = Requests for repatriation to Egypt = = 
 Egypt first requested the return of the Rosetta Stone in July 2003 , on the occasion of the British Museum 's 250th anniversary . Zahi Hawass , the chief of Egypt 's Supreme Council of Antiquities , asked that the stele be repatriated to Egypt , urging in comments to reporters : " If the British want to be remembered , if they want to restore their reputation , they should volunteer to return the Rosetta Stone because it is the icon of our Egyptian identity " . He repeated the proposal two years later in Paris , listing the stone as one of several key items belonging to Egypt 's cultural heritage , a list which also included : the iconic bust of Nefertiti in the Egyptian Museum of Berlin ; a statue of the Great Pyramid architect <unk> in the Roemer @-@ und @-@ <unk> @-@ Museum in Hildesheim , Germany ; the <unk> Temple Zodiac in the Louvre in Paris ; and the bust of <unk> from the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston . 
 During 2005 the British Museum presented to Egypt a full @-@ sized replica of the stele . This was initially displayed in the renovated Rashid National Museum , close to the site where the stone was found . By November 2005 Hawass was suggesting a three @-@ month loan of the Rosetta Stone , while reiterating the eventual goal of a permanent return . In December 2009 he proposed to drop his claim for the permanent return of the Rosetta Stone if the British Museum lent the stone to Egypt for three months , for the opening of the Grand Egyptian Museum at Giza in 2013 . 
 As John Ray has observed , " the day may come when the stone has spent longer in the British Museum than it ever did in Rosetta . " There is strong opposition among national museums to the repatriation of objects of international cultural significance such as the Rosetta Stone . In response to repeated Greek requests for return of the Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon and similar requests to other museums around the world , in 2002 , over 30 of the world 's leading museums — including the British Museum , the Louvre , the Pergamon Museum in Berlin and the Metropolitan Museum in New York City — issued a joint statement declaring that " objects acquired in earlier times must be viewed in the light of different sensitivities and values reflective of that earlier era " and that " museums serve not just the citizens of one nation but the people of every nation " . 
 = = <unk> use = = 
 The term Rosetta stone has been used idiomatically to represent a crucial key in the process of decryption of encoded information , especially when a small but representative sample is recognized as the clue to understanding a larger whole . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the first figurative use of the term appeared in the 1902 edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica relating to an entry on the chemical analysis of glucose . An almost literal use of the phrase appears in popular fiction within H. G. Wells ' 1933 novel The Shape of Things to Come , where the protagonist finds a manuscript written in shorthand that provides a key to understanding additional scattered material that is sketched out in both longhand and on typewriter . Perhaps its most important and prominent usage in scientific literature was Nobel laureate Theodor W. <unk> 's reference in a 1979 Scientific American article on spectroscopy where he says that " the spectrum of the hydrogen atoms has proved to be the Rosetta stone of modern physics : once this pattern of lines had been deciphered much else could also be understood " . 
 Since then , the term has been widely used in other contexts . For example , fully understanding the key set of genes to the human <unk> antigen has been described as " the Rosetta Stone of immunology " . The flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana has been called the " Rosetta Stone of flowering time " . A Gamma ray burst ( GRB ) found in conjunction with a supernova has been called a Rosetta Stone for understanding the origin of GRBs . The technique of Doppler echocardiography has been called a Rosetta Stone for clinicians trying to understand the complex process by which the left ventricle of the human heart can be filled during various forms of diastolic dysfunction . 
 The name has also become used in various forms of translation software . Rosetta Stone is a brand of language @-@ learning software published by Rosetta Stone Ltd . , headquartered in Arlington County , Virginia , US . " Rosetta " is the name of a " lightweight dynamic translator " that enables applications compiled for PowerPC processors to run on Apple systems using an x86 processor . " Rosetta " is an online language translation tool to help localisation of software , developed and maintained by Canonical as part of the <unk> project . Similarly , Rosetta @ home is a distributed computing project for predicting protein structures from amino acid sequences ( or translating sequence into structure ) . The Rosetta Project brings language specialists and native speakers together to develop a meaningful survey and near @-@ permanent archive of 1 @,@ 500 languages , intended to last from AD 2000 to 12 @,@ 000 . The Rosetta spacecraft is on a ten @-@ year ( 2004 – 2014 ) mission to study the comet 67P / Churyumov – Gerasimenko , in the hope that determining its composition will reveal the origin of the Solar System . 
 = = = Timeline of early publications about the Rosetta Stone = = = 
 = Circles ( George Harrison song ) = 
 " Circles " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released as the final track of his 1982 album Gone Troppo . Harrison wrote the song in India in 1968 while he and the Beatles were studying Transcendental Meditation with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi . The theme of the lyrics is reincarnation . The composition reflects the cyclical aspect of human existence as , according to Hindu doctrine , the soul continues to pass from one life to the next . Although the Beatles never formally recorded it , " Circles " was among the demos the group made at Harrison 's home , Kinfauns , in May 1968 , while considering material for their double album The Beatles . 
 Harrison revisited " Circles " during the sessions for his 1979 album George Harrison before he finally recorded it for Gone Troppo . Over this period , Harrison had softened the spiritual message in his work and had also begun to forgo the music business for a career as a film producer with his company HandMade Films . The song was produced by Harrison , Ray Cooper and former Beatles engineer Phil McDonald , with recording taking place at Harrison 's Friar Park studio between May and August 1982 . The track features extensive use of keyboards and synthesizer , with Billy Preston , Jon Lord and Mike Moran among the contributing musicians . 
 A slow , meditative song , " Circles " has received a mixed response from reviewers , some of whom find it overly gloomy . In the United States , it was issued as the B @-@ side of the album 's second single , " I Really Love You " , in February 1983 . As the closing track on Gone Troppo , " Circles " was the last song heard on a new Harrison album until 1987 , when he returned with Cloud Nine . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Circles " was one of several songs that George Harrison wrote in Rishikesh , India , when he and his Beatles bandmates were attending Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 's Transcendental Meditation course in the spring of 1968 . Aside from providing an opportunity to progress with meditation techniques , the two @-@ month stay marked Harrison 's return to the guitar after two years of studying the Indian sitar , partly under the tutelage of Ravi Shankar . Harrison biographer Simon Leng considers that " Circles " was composed on an organ , however , as most of Harrison 's Indian @-@ inspired melodies since 1966 had been . Leng writes of " fugue @-@ like keyboard parts " on the song and " bass figures " that partly recall the works of Johann Sebastian Bach . Author Ian Inglis considers that " Circles " " displays a direct connection with the unspoken psychedelia " of Harrison 's Beatles tracks " Blue Jay Way " and " Long , Long , Long " . 
 The song 's lyrical theme is reincarnation , in keeping with its composer 's absorption in Hindu philosophy – a preoccupation that had led the Beatles to the Maharishi 's teachings and would result in Harrison 's introduction to the Hare Krishna movement in December 1968 . Harrison had first taken reincarnation as his theme for " Art of Dying " , which he began writing in 1966 , and it would continue to be the focus of many of his compositions as a solo artist , notably the 1973 hit " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " . Theologian Dale Allison highlights " Circles " as the only Harrison song to use the term " reincarnate " , however , and he also notes the composer 's use of the word " soul " " in its proper metaphysical sense " . 
 Allison describes the lyrics as " a clear statement of reincarnation " , as well as " the most blatant example " of Harrison 's desire to pass on to a " ' higher ' and better world " at death , and so escape the cycle of rebirth in the material world . In the song 's choruses , the lines " He who knows does not speak / He who speaks does not know " quote the Chinese sage and author Lao @-@ Tse , whose work Tao Te Ching inspired Harrison 's 1968 composition " The Inner Light " . Elsewhere in the lyrics to " Circles " , Harrison contemplates the changing nature of friendship as , over the course of lifetimes , according to Inglis , " our enemies become our companions , affections turn into hatred " . 
 Lindsay Planer of AllMusic writes that Harrison carried out " significant lyrical embellishments " after debuting the song in 1968 . On the released recording , he concludes with a statement on how to break the circle of repetition : " When loss and gain and up and down / Become the same , then we stop going in circles . " Allison interprets this conclusion , and Harrison 's worldview generally , as espousing the need to recognise the illusory nature of the material world , saying : " All the multiplicity and diversity are in truth manifestations of the one hidden and divine reality … opposites are not opposites . To understand that up is down and that gain is loss is to be … on one 's way to escaping from the material world . " 
 Musically , Leng views the " chromatic melodic web " of " Circles " as appropriate for conveying the " repetition and entrapment " of reincarnation , as the soul passes through one human life to another . The song is in the key of F major , although , in Leng 's estimation , the melody " yearn [ s ] for resolution in E minor … revolving in dissonance like a lost soul awaiting its place in the reincarnation checkout line " . 
 = = The Beatles ' demo = = 
 " Circles " was one of five Harrison compositions that the Beatles demoed before recording their 1968 double album , The Beatles , also known as the White Album . The song was taped in late May 1968 at Kinfauns , Harrison 's home in Esher , using his Ampex four @-@ track recorder . Although never released officially , the demo began circulating on bootleg compilations in the early 1990s . 
 Harrison played organ on the track , taping two parts on the instrument . The use of keyboards contrasted with the mainly acoustic @-@ guitar backing otherwise employed on the Beatles ' Esher demos ; author and critic Richie Unterberger describes the keyboard sound as " an eerie organ that seems to have been dragged out of a dusty , disused church closet " . In his book Revolution in the Head , Ian MacDonald credits the instrument as a harmonium and writes that , rather than performing the song alone , Harrison was " shadowed by a tentative … bass @-@ line " from Paul McCartney . 
 As with another Harrison composition inspired by the Beatles ' time in Rishikesh – " Sour Milk Sea " – the group did not attempt to record " Circles " for the White Album . With the band 's songwriting output at an unprecedentedly high level , Harrison 's " Not Guilty " was similarly left off the album , even though the group had completed a recording of that track . 
