 = = Recording = = 
 In 1978 , Harrison returned to both " Circles " and " Not Guilty " during the sessions for his sixth post @-@ Beatles solo album , George Harrison . Although " Not Guilty " appeared on that release the following year , " Circles " remained unused until 1982 , when Harrison again revisited it while working on Gone Troppo . By this point in his career , Harrison had long softened the spiritual message of his work and , since the late 1970s , he had distanced himself from the Hare Krishna movement . Allison notes that Harrison nevertheless gave an in @-@ depth interview to senior devotee Mukunda Goswami in September 1982 , during which he shared his thoughts on reincarnation , meditation and chanting . 
 " Circles " was recorded at Harrison 's Friar Park studio , in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames , Oxfordshire , during sessions held between 5 May and 27 August 1982 . Harrison co @-@ produced the track with Ray Cooper and former Beatles engineer Phil McDonald . The backing musicians included keyboard players Billy Preston , Jon Lord and Mike Moran , while Harrison also played synthesizer , in addition to bass and slide guitar . Leng describes the song as Harrison 's " first Hindustani blues " and , unlike the sparse 1968 recording , a track arranged with " rich instrumentation " that includes " gospel flourishes " from Preston , on piano and Hammond organ , and " Harrison 's unique guitar tones " . 
 Leng also comments on the seemingly unlikely pairing of Harrison and Lord , who was the keyboardist for heavy rock bands such as Deep Purple and Whitesnake . Acknowledging the close friendship between the two near @-@ neighbours , Leng cites Lord 's presence on the track as indicative of a preference for locally sourced contributors and " trusted pals " when Harrison made Gone Troppo . As another factor in the album 's creation , Harrison felt increasingly removed from contemporary musical trends and more involved with his burgeoning film company , HandMade , whose recent successes had included Terry Gilliam 's fantasy adventure Time Bandits ( 1981 ) . While viewing " Circles " as " a throwback to the early days of enlightenment in the 1960s " , Leng considers that the " ponderous , stuttering , meditative pace and bizarre , circular melodic structure " of the song evokes " the feeling of being transported to one of the parallel realities " depicted in Gilliam 's film . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Circles " was issued on 5 November 1982 as the closing track on Gone Troppo , sequenced after Harrison 's song from the Time Bandits soundtrack , " Dream Away " . By this point , " Circles " had already gained a degree of notoriety , as a title that frequently appeared on lists of the Beatles ' unreleased compositions . Writing in Mojo in 2011 , John Harris described the song as " one bit of <unk> @-@ related intrigue " on a release that otherwise received little notice , due to the artist 's refusal to promote his " contract @-@ finisher " with Warner Bros. Records , the distributor of his Dark Horse record label . Author Alan Clayson comments that the song 's " sense of once more going through the old routine " matched its " world @-@ weary lyrics " – a reflection of Harrison 's disenchantment after Warner 's had rejected part of the content of his previous album , Somewhere in England . 
 Gone Troppo became Harrison 's last album for five years , during which he continued to focus on film production , while occasionally contributing to film soundtracks . Among these projects , the HandMade comedy Water ( 1985 ) reunited four of the musicians who played on " Circles " , as Moran wrote part of the film score ( with Harrison ) , and Harrison , Lord , Moran and Cooper made a cameo appearance as " the Singing Rebels Band " , along with Eric Clapton and Ringo Starr . In February 1983 , " Circles " was released as the B @-@ side to the album 's second single in the United States , " I Really Love You " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Discussing the reception to Gone Troppo in their book Eight Arms to Hold You , Chip Madinger and Mark Easter note " Circles " as the only track " reflecting weightier matters " on what was otherwise Harrison 's " <unk> " collection of songs to date , and they conclude : " Sadly , a decent album was lost in the shuffle of the rapidly changing marketplace of the early ' 80 's . " In a contemporary review for Musician magazine , Roy <unk> found that , following John Lennon 's murder two years before , Harrison 's " tortured honesty " undermined the album 's " attempt to heal those psychic wounds with calm , <unk> music " , and he added that " not even Billy Preston can rescue … the maudlin tautologies of the closing ' Circles ' . " 
 More impressed with Gone Troppo , Dave Thompson wrote in Goldmine in 2002 that , together with " Dream Away " , " Circles " " stand [ s ] alongside any number of Harrison 's minor classics " . In his book The Unreleased Beatles , Richie Unterberger describes the song as " a pretty neat , if droning , reflection of Harrison 's more somber spiritual sensibilities " , and he views the 1968 demo as a version that " exerts by far the greater fascination " compared with Harrison 's later recording . Unimpressed with the track , author John Winn dismisses " Circles " as " a depressing number that makes ' Blue Jay Way ' sound like a Little Richard freakout " . Ian MacDonald describes it as " a typically perceptive , if deeply gloomy , song about karma " . 
 Simon Leng admires " Circles " as " one of [ its ] composer 's most complex pieces " and pairs the song with " Beware of Darkness " , as " a study in Harrison 's unique harmonic sense " . In light of its appearance as the final track on Gone Troppo , Leng adds : " ' Circles ' was so personal and eccentric that it seemed to close the book on George 's recording career . It felt like he was making music only for himself . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to the Gone Troppo CD credits and Simon Leng : 
 George Harrison – vocals , bass , synthesizer , slide guitars , backing vocals 
 Billy Preston – organ , piano 
 Mike Moran – synthesizer 
 Jon Lord – synthesizer 
 Henry Spinetti – drums 
 Ray Cooper – percussion 
 = Palladian architecture = 
 Palladian architecture is a European style of architecture derived from and inspired by the designs of the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio ( 1508 – 1580 ) . That which is recognised as Palladian architecture today is an evolution of Palladio 's original concepts . Palladio 's work was strongly based on the symmetry , perspective and values of the formal classical temple architecture of the Ancient Greeks and Romans . From the 17th century Palladio 's interpretation of this classical architecture was adapted as the style known as Palladianism . It continued to develop until the end of the 18th century . 
 Palladianism became popular briefly in Britain during the mid @-@ 17th century , but its flowering was cut short by the onset of the Civil War and the imposition of austerity which followed . In the early 18th century it returned to fashion , not only in England but also , directly influenced from Britain , in Prussia . Count Francesco Algarotti may have written to Burlington from Berlin that he was recommending to Frederick the Great the adoption in Prussia of the architectural style Burlington had introduced in England but Knobelsdorff 's opera house on the Unter den Linden , based on Campbell 's Wanstead House , had been constructed from 1741 . Later in the century , when the style was falling from favour in Europe , it had a surge in popularity throughout the British colonies in North America , highlighted by examples such as Drayton Hall in South Carolina , the Redwood Library in Newport , Rhode Island , the Morris @-@ <unk> Mansion in New York City , the Hammond @-@ Harwood House in Annapolis , Maryland , and Thomas Jefferson 's Monticello and Poplar Forest in Virginia . 
 The style continued to be popular in Europe throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries , where it was frequently employed in the design of public and municipal buildings . From the latter half of the 19th century it was rivalled by the Gothic revival , whose champions , such as Augustus Pugin , remembering the origins of Palladianism in ancient temples , deemed it too pagan for Protestant and Anglo @-@ Catholic worship . However , as an architectural style it has continued to be popular and to evolve ; its pediments , symmetry and proportions are clearly evident in the design of many modern buildings today . 
 = = Palladio 's architecture = = 
 Buildings entirely designed by Palladio are all in Venice and the Veneto , with an especially rich grouping of palazzi in Vicenza , vaunted now in guidebooks as Palladio 's City . They include villas , and churches such as <unk> in Venice . In Palladio 's architectural treatises he followed the principles defined by the Roman architect Vitruvius and his 15th @-@ century disciple Leon Battista Alberti , who adhered to principles of classical Roman architecture based on mathematical proportions rather than the rich ornamental style also characteristic of the Renaissance . 
 Palladio always designed his villas with reference to their setting . If on a hill , such as Villa Capra , facades were frequently designed to be of equal value so that occupants could have fine views in all directions . Also , in such cases , porticos were built on all sides so that occupants could fully appreciate the countryside while being protected from the sun , similar to many American @-@ style porches of today . Palladio sometimes used a loggia as an alternative to the portico . This can most simply be described as a recessed portico , or an internal single storey room , with pierced walls that are open to the elements . Occasionally a loggia would be placed at second floor level over the top of a loggia below , creating what was known as a double loggia . <unk> were sometimes given significance in a facade by being surmounted by a pediment . Villa Godi has as its focal point a loggia rather than a portico , plus loggias terminating each end of the main building . 
 Palladio would often model his villa elevations on Roman temple facades . The temple influence , often in a cruciform design , later became a trademark of his work . Palladian villas are usually built with three floors : a rusticated basement or ground floor , containing the service and minor rooms . Above this , the piano nobile accessed through a portico reached by a flight of external steps , containing the principal reception and bedrooms , and above it is a low mezzanine floor with secondary bedrooms and accommodation . The proportions of each room within the villa were calculated on simple mathematical ratios like 3 : 4 and 4 : 5 , and the different rooms within the house were interrelated by these ratios . Earlier architects had used these formulas for balancing a single symmetrical facade ; however , Palladio 's designs related to the whole , usually square , villa . 
 Palladio deeply considered the dual purpose of his villas as both farmhouses and palatial weekend retreats for wealthy merchant owners . These symmetrical temple @-@ like houses often have equally symmetrical , but low , wings sweeping away from them to accommodate horses , farm animals , and agricultural stores . The wings , sometimes detached and connected to the villa by colonnades , were designed not only to be functional but also to complement and accentuate the villa . They were , however , in no way intended to be part of the main house , and it is in the design and use of these wings that Palladio 's followers in the 18th century adapted to become an integral part of the building . 
 = = The Palladian window = = 
 The Palladian , <unk> , or Venetian window features largely in Palladio 's work and is almost a trademark of his early career . It consists of a central light with semicircular arch over , carried on an impost consisting of a small entablature , under which , and enclosing two other lights , one on each side , are pilasters . In the library at Venice , Sansovino varied the design by substituting columns for the two inner pilasters . To describe its origin as being either Palladian or Venetian is not accurate ; the motif was first used by Donato Bramante and later mentioned by Sebastiano Serlio ( 1475 – 1554 ) in his seven @-@ volume architectural book <unk> l <unk> d 'architettura et <unk> expounding the ideals of Vitruvius and Roman architecture , this arched window is flanked by two lower rectangular openings , a motif that first appeared in the triumphal arches of ancient Rome . Palladio used the motif extensively , most notably in the arcades of the Basilica <unk> in Vicenza . It is also a feature of his entrances to both Villa Godi and Villa Forni <unk> . It is perhaps this extensive use of the motif in the Veneto that has given the window its alternative name of the Venetian window ; it is also known as a <unk> window . Whatever the name or the origin , this form of window has probably become one of the most enduring features of Palladio 's work seen in the later architectural styles evolved from Palladianism . According to James Lees @-@ Milne , its first appearance in Britain was in the remodeled wings of Burlington House , London , where the immediate source was actually in Inigo Jones 's designs for Whitehall Palace rather than drawn from Palladio himself . 
 A variant , in which the motif is enclosed within a relieving blind arch that unifies the motif , is not Palladian , though Burlington seems to have assumed it was so , in using a drawing in his possession showing three such features in a plain wall ( see illustration of <unk> House right ) . Modern scholarship attributes the drawing to Scamozzi . Burlington employed the motif in 1721 for an elevation of Tottenham Park in Savernake Forest for his brother @-@ in @-@ law Lord Bruce ( since remodelled ) . Kent picked it up in his designs for the Houses of Parliament , and it appears in Kent 's executed designs for the north front of Holkham Hall . The variant motif continued to be extensively used in Neoclassical architecture from the late 1760s . 
 = = Early Palladianism = = 
 In 1570 Palladio published his book , I Quattro Libri dell 'Architettura , which inspired architects across Europe . 
 During the 17th century , many architects studying in Italy learned of Palladio 's work . Foreign architects then returned home and adapted Palladio 's style to suit various climates , <unk> and personal tastes of their clients . Isolated forms of Palladianism throughout the world were brought about in this way . However , the Palladian style did not reach the zenith of its popularity until the 18th century , primarily in England , Wales , Scotland , Ireland and later North America . In Venice itself there was an early reaction to the excesses of Baroque architecture that manifested itself as a return to Palladian principles . The earliest neo @-@ <unk> there were the exact contemporaries , both trained up as masons , Domenico Rossi ( 1657 – 1737 ) and Andrea <unk> ( 1657 – 1737 ) . Tommaso <unk> , their biographer , proved to be the movement 's most able and learned proponent ; in his hands the visual inheritance of Palladio 's example became increasingly codified in correct rules and drifted towards neoclassicism . 
 The most influential follower of Palladio anywhere , however , was the Englishman Inigo Jones , who travelled throughout Italy with the ' Collector ' Earl of Arundel , annotating his copy of Palladio 's treatise , in 1613 – 14 . The " Palladianism " of Jones and his contemporaries and later followers was a style largely of facades , and the mathematical formulae dictating layout were not strictly applied . A handful of great country houses in England built between 1640 and c . 1680 , such as Wilton House , are in this Palladian style . These follow the great success of Jones ' Palladian designs for the Queen 's House at Greenwich and the Banqueting House at Whitehall , the uncompleted royal palace in London of King Charles I. 
 However , the Palladian designs advocated by Inigo Jones were too closely associated with the court of Charles I to survive the turmoil of the civil war . Following the Stuart restoration Jones 's Palladianism was eclipsed by the baroque designs of such architects as William Talman and Sir John Vanbrugh , Nicholas Hawksmoor , and even Jones ' pupil John Webb . 
 = = Neo @-@ Palladian = = 
 = = = English Palladian architecture = = = 
 The baroque style , popular in continental Europe , was never truly to the English taste . It was quickly superseded when , in the first quarter of the 18th century , four books were published in Britain which highlighted the simplicity and purity of classical architecture . These were : 
 Vitruvius Britannicus published by Colen Campbell , 1715 ( of which supplemental volumes appeared through the century ) 
 Palladio 's Four Books of Architecture translated by Giacomo Leoni , published from 1715 onwards . 
 Leone Battista Alberti 's De Re <unk> , translated by Giacomo Leoni , published 1726 . 
 The Designs of Inigo Jones ... with Some Additional Designs , published by William Kent , 2 vols . , 1727 ( A further volume , Some Designs of Mr. Inigo Jones and Mr. William Kent was published in 1744 by the architect John Vardy , an associate of Kent . ) 
 The most popular of these among the wealthy patrons of the day was the four @-@ volume Vitruvius Britannicus by Colen Campbell . Campbell was both an architect and a publisher . The book was basically a book of design containing architectural prints of British buildings , which had been inspired by the great architects from Vitruvius to Palladio ; at first mainly those of Inigo Jones , but the later tomes contained drawings and plans by Campbell and other 18th @-@ century architects . These four books greatly contributed to Palladian architecture becoming established in 18th @-@ century Britain . Their three authors became the most fashionable and sought after architects of the era . Due to his book Vitruvius Britannicus , Colen Campbell was chosen as the architect for banker Henry Hoare I 's Stourhead house ( illustration above ) , a masterpiece that became the inspiration for dozens of similar houses across England . 
 At the forefront of the new school of design was the aristocratic " architect earl " , Richard Boyle , 3rd Earl of Burlington ; in 1729 , he and William Kent , designed Chiswick House . This House was a reinterpretation of Palladio 's Villa Capra , but purified of 16th century elements and ornament . This severe lack of ornamentation was to be a feature of the Palladianism . In 1734 William Kent and Lord Burlington designed one of England 's finest examples of Palladian architecture with Holkham Hall in Norfolk . The main block of this house followed Palladio 's dictates quite closely , but Palladio 's low , often detached , wings of farm buildings were elevated in significance . Kent attached them to the design , banished the farm animals , and elevated the wings to almost the same importance as the house itself . These wings were often adorned with porticos and pediments , often resembling , as at the much later Kedleston Hall , small country houses in their own right . It was the development of the flanking wings that was to cause English Palladianism to evolve from being a pastiche of Palladio 's original work . 
 Architectural styles evolve and change to suit the requirements of each individual client . When in 1746 the Duke of Bedford decided to rebuild Woburn Abbey , he chose the Palladian style for the design , as this was now the most fashionable of the era . He selected architect Henry Flitcroft , a protege of Burlington . Flitcroft 's designs , while Palladian in nature , would not be recognised by Palladio himself . The central block is small , only three bays , the temple @-@ like portico is merely suggested , and it is closed . Two great flanking wings containing a vast suite of state rooms replace the walls or colonnades which should have connected to the farm buildings ; the farm buildings terminating the structure are elevated in height to match the central block , and given Palladian windows , to ensure they are seen as of Palladian design . This development of the style was to be repeated in countless houses , and town halls in Britain over one hundred years . Falling from favour during the Victorian era , it was revived by Sir Aston Webb for his refacing of Buckingham Palace in 1913 . Often the terminating blocks would have blind porticos and pilasters themselves , competing for attention with , or complementing the central block . This was all very far removed from the designs of Palladio two hundred years earlier . 
 English Palladian houses were now no longer the small but exquisite weekend retreats from which their Italian counterparts were conceived . They were no longer villas but " power houses " in Sir John Summerson 's term , the symbolic centres of power of the Whig " <unk> " that ruled Britain . As the Palladian style swept Britain , all thoughts of mathematical proportion were swept away . Rather than square houses with supporting wings , these buildings had the length of the façade as their major consideration ; long houses often only one room deep were deliberately deceitful in giving a false impression of size . 
 = = = Irish Palladianism = = = 
 During the Palladian revival period in Ireland , even quite modest mansions were cast in a neo @-@ Palladian mould . Palladian architecture in Ireland subtly differs from that in England . While adhering as in other countries to the basic ideals of Palladio , it is often truer to them – perhaps because it was often designed by architects who had come directly from mainland Europe , and therefore were not influenced by the evolution that Palladianism was undergoing in Britain . Whatever the reason , Palladianism still had to be adapted for the wetter , colder weather . 
 One of the most pioneering Irish architects was Sir Edward Lovett Pearce ( 1699 – 1733 ) , who became one of the leading advocates of Palladianism in Ireland . A cousin of Sir John Vanbrugh , he was originally one of his pupils , but rejecting the baroque , he spent three years studying architecture in France and Italy , before returning home to Ireland . His most important Palladian work is the former Irish Houses of Parliament in Dublin . He was a prolific architect who also designed the south façade of Drumcondra House in 1727 and Cashel Palace in 1728 . 
 One of the most notable examples of Palladianism in Ireland is the Castletown House , near Dublin . Designed by the Italian architect Alessandro Galilei ( 1691 – 1737 ) , it is perhaps the only Palladian house in Ireland to have been built with Palladio 's mathematical ratios , and one of the three Irish mansions which claim to have inspired the design of the White House in Washington . 
 Other examples include <unk> , designed by Richard Cassels , an architect of German origin , who also designed the Palladian Rotunda Hospital in Dublin , and Florence Court , County Fermanagh . Irish Palladian Country houses often feature robust Rococo plasterwork , frequently executed by the <unk> brothers , an Irish speciality , which is far more flamboyant than the interiors of their contemporaries in England . So much of Dublin was built in the 18th century that it set a Georgian stamp on the city ; however arising out of bad planning and poverty , until recently Dublin was one of the few cities where fine 18th @-@ century housing could be seen in ruinous condition . Elsewhere in Ireland after 1922 , the lead was removed from the roofs of unoccupied Palladian houses for its value as scrap , with the houses often abandoned owing to excessive roof @-@ rate based taxes . Some roofless Palladian houses can still be found in the depopulated Irish countryside . 
 = = = North American Palladianism = = = 
 Palladio 's influence in North America is evident almost from the beginning of architect @-@ designed building there though the Anglo @-@ Irish philosopher , George Berkeley , may have been America 's pioneering Palladian . Acquiring a large farmhouse in Middletown , near Newport in the late 1720s , Berkeley dubbed it " Whitehall " and improved it with a Palladian doorcase derived from William Kent 's Designs of Inigo Jones ( 1727 ) , which he may have brought with him from London ; Palladio 's work was included in the library of a thousand volumes he amassed for the purpose and sent to Yale College . In 1749 Peter Harrison adopted the design of his Redwood Library in Newport , Rhode Island , more directly from Palladio 's Quattro Libri , while his Brick Market , also in Newport , of a decade later is also Palladian in conception . 
 The Hammond @-@ Harwood House in Annapolis , Maryland ( illustration ) is an example of Palladian architecture in the United States . It is the only existing work of colonial academic architecture that was principally designed from a plate in Andrea Palladio ’ s Quattro Libri . The house was designed by the architect William Buckland in 1773 – 74 for wealthy farmer Matthias Hammond of Anne Arundel County , Maryland . It was modeled on the design of the Villa Pisani in <unk> , Italy in Book II , Chapter XIV of I Quattro Libri dell ’ <unk> . 
 The politician and architect Thomas Jefferson ( 1743 – 1826 ) once referred to Palladio 's Quattro Libri as his bible . Jefferson acquired an intense appreciation of Palladio 's architectural concepts , and his designs for his own beloved Monticello , the James Barbour Barboursville estate , Virginia State Capitol , and the University of Virginia were based on drawings from Palladio 's book . Realizing the powerful political significance pertaining to ancient Roman buildings , Jefferson designed his civic buildings in the Palladian style . Monticello ( remodelled between 1796 and 1808 ) is quite clearly based on Palladio 's Villa Capra , however , with modifications , in a style which is described in America today as Colonial Georgian . Jefferson 's Pantheon , or Rotunda , at the University of Virginia is undeniably Palladian in concept and style . 
 In Virginia and Carolina , the Palladian manner is epitomised in numerous Tidewater plantation houses , such as Stratford Hall or Westover Plantation , or Drayton Hall near Charleston . These examples are all classic American colonial examples of a Palladian taste that was transmitted through engravings , for the benefit of masons — and patrons , too — who had no first @-@ hand experience of European building practice . A feature of American Palladianism was the re @-@ emergence of the great portico , which again , as in Italy , fulfilled the need of protection from the sun ; the portico in various forms and size became a dominant feature of American colonial architecture . In the north European countries the portico had become a mere symbol , often closed , or merely hinted at in the design by pilasters , and sometimes in very late examples of English Palladianism adapted to become a porte @-@ cochere ; in America , the Palladian portico regained its full glory . 
 One house which clearly shows this Palladian @-@ Gibbs influence is Mount Airy , in Richmond County , Virginia , built in 1758 – 62 . 
 At Westover the north and south entrances , made of imported Portland stone , were patterned after a plate in William Salmon 's Palladio Londinensis ( 1734 ) . 
 The distinctive feature of Drayton Hall , its two @-@ storey portico , was derived directly from Palladio . 
 The neoclassical presidential mansion , the White House in Washington , was inspired by Irish Palladianism . Both Castle Coole and Richard Cassel 's Leinster House in Dublin claim to have inspired the architect James Hoban , who designed the executive mansion , built between 1792 and 1800 . Hoban , born in Callan , County Kilkenny , in 1762 , studied architecture in Dublin , where Leinster House ( built c . 1747 ) was one of the finest buildings at the time . The White House is more neoclassical than Palladian ; particularly the South façade , which closely resembles James Wyatt 's 1790 design for Castle Coole , also in Ireland . Castle Coole is , in the words of the architectural commentator Gervase Jackson @-@ Stops , " A culmination of the Palladian traditions , yet strictly neoclassical in its chaste ornament and noble austerity . " 
 One of the adaptations made to Palladianism in America was that the piano nobile now tended to be placed on the ground floor , rather than above a service floor , as was the tradition in Europe . This service floor , if it existed at all , was now a discreet semi @-@ basement . This negated the need for an ornate external staircase leading to the main entrance as in the more original Palladian designs . This would also be a feature of the neoclassical style that followed Palladianism . 
 The only two houses in the United States — from the English colonial period ( 1607 – 1776 ) — that can be definitively attributed to designs from the Four Books of Architecture are architect William Buckland 's Hammond @-@ Harwood House ( 1774 ) in Annapolis , Maryland , and Thomas Jefferson 's first Monticello . The design source for the Hammond @-@ Harwood House is Villa Pisani at <unk> ( Book II , Chapter XIV ) , and for the first Monticello ( 1770 ) the design source is Villa <unk> at Piombino <unk> ( Book II , Chapter XIV ) . Thomas Jefferson later covered this façade with additions so that the Hammond @-@ Harwood House remains the only pure and pristine example of direct modeling in America today . 
 Because of its later development , Palladian architecture in Canada is rare . One notable example is the Nova Scotia Legislature building , completed in 1819 . 
 The Center for Palladian Studies in America , Inc . , a non @-@ profit membership organization , was founded in 1979 to research and promote understanding of Palladio ’ s influence in the United States . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the 1770s , in Britain , such architects as Robert Adam and Sir William Chambers were in huge popular demand , but they were now drawing on a great variety of classical sources , including ancient Greece , so much so that their forms of architecture were eventually defined as neoclassical rather than Palladian . In Europe , the Palladian revival ended by the end of the 18th century . In North America , Palladianism lingered a little longer ; Thomas Jefferson 's floor plans and elevations owe a great deal to Palladio 's Quattro Libri . The term " Palladian " today is often misused , and tends to describe a building with any classical pretensions . There was , however , a revival of Palladian ideas amongst the colonial revivalist of the early 20th century , and the strain has been unbroken , even through the modernist period . 
 In the mid @-@ 20th century , the originality of the approach of the architectural historian Colin Rowe had the effect of re @-@ situating the assessment of modern architecture within history and acknowledged the Palladian architecture as an active influence . In the later 20th century , when Rowe 's influence had spread worldwide , this approach had become a key element in the process of architectural and urban design . If " the presence of the past " was evident in the work of many architects in the late 20th century , from James Stirling to Aldo Rossi , Robert Venturi , Oswald Matthias <unk> , Peter <unk> , Michael Graves and others , this was largely due to the influence of Rowe . Colin Rowe 's unorthodox and non @-@ chronological view of history then made it possible for him to develop theoretical formulations such as his famous essay " The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa " ( 1947 ) in which he theorised that there were compositional " rules " in Palladio ’ s villas that could be demonstrated to correspond to similar " rules " in Le Corbusier ’ s villas at Poissy and <unk> . This approach enabled Rowe to elaborate an astonishingly fresh and provocative trans @-@ historical assessment of both Palladio and Le Corbusier , in which the architecture of both was assessed not in chronological time , but side by side in the present moment . 
 = Hurricane Flossie ( 2007 ) = 
 Hurricane Flossie was a powerful Pacific tropical cyclone that brought squally weather and light damage to Hawaii in August 2007 . The sixth named storm , second hurricane , first and only major hurricane of the annual hurricane season , Flossie originated from a tropical wave that emerged off Africa on July 21 . After traversing the tropical Atlantic , the wave crossed Central America and entered the eastern Pacific on August 1 . There , a favorable environment allowed it to become a tropical depression and a tropical storm shortly thereafter on August 8 . 
 Tracking generally west @-@ southwestward , the storm entered a stage of rapid deepening on August 10 , despite forecasts of an only marginally favorable environment . On August 11 , Flossie became a major hurricane , reaching its peak intensity with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . With cooler sea surface temperatures and high wind shear in its path , the hurricane weakened steadily , deteriorating to a tropical depression by August 16 . The storm 's center became devoid of strong thunderstorms later that day , making Flossie no longer qualified as a tropical cyclone . 
 As a strong storm , Flossie prompted hurricane and tropical storm warnings for the Big Island of Hawaii . Residents were warned by emergency officials to prepare for over a foot of rainfall and wind gusts well within tropical storm force . However , impact was negligible ; the peak wind gust on the Big Island of Hawaii reached 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , and rainfall totals remained below 6 in ( 150 mm ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The formation of Hurricane Flossie is attributed to a poorly defined tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean on July 21 . Tracking westward , the disturbance remained disorganized and lacked a significant amount of convection – shower and thunderstorm activity – near its center . The wave crossed Central America and entered the eastern Pacific on August 1 , where it was met with a much more favorable atmospheric environment for organization and intensification . A consolidated area of shower and thunderstorms developed near the center while the system was situated just south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on August 2 , though no further development occurred thereafter . Two days later , an increase in deep convection was observed on conventional satellite imagery , but like the first , no further organization occurred . On August 6 , yet another burst of convection developed near the low @-@ level center , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) contemplated classifying the disturbance at that time , but yet another wane in shower and thunderstorm activity deferred this . The disturbance tracked westward through August 8 , and following another deep burst of convection that persisted itself for an appreciable amount of time , had finally gathered enough organization to be classified as a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on August 8 . At this time , the depression was situated roughly 1 @,@ 700 mi ( 2 @,@ 700 km ) east @-@ southeast of the Big Island of Hawaii . Within an environment characterized by low vertical wind shear as a result of an anticyclone aloft and warm sea surface temperatures , Tropical Depression Six @-@ E continued its organizational trend , and was declared a tropical storm – earning the name Flossie – six hours after formation . 
 Located on the southwestern periphery of a subtropical ridge situated over southwestern Mexico , Flossie tracked generally west @-@ southwestward after formation while intensifying . Upper @-@ level outflow began to expand in all quadrants of the cyclone and spiral bands became prominent around the center on August 9 . An eyewall and associated mid @-@ level eye @-@ feature was observed on microwave imagery , but was obscured on conventional satellite imagery , that evening . Following a series of satellite intensity estimates and the presence of an eye on visible and infrared satellite imagery , Flossie was upgraded to a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale at 1200 UTC on August 10 . Despite forecasts of an increasingly unfavorable environment as the cyclone moved towards the Hawaiian Islands , Flossie continued to intensify . The hurricane unexpectedly began a period of rapid deepening during the overnight hours of August 10 , and by 0600 UTC on August 11 , Flossie attained major hurricane intensity – a Category 3 hurricane – with a quickly falling barometric pressure . Early morning satellite images revealed a 15 nmi ( 28 km ) eye with cloud tops cooler than − 75 ° C ( − 103 ° F ) surrounding the feature . Further intensification ensued as the storm entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) ' s area of responsibility that morning , and Flossie was upgraded to a Category 4 hurricane by 1200 UTC . Two hours later , the cyclone attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 949 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 02 inHg ) , the strongest tropical cyclone of the 2007 Pacific hurricane season . 
 After peak intensity , Flossie was forecast to gradually weaken as wind shear increased . However , despite prediction of such , Flossie did not weaken at all and in fact remained a Category 4 hurricane for 36 continuous hours . In its discussion during the morning hours of August 13 , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center stated that Flossie " was not willing to give up . " By the pre @-@ dawn hours of August 14 , however , the cyclone began to feel the impacts of increasingly cool sea surface temperatures and higher southerly wind shear . While outflow in the northern semicircle of Flossie remained exceptional , outflow in the southern half of the circulation began to dissipate ; additionally , the southern flank of the eyewall began to fall apart . An aircraft reconnaissance flight into the system revealed surface winds of 122 mph ( 196 km / h ) and warming cloud tops , and Flossie was downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane . Further passes through the eyewall of the storm depicted ever @-@ decreasing surface winds and organization with Flossie , and the storm was downgraded once again , to a Category 2 hurricane , by 1200 UTC as it passed south of the Hawaiian Islands . Over 26 kn ( 30 mph ) of vertical wind shear eroded the remainder of the storm 's eyewall on August 15 ; as such , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center downgraded the cyclone to a tropical storm . Further weakening to tropical depression status occurred by 0600 UTC on August 16 as shower and thunderstorm activity over the center faded away . By 1200 UTC , a lone low @-@ level swirl remained on satellite imagery , and the storm dissipated thereafter , while located southwest of the Hawaiian Islands . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Shortly after entering the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , the organization issued a hurricane watch for the Big Island of Hawaii . Within a few days , as the hurricane tracked slightly further to the north and its wind radii expanded , a tropical storm warning was overlaid on the hurricane warning . Heavy rainfall and flooding were expected to be the primary concern ; as such , flash flood watches were issued and officials warned residents of the potential for 10 to 15 in ( 250 to 380 mm ) of rainfall . Governor Linda Lingle declared a state of emergency for the Island of Hawaii in advance of the storm , where residents were advised to stock up on necessary supplies . 
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) dispatched 20 transportation , public works and health experts to the region . Emergency shelters were opened , though were used little . The threat of the storm led to the closure of schools , including the University of Hawaii at Hilo and Hawaii Community College , forcing an estimated 26 @,@ 000 college students to remain home . Some libraries , parks , private schools , banks and other businesses were also closed . Non @-@ essential state employees were advised to remain at home , and emergency workers were mobilized to quickly assist in the aftermath of the storm . In advance of the storm , many tourists canceled reservations . 
 Forecast heavy rains over the southeast @-@ facing slopes of the Big Island failed to occur , as Flossie turned westward before low @-@ level southeasterly winds had a chance to produce mountain @-@ enhanced rainfall . However , north and northeast @-@ facing slopes received minimal rainfall ; 1 to 2 in ( 0 @.@ 025 to 0 @.@ 051 m ) of rain was reported in the Hamakua , South Hilo , and Puna Districts . Elsewhere , 1 to 3 in ( 25 to 76 mm ) of precipitation fell at Maui , and 2 to 4 in ( 51 to 102 mm ) fell at the <unk> Range on Oahu , although no significant winds or flooding was reported . Wave action affected the southeast @-@ facing shores , also with little impact . The most significant waves were estimated at 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in height , while sustained winds of at least 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) were reported at South Point . A large lava bench collapsed into the ocean on August 13 , which may have been related to the hurricane 's passage , or alternatively , a recent 5 @.@ 4 magnitude earthquake . 
 = The Last Remnant = 
 The Last Remnant ( <unk> , Rasuto <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for the Xbox 360 . The game had a worldwide release on November 20 , 2008 , and was also released for Microsoft Windows in March 2009 , and received an international release through digital retailer Steam in April 2009 . A PlayStation 3 version was originally announced , but was never released . The game is set in a fictional world divided into multiple city @-@ states inhabited by four different species and whose past includes conflicts over " Remnants , " magical artifacts of varying forms . The player takes the role of Rush Sykes , a young man searching for his sister that becomes entangled in a secret war . It features a unique battle system in which the player command multiple groups , or " unions " , of characters rather than individual units . 
 The game was directed by Hiroshi Takai and was the first game developed by Square Enix to use the Unreal Engine 3 . It was intended by Square Enix president Yoichi Wada to " become a cornerstone for [ their ] worldwide strategy " . Art direction was overseen by chief artist Kimihiko <unk> and art producer Yusuke Naora . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Tsuyoshi Sekito with assistance by Yasuhiro Yamanaka . It was later released as a three @-@ disc album . The design and dialogue of the game were created to appeal to international players as well as Japanese players , and the motion capture for the main characters , including the lip @-@ syncing , was done with Western , English @-@ speaking actors . 
 The game received a weak reception by reviewers , though it was better received by Japanese reviewers than by Western ones . A common complaint , especially in the original Xbox 360 release , was of graphical problems including low framerates and " texture pop @-@ in " where higher resolution textures would suddenly replace lower ones several seconds after a scene had started . Other issues included complaints about the game 's storyline and battle system , though these were not as universal . The Last Remnant received praise for its art direction and music . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is split between a world area , a battle area , and a world map . The player controls Rush Sykes , the protagonist , and moves him around the world screen within an area , with the camera floating behind and slightly above him . Within the world screen , the player may talk to NPCs , enter buildings and other areas , or exit to the map screen . The map screen allows instant travel between different cities and areas , or between different areas within a city . The battle screen is shown only during combat , and is a three @-@ dimensional area like the world screen with a setting reminiscent of the location the player is at in the world . There are no random encounters ; instead , the player enters a battle and separate battle screen when they touch an enemy on the main world screen . The player may choose to enter a battle with multiple enemies at once by activating a " time @-@ shift " system in which time slows down and they may run up to multiple enemies before commencing the battle . 
 The game features a battle system labeled by director Hiroshi Takai as a " turn @-@ based , command @-@ based system using symbol encounters . " During a battle , each enemy from the world screen is represented by a group , or " union " , of enemies ranging from one to five individual units ; similarly the player 's forces are composed of multiple unions of three to five units each . The skills of the units in the player 's unions , which include both story characters and <unk> units that do not appear outside of battle , vary according to different parameters . One parameter is the " morale " bar , which is affected by the events in battle and can have positive or negative effects on the battle forces . Each unit can also learn different attacks , which are divided into categories such as blade attacks and healing magic . At the beginning of each turn the player selects from a group of choices what attack types each union will perform ; the player is unable to select the individual attack of each unit . Special attacks require " action points " , which continually accrue during each battle . The player selects at the beginning of each turn which enemy union each of their unions will attack . As the enemy makes their selections at the same time , it is possible for a union to be " deadlocked " , or forced to fight a different union than the player or enemy had selected . When multiple unions are deadlocked onto the same enemy , some of the unions can flank the enemy or attack from the rear for extra damage . 
 In addition to battles , there are numerous quests which the player may undertake . Many of these quests take the player to an area immediately upon acceptance and return them once completed , while " guild quests " do not require acceptance and may be turned in by the player whenever the accomplishments listed in the quest are completed . Rush and the other units may equip many different weapons and items . Rush 's equipment can be upgraded to many different options , while other units request materials to upgrade their own equipment , which can be purchased at stores , acquired in battles , or found in the world area using a creature called Mr. Diggs . Mr. Diggs can be upgraded as well to find more or higher quality materials . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game is set in a fictional world featuring a number of distinct humanoid races : the <unk> , human in appearance , the Yamas , strong fish @-@ like people , the <unk> , small reptilians , and the <unk> , feline people with four arms . The world itself is broken up into multiple city @-@ states , each with their own unique culture . The story of the game revolves around " Remnants " , mysterious and coveted ancient artifacts of varying shapes and sizes which possess magic powers and have been the cause of several wars throughout the game 's history . Each Remnant is " bound " to a specific person , who is the only one who can then use their power ; powerful Remnants that remain unbound for too long have the potential to cause a " collapse " and spawn monsters . As Remnants come in varying forms , all cities throughout the world have at least one that their ruler is bound to that assist to govern and bring peace to their assigned realm . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist is Rush Sykes , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Mitra boy from a peaceful island . His 14 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Irina , is kidnapped at the start of the game , and finding her is Rush 's impetus for leaving the island . He meets and joins David Nassau , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Mitra ruler of the city @-@ state of Athlum , and his four generals : the 41 @-@ year @-@ old Mitra Emma Honeywell , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Yama <unk> , the 55 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> <unk> and the 200 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> <unk> . These characters can be joined by more than a hundred of other characters , many of whom are found through quests , while others can be hired at guilds . Every character has their own name and skillset , though the main characters have special additional skills . The main villain is the Conqueror , a Mitra who during the course of the game attacks many city @-@ states of the world with his army . He is assisted in regard , first in secret and then openly , by Wilfred Hermeien , an adult Mitra who is both the leader of the city @-@ state of <unk> with the ruling council of all of the city @-@ states and Wagram , a powerful Mitra sorcerer . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with Rush running through a forest , trying to find his sister Irina , who the player later learns has been kidnapped . He comes across an army led by David opposing an army of monsters and at the battle 's conclusion rushes forward as he sees Emma in the crowd . After he generates a powerful shield with his Remnant pendant , he is interrogated by David and his generals , who decide to help him find Irina . When investigating a Remnant that is about to collapse , Rush and company come across Wagram and Irina , who escape . After chasing Wagram and Irina for several missions , the group attends the Congress meeting of the leaders of the city @-@ states in Elysion , home to the Ark Remnant , which can transport users to the Sacred Lands . The city is also home to the Academy , a research institution devoted to studying Remnants and the place where Rush 's parents work . The Conqueror arrives at the Congress , binds the Ark and demands to be given a massive Remnant of the type that each city @-@ state has . After finding only Rush 's mother , the group learns that the Conqueror , with his demands rejected , has started a war and is marching his army with the support of the " God @-@ Emperor " , a 1000 @-@ year @-@ old legendary figure . 
 David decides to take the lead in opposing the Conqueror in hopes of earning independence for Athlum , which is currently a vassal state to the city of <unk> . The party succeeds in stopping the Conqueror 's army from attacking <unk> , but the Conqueror himself attacks Athlum in their absence . He kills Emma , who had remained behind to defend the city and takes the massive Remnant of Athlum , shrinking it to a normal @-@ sized sword . The party then returns to Elysion to rescue Irina from Wagram . Irina is revealed to have a special power , that of unbinding bound Remnants , and it was for this reason that she was kidnapped . They discover that Hermeien is trying to use the Conqueror and Wagram to spark distrust in the people for Remnants and the city @-@ states ' ability to control them , so that he can then use Irina and her power to prop himself up as supreme ruler . While the party are successful in retaking Irina and killing Hermeien , Wagram escapes while revealing that he and the Conqueror never planned to support Hermeien . Confronted by the Conqueror , Irina uses <unk> 's Remnant to protect her brother , destroying half of the city in the process . 
 Four months later , the player learns that the council city @-@ states are now trying to find Remnants all around the world to use to fight the Conqueror , who is in turn binding and transforming the Remnants of the city @-@ states , even those that are already bound . Rush and Irina 's parents , once found , reveal that their research at the academy had been to create tablets that can transform Remnants and it is through one of these that Wagram stole that the Conqueror is able to do so . When the party travels to the God @-@ Emperor 's city , <unk> , to try to determine why he is supporting the Conqueror , they find Wagram , who tells them that the Conqueror is a Remnant himself . Wagram and the God @-@ Emperor are supporting him in his quest to destroy the people of the world , who are misusing Remnants and destroying the balance of the world . 
 The group heads to Elysion , which is under attack by the Conqueror 's forces . The Conqueror ascends the Ark and binds it so that no one can follow him ; after defeating his army , the protagonists find a second Ark , even though no duplicate Remnants have ever been found . After defeating Wagram , the party chases the Conqueror through the Sacred Lands , which are revealed to be the birthplace of Remnants and confronts him . He informs them that he is trying to release Remnants from the control of man and that the task was originally supposed to be Rush 's , as he is also a Remnant . He believes that their purpose is to take back the Remnants from the world that in his opinion is misusing them for warfare and destruction and allow them in turn to destroy the people of the world . Rush disagrees and instead destroys the source of the Remnants , sacrificing himself . The game ends with all of the Remnants disappearing around the world , but after the credits , Rush is heard talking with the Conqueror , saying : " I 'm going back . They 're waiting for me . " 
 = = Development = = 
 The Last Remnant was created by developers who had previously worked on games in the SaGa and Final Fantasy series . It was directed by Hiroshi Takai and produced by Nobuyuki Ueda . The game was written by Masato Yagi and Miwa Shoda whose work was based on a scenario concept by executive producer Akitoshi Kawazu . Kimihiko <unk> was the chief artist , while Yusuke Naora served as both art producer and character designer . The game was the first game by Square Enix to use the Unreal Engine 3 . Because they used a licensed engine rather than making their own , the production time it took to see graphical resources onscreen was cut significantly , allowing the team to begin illustrating and experimenting at an early stage . The decision to use a licensed engine , rather than develop their own as was traditional at Square Enix , was made due to concerns in the company of the rising production costs of making a game , and the direct development time savings possible from using an existing engine . Over a year after the game was released , on February 17 , 2010 , Square @-@ Enix 's chief technology officer Julien Merceron claimed in an interview that most of the game 's perceived technical shortcomings were caused by a decision to use the Unreal Engine to try to replace having as many skilled programmers as would be used otherwise . 
 The development team planned to distinguish The Last Remnant from the Final Fantasy series and other role @-@ playing games through its focus on the battle system . The art direction of the game was focused on making all of the characters stand out on the battlefield , and in making the Remnants stand out in the world screens . The cities were designed to not look very fantastical , so as to make the Remnants more prominent , and were designed early on in the development process to give the impression that the people of the city were living both literally and figuratively under the power of the gigantic Remnants . The game marked several firsts for Square Enix , as it was their first game to be released on the same day in both Japan and internationally , as well as the first to use motion captures of Western actors . This resulted in the characters ' lips speaking English synced to the spoken dialogue , rather than Japanese . The game had always been intended to be released simultaneously worldwide and was to be targeted to players worldwide , which impacted the character design and art direction . The design and dialogue were created to appeal to international players as well as Japanese players , rather than being focused on the norms of the Japanese video game market alone . 
 The Last Remnant was announced at a press conference at Shinjuku , Tokyo on May 10 , 2007 . It was shown as a playable demo at the Tokyo Game Show in September 2008 . It was then released on the Xbox 360 on November 20 , 2008 , and released in late March 2009 for PC . The PC version of the game featured numerous improvements and changes from the original , including the integration of the downloadable content from the 360 version into the main game , enhanced graphical settings , a " Turbo Mode " that increases battle speed , and a New Game Plus option that allows the player to start a new game with the gold and unique items from their first play @-@ through . Though originally announced to be released on the PlayStation 3 at the same time as the Xbox 360 , no PlayStation version of the game has been released . Square Enix has not commented on why , though director Hiroshi Takai has said that he found developing for the 360 " a lot easier " than for the PlayStation 3 . The PlayStation 3 version has remained with a " to be determined " release date on Square Enix 's official Japanese website . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for the game was composed by Tsuyoshi Sekito , with assistance from Yasuhiro Yamanaka , who composed 10 of the 97 total tracks and co @-@ composed 2 . Prior to The Last Remnant , Sekito had spent the previous decade primarily arranging the work of other composers for remakes and re @-@ releases of various Square Enix games such as the Final Fantasy series and the Mana series . The soundtrack features the heavy use of orchestral elements , arranged for orchestration by Natsumi Kameoka , and guitar playing by Sekito . The orchestrated pieces were played by musicians from several different orchestras , rather than by a single group . Unlike most role @-@ playing games , the battle music was designed by Sekito to switch between three songs depending on how well the player was doing in the battle . A soundtrack album was released on December 10 , 2008 , through Sony Music Distribution . It contains 97 tracks across three discs , and has a total length of 3 : 10 : 21 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Square Enix reported that the game had sold 580 @,@ 000 copies , including both PC and Xbox 360 versions , by March 31 , 2009 , which was less than two weeks after the game was first released on PC . By January 2016 , the PC version of the game had sold over 800 @,@ 000 copies , according to Steam Spy . The Last Remnant received a largely mixed reception . It received a more positive reception in Japan than elsewhere , something which the developers credit to different styles of reviewing between cultures . They also felt that the Japanese reviewers scored the game too high . It received a 38 / 40 from Famitsu magazine ; the review praises the battle system for its unique , massive @-@ scale battles reminiscent of Romancing SaGa but refined to a wholly new class ; however , they criticized the learning curve as well , the length of battles , and the inability to choose specific skills for individual units . Famitsu later gave the game their 2008 " Rookie Title Grand @-@ Prize " award . 
 A common complaint from reviewers was graphical issues . IGN stated in its review of the Xbox 360 version that the game suffered from extreme technical problems , while GameTrailers named the " persistent graphical issues " as one of the Xbox 360 version 's weakest points . GameSpot , IGN , and 1UP.com cited in their Xbox 360 version reviews abysmal frame @-@ rate problems and awful " texture pop @-@ in " , where the textures were displayed as low resolution for several seconds before being replaced with higher @-@ resolution ones , as some of its main failings . However , all three review sites gave a higher score for the PC version , citing drastically improved graphical performance , but still with texture pop @-@ in and slow loading times when moving between areas and when entering or exiting a battle as well as unskippable cut scenes . Other issues raised by reviewers included " cluttered screens and annoying ' quests ' " noted by GamePro , " over the top " and stereotypical characters opined by Game Informer , a poor and generic story according to IGN and 1UP , and long loading screens and cutscenes which were criticisms brought by G4 , 1UP , and the Australian Official Xbox Magazine . 
 Another common complaint among reviewers was the battle system , which were described as " repetitive " by GamePro , frustrating by IGN in their Xbox review , and " boring " and the worst part of the game by 1UP . G4 also criticized the battle system , saying that the game played itself . This criticism was not universal , as GameTrailers cited its " unique battle system " as providing " a lot to enjoy " , IGN called it " the most interesting part of The Last Remnant " in their PC review , and GameSpot called it " intriguing " and especially fun in the larger @-@ scale battles . The game 's visual style was praised across many reviews , such as those by GameTrailers , 1UP , and GamePro , who described the style as " an innovative ' East @-@ meets @-@ West ' " , while GameSpot called it a " distinctive fantasy world " that is " beautifully constructed " . The music was also a source of praise , and was noted as such in the IGN reviews and the GameSpot reviews , which called it an " excellent symphonic soundtrack " with terrific melodies . GameSpot , in their review , also praised the game 's story as " epic " , in contrast to many of the other reviews , though they noted that Rush wasn 't " the most interesting leading man " and preferred when the story focused on the Conqueror . 
 = Ministry of Justice ( Soviet Union ) = 
 The Ministry of Justice of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) ( Russian : Министерство <unk> СССР , <unk> <unk> SSSR ) , formed on 15 March 1946 , was one of the most important government offices in the Soviet Union . It was formerly ( until 1946 ) known as the People 's Commissariat for Justice ( Russian : Народный комиссариат <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> 'i ) abbreviated as <unk> ( <unk> ) . The Ministry , at the All @-@ Union ( USSR @-@ wide ) level , was established on 6 July 1923 , after the signing of the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR , and was in turn based upon the People 's Commissariat for Justice of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) formed in 1917 . The Ministry was led by the Minister of Justice , prior to 1946 a Commissar , who was nominated by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , and was a member of the Council of Ministers . 
 The Ministry of Justice was responsible for courts , prisons , and <unk> . Further responsibilities included criminal justice policy , sentencing policy , and prevention of re @-@ offending in the USSR . The Ministry was organised into All @-@ Union and Union departments . The All @-@ Union level ministries were divided into separate organisations in the Republican , Autonomous Oblast , and provincial level . The leadership of the Ministry of Justice came from notable Soviet law organisations from around the country . 
 = = Duties and responsibilities = = 
 According to a decree from 1972 , the Ministry of Justice prepared proposals for the codification of law ; it carried out methodological management of legal work in the national economy . The Ministry directed and coordinated the work of state bodies and public organisations to promote legal knowledge and to clarify the law among the population about the judicial agencies , as well as general management of the civil registry , state , and legal profession . The Ministry was liable to the Party , the state , and the people . The Ministry 's main goal was to strengthen socialist legality and the rule of law within Soviet judicial institutions . 
 The Ministry was organised into one All @-@ Union ( USSR @-@ wide ) ministry and 15 Union ministries . The leadership of the ministry consisted of notable figures of the judicial authority of the Soviet Republics , the military tribunals , Bar members , notaries , and other judicial institutions . The leadership 's task was to organise and prepare proposals for the codification of legislation . The organisational leadership , and the courts , had full control over the republican , autonomous , and provincial levels of government and the party . On 1 February 1923 the All @-@ Union People 's Commissariat for Justice was dissolved , and its responsibilities , duties , and functions were given to the Procurator General . The Department of the Procuracy of the Ministry of Justice , headed by a republican Procurator General , was responsible for limiting the powers of the Procurator General . On the grounds of stopping " unnecessary centralisation " , the Ministry of Justice was dissolved both on the Union and the All @-@ Union level . The functions of the Ministry was then handed to the Supreme Court and the Legal Commission of the Council of Ministers . The Ministry was reestablished in 1970 by the Alexei Kosygin government . Extensive regulations on the Ministry were created by the Council of Ministers . The Ministry 's main task was to direct and supervise judicially organs , both at the Union and All @-@ Union level , according to a decree from 1975 . 
 The main task of the Ministry was to develop proposals on issues linked to the judicial system ; the election of judges , elect the judiciary , organising the judiciary , studying and summarising of the jurisprudence in coordination with the Supreme Court , and to organise work for the maintenance of judicial statistics . According to Soviet law , the Ministry could propose various measures to improve the Soviet court system . According to Article 1 of the People 's Commissariat for Justice , the commissariat 's main task was to supervise the legal activities of the Soviet central agencies and the people 's procurator . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The Ministry of Justice was headed by a Minister who was elected by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet between seasons , and authenticated by a Supreme Soviet convocation . Deputy Ministers were elected by the Council of Ministers ; allocation of the deputies was decided by the Ministry of Justice . Each deputy usually headed his or her own department . The minister , the deputies , and other senior officials formed the leadership circle , known as the Board of the Ministry of Justice . The members of this board were approved by the Council of Ministers . The Board of the Ministry held meetings regularly to discuss legal matters nationwide . Decisions made by the board were as a rule implemented nationwide . If the board disagreed they sought the assistance of the Council of Ministers to solve the problem . 
 The structure and number of employees of the Ministry were approved by the Council of Ministers . Staffing of the central apparatus of the Ministry , as well as provisions of the departments and divisions , were approved by the Ministry of Justice . The seal of the Ministry of Justice was the state emblem of the USSR . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1922 Vladimir Lenin <unk> the People 's Commissariat for Justice for not dealing firmly enough with political opponents of the Bolsheviks and allowing capitalism to develop outside the framework of state capitalism outlined by the New Economic Policy . Until 1936 the People 's Commissariat for Justice existed only in the Union Republican level . Nikolai Krylenko , the first People 's Commissar of Justice , said in January 1933 that Soviet law waxed indignant about the leniency of some Soviet officials who objected to the infamous " five ears law " : 
 We are sometimes up against a flat refusal to apply this law rigidly . One People 's Judge told me flatly that he could never bring himself to throw someone in jail for stealing four ears . What we 're up against here is a deep prejudice , imbibed with their mother 's milk ... a mistaken belief that people should be tried in accordance not with the Party 's political guidelines but with considerations of " higher justice " . 
 According to <unk> <unk> , Nikita Khrushchev abolished the Ministry during the height of the Khrushchev Thaw in an attempt to restore the " Leninist norms of socialist legality " which had disappeared under Joseph Stalin 's rule . Khrushchev tried to make the Soviet court more independent from central authority by enforcing the 1936 constitution on the country 's judicial branch . This would , according to Khrushchev , give the courts further independence from the central authority . The functions , duties , and responsibilities of the Ministry were reassigned to the Supreme Soviet and the Legal Commission of the Council of Ministers at all levels of Soviet society . By the 1960s it became clear that these reforms were not working as planned , and the ministry was reestablished by the Alexei Kosygin government in 1970 . The Ministry , along with the majority of other Soviet ministries , was supposed to be abolished in December 1991 on the orders of the State Soviet , this did not happen , and the Soviet Union dissolved itself before this date . 
 = = Commissars and ministers = = 
 The following persons headed the Commissariat / Ministry as commissars ( narkoms ) , ministers , and deputy ministers of the Soviet era : 
 = HD 28185 = 
 HD 28185 is a yellow dwarf star similar to our Sun located about 138 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation Eridanus . The designation HD 28185 refers to its entry in the Henry Draper catalogue . The star is known to possess one long @-@ period extrasolar planet . 
 = = Distance and visibility = = 
 According to measurements from the Hipparcos astrometric satellite , HD 28185 has a parallax of 23 @.@ 62 milliarcseconds , which corresponds to a distance of 42 parsecs ( 138 light @-@ years ) . Since the star is located further than 25 parsecs from Earth , it is not listed in the Gliese Catalogue of Nearby Stars . With an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 81 , the star is not visible with the naked eye , though it can be seen using binoculars . 
 = = Stellar characteristics = = 
 HD 28185 is similar to our Sun in terms of mass , radius , and luminosity . The star is on the main sequence and is generating energy by fusing hydrogen in its core . The spectral type of G5V implies HD 28185 is cooler than the Sun . Like the majority of extrasolar planet host stars , HD 28185 is metal @-@ rich relative to the Sun , containing around 173 % of the solar abundance of iron . The star rotates slower than the Sun , with a period of around 30 days , compared to 25 @.@ 4 days for the Sun . 
 Based on the star 's chromospheric activity , HD 28185 is estimated to have an age of around 2 @,@ 900 million years . On the other hand , evolutionary models give an age of around 7 @,@ 500 million years and a mass 0 @.@ 99 times that of our Sun . The higher luminosity and longer rotation period favour an older age for the star . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 In 2001 an extrasolar planet similar in size to Jupiter designated HD 28185 b was discovered in orbit around the star with a period of 1 @.@ 04 years . Unlike many long @-@ period extrasolar planets , it has a low orbital eccentricity . The planet experiences similar insolation to Earth , which has led to speculations about the possibilities for habitable moons . In addition , numerical simulations suggest that low @-@ mass planets located in the gas giant 's Trojan points would be stable for long periods . The planet 's existence was independently confirmed by the Magellan Planet Search Program in 2008 . 
 The star also shows evidence of a long @-@ term radial velocity trend , which may indicate the presence of an additional outer companion . 
 = Dazzle camouflage = 
 Dazzle camouflage , also known as razzle dazzle ( USA ) or dazzle painting , was a family of ship camouflage used extensively in World War I , and to a lesser extent in World War II and afterwards . Credited to the British marine artist Norman Wilkinson , though with a rejected prior claim by the zoologist John Graham Kerr , it consisted of complex patterns of geometric shapes in contrasting colours , interrupting and intersecting each other . 
 Unlike other forms of camouflage , the intention of dazzle is not to conceal but to make it difficult to estimate a target 's range , speed , and heading . Norman Wilkinson explained in 1919 that he had intended dazzle more to mislead the enemy about a ship 's course and so to take up a poor firing position , than actually to cause the enemy to miss his shot when firing . 
 Dazzle was adopted by the Admiralty in Britain , and then by the United States Navy , with little evaluation . Each ship 's dazzle pattern was unique to avoid making classes of ships instantly recognisable to the enemy . The result was that a profusion of dazzle schemes was tried , and the evidence for their success was at best mixed . So many factors were involved that it was impossible to determine which were important , and whether any of the colour schemes were effective . 
 Dazzle attracted the notice of artists such as Picasso , who claimed that Cubists like himself had invented it . Edward Wadsworth , who supervised the camouflaging of over 2 @,@ 000 ships during the First World War , painted a series of canvases of dazzle ships after the war , based on his wartime work . Arthur Lismer similarly painted a series of dazzle ship canvases . 
 = = Intended purposes = = 
 At first glance , dazzle seems an unlikely form of camouflage , drawing attention to the ship rather than hiding it . The approach was developed after Allied navies were unable to develop effective means to hide ships in all weather conditions . The British zoologist John Graham Kerr proposed the application of camouflage to British warships in the First World War , outlining what he believed to be the applicable principle , disruptive camouflage , in a letter to Winston Churchill in 1914 explaining the goal was to confuse , not to conceal , by disrupting a ship 's outline . Kerr compared the effect to that created by the patterns on a series of land animals , the giraffe , zebra and jaguar . 
 Taking up the zebra example , Kerr proposed that the vertical lines of ships ' masts be disrupted with irregular white bands . Hiding these would make ships less conspicuous , and would " greatly increase the difficulty of accurate range finding " . However , in the same letter , Kerr also calls for countershading , the use of paint to obliterate self @-@ shading and thus to flatten out the appearance of solid , recognisable shapes . For example , he proposes to paint ships ' guns grey on top , grading to white below , so the guns would disappear against a grey background . Similarly , he advised painting shaded parts of the ship white , and brightly lit parts in grey , again with smooth grading between them , making shapes and structures invisible . Kerr was thus hoping to achieve both a measure of invisibility and a degree of confusion for the enemy using a rangefinder . Whether through this mixing of goals , or the Admiralty 's skepticism about " any theory based upon the analogy of animals " , the Admiralty claimed in July 1915 to have conducted " various trials " and decided to paint its ships in monotone grey , not adopting any of Kerr 's suggestions . It had made up its mind , and all Kerr 's subsequent letters achieved nothing . 
 The American artist Abbott Handerson Thayer had developed a theory of camouflage based on countershading and disruptive coloration , which he had published in the controversial 1909 book Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom . Seeing the opportunity to put his theory into service , Thayer wrote to Churchill in February 1915 , proposing to camouflage submarines by countershading them like fish such as mackerel , and advocating painting ships white to make them invisible . His ideas were considered by the Admiralty , but rejected along with Kerr 's proposals as being " freak methods of painting ships ... of academic interest but not of practical advantage " . The Admiralty noted that the required camouflage would vary depending on the light , the changing colours of sea and sky , the time of day , and the angle of the sun . Thayer made repeated and desperate efforts to persuade the authorities , and in November 1915 travelled to England where he gave demonstrations of his theory around the country . He had a warm welcome from Kerr in Glasgow , and was so enthused by this show of support that he avoided meeting the War Office , who he had been intending to win over , and instead sailed home , continuing to write ineffective letters to the British and American authorities . 
 The marine artist and Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve officer Norman Wilkinson , agreed with Kerr that dazzle 's aim was confusion rather than concealment , but disagreed about the type of confusion to be sown in the enemy 's mind . What Wilkinson wanted to do was to make it difficult for an enemy to estimate a ship 's type , size , speed , and heading , and thereby confuse enemy ship commanders into taking mistaken or poor firing positions . An observer would find it difficult to know exactly whether the stern or the bow was in view ; and it would be correspondingly difficult to estimate whether the observed vessel was moving towards or away from the observer 's position . 
 Wilkinson advocated " masses of strongly contrasted colour " to confuse the enemy about a ship 's heading . Thus , while dazzle , in some lighting conditions or at close ranges , might actually increase a ship 's visibility , the conspicuous patterns would obscure the outlines of the ship 's hull ( though admittedly not the superstructure ) , disguising the ship 's correct heading and making it harder to hit . 
 Dazzle was created in response to an extreme need , and hosted by an organisation , the Admiralty , which had already rejected an approach supported by scientific theory : Kerr 's proposal to use " parti @-@ colouring " based on the known camouflage methods of disruptive coloration and countershading . This was dropped in favour of an admittedly non @-@ scientific <unk> , led by the socially well @-@ connected Wilkinson . Kerr 's explanations of the principles were clear , logical , and based on years of study , while Wilkinson 's were simple and inspirational , based on an artist 's perception . The decision was likely because the Admiralty felt comfortable with Wilkinson , in sharp contrast to their awkward relationship with the stubborn and pedantic Kerr . 
 Wilkinson claimed not to have known of the zoological theories of camouflage of Kerr and Thayer , admitting only to having heard of the " old invisibility @-@ idea " from Roman times . 
 = = Possible mechanisms = = 
 In 1973 , the naval museum curator Robert F. Sumrall suggested a mechanism by which dazzle camouflage may have sown the kind of confusion that Wilkinson had intended for it . Coincidence rangefinders used for naval artillery had an optical mechanism , operated by a human to compute the range . The operator adjusted the mechanism until the two half @-@ images of the target lined up in a complete picture . Dazzle , Sumrall argued , was intended to make that hard , as clashing patterns looked abnormal even when the two halves were aligned , something that became more important when submarine periscopes included such rangefinders . Patterns sometimes also included a false bow wave to make it difficult for an enemy to estimate the ship 's speed . 
 The historian Sam Willis argued that since Wilkinson knew it was impossible to make a ship invisible with paint , the " extreme opposite " was the answer , using conspicuous shapes and violent colour contrasts to confuse enemy submarine commanders . Willis pointed out , using the HMT Olympic dazzle scheme as an example , that different mechanisms could have been at work . The contradictory patterns on the ship 's funnels could imply the ship was on a different heading . The curve on the hull below the front funnel could seem to be a false bow wave , creating a misleading impression of the ship 's speed . And the striped patterns at bow and stern could create confusion about which end of the ship was which . 
 That dazzle did indeed work along these lines is suggested by the testimony of a U @-@ boat captain : 
 It was not until she was within half a mile that I could make out she was one ship [ not several ] steering a course at right angles , crossing from starboard to port . The dark painted stripes on her after part made her stern appear her bow , and a broad cut of green paint amidships looks like a patch of water . The weather was bright and visibility good ; this was the best camouflage I have ever seen . 
 In 2011 , the scientist Nicholas E. Scott @-@ Samuel and colleagues presented evidence using moving patterns on a computer that human perception of speed is distorted by dazzle patterns . However the speeds required are much larger than were available to First World War ships : Scott @-@ Samuel notes that the targets in the experiment would correspond to a dazzle @-@ patterned Land Rover vehicle at a range of 70 metres , travelling at 90 kilometres per hour . A confusion in aiming of the observed size , 7 % , for a rocket propelled grenade travelling 70 metres in 0 @.@ 5 seconds , would be 7 % of the distance moved by the target , or 90 centimetres , perhaps enough to save life in that situation . 
 = = World War I = = 
 In 1914 , Kerr persuaded the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill , to adopt a form of military camouflage which he called " parti @-@ colouring " . He argued both for countershading ( following the American artist Abbott Thayer ) , and for disruptive coloration , both as used by animals . A general order to the British fleet issued on 10 November 1914 advocated use of Kerr 's approach . It was applied in various ways to British warships such as HMS Implacable , where officers noted approvingly that the pattern " increased difficulty of accurate range finding " . However , following Churchill 's departure from the Admiralty , the Royal Navy reverted to plain grey paint schemes , informing Kerr in July 1915 that " various trials had been undertaken and that the range of conditions of light and surroundings rendered it necessary to modify considerably any theory based upon the analogy of [ the colours and patterns of ] animals " . 
 The British Army inaugurated its Camouflage Section for land use at the end of 1916 . At sea in 1917 , heavy losses of merchant ships to Germany 's unrestricted submarine warfare campaign led to new desire for camouflage . The marine painter Norman Wilkinson promoted a system of stripes and broken lines " to distort the external shape by violent colour contrasts " and confuse the enemy about the speed and dimensions of a ship . Wilkinson , then a lieutenant commander on Royal Navy patrol duty , implemented the precursor of " dazzle " beginning with the merchantman SS Industry . Wilkinson was put in charge of a camouflage unit which used the technique on large groups of merchant ships . Over 4000 British merchant ships were painted in what came to be known as " dazzle camouflage " ; dazzle was also applied to some 400 naval vessels , starting in August 1917 . 
 All British patterns were different , first tested on small wooden models viewed through a periscope in a studio . Most of the model designs were painted by women from London 's Royal Academy of Arts . A foreman then scaled up their designs for the real thing . Painters , however , were not alone in the project . Creative people including sculptors , artists , and set designers designed camouflage . 
 Wilkinson 's Dazzle camouflage was accepted by the Admiralty , even without practical visual assessment protocols for improving performance by modifying designs and colours . The dazzle camouflage strategy was adopted by other navies . This led to more scientific studies of colour options which might enhance camouflage effectiveness . 
 After the war , starting on 27 October 1919 , an Admiralty committee met to determine who had priority for the invention of dazzle . Kerr was asked whether he thought Wilkinson had personally benefited from anything he Kerr had written . Kerr avoided the question , implying that he had not , and said " I make no claim to have invented the principle of parti @-@ colouring , this principle was , of course , invented by nature " . He agreed also that he had not suggested anywhere in his letters that his system would " create an illusion as to the course of the vessel painted " . In October 1920 the Admiralty told Kerr that he was not seen as responsible for dazzle painting . In 1922 Wilkinson was awarded the sum of £ 2000 for the invention . 
 = = = Effectiveness = = = 
 Dazzle 's effectiveness was highly uncertain at the time of the First World War , but it was nonetheless adopted both in Britain and America . In 1918 , the Admiralty analysed shipping losses , but was unable to draw clear conclusions . Dazzle ships were attacked in 1 @.@ 47 % of sailings , compared to 1 @.@ 12 % for uncamouflaged ships , suggesting increased visibility , but as Wilkinson had argued , dazzle was not attempting to make ships hard to see . <unk> , of the ships that were struck by torpedoes , 43 % of the dazzle ships sank , compared to 54 % of the uncamouflaged ; and similarly , 41 % of the dazzle ships were struck amidships , compared to 52 % of the uncamouflaged . These comparisons could be taken to imply that submarine commanders did have more difficulty in deciding where a ship was heading and where to aim . However , the ships painted in dazzle were larger than the uncamouflaged ships , 38 % of them being over 5000 tons compared to only 13 % of uncamouflaged ships , making comparisons unreliable . 
 With hindsight , too many factors ( choice of colour scheme ; size and speed of ships ; tactics used ) had been varied for it to be possible to determine which factors were significant or which schemes worked best . Thayer did carry out an experiment on dazzle camouflage , but it failed to show any reliable advantage over plain paintwork . 
 The American data were analysed by Harold Van Buskirk in 1919 . About 1256 ships were painted in dazzle between 1 March 1918 and the end of the war on 11 November that year . Among American merchantmen 2500 tons and over , 78 uncamouflaged ships were sunk , and only 18 camouflaged ships ; out of these 18 , 11 were sunk by torpedoes , 4 in collisions and 3 by mines . No US Navy ships ( all camouflaged ) were sunk in the period . 
 = = World War II = = 
 However effective dazzle camouflage may have been in World War I , it became less useful as rangefinders and especially aircraft became more advanced , and , by the time it was put to use again in World War II , radar further reduced its effectiveness . However , it may still have confounded enemy submarines . 
 In the Royal Navy , dazzle paint schemes reappeared in January 1940 . These were unofficial , and competitions were often held between ships for the best camouflage patterns . The Royal Navy 's Camouflage Department came up with a scheme devised by a young naval officer , Peter Scott , a wildlife artist , which were developed into the Western Approaches Schemes . In 1942 the Admiralty Intermediate Disruptive Pattern came into use , followed in 1944 by the Admiralty Standard Schemes . 
 The United States Navy implemented a camouflage painting program in World War II , and applied it to many ship classes , from patrol craft and auxiliaries to battleships and some Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers . The designs ( known as Measures , each identified with a number ) were not arbitrary , but were standardised in a process which involved a planning stage , then a review , and then fleet @-@ wide implementation . Not all United States Navy measures involved dazzle patterns ; some were simple or even totally unsophisticated , such as a false bow wave on traditional Haze Grey , or Deck Blue replacing grey over part or all of the ship ( the latter to counter the kamikaze threat ) . Dazzle measures were used until 1945 ; in February 1945 the United States Navy 's Pacific Fleet decided to repaint its ships in non @-@ dazzle measures against the kamikaze threat , while the Atlantic Fleet continued to use dazzle , ships being repainted if transferred to the Pacific . 
 Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine first used camouflage in the 1940 Norwegian campaign . A wide range of patterns were authorised , but most commonly black and white diagonal stripes were used . Most patterns were designed to hide ships in harbour or near the coast ; they were often painted over with plain grey when operating in the Atlantic . 
 = = Arts = = 
 The abstract patterns in dazzle camouflage inspired artists including Picasso . With characteristic hyperbole , he claimed credit for camouflage experiments , which seemed to him a quintessentially Cubist technique . In a conversation with Gertrude Stein shortly after he first saw a painted cannon trundling through the streets of Paris he remarked , " Yes it is we who made it , that is cubism " . In Britain , Edward Wadsworth , who supervised dazzle camouflage painting in the war , created a series of canvases after the war based on his dazzle work on ships . In Canada , Arthur Lismer used dazzle ships in some of his wartime compositions . In America , Burnell Poole painted canvases of United States Navy ships in dazzle camouflage at sea . The historian of camouflage Peter Forbes comments that the ships had a Modernist look , their designs succeeding as avant @-@ garde or <unk> art . 
 In 2007 , the art of camouflage , including the evolution of dazzle , was featured as the theme for a show at the Imperial War Museum . In 2009 , the Fleet Library at the Rhode Island School of Design exhibited its rediscovered collection of lithographic printed plans for the camouflage of American World War I merchant ships , in an exhibition titled " Bedazzled " . 
 In 2014 , the Centenary Art Commission backed three dazzle camouflage installations in Britain : Carlos Cruz @-@ Diez covered the pilot ship Edmund Gardner in Liverpool 's Canning Dock with bright multi @-@ coloured dazzle artwork , as part of the city 's 2014 Liverpool Biennial art festival ; and Tobias <unk> painted HMS President , anchored since 1922 at Blackfriars Bridge in London , to commemorate the use of dazzle , a century on . Peter Blake was commissioned to design exterior paintwork for Snowdrop , a Mersey Ferry , which he called " Everybody Razzle Dazzle " , combining his trademark motifs ( stars , targets etc . ) with First World War dazzle designs . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Patterns reminiscent of dazzle camouflage are sometimes used to mask test cars during trials . During the 2015 Formula 1 testing period , the Red Bull <unk> car was painted in a scheme intended to confound rival teams ' ability to analyse its aerodynamics . The designer Adam Harvey has similarly proposed a form of camouflage reminiscent of dazzle for personal camouflage from face @-@ detection technology . It attempts to block detection by facial recognition technologies such as <unk> " by creating an ' anti @-@ face ' " . It uses occlusion , covering certain facial features ; transformation , altering the shape or colour of parts of the face ; and a combination of the two . Since 2009 , the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society has used dazzle patterns on its fleet . 
 Some similarities can be drawn in the modern usage of " <unk> " ( short for camouflages ) on production @-@ intent cars that are not yet released but have to be tested on public roads . This kind of pattern prevents discerning the design or style even if photographs of the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ released car are taken . 
 = 1991 – 92 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 1991 – 92 season was the 94th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . The club , managed by George Graham , entered the season as Football League First Division champions , with only one defeat in the previous campaign . In spite of scoring the most goals in the division , Arsenal ended the season in fourth position , ten points behind league champions Leeds United . The club exited the FA Cup after defeat by Fourth Division opponents Wrexham and fell at the same stage of the Football League Cup to fellow First Division club Coventry City . Arsenal represented England in the European Cup ; the club was the first to do so since the ban on English teams from playing in European club competitions . Their time in the competition was brief however as Portuguese team Benfica eliminated them in the second round . 
 Arsenal signed striker Ian Wright for a club record fee of £ 2 @.@ 5 million in September 1991 . Defender Pål Lydersen and midfielder Jimmy Carter later joined the club . Stuart Young moved to Hull City , whereas Michael Thomas joined Liverpool . 
 After undertaking a series of friendlies , Arsenal played Tottenham Hotspur in the Charity Shield and drew 0 – 0 to share the honour . Defeats by Everton and Aston Villa set the tone for the league season as the team were left with much to do ; a poor run of form during the Christmas and New Year period effectively ruled the team out of retaining the championship . Arsenal finished the season strongly however – unbeaten in 16 matches , to end the campaign in fourth place . Wright was Arsenal 's top goalscorer with 26 goals . 
 = = Background = = 
 Arsenal 's failure to retain the league championship in the 1989 – 90 season prompted manager George Graham to make changes to improve his side ; he signed goalkeeper David Seaman and Swedish winger Anders Limpar in the close season . Arsenal made a good start to the league campaign , but had two points deducted in October 1990 , after ten of their players were involved in a brawl with Manchester United players , in a match at Old Trafford . In December , captain Tony Adams was sentenced to four months ' imprisonment for drink driving . Despite these setbacks , Arsenal lost only one league match all season ( away to Chelsea ) and finished on 83 points , seven ahead of runners @-@ up Liverpool . They also reached the FA Cup semi @-@ finals , where they faced Tottenham Hotspur . Midfielder Paul Gascoigne scored from a free kick after just five minutes and Tottenham went on to win 3 – 1 , ending hopes of a second Double . Nevertheless , the impressive league form prompted Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson to comment that Arsenal had the platform to " do really well next season " , particularly in Europe . 
 It was the last season that Arsenal played in front of their famous North Bank terrace , which was being demolished over the summer of 1992 to make way for a new all @-@ seater stand which was scheduled for completion during 1993 , by which time Highbury was set to have an all @-@ seater capacity of just under 40 @,@ 000 . These changes were necessary due to the Taylor Report , which required all clubs in the highest two divisions of English football to have an all @-@ seater stadium by August 1994 . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 Striker Ian Wright moved from Crystal Palace to Arsenal a month into the season ; at £ 2 @.@ 5 million he became the club 's most expensive signing yet . Palace chairman Ron Noades revealed the club had offered the player a new deal , but " Ian was hankering for a move . He wanted to play in Europe and Arsenal was the club he wanted to join . " Arsenal paid £ 500 @,@ 000 each for midfielder Jimmy Carter and Pål Lydersen , a Norwegian defender . Graham and Lydersen were in attendance for Norway 's international match against the Soviet Union in September 1991 ; he later agreed personal terms to join Arsenal . In December 1991 , Michael Thomas left Arsenal and moved to Liverpool , the club he famously scored against to win the league title for Arsenal in 1989 . 
 Loan out 
 = = Pre @-@ season and friendlies = = 
 In preparation for the forthcoming season , Arsenal played a series of friendles . The tour of Sweden was a success , with three wins in the space of a week . Arsenal then travelled back to England and beat Plymouth Argyle , before hosting Celtic , Panathinaikos and Sampdoria at Highbury . Arsenal ended their pre @-@ season with a 3 – 1 victory against Watford , who staged their centenary match . Three further friendles were played in 1992 , one of which was a testimonial for Barry Fry , the manager of Barnet . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . Arsenal score ordered first . Source : 
 = = FA Charity Shield = = 
 As league champions , Arsenal contested the 1991 FA Charity Shield against local rivals Tottenham Hotspur , who had beaten Nottingham Forest to win the 1991 FA Cup Final . Anders Limpar was absent for Arsenal , as he had sustained a knee injury while on duty for Sweden . David O 'Leary started in place of the injured Steve Bould and midfielder David Hillier was picked ahead of Michael Thomas in midfield . In spite of dominating territorial advantage , Arsenal were held to a 0 – 0 draw , meaning each team held the trophy for six months . Graham commentated that Arsenal played below their usual standard and accepted that his team needed to work on their finishing , in order to make use of their possession . 
 = = Football League First Division = = 
 A total of 22 teams competed in the First Division in the 1991 – 92 season . Each team played 42 matches ; two against every other team and one match at each club 's stadium . Three points were awarded for each win , one point per draw , and none for defeats . This was Arsenal 's final season in the Football League ; in 1992 they and 21 other clubs joined the newly formed Premier League , which became the top division of English football from the 1992 – 93 season onwards . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal started their defence of the league championship at home to Queens Park Rangers on 17 August 1991 . It was the visitors who had led the match right from the 15th minute , but for Arsenal midfielder Paul Merson to earn his side a point after equalising well into stoppage time . The draw according to The Independent showcased the need for reinforcements : " ... not just to improve the squad , but also to cause a buzz in the dressing room " . Arsenal were beaten 3 – 1 by Everton at Goodison Park three days after and lost to Aston Villa by the same scoreline . Graham dismissed any talk of crisis , saying " I have been in football too long to think it is going to be nice and comfortable every season " and felt the performance at Villa showed signs of improvement compared to the earlier league fixtures . A 2 – 0 win at home to Luton Town was followed by victory against Manchester City , where Alan Smith and Limpar scored a goal apiece . 
 September began with a trip to Elland Road to face Leeds United . Arsenal 's two @-@ goal led was overturned by the opposition , who secured a draw after Lee Chapman equalised in injury time . Had this been the winning goal , " it would have been a gross injustice for Arsenal " opined John Roberts of The Independent . Lee Dixon scored an " amazing " own goal against Coventry City on 7 September 1991 , which set Arsenal on their way to their third defeat of the season . The team responded by defeating Crystal Palace 4 – 1 ; Kevin Campbell scored his first two goals of the league season . Arsenal scored four first half goals against Sheffield United on 21 September 1991 – the game ended 5 – 2 , which moved them into seventh position – three places up from the previous weekend . By the time Campbell scored Arsenal 's fourth " ... the North Bank was entitled to sound the ironic chant , ' Boring , boring , Arsenal ' , " said reporter Jasper Rees . Wright scored three league goals for Arsenal on his league debut , away to Southampton . 
 Arsenal defeated Chelsea at home in the first weekend of October . The team found themselves two goals down after 20 minutes , but a converted Dixon penalty and goals from Wright and Campbell turned the score around in their favour . Arsenal came away from Old Trafford with a point against league leaders Manchester United on 19 October 1991 . After a midweek European football match , Arsenal beat Notts County by two goals , a result which moved them fourth in the table . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 The visit of West Ham United to Highbury produced a 1 – 0 defeat for Arsenal ; the winning goal scored by Mike Small came in the 76th minute . Arsenal 's conserved performance was attributed to their upcoming European Cup match , something Graham categorically denied : " I 'm not even thinking about next Wednesday . " Arsenal drew away to Oldham Athletic and then Sheffield Wednesday , extending a winless run of five games in all competitions . The team beat Tottenham on 1 December 1991 to go fourth in the league table , 10 points behind the leaders . Arsenal 's aspiration to defend the league title suffered to Nottingham Forest ; though the team scored twice in the second half they were unable to overturn the home side 's three @-@ goal lead and collected no points . David Hillier opined that his team " should have done better in the first half – that 's when we really lost it . " Wright scored all of Arsenal 's four goals against Everton , but scored none in the team 's Boxing Day defeat by Luton Town . Graham called it Arsenal 's worst performance of the season and was critical of his players ' attitude . Although the team 's concentration and effort improved according to Peter Ball of The Times in their next game – away to Manchester City , Arsenal lost for the second consecutive league match . They ended the calendar year in seventh position , 16 points behind the leaders Manchester United . 
 January saw Arsenal 's title challenge falter ; the team went on a four @-@ match winless run . At home , they only merited draws to Wimbledon , Aston Villa and QPR – the latter two were scoreless . Arsenal were beaten 2 – 0 by Liverpool on 29 January 1992 ; journalist Derek Hodgson said this was in spite of playing " crisper " and more confident football . A draw against Manchester United on 1 February 1992 came before a win away to Notts County . A crowd of 22 @,@ 352 witnessed Arsenal draw once more at home , this time against Norwich City . Rockets were launched on the pitch during the match by Arsenal supporters , in protest of the club 's bond scheme . Arsenal recorded their biggest win of the season , scoring seven past Sheffield Wednesday , on 15 February 1992 . Campbell , who began the match as a substitute , came on and scored two goals ; six of Arsenal 's goals came in the second half . Arsenal ended February with a 1 – 1 draw away to Tottenham . After 30 games , the team were in sixth position , 18 points behind Manchester United in first . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 After a fortnight of inactivity in all competitions Arsenal faced Oldham Athletic at Highbury . The team won 2 – 1 on a day where O 'Leary registered his 700th league appearance . Wright scored both of Arsenal 's goals against West Ham on 14 March 1992 , which inflicted a fifth consecutive league defeat on his opponents . Merson 's late equaliser against Leeds United the following week earnt Arsenal a point . Against Wimbledon Ray Parlour scored inside the first minute , which set Arsenal on to a 3 – 1 victory . The third win in four league matches moved Arsenal to fifth position and left journalist Ball to opine : " How the champions must be regretting earlier inconsistency . " March ended with a " highly entertaining game " so said match reporter Dennis Signy between Arsenal and Nottingham Forest at Highbury . Arsenal took the lead after five minutes when Dixon converted a penalty kick – it was awarded after Ian <unk> was adjudged to have fouled Limpar in the 18 @-@ yard box . Forest equalised in the 41st minute , and made it 2 – 1 moments before the interval . They extend their lead through Roy Keane in the 71st minute , but Arsenal scored twice in the final five minutes to draw . 
 A 1 – 0 victory against Coventry City meant Arsenal were five points behind Sheffield Wednesday , who lay in third spot . Arsenal continued their strong finish to the season by scoring seven goals in the space of three days – three away to Norwich City and four at home to Crystal Palace . The team , without the suspended Wright for the trip to Sheffield United came away from Bramall Lane with a point . Arsenal beat Liverpool 4 – 0 on 21 April 1992 , which marked the opposition 's biggest defeat in nine years . A draw at Chelsea ended Arsenal 's chances of finishing in a UEFA Cup place . Arsenal ended the league campaign with a 5 – 1 win against Southampton at home . Wright overtook Tottenham striker Gary Lineker as the league 's top goalscorer by scoring three on the day which took his total to 29 ( 24 of those scored for Arsenal ) – one more than Lineker . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . Arsenal score ordered first . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = League position = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the FA Cup in the third round ( last 64 ) , in which they were drawn to face Wrexham of the Football League Fourth Division away from home . Smith 's goal had given Arsenal the lead just before half time , but Wrexham equalised through a Mickey Thomas free kick with eight minutes of the match remaining . Steve Watkin scored the winning goal two minutes after , once Adams failed to clear the ball in the penalty box . The cup exit did not prompt Graham to <unk> his players ; he bluntly said : " I thought they played very well . We just didn 't finish them off . " 
 The result was described by BBC Sport in 2011 as " one of the greatest FA Cup giant @-@ killings of all time " . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . Arsenal score ordered first . 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the second round , where they were drawn against Leicester City in a two @-@ legged tie . The first match ended 1 – 1 ; Wright scored 44 minutes into his debut . Wright and Merson each scored for Arsenal in the second leg which ensured progress into the third round . It was there the team exited the competition following a 1 – 0 defeat , away to Coventry City . 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . Arsenal score ordered first . 
 = = European Cup = = 
 As league champions , Arsenal participated in the European Cup , where they were drawn to face Austria Wien in the first round . This marked the first time that England was represented in Europe 's premier competition since the Heysel disaster in 1985 . In the first leg , Arsenal were awarded a penalty after 24 minutes , which Dixon missed . Linighan opened the scoring seven minutes before the interval , when goalkeeper <unk> <unk> failed to deal with a cross . Smith then scored four goals for the team in the space of 16 minutes – " The England striker responded resoundingly to Graham Taylor 's criticism of his ineffective performance against Germany a week earlier , " said The Guardian correspondent David Lacey . Andreas <unk> reduced Arsenal 's lead , before Limpar added a sixth , taking the ball on unchallenged and shooting from a narrow angle . Arsenal lost the second leg 1 – 0 at the Franz <unk> Stadium on 2 October 1991 , but progressed as they won 6 – 2 on aggregate . 
 In spite of earning a draw against Benfica away from home the following round , first leg , Arsenal were eliminated from the tournament , in extra time at home on 6 November 1991 . Graham offered no complaints in witnessing his side going out , by saying : " Benfica played very well once we went 1 – 0 up . Their attack was superb . We could have done with more anticipation in the box . " 
 Colour key : Green 
 = Arsenal win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . Arsenal score ordered first . 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 Arsenal used a total of 24 players during the 1991 – 92 season and there were 16 different goalscorers . There were also two squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . Merson featured in 50 matches – the most of any Arsenal player in the campaign . Seaman started in all 42 league matches . The team scored a total of 92 goals in all competitions . The top goalscorer was Wright , with 26 goals – 24 of which were scored in the league . 
 Key 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . Players with name struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = M @-@ 103 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 103 is a state trunkline highway entirely within St. Joseph County in the southwestern region of the U.S. state of Michigan . The trunkline runs between U.S. Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in Mottville and the Indiana state line along undivided highway near the St. Joseph River . With the connection to State Road 15 ( SR 15 ) , it provides access to the Indiana Toll Road . The current highway is the second to carry the number ; the first version of M @-@ 103 has been incorporated into the routing of US 131 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 103 is the continuation of SR 15 in Michigan . It starts at State Line Road which runs along the state line east from M @-@ 103 . From here north to the terminus in Mottville , M @-@ 103 parallels the St. Joseph River running through farmlands . South of town , it runs past the Mottville Township Cemetery . Between John and Water streets , M @-@ 103 intersects and ends at US 12 . The highway has not been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads important to the country 's economy , defense and mobility . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) tracks traffic volumes along the roads it maintains . These volumes are expressed as the average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measurement of the number of vehicles on a stretch of roadway for any average day of the year . For the 2008 survey , traffic volume was 3 @,@ 604 vehicles per day , with 437 commercial vehicles in the tally . In 2009 , the numbers increased to 8 @,@ 252 vehicles total and 1287 commercial vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 103 was first designated as a state trunkline in 1932 . The first version ran from SR 13 at the state line northerly to the junction with US 112 and US 131 in White Pigeon . At the time , US 131 turned westerly along US 112 before turning south to connect with SR 15 . This first version of M @-@ 103 was completed paved by 1934 . The routings of US 131 and M @-@ 103 were swapped south of US 12 ( successor to US 112 ) by 1960 . Since that time , M @-@ 103 has been routed between US 12 and SR 15 in western Mottville Township and US 131 has run due south of White Pigeon to SR 13 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Mottville Township , St. Joseph County . 
 = Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 ( ファイナルファンタジーX @-@ 2 , Fainaru Fantajī Ten Tsū ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Square for the PlayStation 2 , as the direct sequel to Final Fantasy X. The game 's story follows the character Yuna from Final Fantasy X as she seeks to resolve political conflicts in the fictional world of Spira before it all leads to war . 
 Final Fantasy X2 set several precedents in the Final Fantasy series aside from being the first direct sequel in video game form and the second sequel in the franchise , after the anime Final Fantasy : Legend of the Crystals . It was the first game in the series to feature only three player characters , an all @-@ female main cast , and early access to most of the game 's locations . Additionally , it featured a variation of the character classes system — one of the series ' classic gameplay concepts — and is one of the few games in the series to feature multiple endings . Finally , it was the first Final Fantasy game in the series that did not have musical contributions in it from longtime composer Nobuo Uematsu . 
 The game was positively received by critics and was commercially successful . After nine months of being released in Japan , it sold a million copies in North America , and approximately four million copies worldwide . Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was voted as the 32nd best game of all time by the readers of Famitsu . The English version of the game won an award for " Outstanding Achievement in Character Performance " at the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences in 2004 . The game has attained a rating of 86 % on GameRankings and an 85 % rating on Metacritic . The game was re @-@ released as a high @-@ definition port for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita in 2013 , together with Final Fantasy X , under the title Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster . It was also re @-@ released for the PlayStation 4 in May 2015 . In October 2013 , Square Enix announced Final Fantasy X and its sequel Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 have together sold over 14 million copies worldwide on PlayStation 2 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Though a direct sequel to Final Fantasy X , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 does not duplicate its predecessor 's gameplay ; instead , it innovates on traditional elements . Like pre @-@ Final Fantasy X installments , characters " level up " after a certain number of battles , by gaining pre @-@ determined stat bonuses . The conditional turn @-@ based battle system in Final Fantasy X has been replaced by a faster @-@ paced variation of the Final Fantasy series ' traditional active time battle ( ATB ) system , which was originally designed by Hiroyuki Ito and first featured in Final Fantasy IV . Whenever a random enemy is encountered , the ATB system is used . Under this enhanced version of the ATB , playable characters may interrupt an enemy while they are preparing to take action , in lieu of waiting for an enemy 's turn to finish before attacking . Furthermore , it is possible for both characters and enemies to chain attacks together for greater damage . 
 = = = Navigation and quests = = = 
 Another departure from the gameplay of Final Fantasy X is in its world navigation system : players can visit almost every location in Spira from early in the game , transported via the airship Celsius . This is a deviation from the overall Final Fantasy series , where the most efficient means of transportation is typically not obtained until late in the game . 
 These two changes allow players to choose a less linear storyline . Unlike Final Fantasy X , in which a player 's course through the game 's world was largely straightforward , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 is almost entirely free form . The game consists of five chapters , with each location featuring one scenario per chapter . Put together , the five scenarios in one locale form a subplot of the game , called an " Episode " . Only a few scenarios per chapter are integral to the game 's central plot , and are marked on the world navigation system as " Hotspots " ( " Active Links " in the Japanese version ) . By accessing only Hotspots , a player can quickly proceed through the game 's story without participating in sidequests . 
 The game keeps track of the player 's completed percentage of the storyline , increased by viewing the scenarios comprising each Episode . If 100 % of the game is completed , an additional ending will be unlocked . The game features a fork in its plot , allowing the player to make a choice that changes what scenes they see and the number of percentage points they acquire afterward . It is impossible to see all of the game 's content on a single playthrough , due to this fork in the storyline , although it is possible to achieve 100 % storyline completion in a single playthrough . However , a 100 % storyline completion can only be achieved through one of the two possible storylines . When the game is completed for the first time , it unlocks a New Game Plus option that allows the player to restart the game with all of the items , Garment Grids , dresspheres and storyline completion percentage achieved previously . However , all character levels are set back to one . 
 The field @-@ map navigation system is largely unchanged from Final Fantasy X ; it is still dominantly three dimensional with mostly continuous locations . A few upgrades have been implemented , providing the player with extended interaction with the environment through jumping , climbing and rotating camera angles . 
 The game 's sidequests include minor tasks and quests , optional bosses and dungeons , and the most minigames of any Final Fantasy at the time of its release . These minigames include Gunner 's Gauntlet ( a third @-@ person / first @-@ person shooter game ) and Sphere Break ( a mathematical coin game involving addition and multiplication ) , as well as the fictional underwater sport blitzball originally featured in Final Fantasy X with a different control scheme . Director Motomu Toriyama has explained that one of the concepts at issue during development was providing a large variety of minigames , such that " if you bought Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 you wouldn 't need any other game " . 
 = = = <unk> and the Garment Grid = = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 reintroduces the series ' classic character class system ( seen previously in Final Fantasy III , Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy Tactics ) through the inclusion of dresspheres . Because the party never grows beyond three characters , switching characters during battle is unnecessary . Instead , the player can switch character classes , providing access to different abilities . The playable characters are allowed to equip one dressphere at a time , each providing different battle functions and abilities . Characters can learn new skills for each dressphere with the use of Ability Points ( AP ) . AP is obtained by defeating enemies and by the use of items and abilities for that sphere . Abilities to be learned are chosen in the main menu . During battle , AP is given to that ability until it is learned . Each character can access as many as six dresspheres at a time , depending on the specific properties of the Garment Grid they are wearing . The Garment Grid is a placard featuring a geometric shape connected by nodes . These nodes are slots that can be filled with dresspheres , allowing characters to change character classes during their turn in battle . Most Garment Grids possess Gates that when passed through grant the user a complimentary buff . 
 As with equipped items , Garment Grids often provide characters with a variety of enhancements and extra abilities . The game features diverse Garment Grids and dresspheres which can be discovered as the game progresses . While normal dresspheres can be used by all three playable characters , each character can acquire a dressphere that only they can use . These dresspheres can only be activated after a character has changed into all of the classes designated to her Garment Grid in a single battle . When a character activates one of these dresspheres , the other characters are replaced by two controllable support units . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 While the setting of the original Final Fantasy X was decidedly somber , in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , the main characters were fitted with a jovial Charlie 's Angels @-@ like motif . Aesthetically , the world of Spira is essentially unchanged in the two years since Final Fantasy X. Most areas are from the original return ( exceptions being the Omega Ruins and <unk> Temple ) , with few new locations . The only significant changes include the reconstruction of the village of Kilika and the clearing of the mist atop Mt . Gagazet , revealing forgotten ruins . Additionally , the Palace of St. Bevelle is now accessible throughout the game , rather than only during mandatory storyline sequences . However , even with Sin gone , fiends are no less populous than before . 
 Despite cosmetic changes , there are major differences in the ideology of Spira 's people . After Sin 's defeat came the arrival of an era known as " the Eternal Calm " . The priests of the Yevon religion chose to expose the truth about the order , leaving the population to decide for themselves how to live in a world without that particular religion , and without Sin . Advanced technology and the Al Bhed are now embraced by the population as a whole , and most have begun to pursue <unk> such as attending musical concerts and participating in the sport of blitzball . Others have become hunters of ancient treasures , ranging from coins and machinery long buried under the sands on Bikanel Island to spheres in forgotten caves and ruins . Those who pursue the latter are known as " sphere hunters " , of which many groups have formed . 
 Despite the absence of Sin and the corrupt <unk> of Yevon , Spira is not without conflict . Young people were especially quick to abandon Yevon and embrace machinery ( called " machina " in the game ) , eager to see Spira develop , while many of the older generation felt that cultural changes were happening too quickly . As new ideals and practices began to sweep Spira , several new political groups emerged . Most influential among them were the Youth League , led by <unk> Nooj , and the New Yevon Party , led by a former priest named " <unk> " until his disappearance , and later by Praetor Baralai . The Youth League consists mainly of young people , determined to see Spira completely abandon its past practices , while the New Yevon Party consists of members both old and young who felt that changes should be gradual , their motto being , " One thing at a time " . 
 Following their formation , both the Youth League and New Yevon sought High Summoner Yuna 's support in the hopes of bolstering their political presence . She chose to remain neutral , instead joining the Gullwings , the sphere hunter group to which her cousins Brother and Rikku belonged . She also began working with the excavation team of the Machine Faction , a neutral group of Al Bhed researching more advanced machina technology , and led by a young man named " Gippal " . 
 As time passed , tensions between the Youth League and New Yevon began to escalate towards violence . Meanwhile , Yuna sought spheres that she hoped would lead her to Tidus , her lost love who vanished during the ending of Final Fantasy X. After defeating Sin , Yuna initially retired to a quiet life on the island of Besaid , arranging appointments daily with the citizens of Spira . However , Rikku brought Yuna a video sphere discovered on Mt . Gagazet by her childhood guardian , Kimahri , now the elder of the Ronso Tribe . The sphere displayed a young man with a strong resemblance to Tidus , apparently locked inside a prison cell . Despite misgivings from Wakka — now married to his childhood friend , Lulu — Rikku convinced Yuna that she had fulfilled her duty to Spira and deserved to follow her heart . Yuna then left Besaid to join the Gullwings and hunt for more clues about the identity of the man shown in the sphere in the hope that it might be Tidus . 
 Whereas Final Fantasy X drew heavily on ancient Japanese culture and Asian settings , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 incorporated a number of elements from modern Japanese pop culture . An exception , however , is the Trainer dressphere , featuring the game 's main characters fighting alongside a dog , monkey and bird , the three animals befriended by the Japanese folk hero Momotarō in a traditional story . Another exception is the Samurai dressphere , which features each character fighting in traditional Japanese samurai armor . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The three main playable characters of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 are Yuna , Rikku , and Paine , whose team is abbreviated in @-@ game as " <unk> " ( " <unk> " in the original Japanese version ) . Yuna and Rikku reprise their roles from Final Fantasy X , and , though their personalities are much the same as before , Square decided that their appearances would be heavily altered to give a greater impression of activity . Furthermore , it was decided that the pervading cultural changes occurring in Final Fantasy X 's world as they and others began trying to live positively would be reflected in the new clothing of these two characters . The character of Paine is a new creation designed for inclusion in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , to accommodate the game 's intended action @-@ adventure style revolving around a trio of female characters . Her personality is far more cynical and emotionally distant than that of her teammates , and she keeps her past a secret from them for much of the game . 
 Several other major and supporting characters from Final Fantasy X appear in the game . Additionally , other new characters are introduced in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , such as the Leblanc Syndicate , a group of sphere hunters who serve as the Gullwings ' rivals for much of the game . The game 's main antagonist is Shuyin , another new character . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The story begins as Yuna , Rikku and Paine recover Yuna 's stolen Garment Grid from the Leblanc Syndicate in the first of several encounters in which they vie for spheres . The game is punctuated by a narration of Yuna addressing Tidus , as though she is recounting the events of the game to him as they occur . Although Yuna 's quest is to find clues that may lead her to Tidus , much of the storyline of the game follows the clash of the factions that have established themselves in the time since the coming of the Eternal Calm in Final Fantasy X , and the uncovering of hidden legacies from Spira 's ancient history . A significant portion of the game 's events are unnecessary for the completion of the main storyline , but much of the depth of the story — including characterization and background details — are featured in the optional content , which generally follows how Spira is healing in the time since the defeat of Sin . 
 As the game progresses , the hostilities between the Youth League and New Yevon come to a head . Meanwhile , the Gullwings discover an ancient sphere containing images of an enormous machina weapon called " Vegnagun " that was secretly buried beneath Bevelle . The weapon has enough power to threaten all of Spira , and , moreover , it is revealed that Vegnagun 's AI is unable to distinguish friend from foe once activated . The Gullwings then join forces with the Leblanc Syndicate to investigate the underground areas of the city in an attempt to destroy the machine before it can be used by either side in the upcoming conflict . However , discovering a large tunnel recently dug into the floor of the weapon 's chamber , they realize that Vegnagun has apparently moved to the Farplane , located at Spira 's core . 
 Disagreements between Spira 's factions are soon punctuated further after the disappearance of Baralai , Nooj , and Gippal — the leaders of New Yevon , the Youth League and the Machine Faction respectively . Returning to the underground areas of Bevelle , the Gullwings discover the missing faction leaders discussing Vegnagun and learn that the machine 's AI allows it to detect hostility and to respond by activating itself and fleeing . Additionally , it is revealed that Nooj had come to Bevelle with the intention of destroying Vegnagun previously , prompting it to flee to the Farplane . 
 The player then learns that Paine had once been friends with all three men , assigned to be their sphere recorder while they were candidates for the Crimson Squad , an elite group intended to be assigned leadership of Crusader chapters across Spira . Two years earlier in a cave beneath Mushroom Rock Road called " the Den of Woe , " just before the failed Operation Mi 'ihen , the squad 's final exercise was conducted . Within the cave , the various squad candidates were swarmed by pyreflies and driven to kill one another . The only survivors were Paine , Baralai , Gippal , and Nooj , who were themselves targeted by the Order of Yevon afterward when they revealed having seen images of Vegnagun while in the cave . Soon after , Nooj shot his surviving comrades and left them to die , severing the friendship the group had with one another . However , at this time , it is revealed that he was not acting of his own accord when he shot them . The feelings that drove the squad members to kill one another are revealed to have been the despair of the spirit Shuyin , who died 1000 years earlier . Before the four survivors could leave the cave , the spirit of Shuyin — requiring a host in order to interact with the world physically — had possessed Nooj , and later forced him to shoot his comrades . 
 Failing to control Nooj , Shuyin possesses Baralai 's body , pursuing Vegnagun to the Farplane . Nooj and Gippal follow in pursuit , asking Yuna to keep things under control on the surface . In doing so , the player must fight and defeat each of Yuna 's aeons from Final Fantasy X , their spirits now corrupted by Shuyin 's despair on the Farplane . During this mission , Yuna falls into the Farplane and meets Shuyin , who mistakes her for a woman named " Lenne " . Shuyin expresses his anger that Spira 's citizens have not yet come to understand the heartache that war can cause , and reveals that he has developed a plan to use the old ( but still operational ) Vegnagun to destroy all of Spira , ending the possibility of there ever being a war again . In so doing , he believes that he will be making the world a better place . 
 The player learns that 1000 years before the game , Shuyin was a famous blitzball player in the high @-@ tech metropolis of Zanarkand , and the lover of a popular songstress and summoner — Lenne . The two lived during Zanarkand 's war with the more powerful Bevelle , and during the course of the war , Zanarkand ordered all summoners to the front lines , separating the couple . Believing that Lenne would die in battle , Shuyin decided that the only way to save her was to infiltrate Bevelle , commandeer Vegnagun , and use it to destroy Zanarkand 's enemies . However , Lenne perceived Shuyin 's intentions , and — unwilling to allow him to take the lives of many others for her sake — followed him . When she caught up to Shuyin in Bevelle , he had only just begun to operate Vegnagun 's control panel . Before he could use Vegnagun , Lenne begged him to stop . Shuyin yielded , but a group of Bevelle soldiers arrived a moment later and shot the couple . Over the course of the following 1000 years , Shuyin 's despair and resentment over his failure to save Lenne grew to the point that they began acting on their own . 
 Now with an understanding of Shuyin 's hatred for war , Yuna manages to return to the surface , and the Gullwings organize a concert to which everyone in Spira is invited , supporters of the Youth League and New Yevon alike . Additionally , the Songstress dressphere worn by Yuna is revealed to hold Lenne 's memories , resulting in a sphere screen projecting them to everyone in attendance during the concert . Witnessing images of Shuyin and Lenne 's last moments , Spira 's citizens begin to understand the unproductive nature of their disagreements . The player then learns that it was because of Lenne 's memories that Shuyin had mistaken Yuna for Lenne . 
 Although the factional fighting has ceased , Shuyin has nearly carried out his plan to destroy Spira with Vegnagun . Joining forces with the Leblanc Syndicate once again , the Gullwings make their way to the Farplane and find Gippal and Nooj already battling Vegnagun . Working together , they manage to disable the giant machina before its cannon can fire at Spira . Finally confronting Shuyin , Lenne 's consciousness emerges from the Songstress dressphere and convinces him to abandon his mission and be at peace . Thanking Yuna , Lenne guides Shuyin 's spirit to peace on the Farplane . 
 Subsequently , the fayth once located in Bevelle appears before Yuna and thanks her as well . He then asks her if she would like to see " him " again . If the player replies with " Yes " , and a sufficient percentage of the game 's optional storyline has been completed , the fayth locates Tidus 's scattered pyreflies and sends them to Besaid , where they reform ; thus , when Yuna returns home , she is reunited with Tidus . Players who achieve 100 % completion in addition to reviving Tidus will see an additional reunion scene in Zanarkand where the pair discuss whether he is truly real or still a dream . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 began in late 2001 in response to the success of Final Fantasy X , particularly fan reaction to the Eternal Calm video included in the Japanese version of Final Fantasy X International . It was released in Japan shortly before the merger between Square and Enix . The game 's eventual name , X @-@ 2 , was initially not liked by the production team , but it was eventually accepted since the story was a direct continuation of X and thus could not be the next numbered title in the series . Kazushige Nojima , the previous game 's writer , was also skeptical about the creation of a sequel . Something he was particularly averse to originally was the happy ending , which he felt was wrong for the story . The production team was one third the size of the previous installment . This was because the team was already familiar with the material and it allowed them to give a hand @-@ crafted feel to the game . In designing the game , a significant number of character models , enemies , and location designs from Final Fantasy X were reused . Character designer Tetsuya Nomura has explained that this allowed the game to be developed in one year and at half the normal scope Final Fantasy titles are normally produced . Maya and Softimage 3D were the two main programs used to create the graphics . 
 Producer Yoshinori Kitase and director Motomu Toriyama have explained that the objective in mind when designing Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was to embrace the concept of change as the game 's theme and establish a more upbeat atmosphere than its predecessor . To portray the drastic change in Spira , the developers excluded summons , redesigned towns , and included vehicles . The low @-@ flying vehicles were added to allow the player quicker access and mobility to the areas that were already available in the previous title . Because of the emphasis on a more optimistic setting , the game 's dressphere system ( inspired by the magical girl subgenre of anime and manga ) was implemented , and the atmosphere of J @-@ pop introduced right from the game 's opening sequence . Additional allusions to popular culture in general were featured , such as the style of Charlie 's Angels . Though work on the opening song and motion capture began early in development , the opening sequence was actually the last portion of the game to be completed . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 For Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu was replaced by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi of The Bouncer fame . Among the game 's more notable tracks are two vocalized songs : the J @-@ pop @-@ style " Real Emotion " and a more slowly @-@ paced ballad , " 1000 Words " . The Japanese versions of the songs are sung by Kumi Koda , a Japanese music artist who also performed motion capture for the " Real Emotion " opening full motion video and provided the voice of Lenne in the Japanese version of the game . Koda also released her own English versions of the songs on her CD single Come with Me . The English versions of the songs are sung by Jade Villalon of Sweetbox . She released extended versions of the songs she sang as bonus tracks on the Japanese release of her album , Adagio . While similar , the lyrics of Koda Kumi 's versions differ from those sung by Jade Villalon . 
 = = Versions and merchandise = = 
 As with Final Fantasy X , an expanded international version was produced for Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . This version of the game , titled Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission , introduces two new dresspheres , an additional " Last Mission " at a location called " <unk> Tower , " and the option to capture numerous monsters and characters including Tidus , Auron and Seymour from Final Fantasy X — as well as several supporting characters from both games — during battle . This version was never released outside Japan , although the English voices were used for the main story in the International version ( not in the Last Mission ) . Due to this change , parts of the Japanese subtitles were changed or altered to fit the voice @-@ overs . This was detailed in the official strategy book for the International version ( see below ) . In 2005 , a compilation featuring Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was released in Japan under the title Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 Ultimate Box . 
 Several action figures , books and soundtracks were released by Square Enix . Among the books that were published were three Ultimania guidebooks , a series of artbooks / strategy guides published by Square Enix in Japan . They feature original artwork from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , offer gameplay walkthroughs , expand upon many aspects of the game 's storyline , and feature several interviews with the game 's designers . There are three books in the series : Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Ultimania , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Ultimania Ω , and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 : International + Last Mission Ultimania . A similar three @-@ book series was produced for Final Fantasy X. 
 Gaming peripheral company Hori produced PlayStation 2 controllers modeled after the Tiny Bee guns Yuna uses in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . These controllers were released only in Japan . They were re @-@ released in a new silver box to coincide with the release of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 : International + Last Mission . They also released a vertical stand for the console , to be used with the first PlayStation 2 models , not the slim , holds the console in upright position . The accessory has a Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 logo that lightens up in blue color when plugged in to a powered console , no additional power supply required as the power is taken from the PS2 USB port . 
 On September 13 , 2011 , Square Enix announced that Final Fantasy X would be re @-@ released in high @-@ definition for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita , in celebration of the game 's 10 year anniversary . Yet rumors spread that it would also include its sequel Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 In January 2012 , production of the game had started . Producer Yoshinori Kitase will once again be involved in the production of the game , wishing to work on its quality , yet again no confirmation yet of the inclusion of the sequel . On February 18 , 2013 the first footage of the PlayStation Vita version of Final Fantasy X HD was released , showing off HD models of Tidus , Yuna , Bahamut and Yojimbo . On 19 March , it was confirmed that the PS3 version of the game would also include its sequel X @-@ 2 , and that it would also be remastered in HD and would be based on the International version . Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Last mission was announced to be also included in HD as well . The HD remastered games for the PS3 was released under the title Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster . The two games were sold separately on PlayStation Vita in Japan with Final Fantasy X International HD to include Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X Eternal Calm and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 HD Remaster to include Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Last Mission . They were sold together with a voucher to download Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 + Last Mission for free in regions outside Japan as well as in Japan . Square Enix launched an official website for the two HD remastered titles in March 2013 . During the PlayStation China press conference that took place in Shanghai on December 11 , 2014 , Square Enix has confirmed Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster will be available for the PlayStation 4 in Spring 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 sold over 1 @.@ 94 million copies in Japan in 2003 as the highest @-@ selling game of the year . Within nine months of its Japanese release , it sold more than a million copies in North America ( within two months of its release there ) , and nearly four million copies worldwide . It went on to sell 2 @.@ 11 million units in Japan , 1 @.@ 85 million units in the United States , and more than 100 @,@ 000 units in the United Kingdom . International + Last Mission sold over 288 @,@ 000 copies in Japan over the course of 2004 . In October 2013 , Square Enix announced Final Fantasy X and its sequel Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 have together sold over 14 million copies worldwide on PlayStation 2 . 
 It was voted as the 32nd best game of all time by readers of the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu , which also gave it a 34 out of 40 . The English release of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 won the Seventh Annual Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences award in 2004 for " Outstanding Achievement in Character Performance " in recognition of the character Rikku . 
 Multimedia website IGN felt that the game 's shift in tone is " part of what makes [ it ] so intriguing , " labeling the storyline " a deep political drama " that " always manages to keep from taking things too seriously . " They also commented that the game " treats its history with intelligence " and " its returning characters ... just as clever " . Further positive reaction came from RPGamer , with one staff reviewer summarizing X @-@ 2 as " a light @-@ hearted fun game " that " may ... be the most enjoyable thing to come from the series in several years " , while another regarded its battle system as innovative and " very simple to navigate " . 
 The game 's stylistic changes from past Final Fantasy titles sparked negative comments , with some perceiving it as a change in the spirit of the franchise . Among these were the game 's status as Final Fantasy 's first direct sequel and the change from a tragic atmosphere in Final Fantasy X to a dominantly lighthearted tone in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . In their review , gaming website GameSpot commented that " Some of the missions ... come off as downright silly and a bit tacked on " . Additionally , they felt that the game 's non @-@ linear style makes it " [ lack ] the singular narrative thrust of Final Fantasy X or other typical RPGs , and the storyline can feel a little nebulous and disjointed as a result " . Moreover , GameSpot commented that " trivial minigames have been creeping into the Final Fantasy games at an alarming rate over the last few years , and in this regard , X @-@ 2 is definitely the most egregious offender in the series " . Despite these comments , they praised the battle system as a " welcome addition " , while regarding its voice @-@ overs and localizations as " outstanding " . 
 Another aspect of the game that has attracted criticism is the reuse of graphical designs from Final Fantasy X. One reviewer at RPGamer commented that " there is little question that the graphics in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 could rival just about any other RPG on the market ... [ but ] one does not get ... [ the impression ] that the graphics have been improved in any significant way since Final Fantasy X " , while GameSpot said " X @-@ 2 doesn 't look that much better than X did two years ago " . Electronic Gaming Monthly regarded this reuse of code as " [ tripping up ] in the one area where Final Fantasy titles usually shine " . 
 The game 's soundtrack was met with mixed feelings , because Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's score was the first in the series without input from Nobuo Uematsu , composer of all previous games in the main series , and because of the change to a distinct J @-@ pop atmosphere . While IGN commented that the music provided an " appropriately fitting backdrop " and 1UP.com suggested that it " certainly is in keeping with the new flavor " , others , such as Electronic Gaming Monthly , regarded it as " too bubbly . " One staff member at RPGamer suggested that " the absence of Uematsu proves deafening , " and " the soundtrack that accompanies this nonsensical adventure manages to encapsulate the shallow nature of the game perfectly . " Moreover , some reviewers felt that the outfits worn by the main characters are too revealing and aimed at making the game more appealing to Final Fantasy 's largely male audience . 
 Despite the negative comments it has received , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's critical reception has been largely positive , with IGN summarizing it as " a brilliant and addictive romp through Spira that we 're certainly glad to experience " , and GameSpot commenting that it is " every bit as poignant , endearing , and engrossing as its forebears , " with strengths that " ultimately make ... X @-@ 2 's minor flaws forgivable " . The game maintains an 86 @.@ 25 % approval rating on GameRankings and an 85 / 100 rating on Metacritic , both only slightly down from its predecessor . 
 = Kaunas Fortress = 
 Kaunas Fortress ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> , Russian : <unk> <unk> ) is the remains of a fortress complex in Kaunas , Lithuania . It was constructed and renovated between 1882 and 1915 to protect the Russian Empire 's western borders , and was designated a " first @-@ class " fortress in 1887 . During World War I , the complex was the largest defensive structure in the entire state , occupying 65 km2 ( 25 sq mi ) . 
 The fortress was battle @-@ tested in 1915 when Germany attacked the Russian Empire , and withstood eleven days of assault before capture . After World War I , the fortress ' military importance declined as advances in weaponry rendered it increasingly obsolete . It was used by various civil institutions and as a garrison . 
 During World War II , parts of the fortress complex were used by the Nazi Germany for detention , interrogation , and execution . About 50 @,@ 000 people were executed there , including more than 30 @,@ 000 victims of the Holocaust . Some sections have since been restored ; the Ninth Fort houses a museum and memorial devoted to the victims of wartime mass executions . The complex is the most complete remaining example of a Russian Empire fortress . 
 = = Background = = 
 The city of Kaunas is located at the confluence of two rivers , the Neman and Neris , which link Lithuania 's interior and its capital , Vilnius , to the Baltic Sea . The Baltic peoples had created significant domains by the 1st century , and came into conflict with the Scandinavians and the Slavs ; the Teutonic Order began targeting Lithuanian lands at the beginning of the 13th century . Since Lithuania was heavily wooded and its lands were often impassable , its interior was most approachable along its rivers when frozen and during the short dry harvest season in late summer . In response to this vulnerability , defensive structures , including a brick castle in Kaunas , were in place at various points on the Nemunas River by the 14th century . The city was first mentioned in written sources in 1361 ; it received Magdeburg rights , regulating its autonomy and establishing trade protocols , from Vytautas the Great in 1408 . An outpost of the Hanseatic League was created there in 1441 . By the end of the 16th century Kaunas had become a major regional trade center , but plagues , fires , and wars adversely affected the country and city during the 17th and 18th centuries . Following the partitions of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth at the end of the 18th century , Lithuania was incorporated into the Russian Empire . Two major 19th century projects contributed to the city 's revival . The Augustów Canal , completed in 1832 , linked the Neman to the Black Sea , and a rail line linking Saint Petersburg , Warsaw , and Germany via Kaunas was completed in 1862 ; it was part of a limited network of western Russian railways . 
 Russia 's western borders needed support , and fortresses existed or were being built in Latvia , Ukraine , and Belarus . The concept of building a fortress in Lithuania was discussed without result in 1796 , but became a critical concern after the French invasion of Russia in 1812 led by Napoleon . The Grande Armée managed to cross the Nemunas near Kaunas on its drive towards Moscow without major difficulties . An increasingly unified Germany troubled the Empire during the second half of the century . A fortress in Kaunas would present an obstacle to attacks from the west , preventing further incursions towards Riga and Vilnius . In order to control the region , attackers would need to first neutralize Kaunas . Facing this possibility and evaluating the natural advantages of the city , Russian officials decided to construct a fortress there . After several delays , on July 7 , 1879 Tsar Alexander II issued an edict ordering its construction . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The first design was overseen by Generals Nikolay <unk> , Konstantin Zverev , and Ivan <unk> . As originally planned , the fortress encompassed a huge site , consisting of seven forts and nine defensive batteries arranged in concentric loops . The plan included support buildings and infrastructures , such as barracks , new roads , and an ammunition depot . Construction began in 1882 ; about 4 @,@ 000 workers were mustered for the project . The principal structures were concentrated in Freda , <unk> , <unk> , and the new section of the city . The project significantly affected the daily life of Kaunas residents , and there were plans to detach the fortress into an independent administrative unit governed by a military board ; its commandant wrote that " There is no city of Kaunas , there is only the Fortress of Kaunas . " 
 The first forts were built using bricks reinforced with thick ramparts of earth , which were incorporated into the surrounding relief , making them harder to breach . They were symmetrical , usually having five faces , with positions for infantry and artillery . These forts were built according to the standard Russian brick fort design of the time . Therefore , the first seven forts were very similar ; they differed only in the layout of their interiors , their integration into the surrounding relief , and in some construction details . They would also be renovated in slightly different ways . Batteries were built between adjacent forts ; these were fortifications containing various types of artillery , located along the fortress ' outer lines and usually erected on the hills . The first construction phase was completed in 1887 . The fortress was designated first @-@ class in that year , marking its importance and defensive capabilities , and Otto Klem was named its first commandant . At the same time , administrative rules were established to manage the fortress ' impact on the city and its surrounding areas ; the height of the fortress ' civil buildings was restricted . 
 During 1890 work began on an eighth fort , known as Linkuva ; new construction techniques were introduced , particularly reinforced concrete . The Linkuva fort became the most modern entrenchment , equipped with electricity , sewerage , and casemates for a garrison of 1 @,@ 000 personnel . At the same time , massive groundworks were laid along with additional defensive structures , effecting the complete enclosure of the city center between the Rivers Nemunas and Neris . By 1890 , seven forts had been completed , supporting roads had been constructed , and a railroad bridge over the Nemunas had been adapted for military transport . By now , expenditures on the fortress had amounted to over nine million rubles . The first bricks for a church that would serve the garrison were laid in 1891 ; it was completed in 1893 . The following year construction began on a dedicated narrow gauge railway . 
 The Ninth Fort , begun in 1903 , was the first of its kind in the Empire . The structure was a trapezoid , encompassing one infantry rampart , and was equipped with two armored watchtowers , electricity , and ventilation . The walls of its cannon casemates were covered with cork to reduce firing noise . The cost of this single fort was 850 @,@ 000 rubles . 
 The complex of forts and defensive structures was divided into four sectors . The first followed the left bank of the Nemunas to its confluence with the <unk> River and included the three earliest forts . The second sector extended from the <unk> to <unk> monastery and included two forts . The third extended from the right to the left bank of the Nemunas ; this sector also contained two forts . The fourth and last sector stretched from the right bank of the Neris to the left bank of the Nemunas , comprising two forts , including the newest – the Ninth Fort . 
 As new building and weapons technologies developed , the fortress was repeatedly renovated in order to maintain its military effectiveness . In 1912 an expansion and reconstruction initiative was launched . This project called for twelve new forts along with batteries , support buildings , and defensive structures . Its completion was scheduled for 1917 . The older forts were to be completely encircled by the new construction , which was meant to employ the newest military technologies . During the early realization of the plan , new defensive entrenchments were built and the old forts were strengthened with concrete . However , when action began on the Eastern Front during World War I , work on the fortress was halted . In 1915 only one fort , the Ninth , conformed with the new technological criteria , while the Tenth Fort was only partially built . The complex then covered about 65 km2 ( 25 sq mi ) and contained a 30 km ( 19 mi ) internal railway , power plant , water supply system , mill , bakery , brewery , food bank , and telegraph . Despite the fact that the fortress ' renovations and new construction had not been finished , it presented a formidable challenge to its attackers . 
 = = World War I = = 
 In 1915 , Germany and the Central Powers began an offensive against Russia and advanced towards Lithuania and Kaunas . The German army reached Kaunas Fortress in July 1915 . At that time , about 90 @,@ 000 soldiers , commanded by Vladimir Grigoriev ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) , manned the fortress . To attack the fortress , the Germans brought four divisions to the operation , which were placed under the command of Karl <unk> . 
 To support this attack , the Germans constructed a railroad to transport their 42 @-@ centimetre ( 17 in ) Gamma @-@ Gerät howitzer . The howitzer 's shell weighed about 1 ton with a range of 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) . Several days into the siege more guns of various calibers were deployed . 
 The German army concentrated its attack on the First , Second and Third Forts , which were the complex 's oldest structures . The army did not surround the entire fortress , and its defense was able to regroup and resupply . On August 8 , the Germans intensified their bombardment , but the fortress garrison withstood several attempts to breach the defensive perimeter . Several days afterward , the bombardment of the fortress reached its peak ; its defenders sustained heavy casualty rates of 50 % to 75 % . On August 14 , over 1 @,@ 000 defending troops were killed , but the Germans were unable to completely overcome the fortress ' defenses . However , on the next day , Gamma @-@ Gerät shells destroyed the First Fort and the Germans transferred their attentions to the Second Fort . The fight was now within the confines of the greater fortress complex . 
 At the cost of many casualties , the Third Fort 's defenders delayed the advance of the Germans , but were forced to evacuate and retreat later the same day . The next day the Fourth Fort was abandoned and the Fifth Fort was conquered soon afterwards . In a chain reaction , the other forts began capitulating . Commander Grigoriev abandoned his post and escaped to <unk> . When the Germans crossed the Nemunas river they captured the Sixth and Seventh Forts . The remaining two forts were captured soon afterwards . After eleven days of fighting , the fortress had been taken . 
 The defensive forces sustained 20 @,@ 000 casualties , and about 1 @,@ 300 weapons were captured by the Germans . Grigoriev was arrested by Russian authorities , tried , and sentenced to fifteen years in prison for failure to properly perform his duties . He also suffered the revocation of all his awards , military degrees , and honors . The Germans used materials from the fortress elsewhere during their war against Russia . 
 Researchers have identified factors contributing to the relatively rapid fall of the fortress . It had not been completely renovated ; its defenders were inexperienced ; the crew had been frequently rotated , and had not been able to familiarize themselves with the surrounding area and with the fortress . Although most of their experience lay in the defense of the fortress ' interior , they were dispatched to fight on open ground . When the combat moved outside the fortress , communication lines were disrupted by the German bombardment , and the fortress defense was unable to restore complete communication with the command center or with other forts . The absence of external support was a crucial factor in its fall . 
 = = Interwar = = 
 Lithuania regained its independence on February 16 , 1918 and the old fortress was placed under engineering staff supervision . Those materials that had not been taken by the Germans were used to resupply Lithuanian military needs , and for the construction of the armored train Gediminas , named after the 14th century Grand Duke of Lithuania Gediminas . In 1920 , the Kaunas Fortress Board was formed and charged with the task of administering the fortress . Due to the development of new military technologies , its reconstruction was seen as a vast and inappropriate expense . The fortress ' armament was dismantled and the trenches were filled with scrap iron . 
 Sections of the fortress were given to various civil institutions , while the army occupied the barracks of the former 28th Division . The Sixth and Ninth forts were used as prisons and the Central Archive was located in the Seventh Fort ; the Republic 's official radio station was based in the fortress ; a gas chamber was installed in the gunpowder depot of the First Fort and used to execute condemned prisoners . Some sections were used as housing for the poor . As the city of Kaunas expanded near the complex , its roads became public streets . The structures and layouts of the new sections were influenced by the presence of the fortress . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Adjustments to the secret protocols of the 1939 Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact assigned Lithuania to the Soviet sphere of influence , and it was occupied by the USSR in June 1940 . The fortress was then used to conduct interrogations and house political prisoners . The pact was broken when Germany invaded USSR on June 22 , 1941 . Nazi forces entered Kaunas on June 24 . The Sixth Fort became a POW camp for Red Army soldiers . Kaunas 's Jewish population numbered between 35 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 ; few would survive the Holocaust in Lithuania . The Nazis , aided by Lithuanian auxiliaries , began massacring the Jewish population . On July 6 , acting under orders of the SS , Lithuanian auxiliary police units shot nearly 3 @,@ 000 Jews at the Seventh Fort . On August 18 , in what came to be known as the " intellectuals action " , over 1 @,@ 800 Jews were shot at the Fourth Fort . On October 28 , the " Great Action " took place — the residents of the Kaunas Ghetto were summoned , and over 9 @,@ 000 men , women and children were taken to the Ninth Fort and executed . During the later course of the occupation , over 5 @,@ 000 Jewish deportees from Central Europe would be executed at this fort . About 60 escaped in December 1943 ; they had been assigned to excavate and burn the bodies of earlier victims , as part of Aktion 1005 . Thirteen of these escapees were able to document the Aktion 's attempt to hide the evidence of the mass murders . 
 When Germany began losing the war and the battlefront approached Lithuania , the German defense began attempts to prepare a defensive in Kaunas , including the use of the fortress . The Nemunas River was labelled " the line of catastrophe " , and Adolf Hitler called for its defense at any price . On August 1 , 1944 Kaunas was captured by the Red Army . The remaining fortress structures were used for military needs and several of the original structures were demolished or redeveloped . 
 The number of deaths at the fortress during World War II vary by source ; the United States Holocaust Museum gives detailed descriptions of the deaths of about 18 @,@ 500 Holocaust victims . Other sources mention 30 @,@ 000 Jewish deaths , with total number 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Lithuania remained a Soviet Socialist Republic until 1990 . In 1948 , the headquarters of the 7th Guards Cherkassy Airborne Division was established in the fortress ' commandant 's headquarters . The barracks were used by the 108th paratroopers regiment and the Fifth Fort served the air defense regiment . Most of the forts , however , served as depots or housed farming organizations . During the postwar expansion and development of the city , parts of the fortress were dismantled ; as part of the construction of Kaunas Polytechnic Institute the ground @-@ level entrenchments of one defensive sector were destroyed . 
 In 1958 , the Ninth Fort was dedicated as a museum . During 1959 , its first exhibition was opened , memorializing the crimes that had taken place there . The museum later expanded its scope to cover the fortress ' entire history . A 32 m ( 105 ft ) tall memorial to the victims was constructed there in 1984 . However , the Soviet military occupied most of the fortress until Lithuania re @-@ established its independence . After the withdrawal of Soviet forces , completed in 1993 , Lithuanian military bases were established at several forts . 
 As of early 2007 , only the Ninth Fort had been partly renovated . It is now devoted to the Holocaust and Lithuania 's occupations by the Nazis and the Soviets . The museum , which holds over 65 @,@ 000 artefacts , is sponsored by the Lithuanian Ministry of Culture . Since the early 2000s , it has received about 100 @,@ 000 visitors per year and hosted Holocaust education seminars and workshops . In 2005 , the international project " Baltic Culture and Tourism Route Fortresses " was launched , with support from the European Union . Its goal is the promotion of transnational scientific cooperation in monument protection , along with the creation of strategies to reconstruct and manage fortresses in the region . Kaunas Fortress is a part of this project . In 2007 , Seventh fort was sold , new owners started the restoration process , since 2009 Seventh fort is open as a fortification and military museum and is the only brick fort in Kaunas suitable for safe visiting . In the 2000s , a variety of entities owned parts of the complex : the Ministry of Culture , the Ministry of Defence , the State Property Fund , and the City of Kaunas . The site still contains unexploded ordnance , although a 1995 project removed about 1 @.@ 9 tonnes of explosives . Other restoration issues include uncovered wells , poor drainage and ventilation , erosion , possible chemical contaminants , vegetative overgrowth , and the presence of a protected bat colony . Despite the damage that it has sustained , the Kaunas Fortress complex is the most complete of the surviving Russian Empire fortresses . 
 = Bigipedia = 
 Bigipedia is a comedy sketch show broadcast on BBC Radio 4 that first aired between 23 July and 13 August 2009 . A second series of four episodes began on 12 July 2011 . The show 's storyline revolves around " Bigipedia " , a fictional website broadcast on radio and parody of Wikipedia , the online encyclopedia . The series mocks Wikipedia and other aspects of the Internet . The BBC Press Office described the show as , " a unique experiment in ' <unk> ' " . The series was created by co @-@ star Nick Doody , who also co @-@ writes the show with Matt Kirshen and a wider team of writers . It is produced by <unk> Productions . 
 Critics have given Bigipedia positive reviews . The series was marketed by the BBC as " The Sunday Format for the online age " , and critics have given Bigipedia favourable comparisons with its predecessor . The quality of the writing has also been praised . However , a few critics have expressed reservations about the way the show is presented . The first series of Bigipedia was made available to purchase as a download from <unk> from 1 December 2009 . The second series was made available to purchase as a download from AudioGo from 5 December 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bigipedia is a website broadcast on the radio . Like Wikipedia , it contains articles and discussion pages about a range of different subjects , which can be edited by anyone . Among the similarities are articles , discussion pages , disambiguation pages , featured articles , a news section and a " Did you know ? " section for new articles . The articles cover a range of fictional celebrities , bands , films , television series , products and a running gag series of articles on anthropomorphic animal characters from Uruguayan safety campaigns . 
 Bigipedia differs from Wikipedia in some ways . For example , Bigipedia includes puzzles and competitions , sells its own software , has a range of screensavers , and a section for children called <unk> , which has had different names in the past which have all had to be changed for different reasons . For example , the name changed from <unk> " due to a misunderstanding " , Hanging at the School Gates " for reasons you may have seen in the news " and Underage Fun " due to a copyright infringement " . 
 Also , while Wikipedia does not have advertising , Bigipedia does and is also sponsored by a fictional wine @-@ like drink called " Chianto " which is referred to as " this horrific drink " . The Bigipedia article on Chianto says : " Over the years it has been sold as a hair remover , self @-@ defence spray , hair restorer , and to farmers as a humane way of killing chickens – by putting it into the pig 's feed and leaving the gate open . By morning not only were the chickens killed , but often plucked , too . " 
 The first series ended with Bigipedia attempting to take over the world , having crushed a rebellion in the Philippines and feeding nanobots into the heads of anyone listening to the programme . At the start of the second series , Bigipedia acknowledges that the original Bigipedia , dubbed Bigipedia 1 @.@ 0 suffered from " security and sentient omniscience issues " and apologises for , " the temporary cyber enslavement of 88 % of mankind and the forming of a <unk> hybrid hivemind centred in the Philippines " , in an incident they refer to as " The Glitch " . The site has been updated and is now known as Bigipedia 2 @.@ 0 . 
 The second series begins with reports of a gigantic Chianto slick in the Gulf of Mexico , a parody of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . At the end of the series , a mix of white and red Chianto in the slick result in the creation of a Chianto " ovum " , which hatches at the bottom of the sea as a monstrous party @-@ animal being called the Chianto Leviathan , which makes its way to the Bigipedia servers in Mexico . The Leviathan attempts to gain all the world 's knowledge by accessing the system . The programme ends with Bigipedia playing " prerecorded programmes " while they attempt to stop the Leviathan . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was originally conceived by Doody , who was working with producer David Tyler on another BBC Radio 4 comedy series , Armando Iannucci 's Charm Offensive . Doody attended a meeting where people were discussing new ideas for radio shows , and Kirshen suggested the idea , and both he and Kirshen wrote the full proposal . Radio 4 liked the idea and a pilot was made . Tyler went on to produce and direct Bigipedia . 
 Doody and Kirshen describe the show as " writing @-@ heavy " . Doody said in an interview with the British Comedy Guide : " Compared to most radio shows , it 's incredibly dense , material @-@ wise , and very fast @-@ moving . I think Matt and I would like some of it to be even faster , but sometimes people who 've heard the pilot say things like , " It 's almost too much . " I really like that . I like that it 's something you kind of need to hear twice to catch everything . When we got the series , I honestly didn 't know where we 'd come up with the material of the quality we were determined to keep up . " 
 Some of the sketches in Bigipedia are inspired directly by articles on Wikipedia . Kirshen said in the same interview : " There 's a ' Bee Whisperer ' in Episode 3 that came from clicking the " Random article " link on Wikipedia . I don 't remember what the page we got was , but about three logical leaps later we landed on that idea . " 
 It was revealed by Doody on his Doubling Up podcast with Rob <unk> that there was an extended edition of " The Line " sketch , which he broadcast on the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The reviews of Bigipedia have been mainly positive . Before the series began , Scott Matthewman in The Stage compared Bigipedia to The Sunday Format , saying : " Indeed , the comparison even makes it into the BBC 's own press notes . Will this version , which takes the mickey out of online communication , deserve the comparison ? That 's something we 'll have to wait and see . " Chris <unk> in The Independent on Sunday also commented that there are references to Spinal Tap , On the Hour and Brass Eye . 
 Elisabeth Mahoney in The Guardian said that she liked the Chianto running gag , while Gillian Reynolds from the Daily Telegraph commented positively on Bigipedia saying it was , " the first late @-@ night comedy in ages that has made me laugh , about computers and why I 'm scared of them , about vile TV shows and meaningless commercials . Written by Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen , performed with zest by a sparkling cast . Bound to become a cult . " Reviewing the second series Elizabeth Day in The Observer described Bigipedia as , " a hilariously mad portrayal of information overload in the computer age . " 
 Clare Heal in the Sunday Express gave a mixed review , saying that while she found it amusing , it was too similar to the Internet saying , " The programme 's only failing was that on occasion it was a little to [ sic ] reminiscent of the real Internet , ie a virtual ocean full of morons willing to shout loudly about things even ( or perhaps especially ) if they know nothing about them . You wouldn 't want more than half an hour of Bigipedia , no matter how amusing it is . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 = = = 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 = 1909 Grand Isle hurricane = 
 The 1909 Grand Isle hurricane was a large and deadly Category 3 hurricane that caused severe damage and killed more than 400 people throughout Cuba and the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico . Forming out of a tropical disturbance just south of Hispaniola on September 13 , 1909 , the initial depression slowly intensified as it moved west @-@ northwest towards Jamaica . Two days later , the system attained tropical storm intensity and turned northwestward towards Cuba . On September 16 , it attained the equivalent of a modern @-@ day Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale and further strengthened to attain winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) before making landfall in Pinar del Río Province , Cuba on September 18 . After a briefly weakening over land , the system regained strength over the Gulf of Mexico , with peak winds reaching 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) the following day . After only slightly weakening , the hurricane increased in forward motion and made landfall near Grand Isle , Louisiana on September 21 . The system quickly lost strength after moving over land , dissipating the following day over Missouri . 
 In the Caribbean , little impact was known to have been caused by the storm outside of Cuba where rough seas killed 29 people . In the United States , the hurricane wrought catastrophic damage across Louisiana and Mississippi . Throughout these states , 371 people are known to have been killed , making it the sixth deadliest hurricane in United States history at the time ; however , it has since been surpassed by five other cyclones . Along the Louisiana coastline , a powerful storm surge penetrated 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) inland , destroying the homes of 5 @,@ 000 people . Thousands of other homes throughout the affected region lost their roofs and telegraph communication was crippled . In terms of monetary losses , the storm wrought $ 11 million ( 1909 USD ; $ 265 million 2010 USD ) in damage throughout its path . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the Grand Isle hurricane were in a tropical disturbance over the western Atlantic Ocean in early September 1909 . Enhanced by a strong area of high pressure over the Azores and British Isles , the system was able to gradually intensify as it neared the Lesser Antilles . On September 10 , barometric pressures across several of the islands in the eastern Caribbean fell , indicating that a disturbance was moving through the region . According to the Atlantic hurricane database , maintained by the National Hurricane Center , the system developed into a tropical depression south of Hispaniola in the Caribbean on September 13 . However , meteorologist José Fernández Partagás stated that there was no evidence of a closed circulation , a key component of tropical cyclones , until September 14 . Tracking west @-@ northwestward , the depression brushed the coast of Haiti before attaining tropical storm intensity off the northwestern coast of Jamaica on September 15 . 
 After reaching this strength , the storm slowed and gradually took a more northwesterly course , heading towards Pinar del Río Province in western Cuba . On September 16 , the system attained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , what would now be considered a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Moving at a slow pace of 4 to 6 mph ( 6 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 7 km / h ) , the system gradually intensified . Late on September 18 , the center of the storm was estimated to have made landfall in Pinar del Río Province with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) ; an atmospheric pressure of 976 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 82 inHg ) was recorded during its passage . The storm 's eye passed over the town of Manta for four hours , between 3 : 00 pm and 7 : 00 pm on September 17 . 
 Slight weakening took place after moving over western Cuba ; however , once over the Gulf of Mexico , the storm steadily regained its strength . By September 19 , the system re @-@ attained the equivalent intensity of a Category 2 hurricane and the forward motion increased . Early that morning , the storm further intensified to attain its peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , equivalent to a mid @-@ range Category 3 cyclone . By the afternoon of September 19 , reports from the Louisiana and Mississippi coastline indicated that the outer bands of the hurricane were producing scattered rainfall . 
 Early on September 21 , it was estimated that the center of the hurricane made landfall near Grand Isle , Louisiana with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . A pressure of 952 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 11 inHg ) was recorded around this time , the lowest in relation to the storm . Operational analysis of the storm indicated that it attained the equivalent intensity of a Category 4 hurricane as it made landfall . The storm 's lowest pressure was also operationally listed as 931 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 49 inHg ) . This pressure was based on operational estimates in relation to the system 's storm surge and was not directly measured . However , later research of the storm determined that its winds had not exceeded 120 mph ( 185 km / h ) . At this time , the hurricane 's radius of maximum wind was roughly 32 mi ( 51 km ) and the overall size of the storm was estimated to be 374 mi ( 602 km ) wide . Once overland , the system quickly weakened , losing hurricane status within 12 hours and later to a tropical depression over southern Missouri . The remnants of the system were last noted on September 22 as it merged with a trough over the Midwestern United States . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In western Cuba , the hurricane brought strong winds and heavy rains to several areas . A maximum of 7 @.@ 88 in ( 200 mm ) of rain fell in a 24 ‑ hour span . The strongest recorded winds reached 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Numerous buildings in western Cuba sustained extensive damage and a large portion of the orange crop was lost . Ships were pushed onshore by the hurricane 's large swells . Throughout Pinar del Río Province , damage was estimated at $ 1 million ( 1909 USD ) . Amidst rough seas produced by the hurricane , the steamship Nicholas <unk> sank off the coast of Cuba , near the Isle of Pines . At least 29 people drowned in the wreck . Of the fatalities , 27 were crew members and two were passengers . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Prior to the hurricane 's arrival in the United States , the National Weather Bureau issued several hurricane warnings . As the storm passed over western Cuba , warnings were declared for much of the Gulf Coast of Florida and all ships in the Gulf or planning to set sail were advised return and remain at port . Warnings were then issued for the northern Gulf Coast , allowing residents time to evacuate before the storm struck . 
 In the United States , the storm wrought extensive damage along the Gulf Coast . At least 371 people were killed by the storm ; however , this is considered a conservative estimate and the true death toll may never be known . Of the known fatalities , 353 took place in Louisiana and 18 in Mississippi . This makes the 1909 Grand Isle hurricane the eleventh deadliest hurricane in United States history . However , at the time of its occurrence , it was the sixth deadliest storm in the country . Damage throughout Louisiana and Mississippi was estimated to be at least $ 10 million ( 1909 USD ) . 
 = = = = Louisiana = = = = 
 In New Orleans , the storm caused substantial damage , with many homes destroyed and ships wrecked . Communication with the city was completely lost after most of the telegraph wires were downed . Around 3 : 00 pm on September 21 , advisories from the New Orleans Weather Bureau ceased , leading to concerns over the state of the city . Prior to the communication loss , the Weather Bureau reported that waves along the Mississippi River banks were surpassing 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) and water rise in New Orleans itself could reach unprecedented levels . Several lakes overflowed their banks as water from the Mississippi River back @-@ flowed into them , flooding nearby lowlands . The resulting floods , which inundated areas with upwards of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) of water , were similar in scale to the flooding caused by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , nearly 100 years later . However , due to the lack of residential buildings in the area at the time , the flooding caused far less destruction than that of Katrina . A report falsely claimed that the city 's French Quarter was " swept away " . A total of 306 coal barges sank off the coast of New Orleans and Lobdell ( West Baton Rouge Parish ) , incurring over $ 1 million in losses . Nearly every sugar cane plantation between New Orleans and Baton Rouge sustained damage , resulting in at least $ 1 million in loses . 
 Strong winds from the hurricane lifted homes off their foundations and in some cases , the homes were blown away from where they originally stood . Many towns in Louisiana were isolated immediately after the storm as telegraph communication was lost . Along a 25 mi ( 40 km ) near where the storm made landfall , a large 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) storm surge destroyed the homes of 5 @,@ 000 people and traveled 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) inland . At least 300 of the fatalities took place in southeastern Louisiana , the hardest hit region . Many people who were boating on the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico were caught in the storm 's 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) winds and officials presumed that all who were caught in this perished . Near the Texas border , it was estimated that two @-@ thirds of the unharvested rice crop was ruined by the hurricane . In Baton Rouge alone , damage from the hurricane was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 9 million ( 1909 USD ) . Throughout Louisiana , a total of 353 people were killed by the hurricane according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . A maximum of 13 @.@ 5 in ( 340 mm ) of rain fell in the state during the passage of the hurricane . 
 = = = = Elsewhere = = = = 
 At least 18 fatalities also took place in Mississippi where many towns and cities were flooded . The cities of Natchez and Greenville were mostly destroyed by the hurricane . In Natchez , winds up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) blew roofs off homes and shut down the local power station , leaving the city in darkness . Telegraph wires were also downed , cutting communication with the surrounding area . The Biloxi Bay Bridge was swamped by large waves and it was thought that it would be destroyed by the storm at one point . Although the bridge held through the storm , one person died after being washed away while crossing it . Initial estimates stated that damage in Biloxi was between $ 40 @,@ 000 and $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 1909 USD ) . Along a 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) stretch of beach in Mississippi , all of the homes and 300 ft ( 91 m ) of the electric car line were destroyed by the hurricane 's storm surge . Further north in Jackson , communication in the city was lost and the dome of the newly constructed capital building was destroyed by high winds . Two people were killed in the city after being crushed by falling walls . A maximum of 7 @.@ 02 in ( 178 mm ) of rain fell in Mississippi during the passage of the hurricane . 
 In areas in and around Pensacola , Florida , 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds caused some damage . At the local pier , a ship , named Romanoff , toppled over onto a wharf due to large waves produced by the hurricane . Two barges carrying lumber sank near the western beach of Pensacola and several others lost their cargo . Many small ships were destroyed by large swells and according to the New York Times , some of these were " ... swamped and pounded into pieces " . Further inland , the remnants of the hurricane brought light to moderate rainfall to portions of the central United States . A maximum of 3 @.@ 2 in ( 81 mm ) of rain fell in Arkansas ; 3 @.@ 35 in ( 85 mm ) in Missouri ; 2 @.@ 54 in ( 65 mm ) in Tennessee ; and 2 @.@ 29 in ( 58 mm ) in Kentucky . A 25 mi ( 40 km ) section of the Louisville and Nashville railroad and an 8 mi ( 13 km ) section of the Illinois central railroad were washed out by floods caused by the storm 's remnants . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although the storm killed more than 370 people in the United States , the National Weather Bureau was credited for " invaluable warnings " prior to the hurricane 's arrival , saving many lives . Following the hurricane 's landfall on September 21 , rescue and relief efforts began taking place on September 22 near Houma , Louisiana . By September 25 , thousands of dollars worth of supplies had been sent to survivors of the storm . However , more than four days after the passage of the storm , many other areas devastated by the hurricane had yet to receive aid from either the government or United States Army . Congressman Robert F. Broussard sent a telegraph to the war department requesting aid ; however , he had not received a response by September 27 . Initially , news reports focused on the large loss of life from the storm but , once the lack of aid was noticed , their attention shifted to the hundreds of survivors who were left homeless and in dire need of basic necessities . Within days of the storm 's passage , there were fears that the storm ruined the cotton crop in southern Louisiana and would cause a spike in prices . However , in a report released on October 4 , 1909 , it was stated that the losses were much less than previously thought and as a result , there would be no change in the cotton price . According to a report in 2009 , the rice and cotton crops sustained 35 % and 20 % losses respectively in the wake of the hurricane . 
 In 2002 , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration added the storm surge from the hurricane to the Global Tsunami Database based on newspaper reports referring to the event as a tidal wave . However , four years later , a more detailed study of possible tsunamis in the past resulted in this event being " flagged " as suspect . After further review of the news articles indicating that the wave came after the hurricane , it was determined that there was a misinterpretation of the publishing date since the article was archived by telegraph on September 22 , 1909 , the day after the hurricane made landfall . In light of this research , the possibility of the wave being a tsunami was denied ; however , it remains in the database as a " debunked " event . 
 = Ontario Highway 48 = 
 King 's Highway 48 , also known as Highway 48 , is a provincially maintained highway in southern Ontario that extends from Major Mackenzie Drive in Markham , through Whitchurch @-@ Stouffville and East Gwillimbury , to Highway 12 south @-@ east of Beaverton . The route is generally rural and straight , passing near several communities within the Regional Municipality of York . The route is 65 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 40 @.@ 5 mi ) long . Most part of the road has a speed limit of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , except within town limits , where the speed limit is reduced to 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) or 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) . 
 Highway 48 was first designated in 1937 to connect Port Bolster with Highway 12 in Beaverton . It was extended south to meet with Highway 401 in the 1950s in anticipation of a planned freeway connection around the eastern shore of Lake Simcoe that ultimately became Highway 404 . In the mid @-@ 1970s , Highway 48 assumed a portion of the route of Highway 46 in Victoria Country , now the city of Kawartha Lakes , extending the route to Highway 35 in Coboconk . Between then and 1998 , the route was 128 km ( 80 mi ) . However , on January 1 , 1998 the province transferred the responsibility of maintaining the southern and northern sections to the regional governments that those sections lie within . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 48 is an L shaped route , travelling north through York Region to the southern shores of Lake Simcoe before turning east towards Highway 12 . The route is 65 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 40 @.@ 5 mi ) long and travels through the municipalities of Markham , Whitchurch @-@ Stouffville , East Gwillimbury , and Brock . 
 Beginning at York Regional Road 25 ( Major Mackenzie Drive ) , the route progresses northward from the rural – urban fringe of the Greater Toronto Area into farmland . A future extension of Donald <unk> Parkway will bypass former Highway 48 ( Main Street ) through downtown Markham in 2018 just north of Major Mackenzie . The route travels northward for 34 km ( 21 mi ) along the 8th concession of York Region ( Yonge Street being the 1st ) to just south of Regional Road 32 ( Ravenshoe Road ) , intersecting with Elgin Mills Road , former Highway 47 ( Stouffville Road and Bloomington Road ) , York Regional Road 15 ( Aurora Road ) , York Regional Road 74 ( Vivian Road ) , York Regional Road 31 ( Davis Drive ) , York Regional Road 13 ( Mount Albert Road ) and <unk> Sideroad along the way . 
 North of Ravenshoe Road , the highway diverts onto the boundary between York and Durham through the community of Baldwin before jogging east at York Regional Road 79 ( Old Homestead Road ) . Just south of Sutton , the route curves east , meeting York Regional Road 9 ( High Street ) , which travels into the town . Despite that the highway is now travelling directly east , directional signs still reference the direction of this highway as north . Passing through Virginia and approximately a kilometre inland from Lake Simcoe , the highway widens to four lanes and passes through a moderately developed area , with frequent businesses lining the route . It passes south of Duclos Point Provincial Nature Reserve prior to meeting Durham Regional Road 23 ( Lake Ridge Road ) south of Port Bolster , where it crosses from the Regional Municipality of York to the Regional Municipality of Durham . The highway jogs northeastward several kilometres to align with the former Brock – <unk> township line , crossing alongside a power transmission corridor several times along this segment . The final section travels eastward to Highway 12 , south of Beaverton and west of Cannington and Woodville . 
 The route is mostly rural , passing around the urban areas of Stouffville and south of Sutton . However , the east – west section that lies to the south of Lake Simcoe is slightly developed and features a reduced speed limit of 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) . The remainder of the route is signed at 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Like other provincial routes in Ontario , Highway 48 is maintained by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . In 2010 , traffic surveys conducted by the ministry showed that on average , 13 @,@ 300 vehicles used the highway daily along the 6 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) section between York Regional Road 25 ( Major Mackenzie Drive ) and York Regional Road 14 ( Stouffville Road ) while 5 @,@ 950 vehicles did so each day along the 5 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 6 mi ) section between Durham Regional Road 23 ( Lake Ridge Road ) and Brock Side Road 17 ( former Highway 12 ) , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 48 incorporates a significant portion of the former Scarborough and Markham Plank Road , now known as Markham Road , into its length . This section was not incorporated into the highway until 1954 , yet predates the Highway 48 designation entirely . 
 Markham Road began as the eighth concession east of Yonge Street in the Home County of Upper Canada , and was blazed by settlers to whom land had been granted along the right @-@ of @-@ way . The right @-@ of @-@ way extended from Lake Ontario in the south to what is today York Region Road 8A ( Baseline Road ) in Sutton , just south of Lake Simcoe , in the north . Improvements to the road and the necessary funds were authorized by an act of the Upper Canada provincial parliament on February 13 , 1833 for the section in Scarborough township between Danforth Road ( present day Painted Post Drive ) and the Eighth Concession at the border with Markham township . These improvements were supervised by residents Peter Secor , Richard Houck and Robert Armstrong . By 1847 , the section between Scarborough and Markham had become known as the Scarborough and Markham Road . On July 28 of that year , the parliament of the Province of Canada passed an act to establish the Scarborough and Markham Plank @-@ road Company , which was authorized to further improve the road surface to macadamized or planked construction between Kingston Road in Scarborough and Markham Village in the north , and further north and then east to Stouffville along the Markham @-@ Stouffville township line , a line then formed between today 's Stouffville Road and Main Street Stouffville . The company was allowed to erect gates and charge tolls to pay for the work . 
 On March 24 , 1937 , the 9 @.@ 6 km ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) gravel road between Beaverton and Port Bolster , known as the Port Bolster Road , was assumed by the Department of Highways ; it was paved in 1947 . On February 10 , 1954 , the highway was extended 82 km ( 51 mi ) to the future site of Highway 401 , where a cloverleaf interchange was constructed in anticipation of it developing into a freeway around the eastern side of Lake Simcoe ; Highway 404 was constructed for this purpose , but along or parallel to Woodbine Avenue instead . In 1962 , the highway was extended to Highway 46 at Bolsover via a concurrency with Highway 12 north from Beaverton . This routing would last until November 4 , 1966 , when the 10 @.@ 3 km ( 6 @.@ 4 mi ) Beaverton Bypass opened , routing Highway 12 to the east . A new road was opened connecting Highway 48 south of Port Bolster with the bypass on the same day , and both Highway 12 and Highway 48 were rerouted . Portions of the former route of Highway 48 and Highway 12 were renumbered as Highway <unk> . However , the segment between Port Bolster and what is now Brock Sideline 17 was decommissioned entirely . The original route of Highway 48 , prior to 1954 , is now part of Durham Regional Road 23 . 
 On June 28 , 1967 , the routing of Highway 46 was shifted in the vicinity of Balsam Lake on to a new inland bypass ; the old route became known as West Bay Drive . On 1975 , Highway 46 was truncated at Bolsover ; the severed section was renumbered as an extension of Highway 48 , bringing it to its peak length of 129 @.@ 2 km ( 80 @.@ 3 mi ) . The new section of highway between Highway 12 and Bolsover was reconstructed over the following year , opening to traffic on August 19 , 1976 . 
 The section between Highway 401 and the then @-@ unopened Highway 407 interchange was turned over to the Region of York and the City of Toronto on April 1 , 1995 , and is known as Markham Road south of Highway 407 , and Main Street thereafter to Sixteenth Avenue , where the name Markham Road resumes for 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) until Major Mackenzie Drive . The section within York Region is also designated as York Regional Road 68 . 
 On January 1 , 1998 , the section of Highway 48 between its southern junction with Highway 12 and Coboconk was transferred to the Regional Municipality of Durham and Victoria County ( now Kawartha Lakes ) , removing the concurrency with Highway 12 in the process . The section from Highway 12 to Highway 35 is now known as Portage Road and signed as Durham Regional Highway 48 and Kawartha Lakes Road 48 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 48 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Transit Authority of River City = 
 The Transit Authority of River City ( TARC ) is the major public transportation provider for the Louisville , Kentucky , United States metro area , which includes parts of Southern Indiana . This includes the Kentucky suburbs of Oldham County , Bullitt County , Clark County , and Floyd County in southern Indiana . TARC is publicly funded and absorbed various earlier private mass transit companies in Louisville , the largest of which was the Louisville Transit Company . 
 TARC operates a fleet of 225 accessible buses , including numerous hybrids . Starting in 2004 , TARC purchased hybrids , and by 2008 started purchasing clean diesel buses for a cleaner , greener fleet . By late Winter 2013 , TARC added 16 more clean diesels . Then , by mid @-@ Summer 2013 , 11 hybrids were added bringing TARC 's hybrid total to 32 . By Fall 2013 , TARC added 21 clean diesel commuter buses , then as of Fall 2014 TARC added 12 more clean diesels some of them are WiFi @-@ enabled and have comfortable seating . TARC has recently put 12 additional ( updated buses on the road with 13 more due to arrive by late 2016 . This brings their clean diesel total to 82 when the other 13 arrive . There will be 96 @.@ all @-@ electric buses have been circulating downtown Louisville since early 2015 , and eight more will be hitting the road on one local route serving the Iroquois neighborhood , and Iroquois park . These buses will not be fare free , and will have a 42 passenger capacity , and they will share the 8th street charging station with one of the trolley <unk> according to The Courier @-@ Journal . There are also two charging stations in downtown Louisville , one at 3rd and York , the other at 8th and Market . These buses will have a 30 @-@ passenger seating capacity , and be able to operate for up to two hours on a single charge . These buses , like the old trolleys , will be fare free . 
 TARC provides service 365 days a year . It also operates many specialized routes providing transportation to major local employers , educational institutions and recreational events . It began bus operations in 1974 . TARC has explored other forms of public transit , including light rail , but as of 2009 provides only bus service . 
 = = History = = 
 The transit authority was created in 1971 after 1970 legislation authorized city and county governments to operate mass @-@ transit systems using local funding . At the time , public transit was still being provided in Louisville by the private Louisville Transit Company . The Louisville Transit Company had long operated mass transit lines in Louisville , converted from electric trolleys to diesel buses in the late 1940s , and changing its name from the Louisville Railway Company in 1947 . 
 Following a trend seen in cities across America , the company had seen annual ridership decline from 84 million in 1920 to 14 million in 1970 . The ridership was no longer enough for to cover operating expenses and in 1971 it posted its first @-@ ever loss . In 1972 the company announced it would cease operations on September 1 , 1974 . 
 The local government began subsidizing fares in July 1973 , but this was not enough to make Louisville Transit Company profitable . At about the same time , Bridge Transit Co . , which provided mass transit between Louisville and Jeffersonville , ceased operations due to lack of revenue , clearly setting the stage for a metropolitan area without any private mass transit companies . 
 In 1974 , voters approved a controversial referendum allowing for an increased occupational tax to fund mass transit , which was pushed for by then @-@ mayor Harvey Sloane . Combined with a federal grant , this was enough for TARC to purchase the Louisville Transit Company , buy new buses , reduce fares , and extend new service lines . TARC bought up the remaining mass transit companies in the area ; Blue Motor Coach Lines , which served outlying areas , in 1976 and the Daisy Line , connecting New Albany and Louisville , in 1983 . 
 In 1993 , TARC experimented with a " water taxi " service connecting the Belle of Louisville wharf and <unk> Annie 's Restaurant in Jeffersonville . During the 1990s and early 2000s , TARC advocated extensive funding to build and operate light rail system in the Louisville area , but despite wide press coverage , the plans never went past planning stages . 
 In February 1994 , an audit committee headed by future political candidate Bruce Lunsford revealed TARC had been mismanaging funds and was on pace to deplete its once @-@ large trust fund due to <unk> expenses such as door @-@ to @-@ door services for the disabled as well as rates of spending on personal services and fringe benefits for administrators that was much higher than in transit companies for similar sized cities . In the fallout of the audit , TARC 's executive director resigned and fares were nearly doubled before year 's end . 
 In August 2011 , TARC 's new $ 4 @.@ 5 million , 17 @,@ 700 square @-@ foot , Maintenance and Training building received Gold LEED ( Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ) Certification . 
 = = Administration = = 
 TARC purchased Louisville 's Union Station for $ 2 million in 1977 , the year after the former train station had ceased rail operations . The <unk> was replaced with a large maintenance facility for TARC buses and the former train station is now TARC 's administrative headquarters . In 2003 , TARC did a major remodeling of Union Station for the first time since it purchased the facility . The renovation cost $ 2 @.@ 1 million . 
 TARC is administered by an eight @-@ member board . TARC had a budget of $ 67 @.@ 8 million for the 2008 – 09 fiscal year . Fares only cover about 12 % of TARC 's operating expenses ; the rest is paid for by Jefferson County 's occupational tax , federal aid and some other minor sources . The occupational tax is 0 @.@ 20 % , it makes up about two @-@ thirds of TARC 's operating expenses in any given year . The actual total varies due to availability of federal grants and fares collected . In 2002 , TARC had 710 employees , 460 of whom were bus drivers . 
 Some funding comes from a transportation trust fund kept by TARC . In 1992 , the fund contained $ 28 million , which a local alderman claimed made TARC the " Cadillac " of America 's bus systems , and unsuccessfully proposed raiding it to fund the Louisville Free Public Library . The fund declined from $ 34 million in 1989 to $ 13 million in 1994 , prompting severe cutbacks and rate hikes that year . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 As of 2014 , TARC has a fleet of 225 buses . 32 are hybrid buses , which combine a traditional diesel engine and an electric motor to reduce emissions and eliminate tailpipe exhaust during acceleration , but cost nearly twice as much as a conventional bus . The hybrids were provided through Federal highway bill earmarks by U.S. Senator Jim Bunning . In 2007 , a new TARC bus cost $ 285 @,@ 000 , while a hybrid bus cost $ 504 @,@ 000 . Now a New clean diesel costs $ 405 @,@ 000 dollars a bus while a hybrid costs $ 600 @,@ 000 dollars a bus . 
 In October 2010 , TARC announced that the hybrid bus fleet would grow to 21 , with the addition of 9 new buses , with a grant of $ 3 @.@ 9 million , from the Federal Transit Authority 's Clean Fuels Bus and Bus Facilities Program . A previous grant through the federal stimulus program paid for nine hybrid buses that arrived in July 2010 . 
 All buses are equipped with " kneeling " bus technology that makes them easier to board , and a wheelchair lift . TARC once required disabled riders to use a special service with smaller buses that had to be scheduled in advance , but all regular buses were made accessible following protests in 1986 . 
 = = Current bus fleet = = 
 = = Services = = 
 TARC operates a series of city buses that serve throughout the Louisville area . TARC claims over 7 @,@ 000 bus stops , although only about 200 of them have benches and rain shelters — the rest simply have a sign indicating the location is a bus stop . The stops are served by 32 weekday and weekend routes , 12 express routes with weekday service only , totalling 44 routes . The daily routes are named for the primary road they serve . On the daily routes , there is no more than hour between scheduled buses at any stop , and on weekdays on the busiest routes have even less time between stops . Most of the daily routes have existed under the same name and number for decades , although their routes have almost all been extended to provide access to suburban locations . 
 TARC operates various <unk> providing access to hospitals , Downtown Louisville and art galleries . Since 1999 , TARC has operated a shuttle service for the University of Louisville 's main campus . It operates two routes shuttling workers to <unk> , the hub of United Parcel Service and one of Louisville 's largest employers . In 2007 , TARC launched a program called " Ride to Safety " which allows domestic abuse victims to board TARC buses to be given transportation to a shelter . 
 They also operate a system of diesel @-@ powered rubber @-@ tired buses designed in the style of early 20th century streetcars that act as <unk> in the downtown hotel and shopping districts and on certain days are used to provide special shuttle services in other shopping and entertainment areas . The tourist trolleys began operation in November 1987 and their role and fare has varied over the years as funding has allowed . By the end of 2014 , 10 new all @-@ electric buses will be in operation . The first of 10 has arrived already , and is slated to begin testing soon . 
 TARC and its predecessor provided shuttle access to the Kentucky Derby and Kentucky Oaks since the 1950s , but in 2008 new federal rules required the racetrack , Churchill Downs , to negotiate with private companies to provide service . The shuttle operation transported tens of thousands of people each year and provided TARC with over $ 200 @,@ 000 of annual revenue . TARC provides service to some other local events , including Thunder over Louisville and the Kentucky State Fair . 
 Through a program called " Bikes on Board " , TARC has bike racks installed on the front of all its full @-@ size buses , each with the capacity to hold two bicycles . The program began in 2001 , and by 2004 all buses were equipped . In 2005 , TARC reported an average of 6 @,@ 000 riders a month used the bike racks . 
 = = = Fares = = = 
 The standard fare became $ 1 in 1994 , up from $ 0 @.@ 85 for peak hours and $ 0 @.@ 50 for off @-@ peak hours . On July 1 , 2007 , it was raised to $ 1 @.@ 25 . In June 2008 the adult fare was raised to $ 1 @.@ 50 to help defray the increased cost of fuel . Since July 1 , 2012 , the adult fare has been $ 1 @.@ 75 . Since Spring 2015 , fareboxes were updated . The amount for a one @-@ way adult fare was unchanged . <unk> will be accepted for payment , with the fare discounted to $ 1 @.@ 50 , while those without smartcards will have to provide exact change . Discounts are offered to senior citizens and high school students . A " day <unk> " one @-@ day pass can be purchased for $ 3 @.@ 50 while boarding the bus ( <unk> is currently not participating but will be phased in at a later time ) . Express fares are $ 2 @.@ 75 , or $ 1 with a bus pass currently . Children under 6 with a fare @-@ paying rider pay no fare , limited to 3 . 
 = The Elder Scrolls IV : Knights of the Nine = 
 The Elder Scrolls IV : Knights of the Nine is an expansion pack for the role @-@ playing video game The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . Announced on October 17 , 2006 for release on November 21 , 2006 , the expansion was developed by Bethesda Game Studios , and published and released in North America by Bethesda Softworks ; in Europe , the game was co @-@ published with Ubisoft . The Microsoft Windows version is available either as a downloadable plug @-@ in from the company website or as part of the retail @-@ released Oblivion Downloadable Content Collection CD — a release that also includes all previously released official downloadable content available for Oblivion . The Xbox 360 version is available via Xbox Live Marketplace , and the PlayStation 3 version of Oblivion includes Knights of the Nine in its packaged release . 
 Knights of the Nine centers on a faction of the same name , devoted to locating and preserving a set of " Crusaders ' Relics " . Once found , these relics must be used to defeat the sorcerer @-@ king Umaril , who seeks revenge on the Nine Divines . Knights of the Nine was generally well received in the gaming press . Although it made little change to the basic mechanics of Oblivion , it was judged by reviewers to be a brief but polished addition to the game 's main plot . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Knights of the Nine is identical to the gameplay of Oblivion ; the basic design , maneuvers , and interfaces remain unchanged . As such , it is a fantasy @-@ based role @-@ playing adventure game . Players begin Oblivion by defining their character ; deciding on its skill set , specialization , physical features , and race . Knights of the Nine is an example of open @-@ ended @-@ style gameplay : the main quest may be delayed or completely ignored as the player explores the game world , follows side quests , interacts with NPCs , and develops a character according to their taste . Furthering the goal of open @-@ ended gameplay , Knights of the Nine , unlike Bethesda 's prior content packs for Oblivion , begins with no explicit prodding towards the newly introduced content ; players must seek out and find the game 's quest without external aid . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Knights of the Nine 's quest begins as the player approaches the Chapel of <unk> in Anvil . The Chapel was recently abused ; everyone there has been killed in a dark ritual . The player proceeds to consult a prophet near the scene of the attack , who is preaching about it . The prophet reveals to the player that the one responsible for the attacks is Umaril , an ancient revenge @-@ seeking <unk> sorcerer @-@ king , who has escaped from his prison in Oblivion to destroy Cyrodiil . Umaril can only be defeated by the prophesized Crusader , favoured by the gods , bearing the relics of Pelinal Whitestrake , the man who originally slew Umaril , and banished his spirit to Oblivion . 
 The player then makes a pilgrimage ( because the character may not use any artifacts of the Nine unless they have an infamy of 0 ) , and receives a vision from Pelinal Whitestrake , who reveals the location of his tomb , which is beneath the lake surrounding the Imperial City . Inside this tomb , the player discovers the Helm of Pelinal 's armor , as well as the corpse of Sir Amiel , one of the old Knights of the Nine . His diary reveals the location of their priory , which houses the <unk> of Pelinal . Before the player can claim it though , he / she confronts eight spirits of the old Knights of the Nine , including Amiel , who had all given into corruption and been killed . They assist the player , who soon gathers all of Pelinal Whitestrake 's relics . During each leg of the quest to retrieve the relics , the player meets a priest , knight , or pilgrim of faith , each of whom pledge to aid the player , each representing one of the original eight divines . After a final blessing from the prophet , to represent the ninth divine , Talos , the player leads the knights against Umaril 's stronghold , defeating the <unk> King , and then pursues Umaril 's spirit , destroying him utterly . The player then wakes up in the Priory , with the knights believing him / her dead . After realizing that the powers of the gods resurrected him , the player rejoins the knights . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to any announcement regarding Knights of the Nine , Bethesda had pursued a somewhat novel plan to distribute downloadable content through micropayments , priced from US $ 0 @.@ 99 to US $ 2 @.@ 99 , instead of the more common practice of releasing expansion packs . The program was initially met with criticism by customers due to its alleged low value , but later releases — at a reduced price , and with more content — proved more popular . The releases , in addition to stirring controversy , raised questions regarding Bethesda 's future content release plans , and as to whether expansion pack releases were necessary at all . In August 2006 , one Bethesda employee wrote in a post to Bethesda 's The Elder Scrolls forums that the company had " no plans to make an expansion for Oblivion " . Further questions were raised by a product listing found on game retailer GameStop 's website September 11 , 2006 , listing a Knights of the White Stallion Expansion Pack for Oblivion . The game had a listed shipping date of November 21 , 2006 . The title was kept on the website only briefly — removed after gaming news site GameSpot sent Bethesda a request for comment on the product . 
 Knights of the Nine began its life as a supposedly " exclusive " quest for the PlayStation 3 release of The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . Along with the confirmation of the PlayStation 3 release on October 9 , 2006 , some gaming news websites reported that the release would contain " a huge , exclusive quest " focusing on " a new faction , The Knights of the Nine " . Some reports prefixed " allegedly " onto statements that the release would be exclusive . Suggestions of exclusivity , in any case , did not last long : an October 17 , 2006 Bethesda press release announced that Knights of the Nine content was also scheduled for PC and Xbox 360 releases , eliciting commentary from Joystiq remarking on " how finicky " the word ' exclusive ' had come to be , and Kotaku remarking on how " Oblivion 's PlayStation 3 content didn 't stay exclusive for long ... or at all " . Other sites saw no incongruence in the announcement : GameSpot assumed that Knights of the Nine was simply the earlier Knights of the White Stallion by a different name , and 1UP.com had anticipated the move ever since an IGN interview with Oblivion 's executive producer Todd Howard , where Howard had described Bethesda 's general aim " to have all our content available across all platforms " ; the final announcement served only to confirm their suspicions . 
 The October 17 press release set November 21 , 2006 as the North American distribution date for the Xbox 360 and PC versions of Knights of the Nine . The European release for the Xbox 360 and PC was set two days later , on November 23 . The European release was co @-@ published by Bethesda and Ubisoft . On November 9 , 2006 , Bethesda clarified earlier statements regarding PC releases , declaring that , although the boxed retail PC edition of Knights of the Nine was set for release on November 21 , the PC release downloadable from the company website wouldn 't be available until December 4 . This caused some consumer complaints , for although the Xbox 360 release was available on the Xbox Live Marketplace for 800 Microsoft Points ( the equivalent of US $ 10 @.@ 00 , or GB £ 6 @.@ 80 ) , for the time being , PC owners had only the US $ 19 @.@ 99 boxed retail edition of the game . The increased price of the PC 's boxed retail release ( The Elder Scrolls IV : Knights of Nine Oblivion Downloadable Content Collection ) resulted from its inclusion of Oblivion 's other previously released downloadable content . Such content was not included in either the downloadable PC release , the Xbox Marketplace download , or the PlayStation 3 edition of Oblivion . The downloadable release was ultimately issued on December 6 at the price of US $ 9 @.@ 99 . According to IGN Entertainment 's GamerMetrics , a service based on compiled visitor activity information on IGN 's website , the pack was the fourth most anticipated release of its release week , following Tom Clancy 's Rainbow Six : Vegas , Superman Returns and College Hoops <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Knights of the Nine was generally well received in the gaming press . Metacritic , an aggregate review site , scored the PC version of the game with an 81 out of 100 , and the Xbox 360 version of the game with an 86 out of 100 . GameSpot recommended the game for its value ; although it made few improvements over the basic Oblivion experience , Knights of the Nine provides " a good day or two 's worth of questing for a low price " . Similar comments followed from GamePro , who found that the " polish " and " affordable price " of the pack excused the fact that the pack 's content " doesn 't really change [ Oblivion 's ] gameplay " . 
 Eurogamer praised the game for its memorable plot and new , unique content . They concluded that if " more of the same is what you 're after , you can 't really argue with what Bethesda 's served up for its hardcore fans . " The review encouraged caution nonetheless : for if consumers were to fully accept individually priced content releases , Bethesda might just begin charging for all its quests . 
 = The Lucky Shot = 
 The Lucky Shot is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The plot is follows Jack Hunt , the son of a wealthy woman , who weds a chorus singer Nell Horsley . Jack 's mother forgives the son 's error , but rejects his wife . Then Jack is killed while on strike duty in the local militia and the Nell and her child struggle in poverty . Nell begs her mother @-@ in @-@ law for aid , but the woman is enraged and drops dead . Her property goes to the young boy who saves the <unk> future of the family by finding a hidden fortune with a lucky shot while playing ' Indian ' . Released on July 12 , 1910 , the film received positive attention and saw an international release . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 16 , 1910 . It states : " A shot that found a fortune ! Jack Hunt , the son of a wealthy woman , falls in love with Nell Horsley , who is in the chorus of a musical comedy . They are married , but when Jack 's mother is informed she declares she 'll have nothing to do with Nell , although she is willing to forgive her son . But Jack sticks to his wife , and for a time they are very happy . Then Jack , who is in the militia , is called out on strike duty , and meets his death during a fight with strikers . The widow takes the news to her mother @-@ in @-@ law , who nevertheless retains her hatred for Nell , despite the tragedy . As time passes , Mrs. Hunt becomes a miser . She disposes of all of her property , receiving in exchange money and jewels which she hides in a secret place in her room . In the meantime Nell has a hard time to get along and keep a roof over her head and that of her little boy . So desperate are her circumstances that she finally sinks her pride and appeals to her mother @-@ in @-@ law . The old woman repulses her again ; her fit of rage brings on a stroke of apoplexy and she drops dead after Nell leaves . All her property goes to little George , as the woman left no will , but search fails to locate anything except the family homestead . Nell is about to sell that , when she makes a discovery . Playing ' Indian ' with her boy , she shoots arrows aimlessly about the room . One of them hits the secret spring of the treasure vault , and the accident puts the boy and his mother beyond want for the rest of their lives . " 
 The synopsis is at odds with the reviewers of the film who state that the arrow which reveals the hidden cache is shot by the little boy and not the mother . The image still shows the woman with a large bow , but further details by the reviewers state that the boy used a toy bow and arrow to make the shot . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film can be seen as having another loose aspect to labor issues . The film directly followed first Thanhouser film to address the subject : The Girl Strike Leader . The film loosely refers labor relations when Jack Hunt is killed in a riot while on strike duty and the young widow is struggles to make ends meet . Thanhouser subjects would deal with other pressing social issues in The Girls of the Ghetto , another July 1910 release . The plot of The Lucky Shot employed the deus ex machina technique to resolve the financial needs of the widow and her child . Another plot of a needy family suddenly finding a concealed fortune within their house would be reused in The Thunderbolt . The film director and the cameraman are unknown and the only credits known for the cast is that of Marie Eline as the little boy and Mrs. George W. Walters in the role of the miserly woman . Other members cast may have included the other leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 12 , 1910 . The film minor praise from The Morning Telegraph for an interesting story and plot and another review in The Moving Picture World liked the novelty of the film 's premise . Though The New York Dramatic Mirror gives the most detailed review because it recognizes that the film is not as appealing as other Thanhouser films and recognizes that an obvious error in the production when Marie Eline picks up a seemingly weightless bag of gold . The film had a wide release in the United States with known advertisements appearing in Pennsylvania , Kansas , and Indiana . The film looks to have made its way into Canada with the Province making a series of advertisements for The Lucky Shot , but one states the film is a comedy in and another contains only a partial summary . The film saw its United Kingdom release on January 1 , 1911 . 
 = Pizza Delivery ( SpongeBob SquarePants ) = 
 " Pizza Delivery " is the first segment of the fifth episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . The episode was written by Sherm Cohen , Aaron Springer , and Peter Burns , and was directed by Sean Dempsey . Cohen also functioned as storyboard director , and Springer worked as storyboard artist . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on August 14 , 1999 . 
 In the episode , the Krusty Krab receives a call from a customer ordering a pizza , and Mr. Krabs sends SpongeBob and Squidward to deliver it . When the two employees become stranded in the middle of a desert , they get into numerous predicaments . Along the way , SpongeBob tries to show Squidward the way of the pioneers . 
 In pitching the show to Nickelodeon , creator Stephen Hillenburg originally wanted the idea of having the characters on a road trip , inspired by the 1989 film Powwow Highway . However , he eventually gave up the idea , and resurrected it in " Pizza Delivery " . The episode received positive reviews , with most media critics considering it one of the best SpongeBob SquarePants episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At closing time , the Krusty Krab receives a call from a customer ordering a pizza , a product that they do not serve . Knowing that he could get extra money , Mr. Krabs spontaneously makes a Krabby Patty pizza and has SpongeBob and Squidward deliver it . The two go to deliver the pizza ; however , SpongeBob cannot drive and is still in boating school . When SpongeBob tries to shift the boat into reverse , he becomes nervous and goes back too far , causing the two to become stranded in a desert . With the boat out of gas , they are forced to deliver the pizza on foot . 
 While delivering the pizza , SpongeBob sings a song about the Krusty Krab pizza , and how it is " the best pizza for you and me . " The two gradually become tired , and Squidward gets hungry , but SpongeBob prevents him from eating the pizza . They then get whirled into a tornado , where the pizza saves their lives when SpongeBob uses it as a parachute . After escaping the tornado , the two lose sight of the road , and SpongeBob shows Squidward some " pioneer tricks " to help them find it , such as hitchhiking , eating corals , telling where civilization is by looking at what direction moss points , and even using boulders as vehicles . The eternally skeptic Squidward does not believe him , but reconsiders when they end up driving a boulder to the customer 's house . 
 Unfortunately , their journey does not pay off well . The customer gets angry because he did not get the drink he said he ordered , and slams the door on SpongeBob . He starts crying , but Squidward , having a change of heart , confronts the customer and slams the pizza in his face . Squidward comforts SpongeBob , assuring the customer ate the pizza , cheering him up . The two drive back to the Krusty Krab , which is comically revealed to be close nearby , much to Squidward 's dismay . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pizza Delivery " was written by Sherm Cohen , Aaron Springer , and Peter Burns , with Sean Dempsey serving as animation director . Cohen also functioned as storyboard director , and Springer worked as storyboard artist . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on August 14 , 1999 . 
 Series creator Stephen Hillenburg 's original idea for the series pitch was that the writers would write a storyboard for a possible episode and pitch it to Nickelodeon . Hillenburg wanted to write an episode with SpongeBob and Squidward on a road trip , inspired by the 1989 film Powwow Highway . Derek Drymon said " It 's a road trip movie starring Gary Farmer , who is an innocent , kid @-@ like character who is traveling with a curmudgeon . " Eventually , the idea developed while they were working on it , but Hillenburg gave up the idea for the initial pitch . Instead , they used another idea for the pitch which was in the series pilot episode called " Help Wanted " . They resurrected the road trip idea during the first season and used a lot of the ideas for " Pizza Delivery " . 
 " Pizza Delivery " was released on the DVD compilation called SpongeBob SquarePants : Christmas on September 30 , 2003 . It was also included in SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 1st Season DVD released on October 28 , 2003 . On September 22 , 2009 , the episode was released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Pizza Delivery " received very positive reviews . Nancy Basile of About.com ranked the episode No. 2 on her " Best SpongeBob SquarePants Episodes " list . She said " [ It ] is the perfect episode to depict SpongeBob 's enthusiasm for all things Krusty Krab against Squidward 's apathy and cynical nature . " Basile cited her favorite scene in the episode where " After the customer slams his door in SpongeBob 's face , Squidward makes sure he swallows the pizza ' in one bite . ' " Giving the episode 5 out of 5 stars , Bill Treadway of DVD Verdict said the episode is his " personal favorite of all the episodes " , writing that " this one is loaded with enough unique twists and hilarious comedy to bear repeat viewings . " 
 Emily Estep of WeGotThisCovered.com ranked the episode No. 1 on her " Top 10 Episodes of SpongeBob SquarePants " list , saying " But – the pizza is for the customer , and flawless employee SpongeBob won 't let Squidward eat any of it . " She wrote " [ The episode ] has the undervalued nostalgia of being episode five of the entire series and it benefits from the aforementioned chemistry of Spongebob and Squidward . " She also praised the episode as " an in @-@ depth look at their [ SpongeBob and Squidward ] relationship , and it set the tone for just how strange the show could be . " Estep lauded the hitchhiking dances by SpongeBob , saying " These moves are amusing and charming , while Squidward 's bitterness is easy to relate to . " In 2009 , " Pizza Delivery " was chosen by viewers on Nick.com as the No. 1 episode during a television marathon called " The Ultimate SpongeBob SpongeBash " . 
 = From the Bottom of My Broken Heart = 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her debut studio album , ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) . It was released on December 15 , 1999 by JIVE Records as the fifth and final single from the album . After Spears recorded an unused song from Toni Braxton and sent it through Larry Rudolph to several labels , executives from JIVE Records commented that it was very rare to hear someone so young who could deliver emotional content and commercial appeal , appointing the singer to work with producer Eric Foster White . The teen pop ballad was written and produced by White , and features Spears singing about the loss of a first love and how breaking up can be hard . 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who noted the song as a classic hit and competent single , despite considering it unremarkable like other ballads on the album and calling it " another rejection ballad that refers to kissing but nothing else " . " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " achieved moderate success , peaking at number 37 in Australia , and 23 in New Zealand . Through imports , the song managed to peak at number 174 in the United Kingdom . In the United States , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " reached number 14 on Billboard Hot 100 , and 17 on Pop Songs , being later certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 28 , 2000 , for shipping 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 physical units of the single . It was the 8th best @-@ selling physical single of the 2000s in the country . 
 An accompanying music video , directed by Gregory Dark , was released on December 17 , 1999 . It portrayed Spears packing her belongings as she readies herself to move away from home , and feeling upset because she knows that she is going to miss her first love . The video was the subject of controversy among the press , who panned the singer for hiring an adult filmmaker to direct her video . A Spears representative commented that they were only aware of Dark doing music videos . The singer performed " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " in a few live appearances , including at the 2000 Grammy Awards , in a medley with " ... Baby One More Time " , and in three of her concert tours . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1997 , Spears was in talks with manager Lou Pearlman to join female pop group Innosense . Her mother Lynne asked family friend and entertainment lawyer Larry Rudolph for his opinion and submitted a tape of Spears singing over a Whitney Houston karaoke song along with some pictures . Rudolph decided he wanted to pitch her to record labels , therefore she needed a professional demo . He sent Spears an unused song from Toni Braxton ; she rehearsed for a week and recorded her vocals in a studio with a sound engineer . Spears traveled to New York with the demo and met with executives from four labels , returning to Kentwood the same day . Three of the labels rejected her , arguing audiences wanted pop bands such as the Backstreet Boys and the Spice Girls , and " there wasn 't going to be another Madonna , another Debbie Gibson , or another Tiffany . " Two weeks later , executives from JIVE Records returned calls to Rudolph . Senior vice president of A & R Jeff Fenster stated about Spears 's audition that " It 's very rare to hear someone that age who can deliver emotional content and commercial appeal . [ ... ] For any artist , the motivation — the ' eye of the tiger ' — is extremely important . And Britney had that . " They appointed her to work with producer Eric Foster White for a month , who reportedly shaped her voice from " lower and less poppy " delivery to " distinctively , unmistakably Britney . " After hearing the recorded material , president Clive Calder ordered a full album . " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was written by Eric Foster White , for Spears ' debut studio album , ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) . Spears recorded the vocals for the song in 1997 at 4MW East Studios in New Jersey and at Battery Studios in New York City , New York . Dan Petty played the guitar , while the bass guitar was done by Andy Hess . The song was later mixed by White and Chris Trevett , while background vocals were provided by Spears , Angie Simmons , Don Philip and Andrew Fromm . It was released on December 15 , 1999 as the final single from ... Baby One More Time . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was produced by Eric Foster White . Described by Spears as a " soulful " ballad , it draws influence from teen pop and lasts for five minutes and ten seconds . Chuck Taylor of Billboard noted that the singer " turn toward the sad side " on the track , with its lyrics talking about the loss of a first love and how breaking up can be hard . As the song begins , Spears declares , " ' Never look back ' , we said / How was I to know I 'd miss you so ? / Loneliness up ahead , <unk> behind / Where do I go ? " During the chorus , she realizes that she has lost her true love , stating , " From the bottom of my broken heart , even though time may find me somebody new / You were my real love , I never knew love , till there was you . " According to sheet music published at musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " is composed in the key of G major and is set in time signature of common time with a slowly tempo of 76 beats per minute . 
 The single 's b @-@ side , " Thinkin ' About You " , is also a teen pop influenced song . The song is composed in the key of G major and is set in time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . Spears vocal range spans over two octaves from the low note of D3 to the high note G5 Craig <unk> of The Hamilton Spectator said the lyrics of " Thinkin ' About You " , along with " Born to Make You Happy " , " verge on the sort of boy @-@ worshipping dreck that even Tiffany would have <unk> " , while Jane Stevenson of Toronto Sun noted Spears " puts some rather grownup heartfelt soul into [ it ] " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Amanda Murray of Sputnikmusic considered the song a competent , but unremarkable single . Kyle Anderson of MTV criticized its lyrics , deeming it as " another rejection ballad that references kissing but nothing else . " Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone called " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " a " further hit " from ... Baby One More Time , along with " Sometimes " and " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " . The song was a Track Pick from the Allmusic review by Stephen Thomas Erlewine , who praised it along with the other singles from the album , saying , " ... Baby One More Time has its share of well @-@ crafted filler , but the singles , combined with Britney 's burgeoning charisma , make this a pretty great piece of fluff " . Author David Gauntlett considered its lyrics as " slushy " , and noticed that the track was " seen as less interesting and relevant [ by the fans ] , although [ they ] clearly enjoyed [ the song ] too . " Billboard critic Chuck Taylor praised the song , and did a further review on his column : 
 " Eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Britney Spears , 1999 's biggest @-@ selling new artist , spreads it out like soft cream cheese on her fourth @-@ to @-@ be runaway smash single , as dreamy and <unk> as that first spin of " ... Baby One More Time " over a year ago . It 's her first ballad , following that No. 1 debut as well as " Sometimes " and the <unk> " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " , yet " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " still possesses a breezy air that is certain to continue her breakneck success on the singles charts . Eric Forster White is at the helm this time , writing and producing a song that will easily appeal to Miss Spears ' young core , with the potential to chart the more mature AC audience , too . [ ... ] Spears ' star is shining brighter than ever , and this wholesome track will only serve to illuminate it all the more . An ace . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the chart issue dated February 19 , 2000 , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was at number 52 on United States ' Billboard Hot 100 . The following issue , the song peaked at number 14 , after selling 78 @,@ 000 physical units of the single , and became the Greatest Gainer / Sales title of that week . The song also went from number 73 to number 3 on the Hot Singles Sales chart , before peaking at number 1 on the chart issue dated March 4 , 2000 . " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " also appeared on several Billboard component charts , peaking at number 24 on Top 40 Tracks , number 17 on Pop Songs , and number 53 on Radio Songs . On March 28 , 2000 , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipping 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 physical units of the single in the country . By the end of 2000 , the song peaked at number 77 on Billboard Hot 100 Year @-@ End chart . " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was the 8th best selling physical single of the 2000s , according to Nielsen SoundScan . As of June 2012 , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " has sold 778 @,@ 000 physical singles , with 33 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . It is Spears ' second best @-@ selling physical single in the country . In Australia , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " entered the ARIA chart at number 47 , before peaking at number 37 on the following issue . The song stayed a total of five weeks on the chart . It performed better in New Zealand , where it peaked at number 23 . Through imports , " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " did manage to peak at number 174 in the United Kingdom , while in Canada , after staying for five weeks on the RPM Singles Chart , the song peaked at number 25 on the dated week of February 28 , 2000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 JIVE Records commissioned a music video for the song to be directed by Gregory Dark . According to Dark , the label hired him with the intention of re @-@ image Spears from the naughty schoolgirl persona of " ... Baby One More Time " , and stated that they " wanted a much more story @-@ oriented video without dance , one that was serious and emotional . " He further stated that , during the filming , " I 'd joke with her so that she would loosen up and feel comfortable acting , as opposed to being Britney Spears at that moment . " The video was produced by the FM Rocks Production Company . 
 The music video portrays Spears is packing up her belongings , as she readies herself to move away from home , and feeling upset because she knows that she is going to miss her first love . Throughout the video , scenes of the couple 's past are also seen and Spears is sitting on a tyre swing , including one where they climb up onto a windmill , with Spears singing the song , and Spears is standing by a billboard that reads " Welcome to Cedar Springs Gardens " similar to the video " Lucky " . Before the end of the video , Spears is waiting at a bus stop while , at the same time , her first love is driving to come see her one last time . However , by the time he finally gets there , Spears had left him behind and taken the bus . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 According to writer Linda Ruth Williams , the music video attracted attention from the press because of " the clash between Spears ' wholesome image and Dark 's unwholesome back catalogue . " A Spears representative spoke to the Sunday Sport and revealed , " as far as I 'm aware the director just does music videos . This is a video for young teenage girls and not sexy at all . " Dark responded to the negative reviews saying , " I don 't deny that I did [ adult films ] , it 's just that I also like people to know that I don 't currently and haven 't in a long time . " Billboard reporter Carla Hay also noted , " I don 't think people who buy records are too concerned about the background of the video 's director . " Lucy O 'Brien , author of She Bop II : The Definitive History of Women in Rock , Pop and Soul , noted that hiring Dark as the video director implied that Spears was not that innocent . Time journalists Briton Hadden and Henry Robinson Luce said that Spears " may be the queen of pop <unk> , but her new video , ' From the Bottom of My Broken Heart ' , is an entirely wholesome affair , " while Chris Ryan of MTV considered it " a suitably soft @-@ focus affair " . The video was also added to MTV 's 2000 Yearbook , a list with the " biggest , best , most memorable music videos of every year since the beginning of MTV . " 
 Alec Hanley Bemis of LA Weekly highly criticized Spears and the music video . He thought that the singer 's " lack of musical talent " had begun to affect her career , after Dark was selected as the director of the video . Bemis commented , however , that Spears ' already had " a history of questionable decisions " , and cited her Rolling Stone photoshoot done in early 1999 , which was condemned by the American Family Association , as an example . He continued to state that the plotline set the singer " on the fast track to adulthood " and questioned , " who 's in bed with Britney now ? While a TV tabloid recently reported that an old bayou beau in Louisiana has mother Spears ’ approval , fantasizing fans want to believe Britney ‘ s dallying with that braided <unk> from N ’ Sync or a member of the Backstreet Boys . But the only verifiable fact we have to work with is that Spears has started running with a darker L.A. crowd . " Bemis finished his review saying that " no avant @-@ garde film techniques [ were used on it ] . But Britney 's lips glisten so ... Speaking frankly , this light in our lives hurts us , from the fire in our loins to the bottom of our broken hearts . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " was performed for the first time on Spears first tour , ... Baby One More Time Tour . After its release as a single , Spears performed the song in a medley with " ... Baby One More Time " at the 42nd Grammy Awards . Spears was wearing a turtleneck and a full tulle skirt at the beginning of the performance , while dancers surrounded her with enormous hand fans . After singing a shortened version of the song , she then took a few moments to shuffle into a form @-@ fitting red rhinestone outfit ( with side cutouts ) and emerged onto a stage to perform " ... Baby One More Time . " Jocelyn Vena of MTV included the performance on her list of Spears ' Top 10 Best TV Performances . Spears also performed the song on her 2000s Crazy 2k Tour , where her dancers picked a boy from the audience and invited him onstage , while Spears dedicated the performance of " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " to the boy . The same year , the song was performed on Oops ! ... I Did It Again World Tour . Wearing glittery jeans and an orange halter top , she performed an acoustic version of the song with her guitarist Skip . Spears also performed " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " and " Born to Make You Happy " on Disney Channel in Concert in 1999 . The performances were recorded and included on Spears ' first home video release , Time Out with Britney Spears . The song was also performed in the television program Good Morning America in January 7 , 2000 along with ... Baby One More Time . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " are adapted from ... Baby One More Time 's liner notes . 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals 
 Eric Foster White – audio mixing , producer , songwriting 
 Chris Trevett – audio mixing 
 Dan Petty – guitar 
 Andy Hess – bass guitar , bass , guitar 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cycling at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men 's individual road race = 
 The men 's road race , a part of the cycling events at the 2008 Summer Olympics , took place on August 9 at the Urban Road Cycling Course in Beijing . It started at 11 : 00 China Standard Time ( UTC + 8 ) , and was scheduled to last until 17 : 30 later that day . The 245 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre ( 152 @.@ 5 mi ) course ran north across the heart of the Beijing metropolitan area , passing such landmarks as the Temple of Heaven , the Great Hall of the People , Tiananmen Square and the Beijing National Stadium . After rolling over relatively flat terrain for 78 @.@ 8 km ( 49 @.@ 0 mi ) north of the Beijing city center , the route entered a decisive circuit encompassing seven loops on a 23 @.@ 8 km ( 14 @.@ 8 mi ) section up and down the Badaling Pass , including ramps as steep as a 10 percent gradient . 
 The race was won by the Spanish rider Samuel Sánchez in 6 hours , 23 minutes , 49 seconds , after a six @-@ man breakaway group contested a sprint finish . Davide Rebellin of Italy and Fabian Cancellara of Switzerland , finishing second and third place with the same time as Sánchez , received silver and bronze medals respectively for the event . The hot and humid conditions were in sharp contrast to the heavy rain weathered in the women 's road race the following day . 
 The event was one of the earliest to be concluded at the 2008 Summer Olympics , taking place on the first day of competition . Concerns were raised before the Olympics about the threat of pollution in endurance sports , but no major problems were apparent in the race . 
 In April 2009 , it was announced that Rebellin had tested positive for Continuous erythropoietin receptor activator ( CERA , a third @-@ generation form of erythropoietin ) during the Olympics . After his B @-@ sample subsequently confirmed initial results , he returned his medal and repaid the prize money he had won from the Italian National Olympic Committee ( CONI ) while still maintaining his innocence . Cancellara and original fourth @-@ place finisher Alexandr Kolobnev were later awarded new medals corresponding to their updated finishing positions . 
 = = Qualification = = 
 Qualification for the race was restricted to five athletes per National Olympic Committee ( NOC ) , providing that these athletes qualified through the Union Cycliste Internationale ( UCI ) rankings , with the UCI ProTour considered to be superior to the UCI Continental Circuits . The number of qualification places allocated varied among the different UCI tours , which all maintain their own ranking system . Any NOC unable to fill its quota of athletes from the ProTour was permitted to enter athletes from one of the continental tours , and if that was not feasible , from the " B " World Championship . The number of places allocated to each tour were thus ( in descending order ) : 70 riders from the ProTour , 38 from the Europe tour , 15 from the America tour , nine from the Asia tour , five from the Africa tour , and three from the Oceania tour . Five entrants qualified through the " B " World Championships . 
 The final number of competitors was set to be 145 , but only 143 athletes started the race . Four cyclists were scratched from the race shortly before it took place . Damiano Cunego of Italy had not yet recovered from the injuries he sustained in the 2008 Tour de France , so he was replaced by Vincenzo Nibali . Portugal 's Sérgio Paulinho , the silver medalist at the 2004 event , was said to be in insufficient shape to race . After Russian Vladimir Gusev was fired by his professional team Astana for failing an internal doping check , he was replaced in this event by Denis Menchov , who later competed in the time trial . While training earlier in the week before the race , Switzerland 's Michael Albasini crashed and broke his collarbone ; there was not sufficient time to find a replacement for him . 
 = = Preview = = 
 = = = Pollution issues = = = 
 Prior to the opening of the Games , the International Olympic Committee was keen to play down the risk that athletes faced from pollution ; however , the organizing body considered re @-@ scheduling of endurance events ( such as the cycling road race ) if the pollution levels were too high . Athletes partaking in these events can consume 20 times the amount of oxygen as a sedentary person . A higher level of pollution in the air could adversely affect performance , damage or irritate an athlete 's lungs , or exacerbate respiratory conditions , such as asthma . 
 Independent sources showed that pollution levels were above the limit deemed safe by the World Health Organization on August 9 . However , the cycling event went ahead as scheduled with no objections from the athletes . Fifty @-@ three of the 143 cyclists pulled out during the race ; however , this is not unusual ( over half withdrew mid @-@ race at the 2004 Summer Olympics ) . Post @-@ race , a number of riders highlighted the punishing conditions , in particular the heat ( 26 ° C or 79 ° F ) and humidity ( 90 % ) , which were much higher than in Europe , where the majority of UCI ProTour races are held . Pollution , however , was not widely cited as a problem , though Stefan Schumacher of Germany , who had been considered an outside favorite for victory in the event , said the elements and the pollution played a role in his withdrawal . 
 = = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = = 
 Among the pre @-@ race favorites was the entire Spanish contingent of riders . It included two winners of Grand Tours in Alberto Contador and Carlos Sastre , along with highly regarded countrymen Alejandro Valverde , winner of the 2008 Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré and the reigning Spanish national road race champion , and Samuel Sánchez , who had won three stages in the 2007 Vuelta a España . They also had 2008 Tour de France points classification winner and three @-@ time world champion Óscar Freire available to work on their behalf . Valverde was seen as the strongest threat among the Spaniards . Other medal hopefuls included the defending Olympic champion Paolo Bettini of Italy , Germany 's Stefan Schumacher , and Australian Cadel Evans , twice a runner @-@ up in the Tour de France ( 2007 and 2008 ) . It was thought that members of the overall strong squads from Germany and Luxembourg could also contend for victory . The German team contained Schumacher and many veterans of Grand Tours such as Jens Voigt to work in support , while Luxembourg had the Schleck brothers Andy and Fränk , along with Kim Kirchen , all of whom had worn leader 's jerseys during the 2008 Tour de France . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Urban Road Cycling Course ( one of Beijing 's nine temporary venues ) was 102 @.@ 6 km ( 63 @.@ 8 mi ) in its entirety , and the men 's race was a distance of 245 @.@ 4 km ( 152 @.@ 5 mi ) , the longest in Olympic history . The race 's starting line was located at the Yongdingmen Gate , a remnant of Beijing 's old city wall , which is a part of the Chongwen District of northern Beijing . The course ended at the Juyong Pass in the Changping District . 
 The route passed through a total of eight districts : Chongwen , Xuanwu , Dongcheng , Xicheng , Chaoyang , Haidian , Changping , and Yanqing . The course 's scenery , described by The Guardian newspaper ( UK ) as " visually sumptuous " , included landmarks such as the Temple of Heaven , the Great Hall of the People , Tiananmen Square , the <unk> Temple , and sections of the Great Wall of China , which were passed through as the course journeyed from urban Beijing into the countryside . It also passed the architecture of the 2008 Olympics , including the Beijing National Stadium and Beijing National Aquatics Center ( known colloquially as the " Bird 's Nest " and " Water Cube " ) . 
 The men 's race layout , which differed most significantly from the women 's in that it was over double its length , saw the riders make seven loops back @-@ and @-@ forth between the Badaling and Juyong Passes . The early sections of the race took place within central Beijing ; consequently , the gradient of this part of the race was relatively flat . At approximately the 78 @.@ 8 km ( 49 @.@ 0 mi ) point in the race the riders reached the Badaling section of the Great Wall , and began their first of seven 23 @.@ 8 km ( 14 @.@ 8 mi ) loops . The riders encountered an increase in the gradient at this point , with the Badaling Pass gaining 338 @.@ 2 metres ( 1 @,@ 110 ft ) in elevation over a distance of 12 @.@ 4 km ( 7 @.@ 7 mi ) from the start of the circuit to the highest point . From there the cyclists rode over a false flat before descending a highway towards the Juyong Pass . The final 350 m ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) of the race gave the riders a moderately steep climb to contend with , which was designed to ensure an exciting finale should several riders have been grouped together at the end of the race , as there were . 
 Due to security regulations put in place by the Olympic organizers , no spectators were permitted to stand roadside along the course . This decision proved to be controversial : several prominent figures in cycling , including UCI president Pat McQuaid and riders Stuart O 'Grady and Cadel Evans ( both Australia ) , spoke out against it . McQuaid and O 'Grady both felt that the absence of people along the course deprived the race of the atmosphere present at other cycling events , and said that it failed to take supporters ' wishes into consideration . Cycling Australia 's reaction to the cyclists ' complaints was to request that security restrictions be eased for the time trial to follow , but they were not . 
 = = Race = = 
 The men 's road race began at 11 : 00 local time ( UTC + 8 ) and within 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of the start , Horacio Gallardo ( Bolivia ) and Patricio <unk> ( Chile ) formed a two @-@ man breakaway . They held a maximum advantage of 15 minutes , but were never really seen as a threat , and in fact neither went on to finish the race . With no single team willing to force the pace , a 26 @-@ man breakaway formed at the 60 km ( 37 mi ) mark , including Carlos Sastre ( Spain ) , Kim Kirchen ( Luxembourg ) , Jens Voigt ( Germany ) , Roman Kreuziger ( Czech Republic ) and Simon Gerrans ( Australia ) . Shortly after the race reached the finish line to begin the first of seven 23 @.@ 8 km ( 14 @.@ 8 mi ) loops , Gallardo was dropped by <unk> . The lone Chilean leader was then caught by the now 24 @-@ man chase group at the summit on the second loop , after riding solo ahead of the pack for over an hour and a half . 
 Under the impetus of Sastre and Kreuziger in particular , the 24 @-@ strong breakaway group built their lead to over six minutes at the half @-@ way point of the race , after four of the seven circuits . At that point , the Italian @-@ paced main field increased its speed in order to bring them back . Aleksandr Kuschynski ( Belarus ) and Ruslan Pidgornyy ( Ukraine ) went clear of the leading group afterward and gained an advantage of a minute and 40 seconds over the Sastre group and 2 minutes , 45 seconds over the main field by the start of the fifth lap over the hilly circuit . The Sastre group was absorbed by the main field at the 60 km ( 37 mi ) to go mark , leaving just Kuschynski and Pidgornyy out front . Not long after , shortly before the end of the fifth circuit , Marcus <unk> ( Sweden ) , Rigoberto Urán ( Colombia ) and Johan Van <unk> ( Belgium ) attacked from the peloton and reeled in Kuschynski and Pidgornyy . 
 The next attack , one that would later be described as " audacious " and " brave " , came from Christian <unk> ( Austria ) , who went free of the main field toward the end of the sixth lap . His maximum advantage never grew to more than a minute , but he did stay away until well into the seventh and final lap , being caught with 20 km ( 12 mi ) to go . Within five minutes of fierce attacks , fewer than 20 riders were left in the front group , a group that included Cadel Evans ( Australia ) , Levi Leipheimer ( United States ) , Santiago Botero ( Colombia ) , and Jérôme Pineau ( France ) , with Valverde and Bettini left behind them . Five riders , Samuel Sánchez ( Spain ) , Michael Rogers ( Australia ) , Davide Rebellin ( Italy ) , Andy Schleck ( Luxembourg ) , and Alexandr Kolobnev ( Russia ) , came further clear from the group of now 13 due to repeated attacks from Schleck . Sánchez , Rebellin , and Schleck reached the summit of the Badaling climb , with 12 @.@ 7 km ( 7 @.@ 9 mi ) to race , 10 seconds ahead of Rogers and Kolobnev , and 26 seconds ahead of the Evans group . Bettini , Valverde and Fabian Cancellara ( Switzerland ) attacked from the main peloton and joined the Evans group at the top of the climb . The leading group 's advantage over the two @-@ man chase was 15 seconds with 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to go . 
 With 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) left , Cancellara attacked from the Evans group and caught up with the chasers that the group of three had left behind , Kolobnev and Rogers . The three of them successfully bridged the gap to the leaders with about 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to go , and there were six riders contesting the final sprint . Sánchez won the gold medal , Rebellin the silver , and Cancellara the bronze . 
 = = Doping incident = = 
 In April 2009 , the IOC announced that six athletes had tested positive during the 2008 Summer Olympics , without mentioning names or sports . Later , rumours emerged that the athletes included two cyclists , one of them a medal winner . The Italian National Olympic Committee ( CONI ) then confirmed that a male Italian cyclist had tested positive for Continuous erythropoietin receptor activator ( CERA ) during the men 's road race , without identifying him . The next day , on 29 April 2009 , the Committee confirmed that Davide Rebellin was an involved athlete . Rebellin 's agent sent a request for the analysis of the B sample . On 8 July 2009 , Rebellin , along with Stefan Schumacher , were confirmed as having tested positive . Schumacher was already serving a ban after testing positive in the 2008 Tour de France , but faces further punishment , and Rebellin subsequently had his medal removed by the UCI and the IOC . On 27 November , Rebellin returned his silver medal to CONI , per their and the UCI 's request . Per UCI regulations , Cancellara and Kolobnev were moved up to second and third in the official results , but did not initially receive new medals . On December 18 , 2010 , Cancellara received the same physical medal initially given to Rebellin , in a ceremony held in his hometown of <unk> , Switzerland . The medal originally given to Cancellara will in turn be given to Kolobnev . 
 Rebellin had appealed at the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) against the decision to remove his silver medal , but in July 2010 , this was rejected . 
 There had been controversy in the months before the men 's road race when , in the aftermath of doping revelations at the Tour de France , International Olympic Committee vice @-@ president Thomas Bach had suggested that the men 's road race 's place in the Olympics should be reconsidered , and said that the credibility of the sport had been damaged ; although he clarified that there was no immediate threat . Pat McQuaid had reacted angrily to these comments , saying , " Why should they [ the majority of cyclists ] be threatened because of a few bad apples ? " 
 = = Final classification = = 
 A total of 142 riders have been qualified in the event at these Games . Most of them are not expected to finish one @-@ day races , having worked in support for their teams ( in this case , nations ) to place their riders with better climbing skills in good positions once the mountainous part of a course begins . Many of these riders also sought to conserve themselves for the time trial that was to come . Additionally , if a rider was lapped by the race leader on the Badaling circuit , he would be forced to stop . 
 The notation " <unk> " indicates that the rider crossed the finish line in the same group as the one receiving the time above him , and was therefore credited with the same finishing time . 
 Source : Official results 
 Notes 
 = Finn the Human ( Adventure Time episode ) = 
 " Finn the Human " is the fifth season premiere of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich and Jesse Moynihan , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on November 12 , 2012 . The episode guest stars Ron Perlman as the Lich , Kumail Nanjiani as Prismo , Ming @-@ Na as Farmworld Finn 's mother , and Cloris Leachman as Farmworld Marceline . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn and Jake chase The Lich through a dimensional portal where they meet Prismo , a wish granter , who tells them that the Lich wished for the extinction of all life . This leads Finn to wish that the Lich had never existed . Finn is then transported to an alternate timeline , where he is a normal human living with his family and his dog , Jake , on a farm . In the alternate reality , Finn discovers a magical ice crown , which he attempts to use to repay his family 's debt . After placing it on his head , he is magically imbued with power over ice and snow . 
 The story for " Finn the Human " is a continuation of the plot from the fourth season finale " The Lich " ; the plot was continued on into the following episode , " Jake the Dog " . " Finn the Human " was watched by 3 @.@ 435 million viewers and received critical acclaim , with writers from The A.V. Club and IndieWire applauding the episode for being both an excellent season premiere , as well as a creative challenge , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the fourth season finale " The Lich " , Finn and Jake are tricked by the Lich — disguised as the hero Billy — into opening a portal to the multiverse by using the Enchiridion . After the Lich passes through , Finn and Jake give chase . They eventually reach a time room at the center of the multiverse that is inhabited by Prismo , a wish @-@ granter . They arrive just in time to see the Lich vanish after making his wish for the extinction of all life . After a short conversation with Prismo , Finn wishes that the Lich had never existed and is promptly transported into the reality created by his wish . 
 The scene then shifts to the art style featured in the end of " The Lich " . In this reality , Finn is a normal human living with his family and his dog , Jake , on a farm . Finn is called by his mother and told to sell his beloved mule Bartram to pay off the family 's debt to the Destiny Gang . While going to town to the sell the creature , Finn and Jake fall down an opening in the earth and discover the long @-@ dead skeleton of Simon Petrikov . An aged and decrepit Marceline — who never became a vampire — reveals herself and tells Finn that Simon gave his life stopping a mutagenic bomb from exploding by freezing it in ice . She tells them that she has been guarding Simon 's body , and the ice crown , ever since his demise so that no one is ever harmed from the crown 's power . 
 Finn manages to steal the crown , hoping to sell it instead of Bartram . In town , however , the Destiny Gang steal the crown as well as Bartram . Finn , furious , riles up the town , who begin to riot , as they are sick of being abused by the Destiny Gang . Finn goes to the Destiny Gang 's mansion to confront their leader , Big Destiny . Once there , Big Destiny returns the crown , noting that it is the last possession that he will ever own . Finn looks out the window and sees that the gang is burning the city . Finn races to his home , taking Marceline with him . When he arrives at his house , the gang has already set it on fire with his parents and infant sibling trapped upstairs . Finn asks Marceline if the crown is magic and she tells him it is very dangerous magic . He then puts the crown on his head , and the power begins to flow through him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Finn the Human " was written and storyboarded by Jesse Moynihan and Tom Herpich , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward . The entry was directed by Larry Leichliter . The episode guest stars Ron Perlman as the Lich , Kumail Nanjiani as Prismo , Ming @-@ Na Wen as Farmworld Finn 's mother , and Cloris Leachman as Farmworld Marceline . Perlman had previously appeared in the fourth season finale " The Lich " . Nanjiani and Leachman would appear in the following episode , " Jake the Dog " . 
 The episode features new characters , the Destiny Gang , who were designed to not " really fit in the Adventure Time world " . Moynihan , the designer of the characters , was worried that their appearance would be " a little bit jarring " , but he was not dissuaded from trying it . Furthermore , Moynihan admitted that the characters were partially inspired by the Japanese manga series Fist of the North Star . Despite being officially boarded by Moynihan and Herpich , Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar — the writers and storyboarders for the following episode — helped out with various scenes . For instance , the majority of the scenes with Prismo were created by Sanchez and Herpich , whereas " Finn going insane " was the product of Sugar . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Finn the Human " first aired on Cartoon Network on November 12 , 2012 , along with " Jake the Dog " . The episode was watched by 3 @.@ 435 million viewers , and scored a 0 @.@ 7 percent in the 18 – 49 demographic Nielsen household rating . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 0 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the airing . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2014 Finn the Human DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' third , fourth , fifth , and sixth seasons . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode — along with " Jake the Dog " — an " A − " . He noted that , together , both episodes come together to make " a dense première that evokes nearly all aspects of this series . " He was appreciative of the fact that " Finn the Human " was " an action @-@ packed , mythology @-@ heavy chapter " and a " nice change of pace " . Eric Kohn of IndieWire praised the episode — along with " Jake the Dog " — for being " irreverent and narratively engaging " . He called the collective episodes " the ideal testament to animation 's glorious pliability in an commercial arena otherwise defined by restrictions . " Kohn felt that the show 's exploration of " sad subtext " — such as the series ' mysterious Mushroom War and the relationship between Marceline and the Ice King — and the characters ' abilities to " deny the bad vibes their surrounding world invites " via " cheery songs and vibrant artwork " were some of the series strongest points . Finally , he praised the exploration of the multiverse and its impact on the show , noting that it was an " interesting creative challenge " . 
 = Germanwings Flight 9525 = 
 Germanwings Flight 9525 ( <unk> / <unk> ) was a scheduled international passenger flight from Barcelona – El Prat Airport in Spain to Düsseldorf Airport in Germany . The flight was operated by Germanwings , a low @-@ cost carrier owned by the German airline Lufthansa . On 24 March 2015 , the aircraft , an Airbus A320 @-@ 211 , crashed 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north @-@ west of Nice in the French Alps after a constant descent that began one minute after the last routine contact with air traffic control and shortly after it had reached its assigned cruising altitude . All 144 passengers and six crew members were killed . It was Germanwings ' first fatal crash in the 18 @-@ year history of the company . 
 The crash was deliberately caused by the co @-@ pilot Andreas Lubitz , who had previously been treated for suicidal tendencies and been declared " unfit to work " by a doctor . Lubitz kept this information from his employer and reported for duty . During the flight , he locked the pilot out of the cockpit before initiating a descent that caused the aircraft to crash into a mountain . 
 In response to the incident and the circumstances of Lubitz 's involvement in it , aviation authorities in Australia , Canada , Germany , New Zealand , Norway , and the United Kingdom implemented new regulations that require the presence of two authorized personnel in the cockpit at all times . Three days after the incident , the European Aviation Safety Agency issued a temporary recommendation for airlines to ensure at least two crew members — including at least one pilot — are in the cockpit during the entire duration of the flight . Several airlines announced they had already adopted similar policies voluntarily . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Germanwings Flight 9525 took off from Runway <unk> at Barcelona – El Prat Airport on 24 March 2015 at 10 : 01 a.m. CET ( 09 : 01 UTC ) and was due to arrive at Düsseldorf Airport by 11 : 39 CET . The flight 's scheduled departure time was 9 : 35 CET . According to the French national civil aviation inquiries bureau , the Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety ( BEA ) , the pilots confirmed instructions from French air traffic control at 10 : 30 CET . At 10 : 31 CET , after crossing the French coast near Toulon , the aircraft left its assigned cruising altitude of 38 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) and without approval began to descend rapidly . The air traffic controller declared the aircraft in distress after its descent and loss of radio contact . 
 The descent time from 38 @,@ 000 feet was about ten minutes ; radar observed an average descent rate of approximately 3 @,@ 400 feet per minute or 58 feet per second ( 18 m / s ) . Attempts by French air traffic control to contact the flight on the assigned radio frequency were not answered . A French military Mirage jet was scrambled from the Orange @-@ <unk> Air Base to intercept the aircraft . According to the BEA , radar contact was lost at 10 : 40 CET ; at the time the aircraft had descended to 6 @,@ 175 feet ( 1 @,@ 882 m ) . The aircraft crashed in the remote commune of <unk> @-@ Haute @-@ <unk> , 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north @-@ west of Nice . 
 The crash is the deadliest air disaster in France since the 1981 crash of <unk> @-@ Adria <unk> Flight 1308 in which 180 people died , and the third @-@ deadliest in France behind Flight 1308 and Turkish Airlines Flight 981 . This was the first major crash of a civil airliner in France since the crash of Air France Flight 4590 on takeoff from Charles de Gaulle Airport in 2000 . 
 = = = Crash site = = = 
 The crash site is within the Massif des Trois @-@ <unk> , three kilometres ( 2 mi ) east of the settlement Le Vernet and beyond the road to the Col de <unk> , in an area known as the Ravin du Rosé . The aircraft crashed on the southern side of the Tête du Travers , a minor peak in the lower western slopes of the Tête de l <unk> . The site is approximately 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) west of Mount <unk> , where Air France Flight 178 crashed in 1953 . 
 Gendarmerie nationale and Sécurité Civile sent helicopters to locate the wreckage . The aircraft had disintegrated ; the largest piece of wreckage was " the size of a car " . A helicopter landed near the crash site ; its personnel confirmed there were no survivors . The search and rescue team reported the debris field covered two square kilometres ( 500 acres ) . 
 = = Aircraft = = 
 The aircraft that crashed was a 24 @-@ year @-@ old Airbus A320 @-@ 211 , serial number 147 , registered as D @-@ <unk> . It first flew on 29 November 1990 . It was delivered to Lufthansa on 5 February 1991 and was leased to Germanwings from 1 June 2003 until mid @-@ 2004 . The aircraft was returned to Lufthansa on 22 July 2004 and remained with that airline until 2014 , during which time it was named Mannheim . It was finally transferred to Germanwings on 31 January 2014 . 
 The aircraft had accumulated about 58 @,@ 300 flight hours on 46 @,@ 700 flights . The original Design Service Goal ( DSG ) of the aircraft was 60 @,@ 000 hours or 48 @,@ 000 flights . In 2012 , an optional Extended Service Goal ( <unk> ) was approved , extending the aircraft 's service life to 120 @,@ 000 hours or 60 @,@ 000 flights , provided a required package of service and inspections was performed before the DSG was reached . 
 = = Crew and passengers = = 
 During its final flight , the aircraft was carrying 144 passengers , two pilots , and four cabin crew members from at least 18 countries — mostly Germany and Spain . The count was confused by the multiple citizenship status of some people on board . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The flight 's pilot in command was 34 @-@ year @-@ old Captain Patrick <unk> , who had ten years of flying experience ( 6 @,@ 000 flight hours ) flying A320s for Germanwings , Lufthansa , and Condor . The co @-@ pilot was 27 @-@ year @-@ old First Officer Andreas Lubitz , who joined Germanwings in September 2013 and had 630 flight hours of experience . 
 = = = = Andreas Lubitz = = = = 
 Andreas Günter Lubitz was born on 18 December 1987 and grew up in Neuburg an der Donau , Bavaria and Montabaur in the German state of Rhineland @-@ Palatinate . He took flying lessons at <unk> Westerwald , an aviation sports club in Montabaur . 
 Lubitz was accepted into a Lufthansa trainee programme after finishing high school . Starting in 2008 , he received pilot training at the Lufthansa Flight Training school in Bremen , Germany , and at the Lufthansa Airline Training Center in Goodyear , Arizona , United States . Lubitz took time off from his flight training for several months and informed the Flight Training Pilot School in 2009 of a previous episode of severe depression . He later completed the training and spent an eleven @-@ month waiting period working as a flight attendant for Lufthansa before gaining his commercial pilot 's licence . 
 = = = Passengers = = = 
 Among the passengers were sixteen students and two teachers from the Joseph @-@ König @-@ Gymnasium of Haltern am See , North Rhine @-@ Westphalia . They were returning home from a student exchange with the <unk> Institute in <unk> del <unk> , Barcelona . Haltern 's mayor , Bodo <unk> , described the crash as " the darkest day in the history of [ the ] town " . Bass @-@ baritone Oleg Bryjak and contralto Maria Radner , singers with Deutsche Oper am Rhein , were also on the flight . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The French Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety ( BEA ) opened an investigation into the crash ; it was joined by its German counterpart , the Federal Bureau of Aircraft Accident Investigation ( <unk> ) , and was assisted by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) . Hours after the crash , the BEA sent seven investigators to the crash site ; these were accompanied by representatives from Airbus and CFM International . The cockpit voice recorder , which was damaged but still usable , was recovered by rescue workers and was examined by the investigation team . The following week , Marseille prosecutor Brice Robin announced that the flight data recorder , which was blackened by fire but still usable , had also been found . Investigators isolated 150 sets of DNA , which were compared with the DNA of the victims ' families . 
 = = = Cause of crash = = = 
 According to French and German prosecutors , the crash was deliberately caused by the co @-@ pilot . Brice Robin said co @-@ pilot Andreas Lubitz was initially courteous to Captain <unk> during the first part of the flight , then became " curt " when the captain began the mid @-@ flight briefing on the planned landing . Robin said when the captain returned from a probable toilet break and tried to enter the cockpit , Lubitz had locked the door . The captain had a code to unlock the door , but the lock 's code panel can be disabled from the cockpit controls . The captain requested re @-@ entry using the intercom ; he knocked and then banged on the door , but received no response . The captain then tried to break down the door . During the descent , the co @-@ pilot did not respond to questions from air traffic control and did not transmit a distress call . Robin said contact from the Marseille air traffic control tower , the captain 's attempts to break in , and Lubitz 's steady breathing were audible on the cockpit voice recording . The screams of passengers in the last moments before impact were also heard on the recording . 
 After their initial analysis of the aircraft 's flight data recorder , the BEA concluded that Lubitz deliberately crashed the aircraft . He had set the autopilot to descend to 100 feet ( 30 m ) and accelerated the speed of the descending aircraft several times thereafter . The aircraft was travelling at 700 kilometres per hour ( 430 mph ) when it crashed into the mountain . The BEA preliminary report into the crash was published on 6 May 2015 , six weeks later . It confirmed the initial analysis of the aircraft 's flight data recorder and revealed that during the earlier outbound Flight <unk> from Düsseldorf to Barcelona , Lubitz had practised setting the autopilot altitude dial to 100 feet several times while the captain was out of the cockpit . 
 = = = Investigation of Lubitz = = = 
 Three days after the crash , German detectives searched Lubitz 's Montabaur properties and removed a computer and other items for testing . They did not find a suicide note nor any evidence his actions had been motivated by " a political or religious background " . During their search of Lubitz 's apartment , detectives found a letter in a waste bin indicating he had been declared unfit to work by a doctor . Germanwings stated it had not received a sick note from Lubitz for the day of the flight . News accounts said Lubitz was " hiding an illness from his employers " ; under German law , employers do not have access to employees ' medical records , and sick notes excusing a person from work do not give information about medical conditions . 
 The following day , authorities again searched Lubitz 's home , where they found evidence he was taking prescription drugs and suffered from a psychosomatic illness . Criminal investigators said Lubitz 's web searches on his tablet computer in the days leading up to the crash included " ways to commit suicide " and " cockpit doors and their security provisions " . Prosecutor Brice Robin said doctors had told him Lubitz should not have been flying , but " medical secrecy requirements " prevented this information from being made available to Germanwings . 
 In the weeks before the BEA 's preliminary report , the investigation into Lubitz found he had been treated for suicidal tendencies prior to his training as a commercial pilot and had been temporarily denied a US pilot 's license because of these treatments for depression . The final report of the BEA confirmed the preliminary report 's findings , saying the co @-@ pilot began showing symptoms of psychotic depression . For five years , Lubitz had frequently been unable to sleep because of what he believed were vision problems ; he consulted over forty doctors and feared he was going blind . Motivated by the fear that blindness would cause him to lose his pilot 's licence , he began conducting online research about methods of committing suicide before deciding to crash Flight 9525 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Political = = = 
 French Minister of the Interior Bernard Cazeneuve announced that due to the " violence of the impact " there was " little hope " any survivors would be found . Prime Minister Manuel Valls dispatched Cazeneuve to the scene and set up a ministerial task force to coordinate the response to the incident . 
 German Foreign Minister Frank @-@ Walter Steinmeier flew over the crash site ; he described it as " a picture of horror " . German Chancellor Angela Merkel and the minister @-@ president of North Rhine @-@ Westphalia Hannelore Kraft travelled to the crash site the following day . Merkel , Valls , and Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy visited the recovery operations base at Seyne @-@ les @-@ Alpes . Bodo <unk> , mayor of Haltern am See , reacting to the deaths of sixteen students and two teachers from the town , said that people were shocked by the crash . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Lufthansa chief executive officer Carsten Spohr visited the crash location the day following the crash ; he said it was " the darkest day for Lufthansa in its 60 @-@ year history " . Several Germanwings flights were cancelled on 24 and 25 March due to the pilots ' grief at the loss of their colleagues . Germanwings retired the flight number <unk> , changing it to <unk> ; the outbound flight number was changed from <unk> to <unk> . In the days following the crash , Lufthansa at first said it saw no reason to change its procedures , then reversed its earlier statement by introducing a new policy across its airlines requiring the presence of two crew members in the cockpit at all times . 
 = = = Regulatory = = = 
 In response to the incident and the circumstances of Lubitz 's involvement in it , aviation authorities in Australia , Canada , Germany , New Zealand , Norway , and the UK implemented new regulations that require two authorized personnel to be present in the cockpit of large passenger aircraft at all times . While the United States Federal Aviation Administration , the Civil Aviation Administration of China , and some European airlines already had a similar " rule of two " requirement , the European Aviation Safety Agency recommended the introduction of similar legal changes . Other airlines announced similar changes to their policies . 
 The British Psychological Society issued a statement offering to provide expert support in psychological testing and monitoring of pilots . The European Federation of Psychologists ' Associations ( <unk> ) issued a statement supporting psychological testing in the selection of pilots , but also stated it could not forecast the life events and mental health problems of individual pilots , nor could it predict the unique ways pilots would cope with these . It said priority should be given to psychological help for relatives and friends of victims in the aftermath of a disaster . 
 In May 2015 , Lufthansa CEO Carsten Spohr proposed random checks of pilots ' psychological fitness and a loosening of the extant physician – patient confidentiality laws . Politicians began echoing the call for a loosening of the laws in exceptional cases . 
 = = = Compensation = = = 
 Germanwings ' parent company Lufthansa offered victims ' families an initial aid payment of up to € 50 @,@ 000 , separate from any legally @-@ required compensation for the disaster . Elmar <unk> , a professor of aviation law at the Technical University of Berlin quoted by the Rheinische Post , said he expected the airline would pay € 10 – 30 million in compensation . The Montreal Convention sets a per @-@ victim cap of € 143 @,@ 000 in the event an airline is held liable , unless negligence can be proved . Insurance specialists said although co @-@ pilot Andreas Lubitz hid a serious illness from his employer and deliberately crashed the passenger aircraft , these facts would not affect the issue of compensation nor be applicable to the exclusion clause in Lufthansa 's insurance policy . Lufthansa 's insurance company set aside US $ 300 million ( € 280 million ) for financial compensation to victims ' families and for the cost of the aircraft . 
 German law does not allow for punitive damages or the broad discovery generally available under the law of most American jurisdictions . A U.S. plaintiffs ' law firm , <unk> & <unk> , signed up families of about 80 of the crash victims as clients ; and filed a lawsuit on their behalf on April 13 , 2016 in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona against the Arizona @-@ based Lufthansa Airline Training Center that Lubitz had attended for his training as a commercial pilot . 
 = = = Commemorative = = = 
 Shortly after the crash , a memorial stone in memory of the victims was erected near the crash site in Le Vernet . The following month , about 1 @,@ 400 relatives of victims , senior politicians , rescue workers , and airline employees attended a memorial service at Cologne Cathedral . The parents of Andreas Lubitz were invited to the service but did not attend . 
 The remains of fifteen of the sixteen school children and their two teachers arrived in their home town of Haltern for burial two months after the crash . Residents held white roses as the hearses passed the children 's school , where eighteen trees — one for each victim — had been planted as a memorial . In Düsseldorf on the same day , the remains of forty @-@ four of the seventy @-@ two German victims arrived for burial . Errors on the victims ' death certificates had caused a delay . A lawyer representing the families of thirty @-@ four victims said that burying the remains would help many relatives achieve closure . 
 = Clarence Ransom Edwards = 
 Clarence Ransom Edwards ( January 1 , 1859 – February 14 , 1931 ) was an American general , known as the first Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs , and commander of the 26th Division in World War I. 
 = = Early career = = 
 Edwards was born in Cleveland , Ohio , the son of local merchant William Edwards , and Lucia Ransom . He graduated last in his class from the United States Military Academy in 1883 . Upon his graduation from West Point , Edwards was appointed a second lieutenant in the 23rd Infantry . For the next several years Edwards served at various posts , including Fort Union , Fort Porter , Cleveland , Ohio ( commanding the guard at the tomb of President Garfield ) , and Fort Davis . While stationed at Fort Porter he met Bessie Rochester Porter , a member of the family that included Peter Buell Porter , for whom the fort was named , and they were married in 1889 . 
 He was promoted to first lieutenant on February 25 , 1891 while serving on detached service as Professor of Military Science and Tactics at St. John 's College ( now known as Fordham University ) , from which he received an honorary degree . Following another stint of detached service in the Military Information Bureau of the Adjutant General 's Office , Edwards returned to the 23rd Infantry at Fort Clark , serving as a captain in command of a company , and later as regimental quartermaster . 
 = = Spanish – American War , the Philippines , and after = = 
 At the outbreak of the Spanish – American War , Edwards moved with his regiment to New Orleans , Louisiana . In May 1898 , he was given the rank of major , U. S. Volunteers , and assigned as Adjutant General of the 4th Army Corps at Mobile , Alabama ( and , later , Tampa , Florida and Huntsville , Alabama ) under the command of Major General John J. Coppinger . The 4th Army Corps was to have been part of the invasion of Cuba , but was unable to obtain transport . 
 In January 1899 , Edwards was appointed Adjutant @-@ General on General H. W. Lawton 's staff , accompanying him to the Philippines . He participated in all of Lawton 's campaigns in the Philippines , including the Battle of Santa Cruz and the Battle of Zapote Bridge . Edwards received three silver citation stars for gallantry in action during these campaigns . Lawton was killed in the Battle of <unk> in December 1899 , and Edwards accompanied his remains to Washington , D.C. for burial . 
 In 1900 , due in part to his knowledge of the conditions in the Philippines , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and named Chief of the Division of Customs and Insular Affairs in the War Department . By 1902 he was promoted to colonel and named the first chief of the new Bureau of Insular Affairs . He retained this office until 1912 , by which time he had risen to the rank of brigadier general . 
 Edwards was named commander of the 6th Brigade at Fort D. A. Russell , Wyoming in October 1912 . The brigade was moved to Texas City , Texas , in February 1913 in response to the Mexican Revolution . In February 1914 , Edwards became the commander of the 1st Hawaiian Brigade , at Schofield Barracks , Hawaii . He then served as commander of all U. S. forces in the Panama Canal Zone from February 1915 to April 1917 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Upon the outbreak of World War I , Edwards was placed in charge of the Department of the Northeast , comprising all the New England states . In August 1917 , he was promoted to major general in the National Army and given the task of organizing the 26th Division . The division arrived in France in September 1917 , the first complete American division to do so . The division also became the first complete American division to go into combat at Chemin @-@ des @-@ Dames in February 1918 , where they remained for 46 days . 
 Going back to his days at West Point , Edwards had earned a reputation for being sharp @-@ tongued and contentious . John J. Pershing , commander of the American Expeditionary Force , particularly despised him . Edwards made another enemy in General Robert Lee Bullard during the 26th Division 's relief of the 1st Infantry Division near Toul in April 1918 . Edwards found fault with everything he saw , and accused the 1st Division of leaving behind classified documents . Bullard was enraged , but Pershing always favored the 1st Division , and reassured him , and nothing came of the incident . In July 1918 , during the Second Battle of the Marne , I Corps commander Hunter Liggett found that , although the 26th Division did not lack for heroism and fought valiantly , he could not depend on its commanders , especially Edwards , to subjugate his unit to Regular Army Divisions . 
 Edwards ' final demise came in October 1918 , when he reported an incident to Liggett involving information two of his soldiers had obtained from German soldiers with whom they had been fraternizing . The Germans had expressed their belief that the war would be over soon , and that they were reluctant to continue fighting . While Edwards thought he was reporting the enemy 's poor morale to Liggett , he instead gave Liggett an excuse to get rid of Edwards for his zeal in supporting the National Guard . Liggett reported the incident to Pershing , who took the opportunity to act on his personal vendetta and relieve Edwards of his command . 
 = = Later career = = 
 On Edwards ' return to the United States , he was assigned to the command of the Northeastern Department once again , with headquarters in Boston . In September 1920 , he reverted to his Regular Army rank of brigadier general , and was placed in command of the 2nd Brigade , based at Camp Taylor , Kentucky . He was promoted to major general in the Regular Army in June 1921 , and given the command of the First Corps area , headquartered in Boston , where he served until retired at on December 1 , 1922 after nearly 40 years of service . Following retirement , Edwards served as president of the grocery company his father had founded . 
 Edwards was a member of the Military Order of Foreign Wars ( <unk> ) and served as its Commander General from 1923 – 1926 . 
 His daughter Bessie died from pneumonia at Camp Meade , Maryland on October 13 , 1918 and his wife died January 25 , 1929 . Edwards died February 14 , 1931 in Boston , Massachusetts and all three are buried together at Arlington National Cemetery , Arlington , Virginia . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = Military honors = = = 
 Distinguished Service Medal ( posthumous – presented in 1937 ) 
 Spanish War Service Medal 
 Philippine Campaign Medal with three silver citation stars 
 Victory Medal 
 Legion of Honor ( France ) 
 Croix de Guerre with palm ( France ) 
 Grand Cross Order of Leopold ( Belgium ) 
 Haller Swords ( Poland ) 
 = = = = Distinguished Service Medal citation = = = = 
