 = = = Negotiating a charter = = = 
 In 1660 , Charles II ascended to the throne of England , and within two years the Act of Uniformity was passed , requiring unified religious observances centered on the Anglican Church . The new king harbored prejudices against the Presbyterians , Independents , and Baptists , increasing Clarke 's difficulty in crafting a charter that included religious freedoms . Clarke 's commission as the agent for Rhode Island was renewed on 18 October 1660 , and from 1661 to 1662 he filed at least ten petitions or letters addressed to the king . Being deferential and begging the king 's indulgence , Clarke offered him complete loyalty on behalf of the Rhode Island colony . He then requested of the king his sympathy and support to guarantee freedom of conscience in the pursuit of religious worship . 
 In a petition received by the crown on 5 February 1661 , Clarke penned a particularly eloquent proposal , with certain words emboldened within the document . Clarke 's earnest request was " ... TO <unk> FORTH A <unk> <unk> THAT A MOST <unk> <unk> STATE <unk> STAND ... AND BEST BE <unk> ... WITH A FULL <unk> IN <unk> <unk> " . These words , which became emblematic of Rhode Island 's struggle for religious freedom , were soon included in the charter itself , and then much later chiseled on the frieze of the Rhode Island State House . One of the later petitions dealt heavily with the boundary issues between the Rhode Island and Connecticut colonies . After forwarding so many sincere petitions covering the issues of the utmost importance to Rhode Island , Clarke had to wait nearly a year for any action on them . 
 An unforeseen emergency occurred in the spring of 1662 when the governor of the Connecticut Colony , John Winthrop , Jr . , was given an audience with the king ahead of Clarke , and got a new charter approved for his colony . While Winthrop was on good terms with many Rhode Islanders , he also had a stake in the Atherton Company , which undermined the sovereignty of Rhode Island by buying large tracts of land of the natives west of the Narraganset Bay , where Rhode Island claimed the territory . Clarke regarded Winthrop 's conduct as treacherous , and the Connecticut governor did his utmost to keep Rhode Island in the dark about his intentions by sailing to England from New Amsterdam instead of the usual route from Boston . Furthermore , Winthrop avoided Clarke while in England , and was able to get his charter approved in May 1662 . 
 Recognizing conflict between Connecticut and Rhode Island , the Earl of Clarendon , representing the king , summoned Winthrop and Clarke in July 1662 to settle the boundary dispute between the two colonies . Both colonies claimed the territory between the Pawcatuck River to the west and the Narragansett Bay to the east . Following months of negotiations involving lawyers and arbitrators on both sides , the boundary line between the two colonies was set as the Pawcatuck River , favoring Rhode Island in the dispute . Those who had settled on Atherton Company lands were allowed to choose whether to be governed by Connecticut or Rhode Island . Once the agreement was reached , Winthrop returned to New England while Clarke made his final push for Rhode Island 's charter . 
 Following all the furor over the land boundaries , none of the other provisions of the proposed charter aroused any debate . Many of the provisions of Rhode Island 's charter were like those in Connecticut 's , except Connecticut wanted a government similar to that of Massachusetts , while Rhode Island wanted the same self @-@ government of the freemen that had been granted earlier in the 1643 patent . However , the Rhode Island charter went much further in its guarantees of religious freedom . 
 = = Rhode Island 's Royal Charter = = 
 Once the boundary issue between Rhode Island and Connecticut was resolved , the long @-@ awaited charter , drafted by Clarke , was given the king 's seal on 8 July 1663 . The document was remarkable in that it not only offered corporate powers beyond what most English bureaucrats thought prudent , but offered a degree of religious freedom without precedent . The provisions of this charter were so far @-@ reaching that not only would Rhode Island proceed as an autonomous entity , but the document would remain in effect for 180 years . 
 In this charter , colonial boundaries were outlined , provisions for a military and for prosecuting war were effected , fishing privileges were secured , and a means of appeal to England was detailed . The charter guaranteed the rights of Rhode Island residents to travel freely within the other colonies , which rights had been curtailed due to religious reasons in the past . The new charter also forbade the other New England colonies from making war against the Indians within Rhode Island , without its permission , and also directed that disputes with other colonies would be appealed to the crown . It also outlined provisions for colonial representation , specifying a colonial governor , deputy governor , and ten assistants ( called magistrates because of their judicial role ) . In addition , the number of deputies allotted to each town was specified . 
 Of paramount importance to Clarke was the charter 's explicit guarantee of religious freedom . It excused Rhode Islanders from conformity with the Anglican Church " because some of the people ... cannot , in their private Opinions , conform to the publique exercise of religion ... " It also took some of the language from the Declaration of Breda : 
 " that no person within the said colony , at any time hereafter shall be any wise molested [ harassed ] , punished , disquieted , or called in question , for any differences in opinion in matters of religion , and do not actually disturb the civil peace of our said colony ; but that all and every person and persons may , from time to time , and at all times hereafter , freely and fully have and enjoy his and their own judgments and consciences , in matters of religious <unk> , throughout the tract of land hereafter mentioned , they behaving themselves peaceable and quietly ... " 
 Once he had the cherished document in hand , it was imperative for Clarke to get it sent to Rhode Island . However , he had received very little remuneration for his diplomatic efforts and did not have the funds to immediately sail back to New England . He therefore entrusted the charter to Captain George Baxter , who carried it to Rhode Island . On 24 November 1663 Rhode Island 's General Court of Commissioners convened at Newport for the last time under the parliamentary patent of 1643 . The inhabitants and legislators had gathered to receive the result of Clarke 's decade @-@ long labors . The magnitude and solemnity of the occasion was captured in the colonial records : 
 At a very great meeting and assembly of the freemen of the colony of Providence Plantation , at Newport , in Rhode Island , in New England , November the 24th , 1663 . The <unk> Assembly being legally called and orderly <unk> for the <unk> reception of his <unk> <unk> letter <unk> unto them sent , and having in order thereto chosen the President , Benedict Arnold , Moderator of the Assembly , [ it was ] Voted : That the box in which the King 's <unk> letters were enclosed be opened , and the letters with the broad <unk> thereto affixed be taken forth and read by <unk> George Baxter in the audience and view of all the people ; which was accordingly done , and the <unk> letters with his Majesty 's Royall <unk> , and the broad seal , with much becoming gravity held up on <unk> , and presented to the perfect view of the people , and then returned into the box and locked up by the Governor , in order to the safe keeping of it . 
 The following day it was voted that words of humble thanks be delivered to the King and also to the Earl of Clarendon , and that a £ 100 gratuity be given to Clarke . The charter stood the test of time , and it wasn 't until 1843 , 180 years after its creation , that the charter was finally replaced , and only for the one reason that the apportionment of representatives for the several towns " could no longer be rendered as just in operation and could only be remedied by alteration of the organic law . " When the document was ultimately retired , it was the longest surviving constitutional charter in the world . It was so far @-@ reaching that even the American Revolutionary War did not change its position , since both the revolution and the charter rested on the same foundation — the inherent right of self @-@ government . 
 = = Later life = = 
 With the royal charter ready to travel to New England , Clarke had to begin gathering funds to get himself back as well . Only a week after the king put his seal on the charter , Clarke made an indenture with Richard Deane of London , mortgaging his Newport properties to raise money . Even this didn 't ensure his immediate departure from England , and it wasn 't until the following spring that he was able to make the voyage back to Rhode Island . He and his wife sailed aboard The Sisters of London , carrying their belongings and a shipment of armaments for the colony . 
 Despite the magnanimous provisions of Rhode Island 's charter , it did not definitively settle the land disputes with Connecticut , which would continue for more than half a century . Nor did it settle the issue with the Atherton Company , occupying two large tracts of land within Rhode Island 's " Narragansett country " . <unk> for the Rhode Island colony , however , was the arrival in 1664 of a group of royal commissioners . Samuel Gorton had told the crown that in 1644 the Narragansett people had submitted themselves to England 's king . Once the newly arrived commissioners verified this , they declared all of the Narragansett territory ( what is now Washington County and a part of Kent County , Rhode Island , including the Atherton tracts ) , to be Kings Province . One of the commissioners was Samuel Maverick , a good friend of Rhode Island 's recent governor William Brenton , who abhorred the Atherton Company . Clarke was one of three men allowed to present Rhode Island 's views on the land disputes , and the commissioners ultimately took a strong stance in favor of Rhode Island . Eventually , the Atherton Company lost its Narragansett property , and the Kings Province became a part of the Rhode Island colony . 
 = = = Civil roles = = = 
 Following his great usefulness in England , Clarke became further involved in the affairs of the Rhode Island colony upon his return . He served for six years , from 1664 to 1671 , as a Deputy from Newport in the General Assembly , and then served as the Deputy Governor under Governor Benedict Arnold for two of the three years between 1669 and 1672 . With his legal background , he was appointed in October 1666 to make a digest of Rhode Island laws . In June 1670 and again in March 1672 he was chosen as an agent to go back to England on behalf of the colony . His selection in 1672 was to make an appeal to the king because of incursions that the Connecticut Colony was making into the territory of Rhode Island , but the plan to send him was abandoned . 
 From 1675 to 1676 , Rhode Island became embroiled in King Philip 's War , considered " the most disastrous conflict to ever devastate New England , " and leaving the mainland towns of the colony in ruins . This confrontation between many indigenous people and the English settlers was named for Metacomet , sachem of the Wampanoags , who had been given the English name of King Philip . Though Rhode Island was much more at peace with the Indians than the other colonies , because of geography , it took the brunt of damage from the conflict , and the settlements of Warwick and Pawtuxet were totally destroyed , with much of Providence ruined as well . Because of the very high esteem Clarke held within the colony , he was one of 16 colonial leaders whose counsel was sought in a 4 April 1676 General Assembly resolution . Two weeks later , while the war was still raging , Clarke was dead . 
 = = = Church divisions = = = 
 While Clarke became very active in the affairs of the colony upon his return from England , he also resumed his leadership role in the Newport church . One major schism occurred in the church while he was in England , and another several years after his return . The first of these concerned the " laying on of hands " . This practice was considered to be one of Christ 's six principles as advocated in the biblical verse Hebrews 6 : 2 , and the ritual was welcomed in the Newport Baptist Church . However , some members of the church wanted the practice to be mandatory , while others did not want additional restrictions placed on the parishioners . This disagreement prompted William Vaughan to break away from the church in 1656 and form his own " Six Principle " Baptist Church in Newport , sometimes called the Second Baptist Church of Newport . 
 The second major division in the church occurred over the day of worship , when Sabbatarians within the congregation wanted to worship on Saturday . The practice was largely tolerated , with some parishioners attending one service , some attending another , and some attending both . The elder Obadiah Holmes , however , was hostile to the practice , and was rebuked by Clarke in 1667 over his harshness towards the Sabbatarians . Holmes subsequently withdrew from preaching at the Newport church , but resumed his pastoral duties there in 1671 . When he continued to be critical of the Sabbatarians , they finally left to form their own church in December 1671 . Additional dissension occurred in the church , centered on the family of Giles Slocum . When Slocum 's wife , Joan , denied that Christ was alive , she was excommunicated in 1673 . Following this , her husband , their children , and their children 's spouses all left the church , and became Quakers . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 With the help of Richard Baily , Clarke drafted his will on 20 April 1676 , then died in Newport the same day . He was buried in his family plot in Newport , as directed in his will , beside his two wives , Elizabeth and Jane , who predeceased him . 
 In his will he set up a trust to be used " for the relief of the poor or bringing up of children unto learning from time to time forever . " Still in use , this trust is generally considered to be the oldest educational trust fund in the United States . Ironically , the trust undermined some of the principles that Clarke cherished , particularly the separation between church and state . While the trust was used to support ministries of the church , it enmeshed the town counsel and the church in many legal entanglements . Eventually the trust was used to pay , at least in part , the salary of a paid minister — something that Clarke thought to be highly inappropriate . 
 Clarke believed that secular government should peacefully coexist with religion , and he became a seminal figure in applying the separation of church and state . Historian Thomas Bicknell , one of Clarke 's most ardent supporters , wrote that at the time of the Puritan settlement of New England that " nowhere on the face of the earth and among civilized men , did civil and soul @-@ liberty exist . Its first clear , full , deliberate , organized and permanent establishment in the world can now be distinctly traced to the Colony of Rhode Island , on the island of Aquidneck , in the Narragansett Bay , under the leadership and inspiration of Dr. John Clarke , the true Founder " . Historian Louis Asher wrote , " It hardly seems arguable that Dr. Clarke was the first one to bring democracy to the New World by means of Rhode Island . " Bicknell also asserted that Clarke was the " recognized founder and father of the Aquidneck Plantations , the author of the Compact of Portsmouth and leading spirit in the organization and administration of the island towns . Historian Edward Peterson wrote that Clarke was a man " whose moral character has never been surpassed , and his piety never been questioned . " Asher made this final assessment of Clarke : " As a man , Clarke lived for others . Like many men of the past , he was selfless and uncomplaining . Despite his sectarian religious views , he gave more for his fellow man than he received . " 
 The First Baptist Church of Newport , a grammar school , and a merchant Liberty ship , the SS John Clarke , are named for Clarke . The science building at the University of Rhode Island was dedicated in his honor in 1963 . A plaque on the wall of the Newport Historical Society reads : 
 Erected by the Newport Medical Society 
 December , 1885 
 To 
 John Clarke , Physician 
 1609 @-@ 1676 
 Founder of Newport 
 And of the Civil Polity of Rhode Island 
 = = Ancestry and family = = 
 John Clarke was the fifth of seven known children born to Thomas and Rose Clarke , all born or baptized at Westhorpe , Suffolk , England . Margaret was the oldest child , born about 1601 , and next was Carew , baptized 17 February 1602 / 3 , followed by Thomas , baptized 31 March 1605 . Mary was next , baptized 26 July 1607 , then the subject John was baptized 8 October 1609 , William was born next , and the youngest , Joseph , was baptized on 16 December 1618 . Margaret married Nicholas Wyeth and lived in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Mary married John Peckham , and came to Newport , Rhode Island with her husband and four brothers , Carew , Thomas , John , and Joseph . 
 John Clarke was married three times , his first wife being Elizabeth Harris , the daughter of John Harris who was lord of the manor of <unk> in Bedfordshire . This was the wife who was with him while he was an agent in England , and she died in Newport a few years before Clarke . Following her death he was married on 1 February 1671 to Jane , the widow of Nicholas Fletcher , but she died the following year on 19 April 1672 . Clarke had a daughter with Jane , born 14 February 1672 and dying on 18 May 1673 . 
 Clarke 's third wife was Sarah , the widow of Nicholas Davis , with whom Clarke had had a long association . Davis , like Clarke , had been an early settler of Aquidneck Island in 1639 , but became a merchant and moved to Hyannis in the Plymouth Colony . Davis had many business dealings in Massachusetts , but when he became a Quaker , he was imprisoned and banished from there in 1659 , and later lived in Newport . He transported Quaker founder George Fox from Long Island to Newport in 1672 , during Fox 's visit to the American colonies . Soon thereafter Davis drowned , and within a year and a half his widow married Clarke . Sarah survived Clarke , and died sometime about 1692 . She had children who were remembered in her husband 's will . 
 Other than the daughter with his second wife , Clarke had no known children , and left no descendants . 
 = Tim Bozon = 
 <unk> " Tim " Phillipe Bozon ( born March 24 , 1994 ) is an American @-@ born French ice hockey left winger . He is currently with the St. John 's IceCaps of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) as a prospect for the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League . 
 Bozon was born in St. Louis , Missouri , where his father , Philippe Bozon , played hockey for the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , but was raised in France , where his father is from . Bozon then moved to Switzerland to further his career , before moving again to Canada after the Kamloops Blazers selected him in the 2011 CHL Import Draft . At the 2012 NHL Entry Draft , Bozon was selected 64th overall by the Canadiens . During his third season with the Blazers Bozon was traded to the Kootenay Ice . Internationally Bozon has played for the French national junior team in several tournaments and joined the French national senior team in the 2013 IIHF World Championships . Bozon contracted Neisseria meningitis in early 2014 , threatening his life , though he ultimately recovered . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Bozon grew up in Germany and Switzerland while his father played hockey in those countries , and began to play hockey in Mannheim , Germany while his father was a member of Adler Mannheim of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga . When Philippe moved to Switzerland , Bozon followed , and was a player for the junior clubs of Genève @-@ Servette HC , the Kloten Flyers and HC Lugano . At age 15 Bozon decided he wanted to follow the path of Nino Niederreiter , a fellow Swiss junior player who had just moved to North America at age 17 and joined a team in the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) to further his career . Bozon wanted to eventually play in the National Hockey League and realized there were more scouts following teams in the CHL , which oversees three major junior hockey leagues in Canada and the United States . He had preferred to play for a team in the Ontario Hockey League , but was instead selected by the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League , twenty @-@ seventh overall at the 2011 CHL Import Draft . He joined the Blazers for the 2011 – 12 season and played 71 games for them , recording 36 goals and 35 assists for 71 points . His goal total was the most among all WHL rookies , his points second among rookies and third overall on the Blazers . Bozon was recognised for his efforts by being named the WHL 's Western Conference nominee for the Jim Piggott Memorial Trophy as WHL rookie @-@ of @-@ the @-@ year . He also was a co @-@ recipient of the Blazers rookie @-@ of @-@ the @-@ year award , sharing it with goaltender Cole <unk> . 
 Midway through the season Bozon was ranked 39th overall amongst North American @-@ based skaters for the 2012 NHL Entry Draft by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . When the final rankings for the draft were released at the conclusion of the season , Bozon was listed 42nd overall for North American skaters . At the draft he was selected in the third round , 64th overall , by the Montreal Canadiens . Bozon was excited to be selected by the Canadiens , who are the only NHL team based in a French @-@ speaking city . 
 Bozon recorded 36 goals and 91 points in 69 games during the 2012 – 13 season , finishing second on the Blazers in scoring and tied for eighth overall in the WHL . In the playoffs Bozon scored six points in eight games ; a fractured wrist kept him out of most of the Blazers ' playoff games . 
 On May 30 , 2013 , Bozon signed a three @-@ year entry level contract with the Canadiens . He was returned by the Canadiens to the Blazers for a third year with the team prior to the start of the 2013 – 14 season . After starting the season with the Blazers , where he was fifth in team scoring with seven points in thirteen games , Bozon was traded to the Kootenay Ice on October 22 , 2013 . The Blazers , who also sent defenceman Landon Cross , received Colin Shirley , Matt Thomas , and three draft picks in return . 
 Bozon 's season was ended prematurely due to a diagnosis of Neisseria meningitis on March 1 , 2014 ; at that point he had recorded 62 points in 50 games for <unk> . His illness caused him to lose 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) ; he had difficulty speaking and had to re @-@ learn how to walk . As he recovered , he resumed skating in June 2014 and by September , he attended the Canadiens ' rookie camp . Bozon participated in the Canadiens main training camp , and later played three exhibition games with their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate Hamilton Bulldogs ; however it was decided that in consideration of the time missed due to his illness , it would be best for Bozon 's development for him to play a final major junior season , and he was assigned to Kootenay for the 2014 – 15 season , where he appeared in 57 games and finished fourth on the team in scoring with 63 points . After the conclusion of the WHL season Bozon was assigned to the Bulldogs and made his professional debut , appearing in one game for the team . For the 2015 – 16 season he was assigned to the St. John 's IceCaps , as the Canadiens relocated the Bulldogs to St. John 's , Newfoundland . 
 = = International play = = 
 Born in the United States and raised in Switzerland by French parents , Bozon possesses American and French citizenship . However he chose to play internationally for the French national team , as both his father and grandfather did . As Bozon said regarding his choice , " All of my family are French , and my grandfather and father played for France ’ s national team . It ’ s why I play too . " At the 2011 IIHF World U18 Division I Championship , he helped France to a third @-@ place finish , the first time the French under @-@ 18 team had ever won a medal in an IIHF tournament . His six points in five games were tied for eleventh overall in tournament scoring and tied for the lead on the French team . Bozon declined to participate in the 2012 World Junior Division IB Championships because he wanted to stay in North America and help the Blazers . 
 Bozon made his debut for the French national senior team at the 2013 IIHF World Championship . His first game came against Slovakia and he recorded an assist . He played in five of France 's seven games during the tournament and finished with the one assist . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bozon was born in St. Louis , Missouri because his father , Philippe Bozon , was playing hockey with the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League . Philippe was the first French @-@ born and <unk> player in the NHL , and spent parts of four seasons with the Blues from 1991 until 1994 . Philippe returned to Europe in 1994 and played for teams in France , Germany and Switzerland . He participated in four Olympics for France and became a coach after his playing career ended ; in recognition of his international play , he was inducted into the IIHF Hall of Fame in 2008 . 
 Bozon was raised in Lugano , Switzerland , along with his older sister Allison ( born 1992 ) and younger brother Kevin ( born 1995 ) . His mother , Hélène Barbier , was an alpine skier . Bozon 's grandfather , Alain Bozon , also played hockey , and captained the French national team in the 1960s and was inducted into the French Ice Hockey Hall of Fame in 2012 . Aside from English , Bozon speaks French , Italian and German . 
 On March 1 , 2014 , the day after a game against the Saskatoon Blades , Bozon was admitted to Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon , Saskatchewan , where he was diagnosed with Neisseria meningitis . He spent four weeks in hospital , some of it in a medically induced coma , before being released on March 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Wanita dan Satria = 
 Wanita dan Satria ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Indonesian for The Woman and the Hero ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) directed by Rd Ariffien and produced by Ang Hock Liem for Union Films that is probably lost . Starring Djoewariah , Ratna Djoewita , Hidajat , Z. <unk> , and Moesa , it follows a womaniser named Soedrajat who abuses his status to gain women 's trust before ultimately getting his comeuppance . Reviews were mostly positive , with one praising the film 's depiction of women 's issues in a Muslim society . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Soedrajat abuses his high social status in order to <unk> and becomes his rich uncle 's heir despite the latter having a son , the kindly and noble Soelarsa . The uncle is disappointed with Soelarsa and considers Soedrajat the better man . Being considered high class , he is unwilling to associate with people of the lower classes . Ultimately Soedrajat falls for a beautiful young woman , Koestijah . Meanwhile , Soelarsa saves Koestijah 's life while driving a truck through her village ; the two fall in love at first sight . By manipulating Koestijah 's father , Soedrajat arranges for her to marry him . 
 At the wedding , however , the terrible truth about Soedrajat is revealed . One of his former conquests , Tarmini , stands up and tells the crowd , including Soelarsa , of the bridegroom 's true nature . In a rage , Soedrajat takes a revolver and shoots Tarmini . With her dying breath , Tarmini makes one last confession . Her father then takes revenge on Soedrajat . 
 = = Production = = 
 Wanita dan Satria was produced by Ang Hock Liem for Union Films . It was directed by Rd Ariffien , a former theatre leader and nationalist journalist who had made his directorial debut the preceding year with Harta Berdarah . The story was written by Saeroen , a former journalist with several screenwriting credits for Union . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white film starred Djoewariah , Ratna Djoewita , Hidajat , Z. <unk> , and Moesa . Moesa was the most experienced of these : he had entered the industry in 1938 with Fatima , a production by Tan 's Film , and had been with Union since 1940 . Djoewariah had been on Union 's payroll since Bajar dengan Djiwa in 1940 , while Ratna Djoewita and Hidajat had not appeared in any films before 1941 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Wanita dan Satria was released in 1941 , reaching Bandung by August and Surabaya by September . The film was open to all ages . A novelisation was published later in 1941 by the Yogyakarta @-@ based Kolff @-@ Buning . As part of the growing movement to attract Indonesian intellectuals , the marketing staff emphasised the respectable ( non @-@ theatrical ) background of the actors ; the intelligentsia had little respect for traditional theatre and its players . 
 A review in the Surabaya @-@ based Soerabaijasch Handelsblad wrote that the film " gives a clear picture of the precarious position of Indonesian women and motivates the desire for a firmer outline of her rights in the Moslem society . " Another review in the same newspaper wrote that the film " is captivating from start to finish " , one which " the film audience in Surabaya should certainly not miss " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Wanita dan Satria , Union produced a further two films ; none of these were by Rd . Ariffien , who had left the company . Saeroen likewise left soon after , joining Star Film . Djoewariah continued to act until the 1950s , when she migrated to theatre after receiving a series of increasingly minor roles . Neither Ratna Djoewita nor Hidajat appeared in any films after 1941 . 
 The film is likely lost ; the American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Startling Stories = 
 Startling Stories was an American pulp science fiction magazine , published from 1939 to 1955 by publisher Ned Pines ' Standard Magazines . It was initially edited by Mort Weisinger , who was also the editor of Thrilling Wonder Stories , Standard 's other science fiction title . Startling ran a lead novel in every issue ; the first was The Black Flame by Stanley G. Weinbaum . When Standard Magazines acquired Thrilling Wonder in 1936 , it also gained the rights to stories published in that magazine 's predecessor , Wonder Stories , and selections from this early material were reprinted in Startling as " Hall of Fame " stories . Under Weisinger the magazine focused on younger readers and , when Weisinger was replaced by Oscar J. Friend in 1941 , the magazine became even more juvenile in focus , with clichéd cover art and letters answered by a " Sergeant Saturn " . Friend was replaced by Sam Merwin , Jr. in 1945 , and Merwin was able to improve the quality of the fiction substantially , publishing Arthur C. Clarke 's Against the Fall of Night , and several other well @-@ received stories . 
 Much of Startling 's cover art was painted by Earle K. Bergey , who became strongly associated with the magazine , painting almost every cover between 1940 and 1952 . He was known for equipping his heroines with brass bras and implausible costumes , and the public image of science fiction in his day was partly created by his work for Startling and other magazines . Merwin left in 1951 , and Samuel Mines took over ; the standard remained fairly high but competition from new and better @-@ paying markets such as Galaxy Science Fiction and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction impaired Mines ' ability to acquire quality material . In mid @-@ 1952 , Standard attempted to change Startling 's image by adopting a more sober title typeface and reducing the sensationalism of the covers , but by 1955 the pulp magazine market was collapsing . Startling absorbed its two companion magazines , Thrilling Wonder and Fantastic Story Magazine , in early 1955 , but by the end of that year it too ceased publication . 
 Ron Hanna of Wild Cat Books revived Startling Stories in 2007 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was booming . Standard Magazines , a pulp publishing company owned by Ned Pines , acquired its first science fiction magazine , Thrilling Wonder Stories , from Gernsback in 1936 . Mort Weisinger , the editor of Thrilling Wonder , printed an editorial in February 1938 asking readers for suggestions for a companion magazine . Response was positive , and the new magazine , titled Startling Stories , was duly launched , with a first issue ( pulp @-@ sized , rather than bedsheet @-@ sized , as many readers had requested ) , dated January 1939 . 
 Startling was launched on a bimonthly schedule , alternating months with Thrilling Wonder Stories , though in 1940 Thrilling moved to a monthly schedule that lasted for over a year . The first editor was Mort Weisinger , who had been an active fan in the early 1930s and had joined Standard Magazines in 1935 , editing Thrilling Wonder from 1936 . Weisinger left in 1941 to take a new post as editor of Superman , and was replaced by Oscar J. Friend , who was an established writer of pulp fiction , though his experience was in western fiction rather than sf . During Friend 's tenure Startling slipped from bimonthly to quarterly publication . Friend lasted for a little over two years , and was replaced by Sam Merwin , Jr . , as of the Winter 1945 issue . 
 Merwin succeeded in making Startling popular and successful , and the bimonthly schedule was resumed in 1947 . At the start of 1952 Startling switched to a monthly schedule ; this was unusual in that Startling was notionally junior to Thrilling Wonder , its sister magazine , which remained bimonthly . Merwin left shortly before this switch , in order to spend more time on his own writing . He was replaced by Samuel Mines , who had worked with Standard 's Western magazines , though he was a science fiction aficionado . 
 Street & Smith , one of the longest established and most respected publishers , shut down all of their pulp magazines in the summer of 1949 . The pulps were dying , partially as a result of the success of paperbacks . Standard continued with Startling and Thrilling , but the end came only a few years later . In 1954 , Fredric Wertham published Seduction of the Innocent , a book in which he asserted that comics were inciting children to violence . A subsequent Senate subcommittee hearing led to a backlash against comics , and the publishers dropped titles in response . The financial impact spread to pulp magazines , since often a publisher would publish both . A 1955 strike by American News Corporation , the main distributor in the U.S. , meant that magazines remained in warehouses and never made it to the newsstands ; the unsold copies represented a significant financial blow and contributed to publishers ' decisions to cancel magazines . Startling was one of the casualties . The schedule had already returned from monthly to bimonthly in 1953 , and it became a quarterly in early 1954 . Thrilling Wonder published its last issue in early 1955 , and was then merged with Startling , as was Fantastic Story Magazine , another companion publication , but the combined magazine only lasted three more issues . Mines left the magazine at the end of 1954 ; he was succeeded for two issues by Theron Raines , who was followed by Herbert D. Kastle for the last two . The final issue was dated Fall 1955 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = War years = = = 
 From the beginning , every issue of Startling contained a complete novel , along with one or two short stories ; long stories did not appear since the publisher 's policy was to avoid serials . When Standard Magazines had bought Wonder Stories in 1936 , they had also acquired rights to reprint the stories that had appeared in it and in its predecessor magazines , Air Wonder Stories and Science Wonder Stories , and so Startling also included a " Hall of Fame " reprint from one of these magazines in every issue . The first lead novel was The Black Flame , a revised version of " Dawn of Flame " , a story by Stanley Weinbaum that had previously appeared only in an edition limited to 250 copies . There was also a tribute to Weinbaum , written by Otto Binder ; Weinbaum had died in 1935 and was well regarded , so even though the story was not one of his best , it was excellent publicity for the magazine . Otto and his brother , Earl , also contributed a story , " Science Island " , under their joint pseudonym Eando Binder . The " Hall of Fame " reprint was D.D. Sharp 's " The Eternal Man " , from 1929 . Other features included a pictorial article on Albert Einstein , and a set of biographical sketches of scientists , titled " Thrills in Science " . The letter column was called " The Ether <unk> " , and there was a regular fanzine review column , providing contact information so that readers could obtain the fanzines directly . Initially the stories for the " Hall of Fame " were chosen by the editor , but soon Weisinger recruited well @-@ known science fiction fans to make the choices . 
 Startling was popular , and soon " became one of the core science fiction magazines " , according to science fiction historian Mike Ashley . The target audience was younger readers , and the lead novels were often space operas by well @-@ known pulp writers such as Edmond Hamilton and Manly Wade Wellman . In addition to space opera , some more fantastical fiction began to appear , contributed by writers such as Henry Kuttner . These early science fantasy stories were popular with the readers , and contrasted with the hard science fiction that John W. Campbell was pioneering at Astounding . 
 Weisinger set out to please the younger readers , and when Friend became editor in 1941 , he went further in this direction , giving the magazine a strongly juvenile flavor . For example , Friend introduced " Sergeant Saturn " , a character ( originally from Thrilling Wonder Stories ) who answered readers ' letters and appeared in other features in the magazine . Many subscribers found the approach irritating . 
 The interior artwork was initially done by Hans Wessolowski ( more usually known as " <unk> " ) , Mark <unk> and Alex Schomburg , and occasionally Virgil Finlay . The initial cover art was mostly painted by Howard Brown , but when Earle K. Bergey began to paint covers for Startling in 1940 , soon after its launch , Bergey quickly became identified with the magazine ; between 1940 and 1952 ( the year of Bergey 's death ) he painted the great majority of covers . Bergey 's covers were visually striking : in the words of science fiction editor and critic Malcolm Edwards , they typically featured " a rugged hero , a desperate heroine ( in either a metallic bikini or a dangerous state of <unk> ) and a hideous alien menace " . The brass bra motif came to be associated with Bergey , and his covers did much to create the image of science fiction as it was perceived by the general public . 
 = = = Merwin and after = = = 
 When Merwin became editor in 1945 he brought changes , but artist Earle K. Bergey retained the creative freedom he had come to expect given his relationship with Standard . Some argue that Bergey 's covers became more realistic , and Merwin managed to improve the interiors of Startling to the point of being a serious rival to Astounding , acknowledged leader of the field . Critics ' opinions vary on the relative quality of the magazines of this era ; Malcolm Edwards regards Startling as second only to Astounding , but Ashley considers Thrilling Wonder to be Astounding 's closest challenger in the late 1940s . Merwin 's discoveries included Jack Vance , whose first story , " The World Thinker " , appeared in the Summer 1945 issue . He also regularly published work by Henry Kuttner and C.L. Moore , who wrote both under Kuttner 's name and as " Keith Hammond " : in a four @-@ year period from 1946 to 1949 the writing team of Kuttner and Moore had seven novels published in Startling , mostly science fantasy , a subgenre not common at that time . Notable novels that appeared in the late 1940s include Fredric Brown 's What Mad Universe and Charles L. Harness 's Flight Into Yesterday , later published in book form as The Paradox Men . Arthur C. Clarke 's novel The City and the Stars first saw print in Startling in abbreviated form , in the November 1948 issue , under the title Against the Fall of Night . 
 One novel that did not appear in Startling was Isaac Asimov 's Pebble in the Sky , which Merwin had commissioned from Asimov in the early summer of 1947 . After the unusual step of allowing the editor to twice read the work @-@ in @-@ progress and receiving nothing but approval , Asimov delivered a completed draft in September . This time , Merwin asked for revisions : Leo Margulies , Merwin 's boss , had decided that Startling needed to focus more on action and adventure in the style of Amazing , and less on cerebral stories in the style of Astounding . Asimov , " for the first and only time of [ his ] life ... openly lost [ his ] temper with an editor " , stalked out of the room with his manuscript and never submitted anything to Merwin again , though he later expressed a softening of feeling and admitted Merwin had been within his rights . 
 Another title in the Standard Magazines stable was Captain Future , which had been launched a year after Startling , and featured the adventures of the superhero after whom the magazine was named . When it folded with its Spring 1944 issue , the series of novels was continued for some time in the pages of Startling ; over the next six years ten more " Captain Future " novels appeared , with the last one , Birthplace of Creation , printed in the May 1951 issue . 
 Merwin 's successor , Mines , also published some excellent work , though increased competition in the early 1950s from Galaxy and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction did lead to some dilution of quality , and Startling 's rates — one to two cents per word — could not compete with the leading magazines . However , Startling 's editorial policy was more eclectic : it did not limit itself to one kind of story , but printed everything from melodramatic space opera to sociological sf , and Mines had a reputation as having " the most catholic tastes and the fewest inhibitions " of any of the science fiction magazine editors . In late 1952 , Mines published Philip José Farmer 's " The Lovers " , a taboo @-@ breaking story about aliens who can only reproduce by mating with humans . Illustrated with an eye @-@ popping cover by Bergey , Farmer 's ground @-@ breaking story integrated sex into the plot without being prurient , and was widely praised . Farmer , partly as a consequence , went on to win a Hugo Award as " Most Promising New Writer " . New authors first published by Mines include Frank Herbert , who debuted with " Looking for Something ? " in April 1952 , and Robert F. Young , whose first story , " The Black Deep Thou <unk> " , appeared in June 1953 . The artwork was also high quality ; Virgil Finlay 's interior illustrations were " unparalleled " , according to science fiction historian Robert Ewald . Other well @-@ known artists who contributed interior work included Alex Schomburg and Kelly Freas . 
 Startling 's instantly recognizable title logo was redolent of the magazine 's pulp roots , and in early 1952 Mines decided to replace it with a more staid typeface . The covers became more sober , with spaceships replacing the women in brass bras . With the Spring 1955 issue , at the start of its final year , Startling dropped its long @-@ standing policy of printing a novel in every issue , but only three issues later it ceased publication . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The editorial succession at Startling was as follows : 
 Mort Weisinger : January 1939 – May 1941 . 
 Oscar J. Friend : July 1941 – Fall 1944 . 
 Sam Merwin , Jr . : Winter 1945 – September 1951 . 
 Samuel Mines : November 1951 – Fall 1954 . 
 Theron Raines : Winter 1955 – Spring 1955 . 
 Herbert D. Kastle : Summer 1955 – Fall 1955 . 
 Startling was a pulp @-@ sized magazine for all of its 99 issues . It initially was 132 pages , and was priced at 15 cents . The page count was reduced to 116 pages with the Summer 1944 issue and then increased to 148 pages with the March 1948 issue , at which time the price went up to 20 cents . The price increased again , to 25 cents , in November 1948 , and the page count increased again to 180 pages . This higher page count did not last ; it was reduced to 164 in March 1949 and then again to 148 pages in July 1951 . The October 1953 issue saw the page count drop again , to 132 , and a year later the Fall 1954 issue cut the page count to 116 . The magazine remained at 116 pages and a price of 25 cents for the rest of its existence . 
 The original bimonthly schedule continued until the March 1943 issue , which was followed by June 1943 and then Fall 1943 . This inaugurated a quarterly schedule that ran until Fall 1946 , except that an additional issue , dated March , was inserted between the Winter 1946 and Spring 1946 issues . The next issue , January 1947 , began another bimonthly sequence , which ran without interruption until November 1951 . With the following issue , January 1952 , Startling switched to a monthly schedule , which lasted until the June 1953 issue which was followed by August and October 1953 and then January 1954 . The next issue was Spring 1954 , and the magazine stayed on a quarterly schedule from then until the last issue , Fall 1955 . 
 There was a British reprint edition from <unk> between 1949 and 1954 . These were heavily cut , with sometimes only one or two stories and usually only 64 pages , though the October and December 1952 issues both had 80 pages . It was published irregularly ; initially once or twice a year , and then more or less bimonthly beginning in mid @-@ 1952 . The issues were numbered from 1 to 18 . Three different Canadian reprint editions also appeared for a total of 21 or 22 issues ( sources differ on the correct number ) . Six quarterly issues appeared from Summer 1945 through Fall 1946 from Publication Enterprises , Ltd . ; then another three bimonthly issues appeared , from May to September 1948 , from Pines Publications . Finally 12 more bimonthly issues appeared from March 1949 to January 1951 , from Better Publications of Canada . All these issues were almost identical to the American versions , although they are half an inch taller . A Mexican magazine , Enigmas , ran for 16 issues from August 1955 to May 1958 ; it included many reprints , primarily from Startling and from Fantastic Story Magazine . 
 = = = Derivative anthologies = = = 
 Two anthologies of stories from Startling have been published . In 1949 Merlin Press brought out From Off This World , edited by Leo Margulies and Oscar Friend , which included stories that had appeared in the " Hall of Fame " reprint section of the magazine . Then in 1954 Samuel Mines edited The Best from Startling Stories , published by Henry Holt ; despite the title , the stories were reprinted from both Startling and its sister magazine , Thrilling Wonder Stories . The anthology was reprinted twice in the UK under different titles ; as Startling Stories in 1954 , published by Cassell , and then in 1956 as a Science Fiction Book Club edition titled Moment in Time . P. Schuyler Miller praised it as " an excellent collection by anyone 's standards . " 
 = Nazario Moreno González = 
 Nazario Moreno González ( 8 March 1970 – 9 March 2014 ) , commonly referred to by his alias El Chayo ( " Nazario " or " The Rosary " ) and / or El Más Loco ( " The Craziest One " ) , was a Mexican drug lord who headed La Familia Michoacana before heading the Knights Templar Cartel , a drug cartel headquartered in the state of Michoacán . He was one of Mexico 's most @-@ wanted drug lords . 
 Very few details are known of Moreno González 's early life , but the authorities believe that religion played a major role in his upbringing . Although born in Michoacán , Moreno González moved to the United States as a teenager , but fled back into Mexico about a decade later to avoid prosecution on drug trafficking charges . In 2004 , the drug boss Carlos Rosales Mendoza was captured , and Moreno González , alongside José de Jesús Méndez Vargas , took control of La Familia Michoacana . Unlike other traditional drug trafficking organizations in Mexico , his organization also operated like a religious cult , where its own members were given " bibles " with sayings and conduct guidelines . Moreno González reportedly carried out several philanthropic deeds to help the marginalized in Michoacán . Such deeds helped him craft an image of protector , saint , and Christ @-@ like messianic figure among the poor , and gave La Familia Michoacana a level of influence among some natives . 
 The Mexican government reported that Moreno González was killed during a two @-@ day gunfight with the Mexican federal police in his home state in December 2010 . After the shootout , however , no body was recovered . Rumors thus persisted that Moreno González was still alive and leading the Knights Templar Cartel , the split @-@ off group of La Familia Michoacana . Four years later , on 9 March 2014 , his survival was confirmed . Mexican authorities located him again , this time in the town of Tumbiscatío , Michoacán , and attempted to apprehend him . A gunfight ensued resulting in Moreno González 's death . Subsequent forensic examination confirmed his identity . 
 = = Criminal career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Moreno González was born in the <unk> of <unk> in Apatzingán , Michoacán , Mexico at around 5 : 00 a.m. on 8 March 1970 . There are few details of Moreno González 's upbringing , but religion may have played an important role in his early life . His parents had 13 children ( including Moreno González ) . His father Manuel Moreno was reportedly an alcoholic and had several mistresses , and one day he left his family when Moreno González was still very young , forcing his mother to singlehandedly raise the whole family . With their father gone , Moreno González and his siblings lived under the strict discipline of their mother . According to his autobiography , Moreno González had a love @-@ hate relationship with his mother ; as a child , he was beaten by his mother for being troublesome and getting into fights . In one occasion , he recalled that his mother once forced him to make his way back to his house by walking on his knees while keeping his arms stretched like a cross throughout the whole day for stealing an animal . Such treatments helped him develop resentment as to partially explain his violent behavior as an adult , he argued . He admitted , however , that he often got into fist fights with other kids from <unk> and the surrounding <unk> . Moreno González recalled that he would not always win and that he once got into 10 fights in a single day . His violent reputation as a child helped him earn the nickname El Más Loco ( " The Craziest One " ) — which he held onto for the rest of his life — among his siblings and other kids from the area where he grew up . 
 He never attended school and was illiterate for some years of his early life . He learned to read and write reportedly out of curiosity after reading and hearing comic books and stories of <unk> and Porfirio Cadena , El Ojo del <unk> on the local radio station . In his autobiography , Moreno González said that as a child he believed he had the superhuman ability of speaking telepathically with animals like <unk> did in the comics . He said he wanted to be a hero like the comic characters . As a child , he was accustomed to seeing gunmen near his home , and played las <unk> ( " war games " ) for fun . While playing the game , he often pretended to be dead , only to say later on that he had been wounded in the game but that he had managed to survive . At the age of twelve , he moved to Apatzingán and made a living by selling matches , peeling onions , working at a melon field , and throwing out the trash from several booths at a marketplace . As a teenager in the late 1980s , Moreno González migrated illegally to the United States , settling in California , where he eventually began selling marijuana . After some years , he moved to Texas and in 1994 was arrested for drug trafficking charges in McAllen . Nearly a decade later in 2003 , the U.S. government charged him with conspiracy to distribute five tons of narcotics and issued an arrest warrant . Moreno González then fled back to Mexico . 
 = = = Organized crime = = = 
 Although raised Catholic , Moreno González became a Jehovah 's Witness during his time in the United States . In Apatzingán , Moreno González preached to the poor and always carried a bible with him . With time , he won the loyalty of several locals , and many started to see him as a " messiah " for preaching religious principles and forming La Familia Michoacana , a drug cartel that posed as a vigilante group . When Carlos Rosales Mendoza was arrested in 2004 , Moreno González ascended to the apex of La Familia Michoacana , a drug trafficking organization based in western Mexico , along with José de Jesús Méndez Vargas . In 2006 , La Familia Michoacana broke relations with the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas , and Moreno González heralded the organization 's independence when several of his gunmen tossed five human heads on a discothèque dance floor in <unk> . Near the severed heads lay a message that read , " La Familia doesn 't kill for money , doesn 't kill women , doesn 't kill innocents . Only those who deserve to die will die . " 
 In 2009 , the Mexican government published a list of its 37 most @-@ wanted drug lords and offered a $ 2 @.@ 2 million reward for information that led to Moreno González 's capture . His three partners – José de Jesús Méndez Vargas , Servando Gómez Martínez and Dionisio Loya Plancarte – were also on the list . In 2010 , he was sanctioned under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act ( sometimes referred to simply as the " Kingpin Act " ) by the United States Department of the Treasury for his involvement in drug trafficking . The act prohibited U.S. citizens and companies from doing business with Moreno González , and virtually froze all his assets in the U.S. 
 Los Zetas eventually broke off from the Gulf Cartel in 2010 , after serving in the armed wing of the organization for more than a decade . But in opposition to Los Zetas , Moreno González 's cartel rejoined with the Gulf Cartel and allied with the Sinaloa Cartel to fight them off . Since then , La Familia Michoacana became one of the fastest @-@ growing cartels involved in Mexico 's drug war . It stood out for its promotion of " family values " and religious agenda , unlike traditional cartels . Although deeply involved in the methamphetamine business , Moreno González 's cartel diversified its criminal agenda by controlling numerous " counterfeiting , extortion , kidnapping , armed robbery , prostitution and car dealership " rings in Michoacán and its neighboring states . By mid @-@ 2009 , La Familia had managed to establish a foothold in about 20 to 30 urban areas across the United States . 
 Moreno González required his men to carry a " spiritual manual " that he wrote himself , " [ containing ] pseudo @-@ Christian aphorisms for self @-@ improvement . " In his " bible , " Moreno González prohibited his men from consuming alcoholic beverages or other drugs , and stated that he would severely punish those who mistreated women . His writings encouraged the corporal punishment of thieves by beating them and making them walk naked with billboards in the city streets . He prohibited members of his cartel from consuming or selling <unk> in Michoacán , arguing that the drug was only to be smuggled into the U.S. for American consumers . Moreno González justified drug trafficking by stating that La Familia Michoacana allegedly regulated the drug trade to prevent exploitation of the people . The book , sometimes known as " The Sayings of the Craziest One " , also talks about humility , service , wisdom , brotherhood , courage , and God . His second book , titled " They Call Me The Craziest One " , is 13 chapters long and talks about his life , idealism , the origins of La Familia Michoacana , their battle against Los Zetas , and his rationale behind joining organized crime . The text reads like a diary and justifies his criminal activities under the rationale that just like others in Michoacán , the limited opportunities and his poor financial situation pushed him to get involved in the drug trade . In addition to that , Moreno González blamed the government for the existence of criminals . 
 As leader of La Familia Michoacana , Moreno González was in charge of forging alliances with other cartels . Reportedly , Moreno González met with several other high @-@ ranking drug lords , including Fernando Sánchez Arellano of the Tijuana Cartel ; Juan José <unk> Moreno of the Sinaloa Cartel ; and Ezequiel Cárdenas Guillén of the Gulf Cartel . In these agreements , the cartels allowed La Familia Michoacana to move drugs freely in their territories in exchange for their support in fighting off rival gangs like Los Zetas . In 2008 , Moreno González agreed to send armed men to help Joaquín Guzmán <unk> and Ismael Zambada García fight off rival cartels , a favor which granted him access to the drug corridors in Sinaloa and Sonora . In addition , his friendship with the Gulf Cartel leader Jorge Eduardo Costilla Sánchez allowed him access to the northeastern state of Tamaulipas . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 During his tenure as leader of La Familia Michoacana , Moreno González reportedly gave loans to farmers , funded schools and churches , financed drainage projects , and carried out several aid campaigns to help out the disadvantaged in the state of Michoacán . This , along with the manpower of the organization , allowed him get the support of several rural sectors in the state , where many served as informants and collaborators for the cartel . His wife was also known for organizing several self @-@ help seminars in Apatzingán . The support of La Familia Michoacana is rooted in family connections and local communities in Michoacán , and in the supposed exploitation of its citizens by the government . 
 = = Alleged 2010 death = = 
 On 9 December 2010 , the Mexican federal police surrounded the village of El Alcalde in Apatzingán , Michoacán with more than 2 @,@ 000 officers . Reportedly , Moreno González was at a local festival handing out Christmas presents to the villagers when he was tracked down by the authorities . 
 As the police troops drove into town , gunmen of La Familia Michoacana blocked the entrances with more than 40 burning trucks and cars . La Familia gunmen also surrounded the state capital of Morelia in an attempt to prevent the police from receiving reinforcements . The shootout lasted about two days , and at least 11 deaths were confirmed . During the gun battle , the gunmen managed to carry out the bodies of their fallen comrades up the hills . The government reported at the time that Moreno González had been killed , but that the cartel took his body away . This triggered rumors that he was alive and leading his cartel . However , the Mexican government denied such claims . Elías Álvarez , the commander of the 2010 police operation , said González 's grave was in the mountains . 2014 reports from the Mexican government stated that Moreno González was possibly injured ( but not killed ) during the shootout . For four years , the drug lord took advantage of the government 's mistake to fall off the authorities 's radar and continue to command the cartel behind the scenes . 
 = = = Background and aftermath = = = 
 The alleged death of Moreno González was considered one of the most significant government victories since the start of the drug war in 2006 . La Familia Michoacana was the focus of the government because their stronghold , Michoacán state , is just about four hours away from the country 's capital , Mexico City . In addition , Michoacán is the homestate of former President Felipe Calderón , who made it a top priority to pacify it . 
 A few days after the shootout , several people carried out a peace march in Apatzingán expressing their support for the cartel with banners that read " Nazario will always live in our hearts , " among others . Others protested against the presence of the federal forces in the state , and argued that the federal government — not the cartels — were responsible for increasing the violence in the country . Through several banners hung on bridges throughout the state of Michoacán , La Familia Michoacana publicly announced that they were open to the possibility of creating a " truce " ( ceasefire ) with the Mexican government throughout December 2010 and January 2011 to prove that they were not the source of the violence . The Mexican authorities " summarily rejected " the agreement . 
 After Moreno Gonzalez was reported dead , José de Jesús Méndez Vargas took the lead of La Familia Michoacana . The other cartel leader , Servando Gómez Martínez ( alias " La <unk> " ) , fought Méndez Vargas for control of the group and eventually formed the Knights Templar Cartel , a drug cartel and pseudo @-@ religious splinter group . The cartel was headed by Moreno González , followed by Gómez Martínez , Dionisio Loya Plancarte ( alias " El <unk> " ) , and Enrique Plancarte Solís ( alias " Kike Plancarte " ) , in that order . However , given that the Mexican government believed that Moreno González had been killed in 2010 , Gómez Martínez was regarded as the first @-@ in @-@ command . Since its creation , the Knights Templar Cartel became a greater security concern for the Mexican government ; it began to extort lime farmers , cutters , and packers , as well as people who worked in the avocado business in Michoacán . The cartel also stole minerals from the state 's reserves to later ship them to China and sell them in the black market . Killings , extortions , kidnappings , and arson attacks against Michoacán residents and local businesses increased . In response to the cartel 's activities , <unk> ( vigilante / self @-@ defense ) groups began to emerge in Michoacán in 2011 , and gained significant momentum in February 2013 when they began to push the cartel outside of the Tierra Caliente region . President Enrique Peña Nieto sent in more federal troops to Michoacán on January 2014 initially with the intent to disarm the informal groups . However , that plan was quickly abandoned following some resistance , and the government decided to sign an agreement that month with the <unk> to combat insecurity together . 
 = = = Allegations of having survived the attempted police capture = = = 
 Given that Moreno González 's body was never recovered from the December 2010 shootout where officials said he was killed , there were rumors that he was alive and secretly leading the Knights Templar Cartel , the split @-@ off group of La Familia Michoacana . On June 2011 , members of La Familia Michoacana set up several public banners throughout the state of Guerrero with written messages directed to the former President Calderón and his security spokesman Alejandro <unk> . The banners proclaimed that Moreno González was in fact alive and leading the Knights Templar Cartel , and that the government was allegedly covering him up . The rumors were immediately denied by the Mexican government , which stood firm that the drug lord was killed by federal forces on December 9 , 2010 . Rumors sparked again in October 2011 following the arrest of Mario <unk> Quiroz , a drug trafficker who headed a Mexico City @-@ based gang known as Los <unk> . In a videotaped police confession , he told authorities that Moreno González was still alive and heading the cartel . Intelligence agency InSight Crime said the rumors were probably part of a campaign of the Knights Templar Cartel to win prestige from La Familia Michoacana by saying that their leader is in fact alive and still supporting the group . On 27 October 2012 , the Mexican Army raided a safe house in Apatzingán where they believed the drug lord Enrique Plancarte Solís was hiding . Though the raid was ultimately unsuccessful because Plancarte Solís managed to avoid capture by sending several gunmen from his inner circle to battle off the soldiers , the authorities discovered several documents written for Moreno González . The Army gave the documents to the intelligence agency <unk> for further investigation . 
 Many Michoacán natives believed that Moreno González was alive ; he was widely believed to have made a public appearance in Morelia in 2012 after his son was killed in a motorcycle accident . According to an unnamed official , his sister went to the morgue to reclaim the body of his son before the autopsy . When the coroner refused to give her the body , Moreno González paid him a visit and convinced him to give up the body . In fears of reprisals , local media outlets self @-@ censored and did not report on the death of his son . Those who wrecked his son were reportedly kidnapped by Moreno González men and killed . In addition , one militia leader from the town of <unk> reported seeing him dressed as Saint Francis of Assisi , baptizing people , and leading his henchmen . There was no concrete evidence of Moreno González being alive . However , since no autopsy was performed , there was no evidence of him being dead either . In January 2014 , Gregorio López , a priest of Apatzingán , reported that that Moreno González ordered a self @-@ imposed curfew in the city and threatened to burn down businesses that did not comply with the order . That week Michoacán had a series of violent episodes after the state 's <unk> ( vigilante ) groups — which emerged in February 2013 to fight the Knights Templar Cartel — attempted to move into several municipalities to fight the cartel . The priest said in an interview that there were rumors that the drug lord met with " La <unk> " for lunch in La <unk> , a ranch outside of Apatzingán . In an interview with Noticias MVS in February 2014 , the former self @-@ defense group leader José Manuel Mireles Valverde stated that Moreno González celebrated Christmas Day ( 25 December 2013 ) with the cartel leader Enrique Plancarte Solís and his daughter and banda singer Melissa at the drug lord 's house . Mireles claimed in March 2014 that the self @-@ defense groups nearly captured Moreno González at a ranch close to Tumbiscatío , Michoacán , but that he managed to escape 20 minutes before their arrival . 
 Rumors surrounding these allegations were around since Moreno González was declared dead by the Mexican government in 2010 . The mysticism and spiritual teachings of the drug lord have played an important role in the Knights Templar Cartel 's propaganda and recruitment in Michoacán . By spreading such rumors , the cartel hoped to gain a level of consensus from the public in their fight against the self @-@ defense militias and state forces in the state . 
 = = Veneration = = 
 After Moreno González 's reported death in 2010 , Michoacán natives reportedly began to worship him as a saint , " drawing attention to the links between narco @-@ culture and religion . " In the region of Apatzingán , people created altars with statues and photos in honor of him . The figurines are often dressed in tunics similar to the Knights Templar , and had prayers calling him Saint Nazario . Reforma newspaper reported that Moreno González had his own prayer : " Oh Lord Almighty , free me from all sins , give me protection through Saint Nazario . " These altars are found in the village of Holanda , on the hill of El Cerrito de la Cruz , and in Apatzingán . Villagers have noted that they had been forced to venerate the criminal under threat of armed force by the gang members . 
 Throughout his criminal career , Moreno González promoted La Familia Michoacana as an organization that existed to protect the people in Michoacán , where he carried out several campaigns that implemented curfews , punished drinkers , and attacked Los Zetas , whom he claimed had corroded the morality of the state and community . The prayers that are now dedicated to Moreno González now refer to him as the " Representative of God , " the " Protector of the poorest , " and as the " Knight of the towns . " Such behavior proves that La Familia Michoacana 's religious campaign influenced the local area . 
 The area where the altars are located is reportedly patrolled by Los 12 <unk> ( ' 12 apostles ' ) , the security body that allegedly protected Moreno González . 
 = = Death = = 
 At around 7 : 00 a.m. on 9 March 2014 , the Mexican Army and Navy pinpointed Moreno González 's whereabouts in Tumbiscatío , Michoacán . When they tried to apprehend him , the drug lord opened fire at the security forces before being killed in the fire exchange . Mexico 's <unk> General de la República ( PGR ) officially confirmed his identity through DNA examinations and fingerprint identification . The results were consistent with law enforcement files . While investigators conducted the autopsy at a hospital in Apatzingán , more than 150 law enforcement officers from the Army , Navy , Federal Police , and the PGR cordoned the area to prevent organized crime members from attempting to steal his body . Post @-@ mortem reports indicated that Moreno González died of two gunshot wounds on his thorax . On 12 March 2014 , his corpse was transferred to Morelia under tight security for further testing . At the time of his death , the drug lord was wanted by the Mexican government for charges relating to drug trafficking , organized crime , kidnapping , murder , and theft . 
 On the evening of 14 March 2014 , his corpse was handed over to his sister and two nephews in Morelia by state authorities . As they left the forensic installations , they covered their faces in front of cameras and did not specify if they had plans to carry out a funeral for Moreno González . His family and friends , however , held a funeral for him at the Santa Cruz funeral home in <unk> , Morelia . They did not comment where the corpse was to be taken , but unconfirmed reports suggested that there were plans to cremate him and scatter his ashes at a village in the Tierra Caliente region in Michoacán . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Moreno González enjoyed watching the Godfather Trilogy and the drama film Braveheart . 
 He went by several nicknames , including but not limited to El Chayo ( <unk> for " Nazario " or " Rosario " , the Spanish word for Rosary ) , Víctor Nazario <unk> Peña , El Dulce ( " The Candy " ) , El Doctor ( " The Doctor " ) , and El Más Loco ( " The Craziest One " ) , In 2014 , the Mexican government discovered that the drug lord also held the alias Emiliano Morelos Guevara in reference to revolutionary figures Emiliano Zapata , José María Morelos , and Che Guevara . 
 His father was reportedly Manuel Moreno , who died on July 2013 , according to intelligence reports from Mexican federal agents . The drug lord was the uncle or cousin of Uriel Chávez Mendoza , the municipal president ( equivalent of mayor ) of Apatzingán . He was arrested by Mexican authorities on 15 April 2014 for his alleged ties to organized crime . The city councilman Isidro Villanueva Moreno may also be his cousin too . His half brother and cousin of Plancarte Solís , Antonio Magaña Pantoja , was arrested by Mexican authorities in Apatzingán on 9 February 2014 . His half brother <unk> Moreno Anguiano ( alias " El Yoyo " ) was arrested by Mexican authorities in Apatzingán , Michoacán on 18 February 2014 . His nephew Faustino Andrade González was arrested by the Mexican Federal Police in Apatzingán with four other suspected criminals on 5 June 2014 . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Pensamientos Del Más Loco ( The Sayings of the Craziest One ) 
 Me Dicen : El Más Loco ( They Call Me The Craziest One ) ( 2010 ) 
 = John McMahon ( wrestler ) = 
 John McMahon ( 1841 – 1912 ) was an American professional wrestler who specialized in collar @-@ and @-@ elbow wrestling . He competed from 1861 to 1891 , traveling throughout the United States and Canada to face the top wrestlers of the day . He competed in several styles of wrestling , and his biggest rivalry was with Colonel J.H. McLaughlin . Toward the end of his career , he performed in wrestling matches for traveling circuses . 
 = = Career = = 
 Born in Vermont in 1841 , McMahon began his professional wrestling career in Port Henry , New York in June 1861 . He won the match , which began an undefeated streak that lasted until 1878 . Although he favored the collar @-@ and @-@ elbow wrestling practiced in Ireland , the country of his ancestry , he also competed in matches that involved catch wrestling and Greco @-@ Roman wrestling . McMahon served in the Union army during the American Civil War , during which he gained notoriety as a wrestler . 
 On July 22 , 1873 , McMahon defeated Thomas Copeland to become recognized as the champion of the United States and Canada . The following month , he also defeated Albert Ellis , who was billed as the champion of England . Because McMahon outweighed his opponent by 60 pounds , the match was contested under Cornwall and Devon rules , which required both men to wear short jackets . His rivalry with Ellis continued , and the pair faced each other twice more . One bout was declared a draw because of a disputed call by the referee . McMahon won the third and final match between the two . McMahon also traveled to the Western United States in search of competitors . In 1877 , he defeated Harry Thurston in a match held in a lumberyard in California . He was also sent to Virginia City , Nevada to help a gambler who had lost a large sum of money to " Dakota Bill " Tompkins . Without revealing his identity , McMahon arranged a match with Tompkins , a local championship wrestler . McMahon 's friends bet money on McMahon , who defeated Tompkins in a best @-@ of @-@ five match . 
 McMahon wrestled James Farwell in January 1878 ; Falwell won a controversial victory to retain his status as champion of the Pacific Coast . After McMahon 's main rival , Colonel J.H. McLaughlin , retired , McMahon ceased to compete as well . The two had never faced each other , but there was a dispute as to who would win if such a match took place . McMahon returned to Virginia City to open a saloon . In October of that year , McLaughlin offered a bet that nobody would be able to defeat Robert Wright , one of his trainees . McMahon accepted the bet , defeated Wright , and arranged a match against McLaughlin . He defeated McLaughlin in a best @-@ of @-@ three match on November 23 , 1878 . A rematch took place , which McLaughlin won . The third and final contest between the two took place in March 1879 and ended in a draw . On May 12 of that year , McMahon defeated Australian " Professor " William Miller in a best @-@ of @-@ three match before a crowd of over 2000 spectators in Gilmore 's Garden in New York . 
 In August 1879 , McMahon faced his second cousin once removed , James Owens , in the St. James Opera House on Broadway in New York City . McMahon lost the first fall but won the next two to claim victory in the match . They faced each other again on July 16 , 1880 for the collar @-@ and @-@ elbow world championship . After a match lasting over three hours , McMahon emerged victorious to win the title . 
 In the mid @-@ 1880s , McMahon traveled internationally to compete and won titles in Australia and Argentina . In 1884 , he defeated John Tedford in England to win the world collar @-@ and @-@ elbow wrestling championship . 
 In his later career , McMahon faced such wrestlers as <unk> Matsuda , Captain James C. Daly and Gus Lambert . He also faced William Muldoon , now a member of the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame . One match between the two , which took place on March 22 , 1881 , featured a best @-@ of @-@ three @-@ falls rule , in which the wrestlers competed in Muldoon 's favored Greco @-@ Roman style , followed by the collar @-@ and @-@ elbow style preferred by McMahon . Each competitor won the fall in his preferred style , which led to a catch @-@ as @-@ catch @-@ can match to determine the winner . The match did not take place , however , as the men were unable to agree to the outfits that would be worn during the match ; as a result , the contest was declared a draw . One of McMahon 's final series of matches was against Henry Moses Dufur . Their first match was declared a draw after neither competitor was able to throw the other within six hours . Although the wrestlers were willing to continue , the lease on the hall had expired and the match was ended at 2 : 45 in the morning . McMahon lost the second contest , but he defeated Dufur for the world collar @-@ and @-@ elbow championship in their final encounter . 
 McMahon also wrestled in traveling circuses . He was part of Adam <unk> 's Circus , and he competed for P. T. Barnum 's circus for over two years . With the latter group , he wrestled over 300 pre @-@ arranged matches against Ed Decker . He also continued in regular competition outside the circus ; in his final match , he defeated Jim Cowley on March 2 , 1891 . McMahon died in 1912 . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Collar @-@ and @-@ Elbow Championship ( 2 times ) 
 = Valor por Tamaulipas = 
 Valor por Tamaulipas ( " Courage for Tamaulipas " ) is a Facebook page that covered security updates in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas . It was founded by an anonymous user on 1 January 2012 , and its goal is to share information with other social media users on the drug @-@ related violence and risk situations all across the state . With over 515 @,@ 000 likes on Facebook , Valor por Tamaulipas routinely posted messages and photos of crime scenes on its page . In a country where many journalists have been assassinated for writing about drug trafficking and organized crime , the page survives under anonymity , but it has not been immune to threats . 
 In early 2013 , a Mexican drug trafficking organization issued fliers offering a reward of $ 600 @,@ 000 pesos ( US $ 46 @,@ 000 ) for anyone that could give out information to locate the administrator of Valor por Tamaulipas or any of his family members . The administrator , however , openly defied the criminal organization 's threat through Facebook . His wife and children reportedly fled to the United States after the threats for security reasons , but the citizen journalist stated on the Facebook page that he had decided to stay in Mexico and continue updating at Valor por Tamaulipas . In December 2014 , however , the administrator announced his retirement from social media . 
 = = History = = 
 The Facebook page Valor por Tamaulipas ( " Courage for Tamaulipas " ) was created by an anonymous user on 1 January 2012 after getting his inspiration from other websites that anonymously reported the drug violence in Mexico . The page regularly posts messages and photos of crime scenes ; its goal is to report on drug @-@ related violence and situations of risk in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas . It frequently posts messages and photos of the criminal activities in the state , including but not limited to law enforcement in action , photos of alleged criminals , vehicles of reported extortionists , abandoned vehicles left on the roadside , roadblocks , arsons , oil theft activities , drug traffickers on the job , and the like . Given the high levels of drug @-@ related activities in northern Mexico and in Tamaulipas , many Facebook users also check Valor por Tamaulipas to verify if there is a shootout in their area , to know in what part of a highway a carjacking took place , or to see if someone is reported missing . The information found at Valor por Tamaulipas is shared by Internet users themselves ; the administrator , on the other hand , was active almost all hours during the day and throughout the whole week . Most of the Mexican mainstream media outlets play down the violence because they fear reprisals from the country 's criminal organizations . Given the censorship , Valor por Tamaulipas was a popular outlet for crime watchdogs concerned with the violence in Tamaulipas . According to crime journalist James Barger from InSight Crime , the information in Valor por Tamaulipas is " spotty , sometimes unreliable , but often the only source of what [ is ] happening " . Several Internet users in Mexico , the United States , and in other countries around the world have shown their support for Valor por Tamaulipas ' work and have followed their reports on Facebook and / or Twitter . 
 The page had over 210 @,@ 000 likes on Facebook in April 2013 ; on Twitter , Valor por Tamaulipas had approximately 24 @,@ 400 followers . 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The state of Tamaulipas is home to two transnational criminal organizations – the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas – who fight for control of the smuggling routes along the Texan border . This border area is a major route for human trafficking , arms smuggling , and for the international narcotics trade . The Gulf Cartel , according to the United States Department of State , started in the 1930s as a bootlegging gang and later transformed into a full @-@ fledged drug trafficking organization in the 1980s . Los Zetas , on the other hand , were formed in the late 1990s and early 2000s by former soldiers of the Mexican Army who were hired by the imprisoned Osiel Cárdenas Guillén to become the Gulf Cartel 's new muscle . In an apparent power struggle , however , Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel broke relations in early 2010 and went to war in the state of Tamaulipas and its bordering states , prompting daily shootouts , kidnappings , and mass slayings . 
 Mexico is among the most dangerous countries on the planet in which to practice journalism , particularly on the topics of organized crime and drug trafficking . Since 2000 , nearly 100 journalists have been kidnapped or killed throughout the country ; many of the killings , however , remain unsolved and unpunished . The high levels of violence and attacks on the press have forced many local media outlets to downplay their coverage . As a result , many people have turned to social media outlets like Valor por Tamaulipas to see hourly updates on the security atmosphere in their areas . But social media reporting carries its own risks too ; in September 2011 , journalist and blogger María Elizabeth Macías Castro was decapitated by Los Zetas for posting their organized crime activities in her personal blog . That same month , two alleged Twitter users were killed and hanged on a bridge in Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas for denouncing on Twitter . 
 In January 2013 , Tamaulipas state had a homicide rate of 36 per every 100 @,@ 000 people ; kidnappings and extortion were also widespread . 
 = = Organized crime threats = = 
 On June 2012 , the Gulf Cartel allegedly created a Facebook page called Anti Valor por Tamaulipas ( " Anti @-@ Courage for Tamaulipas " ) , which intended to counter the goals of the page . It stated that the information spread by Valor por Tamaulipas " [ was ] not a benefit to the community . " In early 2013 , Anti Valor por Tamaulipas had approximately 11 @,@ 244 likes on Facebook . 
 Through several fliers issued in Ciudad Victoria , Tamaulipas , a drug trafficking organization offered a $ 600 @,@ 000 peso ( roughly US $ 46 @,@ 000 ) reward to anyone that could give them information on the whereabouts of the administrator of Valor por Tamaulipas , or to identify any of his family members , whether they are his parents , brothers and sisters , children or wife . The flier included the phone number ( 834 ) <unk> @-@ <unk> , which has the area code of Tamaulipas . The administrator responded by saying that " [ he was ] not playing at being a hero , [ and was ] doing what [ he had ] to do as a citizen . " He also thanked the visitors who contributed to the page and gave him support throughout the project , and asked the Mexican Armed Forces to continue their fight against organized crime . The administrator said , too , that he would continue to his crime reporting at Valor por Tamaulipas even if that might cost him his life . On its page the administrator stated that after hearing about the threat , his wife and children left to the United States for security reasons . He also asked his visitors to refrain from using their personal Facebook or Twitter accounts when uploading information to the page since that could put them at risk . He believes that the Mexican criminal organization known as Los Zetas or state officials working for them are probably responsible for this threat . 
 On 20 February 2013 , a video was released on the web depicting a supposed collaborator of Valor por Tamaulipas , kneeling down and with his hands in his pockets . Beside him was a masked , camouflaged man with a firearm . The supposed collaborator said calmly , " Please refrain from publishing any information – if not , this is the price you will pay . " After the kneeling man warned Internet users against collaborating with Valor por Tamaulipas , the gunman pulled the trigger and shot him in the head , apparently killing the man . The administrator of Valor por Tamaulipas responded by posting a message on Facebook and saying that he will not take a stance on the authenticity of the video , but stated that he does not recognize the man . <unk> blog website reported that the Gulf Cartel was behind the video , but the information and authenticity have not been officially confirmed . 
 In April 2013 , Proceso magazine received information from supposed informants from the Office of the General Prosecutor in Tamaulipas who indicated that the state governor Egidio Torre Cantú wanted to close the page by discrediting it with false reports . The governor , the report said , was concerned that Valor por Tamaulipas " had become a news reference that showed Mexico and the world that it was organized crime , not him , who controlled the state . " 
 On 22 May 2013 , Valor por Tamaulipas released a video sent to the page by an alleged organized crime group . In the video , a man and a woman are interrogated by alleged drug traffickers and ask the administrator to close the page and reveal his true identity . The couple was presented as supposed family members of the administrator ; however , the he later indicated that they were not his family , and that the criminal organization had either confused them or simply targeted a random family to pressure to administrator to close the page . Valor por Tamaulipas responded by sending a message to the authorities in Tamaulipas and blamed them for the death of a person who died of a cardiac arrest after the couple was kidnapped ; the administrator also accused the Tamaulipas authorities of protecting Los Zetas drug cartel . 
 = = Closure and renewal = = 
 Early in the morning of 1 April 2013 , the Facebook and Twitter accounts of Valor por Tamaulipas were shut down unexpectedly and without any explanation . A new page with the same name was created by other administrators , who said that they did not know what had happened to the original administrator but that they wanted to continue his work nonetheless . This raised concerns about who was actually working behind the scenes to keep the page running . Another page run by other users and with a similar name , Responsabilidad por Tamaulipas ( " Responsibility for Tamaulipas " ) , posted on their page that Valor por Tamaulipas had only closed temporarily in order to improve the page and protect the administrator . They advised online users to ignore websites that posed as the original page . 
 About a week later , the original page of Valor por Tamaulipas reopened , but the administrator issued a communiqué in which he indicated that the page was going to close permanently after 8 days . On Facebook the administrator explained that he could not continue collaborating at Valor por Tamaulipas because of his inability to properly manage the page . " In my case , organized crime won , but it has defeated me and not society ; it has defeated me and my family , but it has not defeated that thousands of contributors who trusted this page and reported despite their fears " , the administrator said . He also talked about his experience and the lessons he learned as head of the page , and then thanked those who supported and trusted him for over a year . The administrator concluded by asking his followers to forgive him . 
 In the eight days following the announcement , the page operated as it normally did . After reconsidering several times , the administrator decided to keep maintaining the page , and thanked the media and his followers for supporting him . He concluded by saying , " I am not sure if keeping this page will benefit the people of goodwill ... only God will know if I was irresponsible or stubborn in doing so ... On another note , I confess that it has been an honor and pleasure to continue collaborating and working as a team with all of you . Thank you , people of goodwill from Tamaulipas . I owe it all to you . " 
 = = Block , reopen , and further threats = = 
 On 9 June 2014 , the Facebook page was blocked for a month for uploading gun @-@ related posts , which is considered a violation of Facebook 's policies . In order to continue his reporting , the admin posted on his Twitter and Google accounts . 
 On 15 October 2014 , the former co @-@ admin of the sister page Responsabilidad for Tamaulipas , María del Rosario Fuentes Rubio ( also known by her Twitter account @ Miut3 and Felina ) , was kidnapped , tortured , and killed by alleged organized crime members . She had a strong follower @-@ base on Twitter and was known for posting about risk situations , shootouts , and information about criminal groups from Tamaulipas . Her captors allegedly posted several tweets on her profile , prompting shocking reactions on social media . The first tweet revealed her identity and profession as a doctor , and ended by saying that her " life had come to an end " . Two minutes later , another tweet asked others to not make the mistakes she did ( of posting about organized crime ) . The third tweet warned Valor por Tamaulipas and two other Twitter users , @ <unk> and @ <unk> _ mx , of posting about risk situations . The fourth and final tweet said the following : " Close your accounts , don 't risk your families the way I did , I ask you all for forgiveness , " and included two photos of her . One of them showed her alive , and the second one showed her corpse splattered in blood . Twitter later deactivated the account but the photos had already leaked across social media . 
 Valor por Tamaulipas confirmed her death on its Facebook page and lamented the incident . The admin stated that @ Miut3 was a collaborator at Valor por Tamaulipas and former admin at Responsabilidad por Tamaulipas . It was unknown if her murder was linked to her activities on social media or to her profession as a doctor ; one version suggested that she was kidnapped by organized crime after a son of an alleged drug lord died of medical complications , and that her captors discovered her identity when they took her phone and decided to threaten the rest of the online community . Valor por Tamaulipas does not believe this version , however . The admin said he had reasons to believe that @ Miut3 was targeted for her online activities . Valor por Tamaulipas stated that @ Miut3 was threatened by Twitter user @ <unk> a week before she was killed ; the admin indicated that the threats used similar wordings and that that was " no coincidence " . 
 = = Admin 's retirement and new management = = 
 On 29 November 2014 , the admin of the page announced his retirement on Facebook . He stated that he was leaving the page for personal reasons , but that Valor por Tamaulipas would continue under new management . That person , he said , had some relationship with law enforcement . The admin believes that this would be of benefit for the cyber community because it would allow for citizen reports to reach law enforcement directly . The admin also announced that the pages Responsabilidad , Fortaleza , and Valor por la Huasteca would go under new management too . The new management would be composed of people who he deemed trustworthy given their long history of support or because they had suffered a loss as a result of the violence . In a closing statement , he bid farewell by thanking God for bringing happiness to his personal and professional life . In the comment section of the Facebook post , many people thanked the admin for his support . Some of them , however , expressed their concerned with the new administration given his / her relationship with the government . 
 = = Sister page and similar projects = = 
 Valor por Tamaulipas has a sister page called Esperanza por Tamaulipas ( " Hope for Tamaulipas " ) , which uploads pictures of people who have been kidnapped or are reported as disappeared in the state . The page has a list of more than 120 people who have disappeared between 2010 and 2012 . Other projects like Valor por Michoacán SDR ( " Courage for Michoacán – Risk Situations " ) , which reported about the drug @-@ related violence and role of the self @-@ defense groups in Michoacán since 2013 , have many followers and likes on Twitter ( @ <unk> ) and Facebook ( / <unk> ) . 
 = = <unk> used in page = = 
 Valor por Tamaulipas uses several acronyms in posts on Facebook and Twitter : 
 = Italian battleship Regina Margherita = 
 Regina Margherita was the lead ship of her class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Italian Regia Marina between 1898 and 1904 . She had one sister ship , Benedetto Brin . Regina Margherita saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 . By the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , the battleship had been reduced to a training ship . She struck two naval mines on the night of 11 – 12 December 1916 while steaming off Valona . She sank with heavy loss of life : 675 men were killed , and only 270 survived . 
 = = Design = = 
 Regina Margherita was 138 @.@ 65 meters ( 454 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 23 @.@ 84 m ( 78 @.@ 2 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 81 m ( 28 @.@ 9 ft ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 093 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 870 long tons ; 15 @,@ 535 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Niclausse boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 20 @.@ 3 knots ( 37 @.@ 6 km / h ; 23 @.@ 4 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Regina Margherita had a crew of 812 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with four 12 in ( 300 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with four 8 in ( 200 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in casemates in the superstructure , and twelve 6 in ( 150 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns , also in casemates in the side of the hull . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . The ship also carried a pair of 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns , two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and two 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) Maxim guns . Regina Margherita was also equipped with four 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Regina Margherita was protected with Harvey steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 6 in ( 150 mm ) thick , and the deck was 3 @.@ 1 in ( 79 mm ) thick . The conning tower and the casemate guns were also protected by 6 in of armor plating . The main battery guns had stronger armor protection , at 8 in ( 200 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 Regina Margherita laid down at the La Spezia shipyard on 20 November 1898 . She was launched on 30 May 1901 in the presence of King Victor Emmanuel , and completed three years later ; she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 14 April 1904 . Work progressed slowly on the ship in large part due to non @-@ delivery of material , particularly the heavy armor . In July , the ship conducted her speed trials in the Gulf of Genoa . Following her completion , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron . The ships in the squadron were typically only on active duty for seven months of the year for training ; the rest of the year they were placed in reserve . In 1907 , the Mediterranean Squadron consisted of Regina Margherita , her sister Benedetto Brin , and three of the Regina Elena @-@ class battleships . The ships participated in the annual maneuvers in late September and early October as the flagship of Vice Admiral Alfonso di Brocchetti . 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War Regina <unk> was assigned to the 1st Division of the 2nd Squadron , along with her sister and the two Ammiraglio di Saint Bon @-@ class battleships . She joined the squadron on 5 October , a week after the war started . On 13 April 1912 , Regina Margherita and the rest of the Squadron sailed from Tobruk to the Aegean Sea to rendezvous with the 1st Squadron . The two squadrons met off Stampalia on 17 April . The next day , the fleet steamed into the northern Aegean and cut several Turkish submarine cables . Most of the ships of the Italian fleet then bombarded the fortresses protecting the Dardanelles in an unsuccessful attempt to lure out the Turkish fleet . While they were doing this , Regina Margherita , Benedetto Brin , and two torpedo boats were detached to cut additional cables between Rhodes and Marmaris . On 18 May , Regina Margherita bombarded Marmaris . While debarking troops on the island of Scarpanto in the Aegean , the ship 's anchor chain accidentally slipped loose and killed the ship 's executive officer , Captain <unk> ; five other men were injured in the accident . In July , Regina Margherita and the rest of the Division had withdrawn to Italy to replace worn @-@ out gun barrels , along with other repairs . In 1912 , the ship had four 3 @-@ inch guns added , increasing her battery from 20 to 24 pieces . 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . The primary naval opponent for the duration of the war was the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ; the Naval Chief of Staff , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , planned a distant blockade with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids . The heavy ships of the Italian fleet would be preserved for a potential major battle in the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet should emerge from its bases . By this time , Regina Margherita was long @-@ since obsolescent , and was reduced to a training ship in the 3rd Division , along with her sister ship . On the night of 11 – 12 December 1916 , while sailing from the port of Valona in heavy sea conditions , she struck two mines laid by the German submarine SM UC @-@ 14 and blew up . There were 270 survivors and 675 men perished . The ship 's loss was not announced until January 1917 . Lieutenant General Oreste Bandini , the commander of the Italian Albania Expeditionary Corps , was on the ship and was among those who were killed in the sinking . 
 = Edge of Darkness = 
 Edge of Darkness is a British television drama serial , produced by BBC Television in association with Lionheart Television International and originally broadcast in six fifty @-@ five @-@ minute episodes in late 1985 . A mixture of crime drama and political thriller , it revolves around the efforts of policeman Ronald Craven ( played by Bob Peck ) to unravel the truth behind the murder of his daughter Emma ( played by Joanne Whalley ) . Craven 's investigations soon lead him into a murky world of government and corporate cover @-@ ups and nuclear espionage , pitting him against dark forces that threaten the future of life on Earth . 
 Writer Troy Kennedy Martin was greatly influenced by the political climate of the time , dominated by the Thatcher government , and the aura of secrecy surrounding the nuclear industry – and by the implications of the Gaia hypothesis of environmentalist James Lovelock ; these combined to his crafting a thriller that mingled real world concerns with mythic and mystical elements . Kennedy Martin 's original ending was more fantastic than that eventually used in the finished serial : he had proposed that Craven would turn into a tree but this was vetoed by members of the cast and crew . 
 First broadcast on BBC2 , Edge of Darkness was met with such widespread critical acclaim that within days it had earned a repeat on BBC1 . Winner of several prestigious awards , it remains highly regarded to this day , often cited as one of the best and most influential pieces of British television drama ever made . The series ' director , Martin Campbell , filmed a remake , released in January 2010 , starring Mel Gibson and set in the United States . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = One : Compassionate Leave = = = 
 Yorkshire police officer Ronald Craven ( Bob Peck ) is returning home with his daughter Emma ( Joanne Whalley ) having picked her up from a meeting of an environmental organisation at her university campus . On the doorstep of their home Emma is shot dead . The police concentrate their effort on the theory that her murder was a botched attempt on Craven 's life by a criminal he had been responsible for convicting . However , as Craven goes through Emma 's belongings , he discovers a geiger counter and a gun . He also learns that Emma 's body and her possessions are radioactive . Travelling to London to assist with the inquiry , he is contacted by Pendleton ( Charles Kay ) , a polished official “ attached to the Prime Minister 's office ” , who informs him that Emma was known to them as a terrorist and that it was she , not Craven , who was the gunman 's target . 
 = = = Two : Into The Shadows = = = 
 As he continues his investigations , Craven is visited by Emma 's ghost . The fingerprints on the getaway car used by Emma 's killer match that of Lowe , a man Craven arrested ten years previously . Meanwhile , Pendleton takes Craven to meet his colleague , Harcourt ( Ian McNeice ) , who informs him that Emma was a member of a subversive anti @-@ nuclear group called GAIA . A team of six GAIA members , led by Emma , had broken into a low level radioactive waste facility at Northmoor ; all are now either dead or missing . After Craven makes a televised appeal for information about Emma 's killer , he is contacted by CIA agent Darius Jedburgh ( Joe Don Baker ) , an associate of Harcourt and Pendleton . Jedburgh shows Craven the CIA 's file on Emma 's activities : GAIA had become suspicious of Northmoor when a nearby reservoir had become contaminated with radioactive material , an occurrence that had also alerted the CIA , leading them to believe Northmoor was illegally storing plutonium . Jedburgh is played as a hard @-@ bitten professional with a wry sense of humour and a passion for ballroom dancing . Along with Harcourt and Pendleton , he is keen to find the source and purpose of the plutonium . 
 = = = Three : Burden Of Proof = = = 
 The police close in on their suspect , Lowe ( Roy Heather ) , who is severely injured in a fall while trying to escape . Dying , he tells Craven he was working with McCroon , a terrorist Craven had had convicted in Northern Ireland . Emma 's boyfriend , Terry Shields ( Tim McInnerny ) , tells Craven that she was investigating a hot cell in Northmoor ; he is later killed . Craven meets Harcourt and Pendleton at the House of Commons where an inquiry is taking place into the sale of International <unk> Fuels ( IIF ) – Northmoor 's owners – to the Fusion Corporation of Kansas , owned by Jerry Grogan ( Kenneth Nelson ) . Pendleton tells Craven that he believes Grogan was behind Emma 's death . Returning to Yorkshire for Emma 's funeral , Craven is refused permission to seek a warrant to enter Northmoor . Returning home , he is observed by McCroon ( Sean Caffrey ) . 
 = = = Four : Breakthrough = = = 
 McCroon breaks into Craven 's house intent on killing him . Craven demands McCroon tell him who he is working for but McCroon is shot by a police marksman before he can say anything . Through a contact of Mac ( Struan Roger ) , a colleague from his time in Northern Ireland , Craven gains access to a terminal connected to the MI5 computer . He checks the MI5 records for GAIA , Northmoor and Emma and learns that McCroon was acting on the orders of Northmoor Security . He also obtains a three @-@ dimensional map of Northmoor from the computer . Craven contacts Jedburgh and asks him to accompany him inside Northmoor . 
 = = = Five : Northmoor = = = 
 Craven and Jedburgh penetrate Northmoor and discover the hot cell which has been sealed off following an explosion - a consequence of GAIA 's attempted break @-@ in . Jedburgh , under orders from the CIA , enters the hot cell and steals the plutonium . At the House of Commons inquiry , IIF chief executive Robert Bennett ( Hugh Fraser ) is forced to admit the presence of plutonium at Northmoor and the deaths of the GAIA team . 
 = = = Six : Fusion = = = 
 Craven and Jedburgh escape Northmoor but both are dying from radiation poisoning . Jedburgh makes for the Gleneagles Hotel in Scotland , which is hosting a NATO conference on directed energy weapons . Also present at the conference is Grogan who announces that the British government has approved the purchase of IIF and speaks with cold passion of harnessing the power of the atom to conquer the galaxy . The audience of military and civilian officials applauds but Jedburgh in U.S. uniform takes the dais to denounce nuclear proliferation and a vainglorious crusade amongst the stars . He finishes by bringing together two bars of plutonium he has removed from Northmoor , causing a criticality accident and irradiating himself and the nearby Grogan . 
 Emma 's ghost appears to Craven and tells him of a time when black flowers grew , warming the Earth and preventing life from becoming extinct . She tells him that the black flowers have returned and will melt the polar icecaps , destroying mankind so that life can continue . Craven goes to dissuade Jedburgh from the next step in his plan , which is to cause a nuclear explosion in Scotland with the rest of the plutonium . He succeeds , though the secret service follow him and kill Jedburgh . Craven , like Jedburgh and Grogan fatally exposed to radiation , wanders into the mountains to die , calling Emma 's name . On the mountains , as Emma predicted , the black flowers are growing , foreshadowing the planet 's war against humanity . 
 = = Principal credits = = 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Ronald Craven was played by Bob Peck , an actor who was well known in theatre but , at the time he was cast as Craven , had appeared in only minor roles on television . In creating the role of Craven , Peck drew upon his experience gained from the two years he played the title role in Macbeth for the Royal Shakespeare Company . Notable roles after Edge of Darkness included On the Black Hill ( 1987 ) , Slipstream ( 1989 ) , Natural Lies ( 1992 ) and Jurassic Park ( 1993 ) . He died in 1999 . 
 Joanne Whalley , who played Emma Craven , began acting during childhood , appearing in the long @-@ running soap opera Coronation Street ( 1960 – present ) in 1976 at the age of 10 . She had also appeared in supporting roles in several series including Juliet Bravo ( 1980 – 1985 ) , Bergerac ( 1981 – 1991 ) and Reilly , Ace of Spies ( 1983 ) . Following Edge of Darkness , Whalley was cast in the equally well regarded BBC television serial The Singing Detective ( 1986 ) , written by Dennis Potter . Moving to Hollywood , she appeared in such films as Willow ( 1988 ) , Scandal ( 1989 ) and Shattered ( 1991 ) as well as television mini @-@ series such as Scarlett ( 1994 ) and Jackie Bouvier Kennedy Onassis ( 2000 ) . During her eight @-@ year marriage to the actor Val Kilmer , between 1988 and 1996 , she was often credited as Joanne Whalley @-@ Kilmer . 
 Cast as Darius Jedburgh was Joe Don Baker , who had been acting since the 1960s and was known for his roles in Westerns such as Gunsmoke ( 1955 – 1975 ) and as the lead in the detective series <unk> ( 1979 – 1980 ) . He also starred as Sherriff Buford <unk> in the original 1972 film Walking Tall . The script of Edge of Darkness so impressed him that he agreed to take the part at lower than his usual fee . He was later cast , by Edge of Darkness director Martin Campbell , as CIA agent Jack Wade in the James Bond film GoldenEye ( 1995 ) , a role he reprised in Tomorrow Never Dies ( 1997 ) . 
 Charles Kay , who played Pendleton , was a well established character actor who had appeared in Fall of Eagles ( 1974 ) , I , Claudius ( 1976 ) and The Devil 's Crown ( 1978 ) . He has since acted in many television productions such as Fortunes of War ( 1989 ) , The Darling Buds of May ( 1991 – 1993 ) , Jonathan Creek ( 1997 – 2004 ) and Midsomer Murders ( 1997 – present ) . 
 Edge of Darkness was an early role for Ian McNeice , who played Harcourt . He went on to act in a wide variety of film and television parts including The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain ( 1995 ) , Ace Ventura : When Nature Calls ( 1995 ) and Frank Herbert 's Dune ( 2000 ) , as well as regular roles in Doc Martin ( 2004 – present ) , Rome ( 2005 – 2007 ) and regular appearances as Winston Churchill in the BBC 's revived Doctor Who . 
 Several other faces familiar to British viewers appeared during the course of the episodes , including John Woodvine ( as Craven 's superior DCS Ross ) , Tim McInnerny ( as Emma 's boyfriend Terry Shields ) , Hugh Fraser ( as IIF chief executive Robert Bennett ) , Zoë Wanamaker ( as intelligence agent Clementine ) and Blake 's 7 cast members David Jackson ( as Colonel Lawson ) and Brian <unk> ( as Northmoor security chief Connors ) . Playing themselves were television reporters Sue Cook and Kenneth Kendall , weatherman Bill Giles and Labour MP Michael Meacher . Long @-@ standing BBC visual effects designer Mat Irvine , who contributed visual effects to the series , received a brief cameo as a police diver in " Breakthrough " . Frank L. Ridley played as the Automatic Weapons Cop . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Writer Troy Kennedy Martin was the creator of the long @-@ running BBC police drama Z @-@ Cars ( 1962 – 1978 ) . He also wrote the screenplay for the films The Italian Job ( 1969 ) and Kelly 's Heroes ( 1970 ) and scripts for television series such as Colditz ( 1972 – 1974 ) , The Sweeney ( 1975 – 1978 ) ( which was created by his brother Ian Kennedy Martin ) and Reilly , Ace of Spies ( 1983 ) . Following Edge of Darkness , he wrote the screenplays for the films Red Heat ( with Walter Hill ) ( 1988 ) and Bravo Two Zero ( 1999 ) . He died in September 2009 . 
 Director Martin Campbell had developed a reputation for handling action thrillers with credits including The Professionals ( 1977 – 1983 ) , Minder ( 1979 – 1994 ) and Shoestring ( 1979 – 1980 ) . A few years after Edge of Darkness , Campbell moved into feature films , directing the James Bond films GoldenEye ( 1995 ) and Casino Royale ( 2006 ) as well as The Mask of Zorro ( 1998 ) , Vertical Limit ( 2000 ) and The Legend of Zorro ( 2005 ) . 
 Producer Michael Wearing had worked on Play for Today for which he had produced Alan Bleasdale 's The Black Stuff ( 1978 ) and which he and Bleasdale subsequently spun off into the highly acclaimed Boys from the Blackstuff ( 1982 ) . He also produced the conspiracy thriller Bird of Prey ( 1982 ) . Following Edge of Darkness he continued to be one of British television 's most high profile and successful producers , appointed Head of Serials at the BBC between 1989 and 1998 where he was responsible for such programmes as Pride and Prejudice ( 1995 ) , Our Friends in the North ( 1996 ) and Dennis Potter 's final two plays Karaoke ( 1996 ) and Cold Lazarus ( 1996 ) . 
 Walt Patterson , who acted as series adviser , was a leading commentator on nuclear affairs , best known for his book Nuclear Power ( Penguin , 1976 – 1986 ) . Following Edge of Darkness , he acted as specialist adviser to the British House of Commons Select Committee on Environment for their 1986 study , Radioactive Waste . He continues to contribute to the policy debate about energy and environmental issues . Advice on the policing aspects of the serial was provided by the West Yorkshire Police and former Scotland Yard detective Jack Slipper , famous for his pursuit of the train robber Ronnie Biggs . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The musical score was provided by Eric Clapton and Michael Kamen . Clapton was approached to provide the score by producer Michael Wearing . Shortly afterwards , when Michael Kamen brought Clapton to a screening of Brazil ( 1985 ) , which he , Kamen , had scored , Eric suggested a collaboration between the two on Edge of Darkness . Kamen became one of Hollywood 's most successful film composers , writing the scores for many blockbuster films including the Lethal Weapon series ( 1987 – 1998 ) ( with Eric Clapton ) , the first three Die Hard films ( 1988 , 1990 , 1995 ) , Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves ( 1991 ) and X @-@ Men ( 2000 ) . He died in 2003 . 
 Aside from the Clapton / Kamen soundtrack , Willie Nelson 's " The Time of the Preacher " , New Model Army 's " Christian Militia " , and Tom Waits ' " 16 Shells From A Thirty @-@ Ought @-@ Six " are featured in the series . " Christian Militia " is on the record player when Terry 's body is found . Craven listens to " The Time of the Preacher " when he is in Emma 's room in the first episode . It later emerges Jedburgh is familiar with the song and both he and Craven sing it on two occasions , the lyrics being significant . 
 The Australian Broadcasting Corporation used the music to illustrate stories on the Chernobyl disaster the following year . Eric Clapton and Michael Kamen performed the movie 's main theme with the National Philharmonic Orchestra during the 24 Nights period in 1990 and 1991 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 “ I am writing this story about a detective who turns into a tree ” was what writer Troy Kennedy Martin told his colleagues when asked what he was working on during the early nineteen @-@ eighties . Kennedy Martin had become frustrated that “ at the BBC there was no political dimension to their drama whatsoever ” but had chosen to write a political story anyway , not really believing it would ever get made . The election of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Ronald Reagan as President of the United States had brought about a major shift in the global political landscape and Kennedy Martin was motivated to write out of concern arising from such issues as the Greenham Common protests , the Falklands War , unrest among the miners and , arising out of the escalation of the Cold War , the fear that “ born @-@ again Christians and Cold War warriors appeared to be running the United States ” . 
 By 1983 , Kennedy Martin had written the first draft of what would eventually become Edge of Darkness – at this stage it was called Magnox ( a reference to the Magnox type of nuclear reactor ) and was about trade union problems in the nuclear industry . The script was given to BBC Head of Drama Series & Serials , Jonathan Powell , who encouraged Kennedy Martin to continue its development . The script would go though many changes and revisions before reaching its final form . 
 A particular influence was the speech made by President Ronald Reagan on 23 March 1983 announcing the Strategic Defense Initiative ( SDI ) which , using ground @-@ based and space @-@ based systems , proposed protecting the United States from attack by nuclear missiles . One of the supporters of SDI was one @-@ time US presidential candidate Lyndon LaRouche , on whom Kennedy Martin based the character of Jerry Grogan , owner of the Fusion Corporation of Kansas . Kennedy Martin was also influenced by the culture of secrecy surrounding the UK 's policy regarding nuclear power in light of the inquiry into the construction of the Sizewell B nuclear power station and the concerns about the safety record of the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant ; this led him to conceive International <unk> Fuels and its chief executive Robert Bennett . 
 The other major influence was the Gaia hypothesis , that the Earth is a single living system that self @-@ regulates to maintain the optimum conditions for life , formulated by climate scientist James Lovelock and popularised in his 1979 book Gaia : A new look at life on Earth . Kennedy Martin used the name GAIA for the environmental organisation Emma Craven was involved in and drew the notion for the black flowers seen at the serial 's conclusion from a passage in Lovelock 's book that describes a dark marsh grass that grew on the surface of the Earth trapping heat during a time when the planet was too cold to sustain life . 
 Although Kennedy Martin 's notion for the serial was influenced by real political events , he had for a long time railed against naturalism in television drama – most notably in a 1964 article for the theatre magazine Encore , titled “ <unk> Go Home . First Statement of a New Drama for Television ” , in which he sought “ to free the camera from photographing dialogue , to free the structure from natural time and to exploit the total and absolute objectivity of the television camera ” . Edge of Darkness producer Michael Wearing has noted that “ there is a mystical dimension to Troy 's imagination . His instincts are visual and non @-@ naturalistic ” . Kennedy Martin , therefore , crafted a serial that on the one hand placed its events squarely within the real , present day world but on the other also placed itself within the realm of the mystical and the mythic . Realism and authenticity was provided by the appearances of real life television presenter Sue Cook and Labour MP Michael Meacher . There was also use of contemporary stock footage , such as Robin Day 's interview with Margaret Thatcher and references to real persons like Michael Heseltine and places such as Sellafield , alongside the references to fictitious characters and places contained in the plot . The mystical dimension is provided by Emma 's ghost while the mythic is provided by Craven himself and by Jedburgh and Grogan . Kennedy Martin , influenced by John Darragh 's The Real Camelot ( Thames and Hudson , 1981 ) which examined the pagan origins of the Arthurian legend , saw Craven as a modern @-@ day Green Man who would confront the threats to the Earth on behalf of Gaia . Jedburgh was conceived by Kennedy Martin as a Knight of the Marches , one of the Teutonic Knights who defended the borders of Eastern Europe , opposed to Grogan , who Kennedy Martin saw as a descendant of the Knights Templar who , according to legend , had guarded a special wisdom in the Temple of the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem . These aspects would reach their apotheosis in the serial 's conclusion in which Kennedy Martin envisaged that Craven , having found the plutonium stolen by Jedburgh , would be shot by a sniper and would be transformed into a tree . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 By 1983 , Jonathan Powell was keen to put the serial into production and offered the scripts to producer Michael Wearing who was immediately impressed by the scenes in the first episode , “ Compassionate Leave ” , depicting Craven 's reaction to Emma 's death , describing them as “ the most sustained evocation of individual grief in bereavement that I can remember ” . The budget was set at £ 2 million , of which £ 400 @,@ 000 came from an American co @-@ producer , Lionheart Television International . Director Martin Campbell came on board shortly afterwards and soon clashed with Troy Kennedy Martin , demanding rewrites , in particular to the notion that Craven had known about Emma 's involvement with GAIA right from the start ; this was removed at Campbell 's behest . Further clashes over the script occurred between Kennedy Martin and star Bob Peck over the conclusion in which his character would turn into a tree ; Peck recalled that “ it didn 't seem to be working in script terms , it seemed as though we wouldn 't be able to make it work for the audience ” , a view echoed by Michael Wearing who felt that it was “ likely not to come off as an effect ” . Kennedy Martin capitulated , introducing instead the concept of the black flowers seen in the finished production . However , some elements of Kennedy Martin 's original vision persist in the final script : for example , in episode three , “ Burden of Proof ” , the ghost of Emma urges Craven , as he undergoes a breakdown , to be strong , like a tree . 
 Shooting on Edge of Darkness began on 9 July 1984 and ran for five months until 5 December 1984 . Location filming took place in London ( including the Barbican Arts Centre , BBC Television Centre and the Hilton International Kensington ) , Yorkshire ( including the headquarters of the West Yorkshire Police in Bradford , the Middleton Railway , the headquarters of <unk> Computers ( now the O2 building ) in Leeds where Craven hacks into the MI5 computer and at Westwood Cottage , Ilkley for Craven 's home ) , Scotland ( including the Gleneagles Hotel , where Jedburgh addresses the NATO conference and also where President Reagan 's Reykjavík policy was formulated ) and Wales ( including <unk> Gold Mine and Manod , Blaenau Ffestiniog doubling as Northmoor with the hot cell a set constructed at a factory in <unk> ) . Throughout the entire shoot , the production continued to be known as Magnox ; the title Dark Forces was briefly considered before the serial was renamed Edge of Darkness in April 1985 . As the shoot progressed it became apparent to the cast and crew that they had a potential hit on their hands ; Bob Peck recalled , “ I think we knew when we were making it that it was a good piece of work ” while Kennedy Martin told reporters “ I haven 't had this feeling about something for 20 years . It 's wonderful , after all this time , to get something that actually works ” . 
 = = Broadcast and critical reception = = 
 Edge of Darkness was promoted on the cover of the listings magazine Radio Times and was broadcast on Monday nights on BBC2 at 9 : 30pm , beginning 4 November 1985 . The serial averaged an audience of 4 million viewers over its run . The critical response was generally positive with most commentators concentrating their praise on Peck 's performance as Craven and the scale of the programme 's political themes . “ A good television thriller is very hard to find but Edge of Darkness promises to be one of the best ” , wrote Celia <unk> in The Times , “ The central character is played by Bob Peck , who has the gift of looking tragic and intelligent simultaneously . [ ... ] There was humour to lift the gloom and superb characterisation to flesh out the stock situation ” . Ruth Baumgarten , in The Listener , praised the serial as “ a grandiosely ambitious and compelling piece of fiction ” . Speaking on the BBC 's review programme Did You See ... ? , the writer Sarah Dunant said , “ this is a very classy piece of television drama , on all levels , I think on the plot level , I think on the level of emotion and I think stylistically [ ... ] it looks absolutely wonderful , it 's shot like a feature film ” . Not so impressed was Byron Rogers , television critic of The Sunday Times , who initially hailed the series as one that “ stayed in the mind and will stay there long [ ... ] because of its portrayal of human grief ” but later felt he was “ beginning to find Edge of Darkness slightly irritating ” and decried the final episode as “ an insult to its considerable following ” . 
 Aware of the critical buzz surrounding the show , BBC1 Controller , Michael Grade , quickly announced that the series would be repeated on BBC1 , stating , “ I think it will reach a wider audience and it deserves it ” , and so Edge of Darkness was duly shown , in double episodes , over three consecutive nights between 19 December and 21 December 1985 , the fastest time between original broadcast and repeat in the BBC 's history . These repeats were accompanied by a disclaimer that the GAIA organisation depicted in the programme was not connected with the Gaia publishing company supported by Prince Philip . It was a move that paid off – Edge of Darkness doubled its audience on BBC1 to 8 million viewers . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Edge of Darkness tapped into a cultural zeitgeist of concern about nuclear power and nuclear warfare in the early to mid nineteen @-@ eighties . In 1980 , current affairs programme Panorama broadcast “ If The Bomb Drops ” , a documentary that examined how well prepared Britain was for a nuclear attack ; in 1983 , The Day After an American TV movie about a nuclear war aired , as well as seeing the release of the feature film WarGames , showing the ' no winner ' outcome of nuclear war ; in 1984 , the BBC broadcast On the Eighth Day , a documentary about the effects of a nuclear winter and Threads , a drama about a nuclear attack on Sheffield while 1985 saw the first screening of Peter Watkins ' nuclear war television film The War Game , banned on television since 1965 . Edge of Darkness also rode on a wave of preoccupation with the secretive nature of the State in both fact ( e.g. This Week ’ s “ Death on the Rock ” ( 1988 ) about the deaths of three Provisional IRA members in Gibraltar and Secret Society ( 1987 ) about undisclosed matters of public interest which led to the sacking of BBC Director General Alasdair Milne ) and fiction ( e.g. the films Defence of the Realm ( 1985 ) and The Whistle Blower ( 1987 ) and the television serials A Very British Coup ( 1988 ) and Traffik ( 1989 ) ) . 
 Edge of Darkness continues to be well regarded to this day . When it was repeated on BBC2 in 1992 , Sean Day @-@ Lewis wrote in The Daily Telegraph , “ Edge of Darkness is a masterpiece . It is one of those very rare television creations so rich in form and content that the spectator wishes there was some way of prolonging it indefinitely ” . Andrew Lavender , writing in British Television Drama in the 1980s , has said that Edge of Darkness “ captured the spirit of its age but went far beyond the drama of its time . [ ... ] It pushed against expectations attaching to the thriller form , often transcending the limits of the genre ” . Fred Inglis , in his analysis of the serial in Formations : 20th Century Media Studies , takes it “ as one of the most remarkable works of art made for British television ” . According to Lez Cooke , in British Television Drama : A History , “ In a reactionary climate , when the possibilities for the production of ' social issue ' drama were limited , Edge of Darkness proved that , by adapting to changed circumstances and adopting a serialised thriller format , it was still possible to produce ambitious and progressive television drama in Britain in the mid @-@ 1980s ” , a view echoed by Sean Cubit in <unk> who notes that “ the series neatly echoed the chill that descended on radical politics in the Thatcher years in the United Kingdom ” . The television historian Andrew Pixley has described the series as “ possibly the finest BBC drama ever made ” and “ one of the few television programmes where every element can be said to have worked to complete effect ” ; John Hartley , in Tele @-@ <unk> : Studies in Television , called it " the best police drama series ever made for television " and said that " its method of investigative drama can unravel some of the complexities of public life more truthfully than investigative journalism " . 
 Edge of Darkness was placed fifteenth ( fourth position out of the dramas featured on the list ) on the British Film Institute 's list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes in 2000 , the BFI describing it as “ a gripping , innovative six @-@ part drama which fully deserves its cult status and many awards . ” . Radio Times television editor Alison Graham , in 2003 , listed it as one of the forty greatest television programmes ever made . It was one of only seven dramas listed in Broadcast magazine 's list of the fifty most influential television programmes , published in July 2004 . In March 2007 , Edge of Darkness was placed third in Channel 4 's list of the Greatest TV Dramas . Also on Channel 4 , Darius Jedburgh was listed eighty @-@ fourth in their list of the One Hundred Greatest TV Characters in 2001 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Edge of Darkness received eleven nominations and won six awards at the 1986 BAFTA Awards : 
 Won : Best Drama Series / Serial ( Martin Campbell & Michael Wearing ) 
 Won : Best Actor ( Bob Peck ) . 
 Nominated : Best Actor ( Joe Don Baker ) . 
 Nominated : Best Actress ( Joanne Whalley ) . 
 Won : Best Original Television Music ( Eric Clapton & Michael Kamen ) . 
 Won : Best Film Cameraman ( Andrew Dunn ) . 
 Won : Best Film Editor ( Ardan Fisher , Dan Rae ) . 
 Won : Best Film Sound ( Dickie Bird , Rob James , Christopher Swanton , Tony Quinn ) . 
 Nominated : Best Makeup ( Daphne Croker ) . 
 Nominated : Best Graphics ( Andy Coward , Linda Sherwood @-@ Page ) . 
 Nominated : Best Design ( Graeme Thompson ) . 
 At the 1986 Broadcasting Press Guild television critics ' awards , Edge of Darkness won two awards : 
 Won : Best Actor ( Bob Peck ) ( joint winner with Ben Kingsley for Silas <unk> ) . 
 Nominated : Best Actor ( Joe Don Baker ) . 
 Won : Best Drama Series . 
 = = Hollywood adaptation = = 
 In 2010 , a Hollywood remake of the show was released in cinemas . It was released on 28 January in the UK , 29 January in the US and 4 February in Australia . Mel Gibson plays Detective Craven . The film is directed by Martin Campbell , who also directed the original . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Edge of Darkness was released on VHS videotape by the BBC in 1987 . There was also a release from CBS / Fox Video in North America at the same time . The soundtrack was also released as an album entitled Edge of Darkness . 
 Troy Kennedy Martin 's original script for episode one and the final scripts for episodes two to six of the serial were published by Faber and Faber in 1990 ; the script book also included an introduction by Kennedy Martin and two appendices – the first giving background to the story and the main characters and the second giving comments on the script by experts on nuclear power and police procedures . 
 The serial was re @-@ issued on VHS in 1998 by Revelation Films who also issued the serial on DVD in 1999 . In 2003 , BBC Worldwide re @-@ issued Edge of Darkness on DVD ( encoded for both regions 2 and 4 ) with several extra features including Magnox : The Secrets of Edge of Darkness , a specially made “ making @-@ of ” documentary ; an isolated soundtrack of Eric Clapton and Michael Kamen 's score ; a Bob Peck interview from BBC Breakfast Time ; a contemporary report on the programme 's BAFTA wins and coverage of the programme 's wins at the Broadcasting Press Guild awards . A Region 1 DVD set was released on 3 November 2009 . 
 = Beat of My Drum = 
 " Beat of My Drum " is a song by British recording artist Nicola Roberts . It was released on 2 June 2011 , by Polydor Records , as the lead single from Roberts ' debut solo album , Cinderella 's Eyes ( 2011 ) . The song was simultaneously released with the on air on sale method , receiving no prior promotion . " Beat of My Drum " was written by Roberts , Dimitri Tikovoi , Maya von Doll and Diplo , and was initially produced by Roberts and Tikovoi . Written to feel British and fun , Roberts intended " Beat of My Drum " to be a song which people could sing and dance . 
 " Beat of My Drum " is a dance @-@ pop song which incorporates elements of indie pop , and has been compared to the work of artists including M.I.A. and Major Lazer . Lyrically , the song discusses Roberts ' time in the girl band she was a part of , Girls Aloud ; while part of the group , she felt undervalued in comparison to other members . " Beat of My Drum " garnered universal acclaim from music critics , with some describing it as more original than solo releases by other members of Girls Aloud ; it was also compared to the work of artists such as Kelis and Robyn . Commercially , " Beat of My Drum " failed to make a large impact . 
 In the United Kingdom , it charted at number 27 , and number 26 in Scotland . In Ireland , the song peaked at number 37 . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Wendy Morgan . It displayed Roberts performing in a hall with dancers . Roberts performed the song for the first time at the 2011 T4 on the Beach , as well as various other chat shows . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Before embarking her solo career , Roberts was one fifth of British girl band Girls Aloud . Roberts claimed that she found the experience of going solo troubling . She revealed that she struggled to cope with life in the public eye and the constant media attention . In particular , she received negative attention concerning her image . The experience led her to start to develop her debut album , which , lyrically , reflected the difficult times she experienced in Girls Aloud . On " Beat of My Drum " , Roberts describes herself as a " baby in the corner " . Roberts helped to write all of the tracks on Cinderella 's Eyes , with the lyrics telling stories of things that happened in her life . " Beat of My Drum " was co @-@ written with Maya von Doll , Diplo and Dimitri Tikovoi . She stated that she had always wanted " Beat of My Drum " to be something different from the music that other pop singers were presenting in the charts . Roberts stated that " Beat of My Drum " is " a song everyone can sing and dance to " . Roberts stated that she felt the song had a " fun concept " with a British influence . 
 The song was originally recorded by Roberts and Tikovoi . However , the pair struggled to finish its production , with Roberts describing the process as something that " just wouldn 't work " . The incompletion of the song led to stress and illness for Roberts , and she decided to contact producer Diplo to work on the record . Discussing her choice in an interview for The Guardian , Roberts said that she only had one chance to get him to work with her and asked for his assistance . After Diplo reassured the singer that he would help , Roberts revealed that the situation was no longer in her hands and that she would wait for him to contact her with some progress . Despite her worries , she felt that " he just got it straight away " . Communications were strict between the pair , but when Roberts received Diplo 's finished production , she was too nervous to listen to it immediately . Instead , she burnt the track to a CD , and drove to a deserted field with her younger brother and sister , where she played the song loudly . After positive responses from her siblings , Roberts declared Diplo a " genius " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Beat of My Drum " is a dance @-@ pop track with themes of indie pop , and has been compared to the work of M.I.A. and Daphne & Celeste . The verses , choruses and bridge are all distinctively different ; the chorus consists of chants , the verses are spoken @-@ sung ( half <unk> half sung ) , and the bridge are dancehall themed . The bridge gathered comparisons to the music of Major Lazer , which it samples . The vocals are performed against sirens . Music journalist James Montgomery observed how the song " mashes together every notable pop moment from recent history " , pointing out the dancehall rhythms , drum breaks and " electro @-@ vocal tics " . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Beat of My Drum " was released with the on air on sale method on 3 June 2011 . Universal Music , the record company which owns Polydor , were releasing all singles under this format at the time of " Beat of My Drum " ' s release . The reason for this was to try and reduce the level of illegal downloading of music , a system that Roberts was not used to . As part of promoting singles in Girls Aloud , she was used to releasing a song after approximately six weeks of promotion , which included radio interviews , televised performances and print work . As a result , Roberts stated that that the new system was " very scary " as she was not used to releasing a song with comparatively little publicity , and worried about how her " Beat of My Drum " and subsequent singles would chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Beat of My Drum " was acclaimed by music critics . Robert Copsey for Digital Spy gave the song five out of five stars , saying that " Once named the least desirable member of Girls Aloud , the transformation of Nicola Roberts from pasty and awkward backing singer into glowing , haute couture pop songstress has been a magnificent spectacle . " Jeff Benjamin of Billboard called Roberts ' effort the most " intriguing " out of all the Girls Aloud solo efforts . He said that Roberts had potential for success in the United States , comparing the song to the work of such artists as M.I.A. , Robyn and Kelis . He asked readers to imagine that " a young M.I.A. – mixed with Robyn and band <unk> – went on a shopping spree to Urban Outfitters , started chanting " L ! O ! V ! E ! " and turned it all into a true summer anthem . " A writer from Popjustice noted that " Beat of My Drum " " hardly happened by accident " but that " it feels really carefree and spontaneous " , explaining " what we mean by that is that you can tell a lot of care and attention has gone into it " . 
 Dean Piper for the Daily Mirror called the song " fantastic " claiming that Roberts " means business with her debut solo material " , and saying he could not " get enough of the single " , calling it " classic pop , fresh and fantastic . " Michael Cragg for The Guardian compared the chanting chorus to that of Justice vs. Simian 's track , " We Are Your Friends " . He called it both " ridiculously cool and a bit naff " . In response to the general acclaim from critics , Roberts wished that the track would be well received amongst her peers , saying " I haven 't seen one bad review from the single or album samplers – it seems too good to be true . The response from critics has been amazing . It 's like being at school and being told ‘ well done ’ by the teachers but I want my classmates to like it too . I want the people at home to get something from the record . Then I 'll be doubly happy . " 
 After the leak of the Madonna track " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " in November 2011 critics such as David Kreps of Yahoo ! and fans alike noted similarities to the track and Roberts own " Beat of My Drum " The comparisons arose after the " cheerleader @-@ style " chorus is heard on the Madonna track as she chants the lyrics " L @-@ U @-@ V Madonna " whilst Roberts track features the lyrics " L.O.V.E / Dance to the beat of my drum / Dance to the beat of my drum . " A writer for the Daily Mirror commented on the comparison calling " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " " a poor variation on Nicola Roberts ’ Beat Of My Drum " and negatively commenting on the misspelling of " love " , which Madonna stylised as " l @-@ u @-@ v " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the end of 2011 , " Beat of My Drum " was voted number 25 on MTV 's 25 Best Songs of 2011 . James Montgomery wrote that the song was a " supremely saccharine single from erstwhile Girls Aloud member mashes together every notable pop moment in recent history , yet somehow manages to be better that the sum of its parts . That 's thanks mostly to the supercharged , sing @-@ a @-@ long chorus , where the whole thing comes together in a head @-@ spinning rush . She should go solo more often . " The song was also listed on Billboard magazine 's Best Songs of 2011 list at number 14 . " Beat of My Drum " was listed as The Guardian 's 14th best song . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The music video for " Beat of My Drum " directed by Wendy Morgan , who Roberts described as " focused and passionate " . The singer continued to say that because of this , she felt comfortable with her immediately . The music video and production was featured on the Through Nicola 's Eyes webisodes , in which Roberts stated that she found the production of the music video very stressful . Talking about the experience in an interview with MTV News , Roberts stated that " I 'm nervous and I 'm dreading the night before ... I know I 'm going to be like losing half a stone in weight overnight , so I 'm going to have to get myself into the zone . " Roberts attributed her stress on the set of the video to her time with Girls Aloud , as she had always recorded music videos with four other members ; this was the first time she had performed on her own . This meant that critical responses would only be aimed only at her . During the video shoot , Roberts further discussed the anxiety of a solo career claiming pressure from Morgan was making her feel uncomfortable . During the production , Roberts feared that feeling uncomfortable whilst shooting could have an overall negative effect on the video , explaining " You 've got to be strong and be professional and get through it , obviously enjoy it , but if you feel uncomfortable , you can 't look uncomfortable otherwise it 's not going to work " . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video opens with two men street dancing in a white hall , with speakers and chairs scattered around . Shots of an audience lead to Roberts walking to a microphone positioned on a stage before she starts lip @-@ synching , wearing a 1970s style outfit . After knocking over the microphone stand , Roberts performs a routine with three female back @-@ up dancers in front of multiple speakers . During the chorus , she dances with the same three dancers , whilst shots of men watching them are shown . Roberts then leads the three women through the hall before they perform a dance section in the bridge of the track . Three men marching in a small white room are shown , leading to a shot of Roberts marching alongside a marching band of drummers . She is then shown in a multi @-@ coloured sweater @-@ dress , stood atop a speaker and surrounded by dancers . Final shots show Roberts producing shapes of letters L , O , V , and E with cheerleaders . The video ends with Roberts casually interacting with her dancers . 
 A writer from MTV Buzzworthy stated they were " sold " on the concept ; The Daily Mail 's Jessica Satherley also responded well , noting that Roberts ' " adventurous dance moves certainly give her Girls Aloud pal Cheryl Cole a run for her money . " Daily Mail also reported that Perez Hilton liked the video ; in a Twitter comment , he said " I am dancing to the beat of my drum ! ! ! Just heard the song in full and I am LIVING for [ Roberts ' ] new single ! Vid looks HOT too ! ! " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Roberts performed " Beat of My Drum " for the first time at the 2011 T4 on the Beach in the United Kingdom . After her performance , the singer was asked how she felt it went , saying she had " forgotten what a crowd like that feels and looks like . I try not to get nervous – I don 't like to think about things too much beforehand , otherwise I worry too much . I like to deal with the situation when it happens . " A <unk> from Norfolk , Tom Povey , was picked to perform with her on stage after he was seen performing in a London pub . Povey , who performs with the stage name <unk> T , said it was the highlight of his career . Roberts also performed the song on British chat @-@ shows Daybreak and Paul O 'Grady Live . 
 = = Formats and track @-@ listings = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Beat of My Drum " debuted at number 27 on the UK Singles Chart , on 18 June 2011 . The following week , the single fell outside of the top 40 to number 64 , and fell to number 88 in its third week . However , the song rose to number 76 in its fourth week , and again to number 50 in its fifth . In Ireland , the song debuted and peaked at number 37 on the Irish Singles Chart on 9 June 2011 , whilst in Scotland the song debuted at number 26 on the issue date of 18 June 2011 . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Stadium of Light = 
 The Stadium of Light is an all @-@ seater football stadium in Sunderland , England and home to Sunderland A.F.C .. With space for 49 @,@ 000 spectators , the Stadium of Light has the sixth @-@ largest capacity of any English football stadium and the fifth @-@ largest Premier League stadium . The stadium primarily hosts Sunderland A.F.C. home matches . According to Sir Bob Murray then chairman of Sunderland F.C. the name Stadium of Light " was chosen for two main reasons ; namely as an ever @-@ lasting tribute to the region ’ s mine @-@ workers and proud industrial heritage and in the expectation that the stadium would be a guiding light in the future . The name is very much a symbolic link to the thousands of miners and Sunderland supporters that emerged from the darkness and into the light every day when they returned to the surface after working in the mine . " A Davy lamp monument stands at the entrance to reflect the coal mining industry that brought prosperity to the town . 
 As well as hosting Sunderland games , the stadium has hosted three matches for the England national football team , as well as one England under @-@ 20 football team match . With an original capacity of 42 @,@ 000 , it was expanded in 2002 to seat 49 @,@ 000 , and its simple design is expected to allow for redevelopments up to an eventual capacity of 66 @,@ 000 . The attendance record at the Stadium of Light is 48 @,@ 353 set on 13 April 2002 , when Sunderland played Liverpool with the visitors running out 1 – 0 winners . Along with hosting football matches , the stadium has played host to performers such as Beyoncé , Rihanna , Oasis , Take That , Kings of Leon and Coldplay . The ground also holds conference and banqueting suites , the Black Cats Bar , and a club shop selling Sunderland merchandise . 
 = = Planning and construction = = 
 Following the release of the Taylor Report in January 1990 , Sunderland was obliged to make plans to turn their Roker Park home into an all @-@ seater stadium . Roker Park was a ground that mainly consisted of standing terraces , and if converted into all @-@ seater it would have held far fewer spectators than before . Enclosed by residential streets on all sides , expansion was practically impossible . So , by 1991 , Sunderland chairman Bob Murray began investigating the possibility of relocation to a new stadium . 
 The front @-@ runner that emerged was a proposed stadium located on an area of land adjacent to the Nissan car plant . The 49 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater ground was labelled " the Wembley of the North " – a capacity that not even Manchester United 's Old Trafford exceeded until 1996 . The plans did not come to fruition . Shortly after the plans were announced in 1992 , Nissan launched an official objection , ultimately forcing Sunderland to abandon the idea . In 1995 , Sunderland put forward a plan to build a stadium on the former site of Wearmouth Colliery , which had closed in December 1993 . The area , on the north bank of the River Wear in the <unk> district of Sunderland , was only a few hundred yards from Roker Park , and close to the centre of the city . 
 In 1993 , Sunderland 's planned new stadium was on the shortlist for Euro 96 venues , as England had been named as hosts of the competition in May 1992 . However , it soon become clear that a new stadium in Sunderland would not be ready in time for the tournament . 
 On 13 November 1995 , the Sunderland chairman Bob Murray announced that the Tyne and Wear Development Corporation had approved plans for Sunderland to build a 34 @,@ 000 @-@ seater stadium on the site . 
 Ballast <unk> plc , a contracting company that had built the Amsterdam Arena , was contracted to build the stadium at an initial cost of £ 15 million . In June 1996 , as the planned capacity rose to more than 40 @,@ 000 , construction work began . The capacity was revised again in early 1997 , and the stadium was completed on time , with a capacity of 42 @,@ 000 . The stadium 's design allows possible expansion of a further tier ; completed expansion of the whole upper tier would produce a capacity of 63 @,@ 000 , although it is known that the stadium can expand to a maximum capacity of 84 @,@ 000 , this would never be exercised as the demand for space is at a minimum . During construction , the stadium had not adopted an official name , and had been known colloquially as the " Wearside Stadium " and " New Roker Park " . The name was eventually revealed as the Stadium of Light , a reference to a miner 's lamp ( the stadium is built on the site of the old Wearmouth Colliery , and many Sunderland fans have worked in the region 's mines ) . To emphasise the fact , a Davy lamp is located in front of the stadium 's ticket office , adjacent to the stadium . The stadium was opened on 30 July 1997 by Prince Andrew , Duke of York , with bands such as U2 , Status Quo , Upside Down and Kavana playing . To celebrate the opening of the stadium , Sunderland played a friendly against Ajax , which was drawn 0 – 0 . 
 The North Stand was extended in 2000 to bring the capacity to 49 @,@ 000 , costing the club a further £ 7 million , making the final cost of the stadium £ 23 million . On 18 July 2006 , a statue of 1973 FA Cup Final winning manager Bob Stokoe was unveiled . At the end of season Football League awards , the Stadium of Light was named the Best Away Ground , with other contenders including Crewe Alexandra 's Alexandra Stadium and Plymouth Argyle 's Home Park . Sunderland celebrated the tenth anniversary of the stadium with a pre @-@ season friendly against Juventus on 6 August 2007 ; the game was drawn 1 – 1 . 
 In November 2011 , the club announced that the away supporters ' section would be moved from the South Stand to the North Stand Upper from the beginning of the 2012 – 13 season . As a result , minor modifications to the ground will be necessary . 
 In December 2014 construction work began on a new 141 room Hilton Garden Inn hotel outside of the ground . It is due to open in spring 2016 . 
 A proposed 6 @,@ 000 capacity fanzone outside the South East Corner of the stadium is currently in the planning stage . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium is in the shape of a square bowl , and is separated into the West Stand , North Stand , East Stand ( formerly the Vaux Stand , the Carling Stand , and Fosters Stand respectively ) , and the South Stand ( also known as the Metro FM Stand ) . The West Stand includes the Premier Concourse which is the name of the upper tier , and a number of executive boxes . The North Stand also includes an upper tier , called the Strongbow Upper , which contained the exterior seating for the Black Cats Bar . When the away fans were relocated , the Black Cats Bar seating was relocated at the rear of the lower tier . 
 The pitch is several metres below the level of the ground outside the stadium . The pitch uses a lighting system from Stadium Grow Lighting to ensure the grass can grow at any time of year . The device controls various aspects of the pitch , including exposure to light , temperature , water , and air , to make the grass able to grow in any conditions . Away fans were seated in the west half of the South Stand when the ground opened in 1997 , but in 2012 , Ellis Short decided to move away fans to the Upper Tier of the North Stand The East Stand has the Sunderland emblem on the seats , while the North Stand has the slogan " Ha 'way The Lads " . The stadium also has a Davy lamp monument , and a statue of Bob Stokoe . The perimeter walls of the stadium incorporate a " Wall of Fame " feature , where names can be engraved into the bricks of the walls . The interior of the stadium holds a banqueting suite , which can seat from 460 to 600 people . The stadium also contains several conferencing suites , that can be hired for events . 
 = = International matches = = 
 As well as holding Sunderland games , the stadium has also hosted England matches . The stadium was one of several venues used as temporary home grounds for the England team while the redevelopment of Wembley Stadium took place . It hosted its first England game in 1999 , when they played Belgium in a friendly match , which England won 2 – 1 . It played host to its first competitive England match on 2 April 2003 , when they played Turkey in a Euro 2004 qualifying match , which England won 2 – 0 . The Stadium of Light also held an England under 20 match against Italy on 27 November 2002 , Italy beat England 5 – 3 . On 10 June 2003 it hosted England ’ s under @-@ 21 ’ s 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualification Group 7 match against Slovakia ’ s under @-@ 21 ’ s . The hosts beat the visitors 2 – 0 through Peter <unk> ’ s fortieth minute own goal and Phil <unk> ’ s eighty third minute goal with 11 @,@ 223 in attendance . 
 On 4 March 2016 it was announced that the Stadium of Light would host England for a friendly against Australia on 27 May 2016 as part of their preparations for Euro 2016 . The match finished in a 2 @-@ 1 victory for the hosts , with goals from Marcus <unk> ( on his international debut ) , Wayne Rooney and an own goal from Eric Dier . 
 = = = Matches = = = 
 = = Other uses = = 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 In October 2008 it was announced that the stadium would hold a concert on 10 June 2009 , featuring Oasis , with Kasabian , The Enemy and Reverend and the Makers as support acts , with the stadium housing roughly 60 @,@ 000 fans . On 5 and 6 June 2009 Take That started their nationwide ' Circus ' tour at the Stadium of Light . Pink performed a sell out show at the stadium on 11 June 2010 , with support from VV Brown , Butch Walker and City & Colour . 
 Take That returned to the stadium along with Robbie Williams on 27 May 2011 , supported by Pet Shop Boys . On this occasion Take That began their Progress Live tour in Sunderland , making the Stadium of Light the first venue to hear Take That perform as a five since 1995 . Originally only two dates were announced , however due to huge demand from fans two further dates were added at the Stadium of Light . Kings of Leon played at the stadium on 17 June 2011 as part of their nationwide tour across Britain . During the summer of 2012 , Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band , Coldplay and the Red Hot Chili Peppers performed at the stadium . On 30 October 2012 , it was announced that Bon Jovi would play at the stadium during the summer of 2013 . 
 On 20 June 2013 Rihanna performed a sold out show at the stadium as part of the European leg of her Diamonds World Tour . Rihanna was scheduled to return to the stadium during her Anti World Tour , but the concert was cancelled . 
 On 28 June 2016 Beyoncé performed to a sold out show at the stadium as part of her The Formation World Tour . 
 = = = Sunderland University = = = 
 The Stadium of Light currently hosts the annual graduation ceremony for the students of the University of Sunderland . The stadium won the RSVP magazine 's Most creative use of a sporting venue award in 2007 for its usage as the university 's graduation site . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest recorded league attendance at the Stadium of Light is 48 @,@ 353 set on 13 April 2002 for the Sunderland vs Liverpool game . The Stadium Attendance for non @-@ football games is around 60 @,@ 000 when Take That performed at Sunderland in 2009 . The lowest league attendance at the stadium was 22 @,@ 167 against Wigan Athletic on 2 December 2003 . The lowest ever attendance at the Stadium of Light was 11 @,@ 450 against Chester City in the League Cup 1st Round on 24 August 2004 . Sunderland won the match 3 – 0 . Sunderland 's largest margin of victory at the stadium was a 7 – 0 win over Oxford United during the 1998 – 99 promotion season . 
 The highest seasonal average at the stadium since it was opened was 46 @,@ 790 in the 2000 – 01 season while Sunderland were playing in the Premier League . The lowest average attendance at the Stadium of Light was 27 @,@ 119 in the 2003 – 04 season in Division One . The highest total seasonal attendance was recorded during the 1998 – 99 season when the aggregate was 890 @,@ 660 in a season where Sunderland were First Division champions , and League Cup semi @-@ finalists . The lowest seasonal aggregate at the Stadium of Light was 623 @,@ 741 in the 2003 – 04 season , the same season that the club were FA Cup and play off semi @-@ finalists . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Sunderland station , which is connected to London King 's Cross by services run by the Open Access operator Grand Central Railway , is located nearby to the stadium . The St Peter 's and Stadium of Light Metro stations were built as part of the Sunderland extension , both are quite near the stadium , though ironically St. Peter 's is a closer station to the ground than the Stadium of Light station . The Metro was extended into Sunderland in 2002 . A park and ride system is available on match days to allow spectators to park away from the stadium , and a new footbridge proposal has been put forward to link the stadium to the south bank of the river as part of the stadium park regeneration project . 
 = Outrageous Betrayal = 
 Outrageous Betrayal : The Dark Journey of Werner Erhard from est to Exile is a non @-@ fiction book written by freelance journalist Steven Pressman and first published in 1993 by St. Martin 's Press . The book gives an account of Werner H. Erhard 's early life as Jack Rosenberg , his exploration of various forms of self @-@ improvement techniques , and his foundation of Erhard Seminars Training " est " and later of Werner Erhard and Associates and of the Est successor course , " The Forum " . Pressman details the rapid financial success Erhard had with these companies , as well as controversies relating to litigation involving former participants in his courses . The work concludes by going over the impact of a March 3 , 1991 60 Minutes broadcast on CBS where members of Erhard 's family made allegations against him , and Erhard 's decision to leave the United States . 
 Representatives of Werner Erhard and of Landmark Education , the successor company to The Forum , regarded the book as being " defamatory " . There are no references or citations provided in the book . 
 = = Author = = 
 Pressman worked as a journalist after graduating from college in 1977 . He worked as a journalist for Orange City News , the Los Angeles Daily Journal , California Lawyer magazine , and Congressional Quarterly 's Weekly Report . During his time performing research for and writing Outrageous Betrayal , Pressman published articles for the Legal Times newspaper and wrote articles and served as a senior editor for California Republic . In 1993 , Pressman worked as a San Francisco @-@ based legal journalist for California Lawyer . 
 = = Research = = 
 In the " Acknowledgments " section of Outrageous Betrayal , Pressman wrote that he relied upon both named and unnamed sources for information in the book , in addition to " previously published accounts , court transcripts , depositions , and other documents in which various individuals have recounted earlier conversations " . In an article on fair use for Columbia Journalism Review , Pressman noted that he " gathered reams of written materials -- some of it private and confidential -- that were helpful in drawing a comprehensive portrait of my subject " . In the Daily Journal , Pressman wrote that legal counsel for the book 's publisher insisted on numerous changes to the book " in order to reduce , if not eliminate , the possibility of a successful suit for copyright infringement " . 
 By 1993 , Pressman and St. Martin 's Press had received approximately two dozen letters from Erhard 's attorney Walter Maksym , though Erhard 's representatives had yet to see the book itself . Maksym told the San Francisco Daily Journal in March 1993 that he wanted to " fact check the book " , because he believed that " this is a first @-@ time unknown author who apparently has interviewed only people who have negative things to say " , and stated " We have cautioned the publisher that they are responsible for the accuracy of the book . " Charlie Spicer , a senior editor at St. Martin 's Press , described the actions of Erhard 's representatives with regard to the book as " a desperate campaign by someone with something to hide " . The author himself made specific reference to his legal support , mentioning " the potential legal rapids that confront authors writing these days about controversial subjects " . 
 = = Contents = = 
 In Outrageous Betrayal , Steven Pressman gives a chronological account of Erhard 's life and businesses , from high @-@ school years through his formation of companies that delivered awareness training and the later controversies surrounding his business and family life . The book goes into detail regarding his early life as Jack Rosenberg and his name @-@ change to Werner Erhard , his move to California , and the initial inspirations behind the training that would become " est " . Pressman writes that Erhard took inspiration from the self @-@ help course Mind Dynamics , cybernetics , from the books Think and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill , and Psycho @-@ Cybernetics by Maxwell Maltz , and from Scientology and the writings of L. Ron Hubbard . He also notes how an attorney skilled in tax law helped Erhard in forming his first awareness @-@ training company , Erhard Seminars Training . 
 Pressman notes how Erhard and his businesses became successful within two years of foundation , and writes that his awareness @-@ training programs trained over half a million people in his courses and brought in tens of millions of dollars in revenue . The book then describes controversies relating to both Erhard 's businesses and his reported treatment of his family . Pressman also describes the successor company to Est , Werner Erhard and Associates , and Erhard 's decision to sell the " technology " of his course The Forum to his employees and to leave the United States . The book 's epilogue includes a firsthand account of a Landmark Forum seminar led by the former Est @-@ trainer Laurel <unk> in 1992 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 St. Martin 's Press first published Outrageous Betrayal in 1993 , and Random House published a second edition of the text in 1995 . 
 An analysis in Kirkus Reviews , noting the choice of title by the author , asserted that Pressman : " makes no pretense to objectivity here . " Kirkus Reviews criticized the book , saying " What the author dramatically fails to provide by bearing down on the negative ( to the extent that nearly all his informants denounce est and its founder ) is any real understanding of est 's <unk> of why they appealed so deeply to so many . " Paul S. Boyer , professor of history at the University of Wisconsin – Madison , reviewed the book in The Washington Post . Boyer wrote that the book " nicely recounts the bizarre tale " of Werner Erhard , saying " Pressman tells his fascinating story well . " However he also commented that the book gives " only the <unk> historical context " of est and its roots in societal experiences . 
 A review by Mary Carroll published in the American Library Association 's Booklist noted that the controversy surrounding Erhard was not new , but she wrote that " Pressman pulls the details together effectively . " Carroll went on to comment : " Outrageous Betrayal is a disturbing but fascinating object lesson in the power of charisma divorced from conscience . " Frances Halpern of the Los Angeles Times called the book a " damning biography " . 
 In 1995 , Outrageous Betrayal was cited in a report on the United States Department of Transportation by the United States House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations in a case unrelated to Erhard or Est . This was in reference to a Congressional investigation of Gregory May and controversial trainings given by his company Gregory May Associates ( GMA ) to the Federal Aviation Administration . The testimony given stated that , according to Outrageous Betrayal , a member of GMA 's board had been influenced by Erhard Seminars Training and the Church of Scientology . 
 Dan Wakefield , in his review of the book in " Tricycle : the Buddhist Review , " questioned Pressman 's primarily critical description of Erhard 's character . Wakefield suggested that one of the reasons the press or " media " paints a negative view is because " nobody in the media bothers to speak to the people who value in his programs . " Wakefield refers to a study done by opinion analyst Daniel <unk> in which " seven out of ten participants in The Forum found it to be ' one of their life 's most rewarding experiences , ' while 94 percent felt the program had ' practical ' and ' enduring ' value . " While Pressman describes the est training as " a mish @-@ mash of self @-@ help theories , common @-@ sense psychology , and dime @-@ store ideas of motivation , " Wakefield , who had experienced the est training personally states , " If I was " conned " by that " mish @-@ mash " when I did est in 1984 , I 'm grateful I was conned into losing the addiction to alcohol that had plagued me for a quarter of a century . " 
 = Texas Park Road 2 = 
 Park Road 2 ( PR 2 ) is a 1 @.@ 110 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 786 km ) road that connects Caddo Lake State Park to Farm to Market Road 2198 ( FM 2198 ) . Park Road 2 is located in Harrison County , in the northeastern region of the U.S. state of Texas . The Civilian Conservation Corps constructed the road in the 1930s , and the road was designated in 1939 . Most major roads inside the park carry the PR 2 designation . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PR 2 begins at its southern terminus , an intersection with FM 2198 , as an undivided , two @-@ lane , paved road . The highway proceeds north into Caddo Lake State Park , passing around the park headquarters building , and continuing towards cabin sites . The road proceeds north , past the cabins , and splits into a large loop . The route passes Saw Mill Pond , and a small parking lot for the pond , before continuing down a steep slope back to the beginning of the loop . The PR 2 designation also includes three small roads that serve the main park campgrounds . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1927 , a small area of land near Caddo Lake was donated to create a public park . In 1929 and later in 1931 Caddo Lake itself and some of the surrounding areas were designated by the state of Texas to become state parkland . Between 1933 and 1937 , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) rebuilt the park and created many of the park 's structures . The National Park Service designated <unk> designers Joe W. Westbrook and Fred R. <unk> , as well as others , to design the park 's road system . On September 26 , 1939 , approximately 2 @.@ 0 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the roads inside the park were designated as PR 2 . On August 15 , 1968 , a short road traveling from a boat @-@ launch ramp to the park boundary was removed from PR 2 , shortening the route by approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in the Caddo Lake State Park , Harrison County . 
 = Italian battleship Benedetto Brin = 
 Benedetto Brin was a Regina Margherita @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Italian Regia Marina between 1899 and 1905 . The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and was capable of a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Benedetto Brin saw combat in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 , including the bombardment of Tripoli in October 1911 . She was destroyed by an internal explosion during World War I in September 1915 , which killed over 450 of the ship 's crew . 
 = = Design = = 
 Benedetto Brin was 138 @.@ 65 meters ( 455 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 23 @.@ 84 m ( 78 ft ) and a draft of 9 m ( 30 ft ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 737 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 504 long tons ; 16 @,@ 245 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Benedetto Brin had a crew of 812 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with four 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with four 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in casemates in the superstructure , and twelve 6 in ( 152 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns , also in casemates in the side of the hull . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . The ship also carried a pair of 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns , two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and two 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) Maxim guns . Benedetto Brin was also equipped with four 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . The ship was protected with Harvey steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick , and the deck was 3 @.@ 1 in ( 79 mm ) thick . The conning tower and the casemate guns were also protected by 6 in of armor plating . The main battery guns had stronger armor protection , at 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 The ship was built by the Castellammare di Stabia shipyard . Her keel was laid down on 30 January 1899 , and the completed hull was launched on 7 November 1901 in the presence of the King and Queen of Italy , government officials , and the whole Italian Mediterranean squadron . Fitting out work lasted for the next four years , and she was completed on 1 September 1905 . It took so long primarily because of non @-@ delivery of material , particularly the heavy armor . After she entered active service , the ship was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron . The Squadron was usually only activated for seven months of the year in peacetime , which was occupied with training maneuvers , and the rest of the year the ships were placed in reserve . In 1907 , the Mediterranean Squadron consisted of Benedetto Brin , her sister Regina Margherita , and three of the Regina Elena @-@ class battleships . The ships participated in the annual maneuvers in late September and early October , under the command of Vice Admiral Alfonso di Brocchetti . Benedetto Brin remained in the active duty squadron through 1910 , by which time the fourth Regina Elena @-@ class ship was completed , bringing the total number of front @-@ line battleships to six . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War Benedetto Brin was assigned to the 1st Division of the 2nd Squadron , along with her sister and the two Ammiraglio di Saint Bon @-@ class battleships . Benedetto Brin served as the squadron flagship of Vice Admiral <unk> . In early October , she arrived off Tripoli to relieve Roma on blockade duty outside the port . On 3 – 4 October , she participated in the bombardment of the fortifications protecting Tripoli . The Italian fleet used their medium @-@ caliber guns to preserve their ammunition for the heavy guns . Turkish counter @-@ battery fire was completely ineffective . 
 On 13 April 1912 , Benedetto Brin and the rest of the Squadron sailed from Tobruk to the Aegean Sea to rendezvous with the 1st Squadron . The two squadrons met off Stampalia on 17 April . The next day , the fleet steamed into the northern Aegean and cut several Turkish submarine telegraph cables . Most of the ships of the Italian fleet then bombarded the fortresses protecting the Dardanelles in an unsuccessful attempt to lure out the Turkish fleet . While they were doing this , Regina Margherita , Benedetto Brin , and two torpedo boats were detached to cut additional cables between Rhodes and Marmaris . In July , Benedetto Brin and the rest of the Division had withdrawn to Italy to replace worn @-@ out gun barrels , along with other repairs . Also in 1912 , the ship had four 3 @-@ inch guns added , increasing her battery from 20 to 24 pieces . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by April 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers which it did in May . The primary naval opponent for the duration of the war was the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ; the Naval Chief of Staff , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , planned a distant blockade with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids . The heavy ships of the Italian fleet would be preserved for a potential major battle in the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet should emerge from its bases . As a result , the ship 's career during the war was limited . In addition to the cautious Italian strategy , Benedetto Brin — long @-@ since obsolescent — was reduced to a training ship in the 3rd Division , along with her sister ship . On 27 September 1915 , Benedetto Brin was destroyed in a huge explosion in the harbor of Brindisi , the result of Austro @-@ Hungarian sabotage . A total of 8 officers and 379 ratings survived but 454 members of the crew , including Rear @-@ Admiral Rubin de <unk> died . Two of the ship 's 12 @-@ inch guns were salvaged from the wreck and were reused as coastal guns protecting Venice . 
 = Aboriginal title in the Marshall Court = 
 The Marshall Court ( 1801 – 1835 ) issued some of the earliest and most influential opinions by the Supreme Court of the United States on the status of aboriginal title in the United States , several of them written by Chief Justice John Marshall himself . However , without exception , the remarks of the Court on aboriginal title during this period are dicta . Only one indigenous litigant ever appeared before the Marshall Court , and there , Marshall dismissed the case for lack of original jurisdiction . 
 Fletcher v. Peck ( 1810 ) and Johnson v. M 'Intosh ( 1823 ) , the first and the most detailed explorations of the subject by Marshall , respectively , both arose out of collusive lawsuits , where land speculators presented an artificial case and controversy in order to elicit the desired precedent . In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia ( 1831 ) and Worcester v. Georgia ( 1832 ) , the dicta of Marshall and the dissenting justices embraced a far broader view of aboriginal title . 
 Johnson involved a pre @-@ Revolutionary private conveyances from 1773 and 1775 ; Mitchell v. United States ( 1835 ) involved 1804 and 1806 conveyances in Florida under Spanish rule . However , in both cases , the Marshall Court continued to apply the rule that aboriginal title was inalienable , except to The Crown . This <unk> principle — whether embodied by the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , the Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783 , the Nonintercourse Acts of 1790 , 1793 , 1796 , 1799 , 1802 , or 1833 , or the federal common law — remains the crux of the modern Indian land claim litigation . 
 Several other cases involved disputes between non @-@ Indians holding land grants from different states or state nonintercourse acts ; federal courts had subject @-@ matter jurisdiction over such disputes as " Controversies . . . between Citizens of the same State claiming Lands under Grants of different States . " For example , Preston v. Browder ( 1816 ) , Danforth 's Lessee v. Thomas ( 1816 ) , and Danforth v. Wear ( 1824 ) involved conflicting land grants from the states of North Carolina and Tennessee . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Earlier Supreme Court decisions = = = 
 Sims ' Lessee v. Irvine ( 1799 ) was the first Supreme Court decision to discuss aboriginal title ( albeit briefly ) , and the only such decision before the Marshall Court . The Court found ejectment jurisdiction over certain lands , notwithstanding the defendant 's claim ( in the alternative to the claim that the defendant himself held title ) that the lands were still held in aboriginal title because : 
 Without confessing the aboriginal title of the Indian tribes , it is enough for the lessor of the Plaintiff to allege . . . that before the year 1779 , they had abandoned and relinquished all the lands . . . and that in pursuance of treaties , they have since receded very distantly from that boundary . Lands may be acquired by conquest ; and a relinquishment , in consequence of hostilities , is tantamount to conquest . 
 = = = State court decisions = = = 
 The " first known American case to address the issue " of the validity of state land grands to land over which the aboriginal title had not been extinguished was Marshall v. Clark ( Va . 1791 ) , decided by the Virginia Supreme Court . The plaintiff was John Marshall 's father , Thomas Marshall , challenging ( on behalf of the state militia 's claim to the same land ) the validity of a land grant to Revolutionary War veteran George Rogers Clark . Marshall argued that the grant could not be valid because the aboriginal title was not extinguished ; the Virginia Supreme Court disagreed : 
 The Indian title did not impede . . . the power of the legislature to grant the land . [ The grantee ] must risque the event of the Indian claim , and yield to it , if finally established , or have the benefit of a former or future extinction thereof . 
 The Pennsylvania Supreme Court and Tennessee Supreme Court soon issued opinions to the same effect , holding that states could grant land that the federal government had not yet purchased from Indians . Such transactions , already common , increased in the wake of these decisions ; the assumption was that the Indians held fee simple to their land , but that future executory interests could be sold , representing a promise of the state to transfer the land should it ever come into their possession . 
 A second , competing view was that the Indians possessed only a possessory right of occupancy , not fee simple to their land . " The first reported American court decision holding that unsold Indian land was owned by the government , subject only to the lesser right of ' possession ' or ' occupancy ' held by Indians " was Strother v. Cathey ( N.C. 1807 ) , decided by the North Carolina Supreme Court . There , the North Carolina court decided that the fee title to the land was held by the state , subject to the tribe 's right of occupancy , and that — while the federal government could terminate that right occupancy — the federal government could not acquire fee title by doing so . 
 In Jackson v. Hudson ( N.Y. 1808 ) held that the nature of Indian title was an undecided question in New York , and avoided deciding the issue because neither party claimed its chain of title traced to Indians . The next term , when a party before the court claimed to derive title deeds from Indian sellers , the New York court held that such deeds were insufficient in Van Gorden v. Jackson ( N.Y. 1809 ) : 
 Though Indian deeds were obtained for the purpose of proving that the rights of the natives were extinguished , [ such deeds ] were never admitted , as of themselves , to be a source of legal title . [ Indian deeds ] were presented to government as an inducement to extend its boundary by grant , but the firm and unbending principle has uniformly been , that all titles must be derived , either <unk> or immediately , actually or presumptively , from the crown . 
 Following Fletcher v. Peck ( 1810 ) , the latter view prevailed over the former in additional state courts . Other state courts disagreed . 
 = = Opinions = = 
 = = = Fletcher v. Peck ( 1810 ) = = = 
 Oral arguments 
 Fletcher v. Peck ( 1810 ) is famous as the " first of the great nineteenth @-@ century Contract Clause cases " ; Marshall 's majority , at the very end , " included only two sentence about the Indians , but they would prove to be influential . " Fletcher was " [ t ] he first of the Marshall Court decisions to consider the relative rights of an Indian people and a state government in aboriginal lands , " and " the first time the Supreme Court of the United States was called on to consider this issue . " In the oral argument , Peck 's lawyer " launched into the first discussion of the nature of Indian landownership ever to take place before the U.S. Supreme Court " : 
 What is the Indian title ? It is a mere occupancy for the purpose of hunting . It is not like our tenures ; they have no idea of a title to the soil itself . It is overrun by them , rather than inhabited . It is not a true and legal possession . Vattel , b . 1 . § 81 @.@ p . 37 @.@ and § 209 @.@ b . 2 . § 97 . Montesquieu , b . 18 @.@ c . 12 . Smith 's Wealth of Nations , b . 5 @.@ c . 1 . It is a right not to be transferred but extinguished . It a right regulated by treaties , not by deeds of conveyance . It depends upon the law of nations , not upon municipal right . 
 Although the power to extinguish this right by treaty , is vested in congress , yet Georgia had a right to sell subject to the Indian claim . The point has never been decided in the courts of the United States , because it has never before been questioned . 
 Peck 's lawyer raised the point in response to a question from the bench , almost certainly from Justice Johnson . Vattel , Montesquieu , and Smith all had two things in common : they falsely believed that Native Americans did not practice agriculture ; and , they had never travelled to North America . Marshall did not cite these sources in his opinion in Fletcher , but he would cite all three in Johnson . 
 Marshall 's majority 
 Marshall addressed the arguments raised by Peck 's lawyers and Johnson 's dissent at the very end of his majority opinion : 
 It was doubted whether a state can be <unk> in fee of lands , subject to the Indian title , and whether a decision that they were <unk> in fee , might not be construed to amount to a decision that their grantee might maintain an ejectment for them , notwithstanding that title . 
 The majority of the court is of opinion that the nature of the Indian title , which is certainly to be respected by all courts , until it be legitimately extinguished , is not such as to be absolutely repugnant to seisin in fee on the part of the state . 
 Marshall 's formulation is actually a compromise : responding to Johnson 's concern that Georgian land owners with such grants could evict Indians , while still trying to preserve the validity of the dominant form of land grant in the United States at the time . In doing so , Marshall in effect adopted the newer view of Indian title promulgated in state courts for two decades that the Indians did not own fee simple to their lands . Marshall 's opinion did not spell out which methods could legitimately extinguish Indian title , or even whether the power resided with the state or federal government . 
 Johnson 's dissent 
 <unk> were rare on the Marshall Court ; Justice William Johnson dissented more frequently than most , but still quite rarely by modern standards . First , although Johnson agreed that the Georgia legislature could not revoke its land grant , he located such a prohibition in natural law , rather than the Contract Clause . More substantively , Johnson 's opinion advocated the older view ( from the state courts and colonial custom ) that Indians held fee simple to their land , and that state land grants constituted a future executory interest . 
 Later history 
 In the oral arguments for Meigs v. M <unk> 's Lessee ( 1815 ) , Marshall asked a litigant about the validity of state grants before the extinguishment of aboriginal title ; before the lawyer could finish responding that the question did not arise , Justice Joseph Story interrupted : " That question has been decided in the case of Fletcher v. Peck . " Two years later , riding the Massachusetts Circuit , Story cited Fletcher for the proposition that states owned Indian land in fee simple before extinguishment . Justice Bushrod Washington , riding in Pennsylvania gave the same as a jury instruction . Litigants in the Supreme Court and state high courts cited Fletcher to similar effect . 
 = = = Fairfax 's Devisee v. Hunter 's Lessee ( 1813 ) = = = 
 Fairfax 's Devisee v. Hunter 's Lessee ( 1813 ) considered the rights of British aliens , holding title from a Royal grant , defending against an ejectment action pursuant to a Virginia statute . The Court ( with Justices Marshall and Todd absent ) held that the treaty between the United States and Great British , ratified subsequent to the ejectment judgement in the lower court but prior to the Virginia Supreme Court decision , should have prevented the ejectment . 
 = = = Preston v. Browder ( 1816 ) = = = 
 Preston v. Browder ( 1816 ) upheld North Carolina 's nonintercourse act ; both the statute and the conduct in question dated to the post @-@ Revolution , pre @-@ Articles of Confederation period . There , a plaintiff had acquired land in the western territory of North Carolina ( part of Tennessee at the time of suit ) in 1778 in violation of a 1777 North Carolina statute . The circuit court for the district of East Tennessee denied the plaintiff ejectment against another non @-@ Indian , and the Supreme Court affirmed the ruling . Justice Thomas Todd , writing for a unanimous court , said the follow about aboriginal title : 
 North Carolina , at the time of passing this act , . . . had , but a short time before , shaken off her colonial government , and assumed a sovereign independent . . . . [ D ] uring the colonial system , . . . the citizens were restrained and prohibited from extending their settlements to the westward , so as to encroach on lands set apart for the Indian tribes . . . . [ By treaty , ] a boundary between the state and the said Indians was established . [ The North Carolina nonintercourse act of November 1777 restriction the acquisition of lands ] ‘ which have accrued , or shall accrue , to this state , by treaty or conquest . ’ . . . . It is not to be presumed , that the legislature intended , so shortly after making the treaty , to violate it , by permitting entries to be made west of the line fixed by the treaty . . . . [ T ] he legislative intention , to prohibit and restrict entries from being made on lands reserved for Indian tribes , may be discerned . [ Amendments to the act passed after the acquisition in question ] expressly forbid [ ] the entering or surveying any lands within the Indian hunting grounds , recognises the western boundary as fixed by the above @-@ mentioned treaty , and declares void all entries and surveys which have been , or shall thereafter be made within the Indian boundary . 
 = = = Danforth 's Lessee v. Thomas ( 1816 ) = = = 
 Danforth 's Lessee v. Thomas ( 1816 ) was a companion case to Preston v. Browder , involving a similar dispute ; this time , the relevant North Carolina statute was passed in 1783 , during the Articles of Confederation period . The Cherokee 's aboriginal title to the lands in question had been extinguished by the Treaty of Holston ( 1791 ) , and the plaintiff seeking ejectment had acquired a state land grant from North Carolina that same year ; the defendant held a state land grant from Tennessee issued in 1809 . The plaintiff 's land grant had been excluded from evidence , and the jury had thus returned a verdict for the defendant . The Justice Todd , again writing for a unanimous court , affirmed . The court was able to decide the case without reaching the question of aboriginal title : 
 Whether the legislature had the power , or intended to give the Indians a right of property in the soil , or merely the use and enjoyment of it , need not be inquired into , nor decided , by this court ; for it is perfectly clear , that the [ 1983 act ] prohibits all persons from making entries or surveys for any lands within the bounds set apart for the Cherokee Indians , and declares all such entries and grants thereupon , if any should be made , utterly void . [ The defendant argues ] that the mere extinguishment of the Indian title did not subject the land to appropriation , until an act of the legislature authorized or permitted it . Whatever doubts this court might entertain on this subject , were they now construing these laws upon the first impression , that doubt would be removed [ by North Carolina case law ] . 
 = = = Johnson v. M 'Intosh ( 1823 ) = = = 
 Johnson v. M 'Intosh ( 1823 ) , thirteen years after Fletcher , was the Supreme Court 's " first detailed discussion of the subject " of indigenous title , today " remembered as the origin of the right of occupancy . " Johnson remains " perhaps the best known of the Court 's judgments on aboriginal title . " 
 The primary effect of the Johnson decision was to remove the cloud of title , or the title to property , over the large number of state land grants on land which the indigenous title had not yet been taken away . Many quotes from Johnson have reverberated in legal quotations and law review titles for 200 years , including : " Conquest gives title which the Courts of the conquer cannot deny , whatever the private and speculative opinions of individuals may be , respecting the original justice of the claim . " 
 Because the pre @-@ Revolutionary transactions had taken place after the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , Marshall could have decided the case simply by reliance on the proclamation ; instead , he based his ruling on custom , looking equally to the law of nations of all colonial powers , not just the British . 
 Building upon the brief afterthought in the Fletcher decision , the Johnson decision added to the idea that indigenous nations did not hold fee simple , or unconditional ownership of their lands with the right to control or transfer them as they chose . Justice Johnson , still on the court , did not dissent again . The influence of the Johnson became grew during the " golden age of American legal treatises " that followed ; the case figured prominently in , inter alia , James Kent 's Commentaries on American Law ( c . 1820 ) and Joseph Story 's Commentaries on the Constitution ( 1833 ) . 
 = = = Danforth v. Wear ( 1824 ) = = = 
 Danforth v. Wear ( 1824 ) , like Preston v. Browder and Danforth 's Lessee v. Thomas , involved conflicting land grants issued by North Carolina and Tennessee . The plaintiff 's North Carolina land grant included both " a tract of country over which the Indian title had been extinguished " and " a large body of land , over which the Indian title existed at the time of the survey , but has since been extinguished . " Once again , the trial court had deemed the plaintiff 's grant void and excluded it from evidence ; the Court observed that such a ruling " could only be sustained upon the ground that it was wholly void , or wholly inadmissible in that cause . For if the grant was good but for an acre of the land claimed in the action , the Court could not have withheld it from the jury . " 
 Justice William Johnson delivered the opinion of the unanimous court . The Court cited Preston and Danforth 's Lessee for the proposition that " the inviolability of the Indian territory is fully recognised . " However , the Court reversed the judgment below and held that the grant should have been admissible in relation to the land over which aboriginal title had been extinguished at the time of the survey . 
 = = = Harcourt v. Gaillard ( 1827 ) = = = 
 In Harcourt v. Gaillard ( 1827 ) , a case involving British land grants , the Court distinguished between conquest and change of sovereignty . As to conquest , the Court noted : " War is a suit prosecuted by the sword ; and where the question to be decided is one of original claim to territory , grants of soil made flagrante bello by the party that fails , can only derive validity from treaty stipulations . It is not necessary here to consider the rights of the conqueror in case of actual conquest ; since the views previously presented put the acquisition of such rights out of this case . " Yet , the Court continued to recognize the principle that " a change of sovereignty produces no change in individual property , yet it <unk> to them only a modified validity . " The relevant statute provided that British land grants that were not accompanied by possession must be filed with a commission , and the Harcourt grant was not . 
 = = = Cherokee Nation v. Georgia ( 1831 ) = = = 
 Background 
 Fletcher and Johnson had established one principle that Native Americans soon hoped to be able to enforce : that a state government could not extinguish aboriginal title . William Wirt , former U.S. attorney general , tried three times in three years to get a case regarding Cherokee removal to the Supreme Court . In December 1830 , Marshall granted a writ of error to a criminal case regarding a murder committed by a Cherokee , George Tassel , against another tribe member on Cherokee land , but Georgia executed him and mooted the case before Marshall could hear oral arguments . 
 Marshall 's majority 
 In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia , Wirt filed directly in the Supreme Court seeking to invoke the Court 's original jurisdiction to void the 1820s Georgia statutes declared unconstitutional , contrary to treaties between the U.S. and the Cherokees , or contrary to the Nonintercourse Act of 1802 . Marshall decided that the Cherokee were a " domestic dependent nation , " not a foreign state , and thus dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction . 
 Thompson and Story 's dissent 
 Justices Smith Thompson and Joseph Story dissented on the jurisdictional question , and thus reached the merits , siding with the Cherokee . According to Richard Peters , the court reporter , this dissent was written with the explicit encouragement and assistance of Marshall . Moreover , Marshall " encourage [ d ] Peters to publish a separate report " that included the dissents , oral arguments , treaties , and the opinion of James Kent for the Cherokees . 
 Thompson , with whom Story concurred , noted that although the U.S. had promised in a compact with Georgia to extinguish the aboriginal title , it had not done so yet , and thus : " [ T ] he state has not even a <unk> interest in the soil . . . . [ U ] <unk> this is done , the state can have no claim to the lands . " If the U.S. never extinguished the title , Thompson opined , Georgia could not force the U.S. to specifically perform the compact . Thompson would have enjoined the Georgia laws because : " The complaint is not of a mere private trespass , admitting of compensation in damages ; but of injuries which go to the total destruction of the whole right of the complainants . " 
 = = = Worcester v. Georgia ( 1832 ) = = = 
 Worcester v. Georgia ( 1832 ) was the third case by Wirt , appealing the conviction of Samuel Worcester for illegally residing on Cherokee lands without a license from the state . Although the holding of the opinion reached only the question of criminal jurisdiction , its dicta was far more pro @-@ Indian than Fletcher or Johnson : 
 The extravagant and absurd idea , that the feeble settlements made on the sea coast , or the companies under whom they were made , acquired legitimate power by them to govern the people , or occupy the lands from sea to sea , did not enter the mind of any man . They were well understood to convey the title which , according to the common law of European sovereigns respecting America , they might rightfully convey , and no more . This was the exclusive right of purchasing such lands as the natives were willing to sell . The crown could not be understood to grant what the crown did not affect to claim , nor was it so understood . 
 Of course , the " extravagant and absurd " idea was one " that Marshall himself had played an important role in propagating nine years earlier in Johnson v. M 'Intosh . " Worcester eventually resulted in the freeing of Samuel Worcester , but the decision did not invalidate any state or federal law , or impose any lingering obligation on the state or federal government . Three years later , the U.S. government signed the Treaty of New Echota ( 1835 ) with a " group of dissent Cherokees " and forced them on what became known as the " trail of tears . " 
 = = = United States v. <unk> ( 1833 ) = = = 
 United States v. <unk> ( 1833 ) involved a Spanish land grant in Florida ( and a non @-@ indigenous plaintiff ) . Marshall , for a unanimous Court , reaffirmed the principle that ( at least as far as European property owners — who gained U.S. citizenship — were concerned ) the transfer of sovereignty — in Florida , from Spain to the United States — did not disturb private property rights . Marshall wrote : 
 [ I ] t is very unusual , even in cases of conquest , for the conqueror to do more than to displace the sovereign and assume dominion over the country . The modern usage of nations , which has become law , would be violated ; that sense of justice and of right which is acknowledged and felt by the whole civilized world would be outraged , if private property should be generally confiscated , and private rights annulled . The people change their allegiance ; their relation to their ancient sovereign is dissolved ; but their relations to each other , and their rights of property , remain undisturbed . If this be the modern rule , even in cases of conquest , who can doubt its application to the case of an amicable cession of territory ? Had Florida changed its sovereign by an act containing no stipulation respecting the property of individuals , the right of property in all those who became subjects or citizens of the new government would have been unaffected by the change ; it would have remained the same as under the ancient sovereign . . . . A cession of territory is never understood to be a cession of the property belonging to its inhabitants . The king cedes that only which belonged to him ; lands he had previously granted , were not his to cede . Neither party could so understand the cession ; neither party could consider itself as attempting a wrong to individuals , condemned by the practice of the whole civilized world . The cession of a territory , by its name , from one sovereign to another , conveying the compound idea of surrendering at the same time the lands and the people who inhabit them , would be necessarily understood to pass the sovereignty only , and not to interfere with private property . 
 Marshall interpreted the provision of the Florida land act requiring Spanish grants to be filed within one year narrowly . Marshall stated : “ It is impossible to suppose , that Congress intended to forfeit real titles , not exhibited to their commissioners within so short a period . ” He interpreted this provision to mean only that the commissioners could not grant title after one year , not that the property rights held by virtue of the Spanish grants were void . 
 = = = Mitchel v. United States ( 1835 ) = = = 
 Mitchel v. United States ( 1835 ) , authored by Justice Henry Baldwin , was the last Marshall Court opinion on aboriginal title . At issue was 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 00 acres of land in Florida alienated to the Spanish crown in 1804 and 1806 , and then granted to private parties . Baldwin , for a unanimous court , upheld those transactions . Noting that the Royal Proclamation of 1763 applied while Florida was under British rule from 1763 to 1783 , Baldwin held that Spanish law ( which he perceived to be materially the same as British law in this respect ) governed the extinguishment of aboriginal title when the territory reverted to Spanish rule from 1783 to 1821 . 
 = = International legacy = = 
 According to Canadian lawyer John Hurley , the Marshall Court 's decisions regarding aboriginal title " established the fundamental principles of aboriginal rights by which courts of many jurisdictions have guided themselves ever since . " According to Hurley : 
 Delivered over a period of thirty @-@ five years , the judgements bear witness to the evolution of the Marshall Court 's thinking on aboriginal rights , culminating in an appraisal of them as full rights of beneficial ownership of the land and internal self @-@ government . In order to understand the Marshall Court 's assessment of aboriginal rights , it is essential to appreciate the progression in its treatment of the topic . Failure to do so , by placing excessive weight on the earlier and neglecting the later of these decisions , has sometimes led to distortions of the Marshall Court 's views on aboriginal rights . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 According to Hurley , " [ t ] he Marshall Court 's judgments on aboriginal rights are of particular importance for Canada " because , as emphasized by decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada , " they were founded upon a policy towards indigenous peoples and their lands applied consistently by the imperial British government throughout its North American dominions . " Hurley argues : 
 Given the repeated reliance upon the Marshall Court 's decisions by Canadian courts in adjudicating aboriginal claims , the authority of those decisions in Canada must now be accepted as certain . They have been so often applied by the Canadian courts that they may now be considered as virtually incorporated into Canadian common law . 
 Hurley concludes : 
 Elegant in language and persuasive in logic , the five classic judgments [ Fletcher v. Peck , Johnson v. M 'Intosh , Cherokee Nation v. Georgia , Worcester v. Georgia , and Mitchel v. United States ] of the Marshall Court on aboriginal rights remain as compelling today was when they were written . They provide simple and workable principles for the definition and reconciliation of respective Indian and Canadian state rights of territory and government . These principles flow from the Court 's consideration of the law of nations and British colonial policy regarding relations with the aboriginal peoples of North America . They are not specific to the constitutional context of the United States of America , but apply equally within Canada . 
 = Jeffrey Hammonds = 
 Jeffrey Bryan Hammonds ( born March 5 , 1971 in Plainfield , New Jersey ) is an American former professional baseball player . Hammonds was an outfielder and played for the Baltimore Orioles ( 1993 – 1998 ) , Cincinnati Reds ( 1998 – 1999 ) , Colorado Rockies ( 2000 ) , Milwaukee Brewers ( 2001 – 2003 ) , San Francisco Giants ( 2003 – 2004 ) and the Washington Nationals ( 2005 ) in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Before playing professionally , Hammonds played for Scotch Plains @-@ Fanwood High School in Scotch Plains , New Jersey and Stanford University . 
 At Stanford , Hammonds was named an All @-@ American . The Orioles selected Hammonds with the fourth overall selection of the 1992 MLB Draft . Though he was seen as one of the best prospects in baseball , injuries limited his performance with Baltimore . After he was traded to Cincinnati and then to Colorado , he emerged with the Rockies in 2000 , and was selected to appear at the 2000 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game . He signed a three @-@ year , $ 21 @.@ 75 million contract with the Milwaukee Brewers that off @-@ season , but continued to struggle with injuries . He had a resurgence with the Giants in 2003 , after he was released by the Brewers , but struggled with the Giants in 2004 and Nationals in 2005 before retiring . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Hammonds was born in Scotch Plains , New Jersey , He attended Scotch Plains @-@ Fanwood High School , where he played for the school 's baseball team . After high school , Hammonds was a ninth @-@ round draft pick of the Toronto Blue Jays in the 1989 Major League Baseball Draft , though he did not sign . He reported that he never considered going professional at that point , as his parents insisted he attend college , and that Hammonds ' brother , who had signed with the Pittsburgh Pirates out of high school , suffered a career @-@ ending injury while playing in minor league baseball . 
 Hammonds had scholarship offers to attend Duke University , the University of Notre Dame , and Stanford University and play college baseball . He chose to attend Stanford University , where he played for the Stanford Cardinal baseball team that competed in the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference ( Pac @-@ 10 ) in the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's ( NCAA ) Division I. At Stanford , Hammonds broke the Pac @-@ 10 single season stolen base record as a freshman , stealing 102 bases in 174 career games . Hammonds was awarded NCAA Freshman of the Year and voted All @-@ College World Series in 1990 and was also named an All @-@ American in that year . 
 During the 1992 season , Hammonds batted .380 with 33 stolen bases in 47 games , and was again named an All @-@ American . He again led the Cardinal to the 1992 College World Series . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 Before the 1992 Major League Baseball Draft , Hammonds indicated that he would sign if offered a $ 1 @.@ 8 million signing bonus , which caused Hammonds to fall to the fourth overall selection , where the Baltimore Orioles selected Hammonds with their first @-@ round draft pick . Frank Robinson , then the Orioles ' assistant general manager ( GM ) , met Hammonds at that year 's College World Series while scouting , and advised Orioles GM Doug Melvin to pick Hammonds . The Orioles , regarded as frugal , held a hard line with Hammonds in negotiations , refusing to give a signing bonus as large as $ 1 million . 
 Hammonds did not play professionally in 1992 as he competed for the United States national baseball team in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona . He faced a two @-@ month road trip across sixteen states by bus , more travel combined with training than employed by any professional team . Hammonds struggled with the national team initially , but agreed to sign with the Orioles in July 1992 , receiving a $ 975 @,@ 000 signing bonus , the largest of any player chosen in that draft . Upon signing , his hitting improved . 
 = = = Top prospect : Baltimore Orioles ( 1992 – 1996 ) = = = 
 Without having played a single professional game , Baseball America rated Hammonds as the 19th best prospect in baseball . He made his professional debut in 1993 with the Bowie Baysox of the Class @-@ AA Eastern League , where he batted .283 , at which point he was promoted to the Rochester Red Wings of the Class @-@ AAA International League , where he batted .311 . Hammonds received a promotion to the Orioles on June 25 , becoming the first player chosen in the 1992 MLB draft to reach the majors , where his debut was greeted with fanfare and high expectations . He batted .305 in 105 at @-@ bats with the Orioles that season , however he suffered a pinched nerve in May , and a neck injury in August . The Orioles ended his season prematurely to allow Hammonds to recover . 
 Thought of as a potential candidate for the American League Rookie of the Year Award , at this point Baseball America rated Hammonds the third best prospect in all of baseball . Hammonds suffered a knee injury during the 1994 season but opted to continue playing despite being told he needed reconstructive knee surgery , with his subsequent performances limited as a result . When the Orioles needed to reduce their roster from 28 players to 25 in May 1995 , Hammonds , who started the season batting 4 @-@ for @-@ 19 , was optioned back to Bowie . 
 After struggling with the Orioles early in the 1996 season , batting .237 in 56 games , he was demoted back to Rochester in June . The Orioles included Hammonds in numerous trade proposals that summer , but eventually held on to him . During his spell with Rochester Hammonds became more selective in his approach at the plate , and was recalled to the Orioles . Hammonds injured his knee in August and though he returned to the Orioles in September , they left him off their postseason roster , as they asserted that they felt Hammonds was rusty . Hammonds believed that the snub meant he should be traded , but stopped short of demanding a trade . 
 = = = Searching for success : Baltimore Orioles and Cincinnati Reds ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Formerly considered a top prospect in the Orioles organization , Hammonds returned to them in 1997 with his role in the organization unclear . In past spring trainings Hammonds had always practiced with the starters ; in 1997 , the Orioles alternated him between the starters , who practiced in the stadium , and the minor leaguers and non @-@ roster players , who practiced in fields behind the stadium near an airport runway . New GM Pat Gillick didn 't deny that the Orioles could trade him if Hammonds didn 't maximize his talent , though he called a potential trade a " last resort " . Despite this Hammonds had a successful season , playing in 118 games that season , receiving 397 at @-@ bats . He scored 71 runs , had 105 hits , including 19 doubles , three triples , and 21 home runs , and recorded 55 RBI . 
 By 1998 , Hammonds and the Orioles were hoping he would achieve more consistency . With the threat of facing a salary arbitration hearing , the Orioles approached him with the idea of working out an agreement on a multi @-@ year contract extension . Hammonds agreed , and signed a three @-@ year , $ 7 million contract before the 1998 season . Hammonds felt that this was a strong commitment from the Orioles hierarchy , including Gillick , after which manager Ray Miller believed that this would allow Hammonds to focus on improving his skills . However , Hammonds suffered a back injury that returned him to the disabled list that year . 
 When Hammonds recovered , the Orioles traded him to the Cincinnati Reds for Willie Greene in August 1998 . Hammonds served as a backup outfielder for the Reds , though he batted .279 with 17 home runs and 41 RBIs in 123 games during the 1999 season . He had a three home run game on May 20 . After the season , the Reds traded Hammonds with Stan Belinda to the Colorado Rockies for Dante <unk> and $ 1 @.@ 9 million to make up for the differences in salaries , as the Reds believed the slugging <unk> could aid them in replacing Greg Vaughn . 
 = = = All @-@ Star season and multiyear contract : Colorado Rockies , Milwaukee Brewers ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In 2000 with the Colorado Rockies , Hammonds batted .335 with 20 home runs , 106 RBI , 14 stolen bases , in only 454 at bats . For his performance , he earned a spot on the 2000 National League All @-@ Star team roster . He trailed only teammate Todd Helton in batting average for the majority of the season , eventually finishing with the fourth @-@ highest batting average in the league , behind Helton , Moisés Alou , and Vladimir Guerrero . 
 After the season , the Rockies declined to offer Hammonds salary arbitration , making him a free agent . Due to concerns about Hammonds ' injury history , including 40 games missed due to injury in the 2000 season , the Rockies chose not to meet Hammonds ' financial demands . Before the 2001 season , the Milwaukee Brewers signed Hammonds to a three @-@ year , $ 21 @.@ 75 million contract , the largest contract the organization had approved to that date . However , injuries prevented Hammonds from approaching the All @-@ Star form he had shown with the Rockies . He suffered a shoulder injury in 2001 which required surgery and this limited him to 49 games played for the season . He returned with a hot start in the 2002 season , batting .324 as of June 5 , but he had a recurrence of the shoulder injury later in the season that returned him to the disabled list yet again . Hammonds then began the 2003 season on the disabled list , this time with a high ankle sprain . 
 = = = Struggles , resurgence , and injuries : San Francisco Giants and Washington Nationals ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = 
 The Brewers released Hammonds on June 4 , 2003 after he struggled in ten games , batting .158 . He signed with the San Francisco Giants at the end of June . They initially assigned him to the Class @-@ AAA Fresno Grizzlies of the Pacific Coast League , before promoting him on July 30 . He batted .277 with three home runs and 10 RBIs in 36 games during the second half of the 2003 season , and was selected for the Giants ' postseason roster over Marvin Benard and Eric Young where he batted 2 @-@ for @-@ 4 in Game 4 of the 2003 National League Division Series . Granted free agency at the end of the season , he re @-@ signed with the Giants for the 2004 season for $ 1 million , as the replacement for Jose Cruz , Jr . , who had left after becoming a free agent . However , Hammonds was unable to sustain his improved performance and the Giants released Hammonds that June , after he batted .211 with three home runs and six RBIs . 
 Hammonds then signed with the Washington Nationals organization on a minor league contract . He started the 2005 season with the New Orleans Zephyrs of the PCL , but was recalled to the Nationals on May 3 . He batted .219 with one RBI in thirteen games for the Nationals , before returning to the disabled list with an injured hamstring on May 22 . While rehabilitating the injury , Hammonds decided to retire rather than return to the minor leagues . 
 Though Hammonds had great natural talent , his injuries limited his career . Hammonds announced his retirement on June 10 , 2005 . In his thirteen @-@ year career in MLB , he batted .272 , 110 home runs , 824 hits , and 423 RBIs . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Hammonds lives in Weston , Florida with his three children . He is currently a scout for the San Diego Padres . He has interest in digital media , aiding baseball prospects , and working for the Major League Baseball Players Association . On February 6 , 2014 , Hammonds was hired by the players ' union as special assistant for player program development . 
 Hammonds ' older brother , Reginald , played minor league baseball for the Pittsburgh Pirates ' organization , reaching Class @-@ AAA before suffering a career @-@ ending injury . He enrolled at Northwestern University , graduated , became a stockbroker and aided Hammonds in his 1992 contract negotiations . 
 = Suillus luteus = 
 Suillus luteus is a bolete fungus , and the type species of the genus Suillus . A common fungus native to Eurasia , from the British Isles to Korea , it has been introduced widely elsewhere , including North and South America , southern Africa , Australia and New Zealand . Commonly referred to as slippery jack or sticky bun in English @-@ speaking countries , its names refer to the brown cap , which is characteristically slimy in wet conditions . The fungus , initially described as Boletus luteus by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 , is now classified in a different family as well as genus . Suillus luteus is edible , though not as highly regarded as other bolete mushrooms , and is commonly prepared and eaten in soups , stews or fried dishes . The slime coating , however , may cause indigestion if not removed before eating . 
 The fungus grows in coniferous forests in its native range , and pine plantations in countries where it has become naturalized . It forms symbiotic ectomycorrhizal associations with living trees by enveloping the tree 's underground roots with sheaths of fungal tissue . The fungus produces spore @-@ bearing fruit bodies , often in large numbers , above ground in summer and autumn . The fruit body cap often has a distinctive conical shape before flattening with age , reaching up to 13 cm ( 5 in ) in diameter . Like other boletes , it has tubes extending downward from the underside of the cap , rather than gills ; spores escape at maturity through the tube openings , or pores . The pore surface is yellow , and covered by a membranous partial veil when young . The pale stipe , or stem , measures up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) tall and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick and bears small dots near the top . Unlike most other boletes , it bears a distinctive membranous ring that is tinged brown to violet on the underside . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The slippery jack was one of the many species first described in 1753 by the " father of taxonomy " Carl Linnaeus , who , in the second volume of his Species Plantarum , gave it the name Boletus luteus . The specific epithet is the Latin adjective <unk> , meaning " yellow " . The fungus was reclassified as ( and became the type species of ) the genus Suillus by French naturalist Henri François Anne de Roussel in 1796 . Suillus is an ancient term for fungi , and is derived from swine . In addition to the British Mycological Society approved name " slippery jack " , other common names for this bolete include " pine boletus " and " sticky bun " — the latter referring to its resemblance to the identically named dessert . 
 German naturalist August Batsch described Boletus volvatus ( the specific epithet derived from the Latin volva , meaning " sheath " , " covering " or " womb " ) alongside B. luteus in his 1783 work Elenchus Fungorum . Batsch placed both of these species , along with B. bovinus and the now obsolete names Boletus mutabilis and B. canus , in a grouping of similar boletes he called " <unk> Suilli " . Boletus volvatus is now considered a synonym of Suillus luteus . Several authors have placed the slippery jack in other genera : Finnish mycologist Petter Karsten classified it as <unk> luteus in 1881 — the genus <unk> defined by yellow adnate tubes ; Lucien Quélet classified it as Viscipellis luteus in 1886 , and Ixocomus luteus in 1888 ; and Paul Christoph Hennings placed it in the section <unk> of the genus Boletopsis in 1900 . 
 In works published before 1987 , the slippery jack was written fully as Suillus luteus ( L. : Fr . ) Gray , as the description by Linnaeus had been name sanctioned in 1821 by the " father of mycology " , Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries . The starting date for all the mycota had been set by general agreement as 1 January 1821 , the date of Fries 's work . Furthermore , as Roussel 's description of Suillus predated this as well , the authority for the genus was assigned to British botanist Samuel Frederick Gray in the first volume of his 1821 work A Natural Arrangement of British Plants . The 1987 edition of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature changed the rules on the starting date and primary work for names of fungi , and names can now be considered valid as far back as 1 May 1753 , the date of publication of Linnaeus 's work . In 1986 , a collection of fruit bodies from Sweden was designated as the neotype of Suillus luteus . 
 In their 1964 monograph on North American Suillus species , Alexander H. Smith and Harry Delbert Thiers classified S. luteus in the series Suilli of the section Suillus in genus Suillus . This group is characterized by the presence of either a ring on the stipe , a partial veil adhering to the cap margin , or a " false veil " not attached to the stipe but initially covering the tube cavity . Species closely related to Suillus luteus include S. pseudobrevipes ( a sister species ) , S. brevipes and S. weaverae ( formerly <unk> weaverae ) . A genetic study of nucleotide DNA reinforced the species ' monophyly and low genetic divergence , with material of S. luteus from the United Kingdom , Austria , Germany and North America forming a clade , in contrast with some other species , such as S. granulatus , which were shown to be polyphyletic . 
 Chemical analysis of pigments and <unk> showed that Suillus was more closely related to Gomphidius and Rhizopogon than to other boletes , and hence Suillus luteus and its allies were transferred from the Boletaceae to the newly circumscribed family Suillaceae in 1997 . Molecular studies have reinforced how distantly related these fungi are from Boletus edulis and its allies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is chestnut , rusty , olive brown , or dark brown in color and generally 4 – 10 cm ( rarely to 13 cm ) in diameter at maturity . The cap has a distinctive conical shape , later flattening out . It is slimy to the touch , bare , smooth , and glossy even when dry , and the cuticle is easily peeled off . The tiny , circular pores of the tubes are initially yellow but turn olive to dark yellow with maturity . Like the skin of the cap , they can be readily peeled away from the flesh . 
 Tubes comprising the hymenophore on the underside of the cap are 3 – 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) deep , with an attachment to the stipe ranging from adnate to somewhat decurrent . The pores are tiny , numbering 3 per mm in young specimens and 1 – 2 per mm in maturity . The stipe is 5 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide . It is pale yellow and more or less cylindrical but may bear a swollen base . A membranous partial veil initially links the stipe with the edge of the cap . When it ruptures , it forms a membranous , hanging ring . The top side of the ring is whitish , while the underside is characteristically dark brown to violet . This species is one of the few members of the genus Suillus that have such a ring . Above the ring , the stipe features glandular dots — minute clumps of pigmented cells . Below the ring , the stipe is dingy white , sometimes streaked with brownish slime . In humid conditions , the ring has a gelatinous texture . The white flesh of the entire fungus does not discolour when damaged , and is soft — particularly in mature specimens . It has a " pleasant " taste and lacks any distinctive odour . 
 The spore print is ochre or clay coloured , the elongated elliptical spores measuring 7 – 10 by 3 – 3 @.@ 5 μm . Basidia ( spore @-@ producing cells ) are four spored , with dimensions of 14 – 18 by 4 – 5 μm . Cystidia are present on both the tube faces ( pleurocystidia ) and edges ( cheilocystidia ) , either scattered or , more rarely , as bundles . They measure 20 – 35 by 5 – 7 μm and have a narrow club shape . Clamp connections are not present in the hyphae of S. luteus . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Good field characteristics for Suillus luteus include the slimy brown cap , glandular dots on the upper stipe , and prominent purplish ring . A frequent lookalike is Suillus granulatus , which is another common , widely distributed and edible species occurring in the same habitat . Suillus granulatus is yellow fleshed and exudes latex droplets when young , but most conspicuously bears neither a partial veil nor a ring . Other than that , Suillus luteus is unlikely to be confused with other mushrooms , especially if its preferred habitat under pine trees and the whitish partial veil are considered . In Europe , the related Suillus <unk> is found under larch and has a yellow cap , while immature fruit bodies of Gomphidius glutinosus may look comparable from above but have gills rather than pores underneath . In North America , Suillus borealis and S. pseudobrevipes also have <unk> veils , but lack the distinctive ring of S. luteus . S. cothurnatus forms a band @-@ like ring on the stipe that tends to be brownish rather than purplish . 
 In some specimens of S. luteus , the partial veil separates from the stipe ( rather than the cap margin ) , leaving cottony patches of veil hanging from the cap margin . In this state , fruit bodies can be confused with those of S. albidipes . Unlike S. luteus , however , S. albidipes does not have glandular dots on its stipe . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Suillus luteus can be found all over the Northern Hemisphere . Native to Eurasia , it is widespread across the British Isles . To the east it has been recorded from Pakistan , where it was found along canals in <unk> in the district of Astore , and as far east as South Korea . It has also been widely introduced elsewhere by way of pine plantations around the globe . It is very commonly found in Monterey pine ( Pinus radiata ) plantations , despite the tree being native to California and hence not in the fungus ' native range . In North America it is found in the northeast , the Pacific Northwest and the southwestern United States . According to Ernst Both , it was Charles Horton Peck who first suggested in 1887 that the fungus was introduced to New York State on Pinus sylvestris . DNA studies show that the North American populations differ little genetically from European populations , supporting the idea that the fungus arrived to North America relatively recently as a result of human activity . Suillus luteus is found in coastal and mountainous pine forests and exhibits a tolerance of the northern latitudes . Southern Hemisphere locales where the slippery jack grow with plantation pines include South America , Africa , Australia , and New Zealand . In southwestern Australia , the bolete is limited to areas of greater than 1000 mm ( 40 in ) annual rainfall . It has been recorded as far north as the Darling Downs and southern Queensland , and occasionally in Tasmania . The fungus fruits in spring , summer and fairly prolifically in autumn , following periods of wet weather . Mushrooms can appear in large troops or fairy rings . 
 In Ecuador , Pinus radiata plantations were planted extensively around Cotopaxi National Park , and Suillus luteus boletes appear in abundance year @-@ round . A 1985 field study estimated production to be 3000 – 6000 mushrooms per hectare — up to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) ( dry weight ) of mushrooms hectare per year . This continuous production contrasts with the bolete 's seasonal appearance elsewhere . The fungus is not found in adjacent areas of native vegetation . The fruiting is so bountiful that the harvest of slippery jacks has become the main reason that pine plantations are established or maintained in parts of Ecuador . In southern Brazil , it has been recorded in plantations of slash pine ( P. elliottii ) in the municipalities of Pelotas , Nova Petrópolis and Canela in Rio Grande do Sul , and Colombo in Paraná . It is particularly common in plantations in Patagonia . Suillus luteus is the commonest bolete encountered in the Falkland Islands , where it is found in windbreaks and gardens . 
 In South Africa , Suillus luteus has been occasionally recorded under pines in Bloemfontein , Johannesburg and Royal Natal National Park . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Suillus luteus is a pioneer species that typically establishes itself in the early stages of forest succession . The fungus forms mycorrhizal associations with various species of pine , including Scots pine ( P. sylvestris ) , black pine ( P. nigra ) , and Macedonian pine ( P. <unk> ) in Europe , and red pine ( P. resinosa ) and white pine ( P. strobus ) in North America . An in vitro experiment demonstrated that the species could form an ectomycorrhizal association with Aleppo pine ( P. halepensis ) , a key species used in reforestation in the Mediterranean . A study of the ectomycorrhizal fungi associated with a lodgepole pine ( P. contorta ) invasion front near <unk> , Chile , showed that many invasive trees were supported by S. luteus as the sole mycorrhizal partner . 
 The ectomycorrhizae formed between the fungus and host plant can be influenced by soil microorganisms present in the mycorrhizosphere . For example , soil bacteria from the genera <unk> and Burkholderia alter the branching structure of the root , whereas Bacillus species increase root growth and mycorrhizal colonization . The fungus does not require a specific soil but seems to prefer acidic and nutrient @-@ deficient soil . Suillus luteus produces hydroxamic acid @-@ based <unk> , which are compounds that can chelate iron and extract it from the soil in nutrient @-@ poor conditions . Ignacio <unk> and colleagues analysed the carbon uptake of S. luteus in Ecuador , concluding pine plantations accompanied by S. luteus deplete carbon stored in the soil and raising concerns that these might not be a remedy for rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere . 
 The fungus has been shown to provide a protective effect against heavy metal toxicity when associated with the host Pinus sylvestris , preventing copper accumulation in the needles , and protecting seedlings against cadmium toxicity . Owing to its frequent rate of sexual reproduction and the resulting extensive gene flow within populations , the fungus can rapidly evolve a trait to tolerate otherwise toxic levels of heavy metals in the environment . The genetic basis of this adaptation — intriguing to researchers investigating the bioremediation potential of metal @-@ adapted plants and their fungal associates — are contained in the genome sequence of S. luteus , published in 2015 . 
 Suillus luteus fruit bodies are sometimes infested with larvae , though not nearly as often as S. granulatus or B. edulis . Damage from maggots is much more common in warmer months , and rare late in the season with cooler weather . In a Finnish study , researchers found that 70 – 95 % of fruit bodies collected from typical forest habitats were infested with larvae ; the most common species were the flies Mycetophila fungorum , Pegomya <unk> , and <unk> silvatica . In contrast , other studies have shown that fruit bodies collected from pine plantations are relatively free of larvae . The fungus produces microscopic crystals of oxalic acid at the surface of its hyphae , a feature that is thought to help deter grazing by the springtail species <unk> candida . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Suillus luteus is an edible mushroom . Although some authors regard it as one of low quality , and generally inferior to co @-@ occurring species such as Boletus pinophilus , the species is considered a delicacy in Slavic cultures ( known as <unk> in Russian or <unk> in Polish , deriving from words meaning " buttery " ) . It was highly regarded in Calabria , even more than Boletus edulis , until the 1940s when increased interest in the latter species eclipsed the former . Mushrooms conforming to Suillus luteus are exported from Chile to Italy , and , since the 1970s , the United States . As of 2002 , harvesters in Chile were paid on average US $ 0 @.@ 5 per kilogram of fruit bodies . In Burundi , Suillus luteus mushrooms are sold to Europeans as <unk> in Bujumbura but not generally eaten by the <unk> . Based on samples collected from Chile , the boletes contain ( as a percentage of dry weight ) 20 % protein , 57 % carbohydrates , 6 % fat , and 6 % ash . Pinus radiata plantations in southeastern Australia have become tourist attractions as people flock to them in autumn to pick slippery jacks and saffron milk @-@ caps ( Lactarius deliciosus ) ; <unk> State Forest in particular has attracted large numbers of Polish foragers . 
 Slippery jacks do not keep for long after picking , nor are they suitable for drying , as their water content is too high . They are suited for frying , or cooking in stews and soups , either alone or with other mushroom species . <unk> the mushroom is not recommended , however : " We once made the mistake of running it through a blender to make a soup . The result was a substance recommending itself for use when hanging wallpaper . " S. luteus and other Suillus species may cause allergic reactions in some people or digestive problems that appear to result from consuming the slimy skin . The fungus is better cooked before eating , and some authors recommend discarding the glutinous cuticle and tubes before cooking . Moreover , the skin can spoil other fungi with which slippery jacks are collected . 
 Inexpensive powdered S. luteus fruit bodies are sometimes added to the more expensive B. edulis mushroom soup powder , a fraudulent practice that is difficult to detect with microscopy because the tissues are no longer intact . This adulteration can be determined chemically , however , by testing for increased levels of the sugar alcohols arabitol and mannitol . The practice can also be determined with a DNA @-@ based method that is sensitive enough to detect the addition of 1 – 2 % of S. luteus to B. edulis powder . 
 = No. 90 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing that operated during the early years of the Malayan Emergency . Its purpose was to serve as an umbrella organisation for the RAAF units deployed in the conflict , No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron , flying Avro Lincolns , and No. 38 ( Transport ) Squadron , flying Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas . The wing was established in July 1950 and headquartered at Changi , on the east coast of Singapore . No. 1 Squadron operated from Tengah , in Singapore 's west . No. 38 Squadron was based at Changi and , from April 1951 to February 1952 , at Kuala Lumpur in central Malaya . The Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as precision strikes , to harass communist insurgents . The Dakotas were tasked with airlifting cargo , VIPs , troops and casualties , as well as courier flights and supply drops . Following No. 38 Squadron 's departure in December 1952 , No. 90 Wing was disbanded , leaving No. 1 Squadron to carry on as the sole RAAF unit in the Malayan air campaign until its withdrawal to Australia in July 1958 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and formation = = = 
 In April 1950 , the British government requested Australia 's assistance to combat communist insurgents during the Malayan Emergency . In response , the Australian Defence Committee determined that it was possible to commit a squadron of eight Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakota transports and a flight of four to six Avro Lincoln heavy bombers . The Federal government formally announced the decision to send the Dakotas soon afterwards ; in late June , it confirmed the allocation of six Lincolns . No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron , operating the Lincolns , would be detached from the control of No. 82 Wing at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , and be based at Tengah airfield in the west of Singapore . No. 38 ( Transport ) Squadron , operating Dakotas , would be detached from No. 86 Wing at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and be based at Changi , in Singapore 's east . The transport commitment was rendered possible by the recent return of ten Australian Dakota crews from service during the Berlin Airlift . 
 It was agreed that RAAF operations during the Emergency would be directed by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) through Air Headquarters Malaya ( later No. 224 Group RAF ) . The British also wanted the Australian squadrons attached to an RAF wing . However , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal George Jones , was mindful of repeating the experience of World War II , when RAAF units and personnel based in Britain had been absorbed by the RAF , rather than operating as a national group led by high @-@ ranking Australian officers . He therefore decided that Nos. 1 and 38 Squadrons should be formed into a " composite " organisation ( one made up of disparate elements such as bomber , fighter , or reconnaissance units ) and administered by an overarching RAAF headquarters , and put this requirement to the British Air Ministry . The Air Ministry agreed , and No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing was duly established at Richmond on 10 July 1950 , under the command of Group Captain Paddy Heffernan . 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron 's Dakotas began arriving at Changi on 19 June 1950 , and No. 1 Squadron 's Lincolns at Tengah on 16 July . No. 90 Wing staff departed Richmond by air and established the headquarters at Changi on 22 July . The Dakotas had flown their first mission the previous day ; the Lincolns undertook their initial operations on 26 July . Nos. 1 and 38 Squadrons were responsible for their own routine maintenance ; aircraft rotated back to Australia for major work . The RAF provided base support facilities , including messing and accommodation . 
 The Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as strikes against pinpoint targets . They operated singly and in formations , sometimes in concert with RAF bombers . Not having to contend with anti @-@ aircraft fire , the Lincolns flew mainly by day . After completing a bomb run , they would make another pass over the target to strafe with machine guns and 20 mm cannon . The Lincolns were considered well suited to the campaign , owing to their range and ability to fly at low speeds to search for targets , as well as their firepower and heavy bomb load . No. 1 Squadron also flew night missions — the only Commonwealth air force unit authorised to do so — of up to six hours duration , dropping one bomb every half hour or so . To reduce the risk of collateral damage , all air strikes had to be approved by the Joint Operation Centre , located at Kuala Lumpur in central Malaya and staffed by military , police and civilian personnel . Although the original purpose of the bombing campaign was to kill as many insurgents as possible , the impracticality of achieving this in operations over dense jungle resulted in a shift towards harassing and demoralising the communists , driving them out of their bases and into areas held by Commonwealth ground troops . 
 The Dakotas were tasked with airlifting cargo , VIPs , troops and casualties , as well as courier flights , supply drops to friendly forces and aerial despatch of propaganda leaflets . On other missions they acted as pathfinders for No. 1 Squadron , dropping smoke canisters on suspected communist hideouts that the Lincolns following above and behind would attempt to bomb . <unk> and supplying troops was a key part of the strategy to defeat the insurgency , by ensuring that security forces could maintain a semi @-@ permanent presence in the jungle . No. 38 Squadron 's operations ranged throughout Malaya and into Borneo , the Philippines , Japan and Korea . Transport requirements in the Korean War led to a reduction in No. 90 Wing 's strength when four of the Dakotas were transferred to Iwakuni , Japan , headquarters of No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing , in November 1950 . The same month , Group Captain Frank Headlam was appointed to take over command of No. 90 Wing from Heffernan . Headlam co @-@ piloted a Dakota on a supply drop on 20 December ; he was slightly injured and the aircraft badly damaged following a crash @-@ landing at Kampong Aur in Pahang as a result of engine failure . 
 No. 1 Squadron 's complement was increased from six to eight aircraft after the British Air Ministry requested in February 1951 that Australia augment its bomber force to partly offset the imminent withdrawal of the RAF 's Lincolns to Bomber Command in Europe . In April , No. 38 Squadron 's four Dakotas relocated to Kuala Lumpur , where they undertook supply drops in cooperation with No. 41 Squadron RNZAF . One of No. 1 Squadron 's Lincolns was written off after overshooting the runway at Tengah on 30 November . Wing Commander ( later Group Captain ) Redmond Green was appointed the new commanding officer of No. 90 Wing the following month , replacing Headlam . On 4 April 1952 , Green participated in a Lincoln sortie in place of an injured pilot . The first aircraft he took off in had to turn back owing to engine failure . The second completed the mission but was found to have lost brake power as it was returning to Tengah , and there was a danger of the aircraft overrunning the landing strip and sustaining heavy damage ; the crew was able to slow the Lincoln on the runway by trailing a parachute from the rear turret upon touching down . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron relocated from Kuala Lumpur to its former base at Changi in February 1952 . As the year progressed , RAAF transport priorities altered owing to the increasing demands of the Korean War , and the Malayan commitment was no longer considered sustainable . Having airlifted more than 17 @,@ 000 passengers and almost 1 @,@ 900 tonnes of cargo , dropped some 750 tonnes of supplies and evacuated over 300 injured troops , No. 38 Squadron departed for Australia on 8 December and rejoined No. 86 Wing at Richmond three days later . Following this withdrawal , No. 90 Wing was disbanded at Changi , and No. 1 Squadron became the only Australian flying unit in Malaya . It continued the bombing campaign against the communists until it was withdrawn to Australia in July 1958 , having flown almost 4 @,@ 000 sorties in its eight years of operation and dropped over 14 @,@ 000 tonnes of bombs — 85 per cent of the total delivered by Commonwealth forces during the Emergency . No. 1 Squadron was relieved by No. 2 Squadron , operating English Electric Canberra jet bombers out of Butterworth in north @-@ west Malaya . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 No. 90 Wing was commanded by the following officers : 
 = Believe in the Stars = 
 " Believe in the Stars " is the second episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 38th overall episode of the series . It was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and directed by series producer Don Scardino . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on November 6 , 2008 . Guest stars in this episode include Remy Auberjonois , Todd Buonopane , Raven Goodwin , and Oprah Winfrey . 
 The episode 's plot concerns a feud between Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) over royalties from Tracy 's pornographic video game Gorgasm : The Legend of Dong Slayer . Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) attempts to settle the fight with the help of Oprah Winfrey , whom she meets on a return flight from Chicago . Meanwhile , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) is stung by the revelation that most events from the 2008 Summer Olympics were staged to boost America 's image and NBC 's ratings . Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) attempts to break Kenneth of his moral absolutism . 
 " Believe in the Stars " received generally positive reception from television critics , with Neal Justin of the Star Tribune concluding it was " the most brilliant episode in the series ' history " . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 0 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode starts with Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) announcing to her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , that she needs to go to Chicago for jury duty because she is still registered to vote there . Jack gives Liz a powerful sedative for the trip . Later , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) walks in on a meeting between Jack and the American silver medalist in tetherball , Tyler Brody ( Remy Auberjonois ) . Tyler is angry at Jack for not selecting him as the gold medalist , and is threatening to go public with the revelation that there was no Olympic tetherball competition during the 2008 Summer Olympics , as it was staged to boost NBC 's ratings . To keep him quiet , Jack tells him that he can " be the voice of Knight Rider " in a film adaptation , which Tyler considers . Afterwards , Kenneth tells Jack that he " lost two heroes today " , as he looked up to both Jack and Tyler . As a result , Jack wants to be in Kenneth 's good side , but wants to break his moral absolutism , after Kenneth did not hesitate to attempt to kill himself when he believed the air in a stalled elevator was about to run out . Jack finally succeeds when he supplies Kenneth with a big screen television , but no cable hookup . Kenneth steals cable and later confesses to Jack , asking if SpongeBob SquarePants " is supposed to be terrifying " . 
 Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) demands compensation for her voice work in Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) pornographic video game , Gorgasm : The Legend of Dong Slayer . The argument escalates and Liz orders them to stop their bickering . After Liz leaves for Chicago , Jenna and Tracy decide to conduct a social experiment to see whether Tracy can survive better as a white woman than Jenna can as a black man , after arguing respectively that black men and white women have it harder in society . Later , while on her flight , Liz takes Jack 's sedative . Liz realizes that the woman sitting next to her is Oprah Winfrey . When Liz arrives back at the 30 Rock studios , Tracy is dressed in female drag with his body covered in white makeup and soon after , Jenna enters in blackface and male drag . Jack worries that the situation has gone out of control , but Liz assures him that Oprah , who is coming to the studios , will be able to make them come to terms . As it turns out , her inflight conversation with Oprah was a hallucination . The person who Liz thought was Oprah is actually a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl named Pam ( Raven Goodwin ) . Even so , Pam engages Tracy and Jenna in a heart @-@ to @-@ heart , and manages to settle their differences . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Believe in the Stars " was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and directed by series producer Don Scardino . This episode was Carlock 's ninth writing credit , and was Scardino 's fifteenth directed episode . " Believe in the Stars " originally aired in the United States on November 6 , 2008 on NBC as the second episode of the show 's third season and the 38th overall episode of the series . 
 In September 2008 , it was announced that television host Oprah Winfrey would guest star on the show . She filmed her appearance on September 13 , 2008 . When Winfrey interviewed series creator Tina Fey on her show in November , Fey revealed that they shot their scene together on a Saturday , a day that the show normally does not film on . Actress Raven Goodwin played Pam , a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl that , while hallucinating , Liz Lemon believed was Oprah . Actor Remy Auberjonois played Olympic medalist Tyler Brody in this episode . This was actor Todd Buonopane 's debut as the character Jeffrey Weinerslav , an NBC Human Resource mediator . In " Believe in the Stars " , Jeffrey tries to mediate the disagreement that Jenna and Tracy are having over the video game . Buonopane later guest starred in the episodes " Cutbacks " and " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode in 2006 where Tracy Jordan is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , and dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four recent Halloweens , and in this episode while trying to get out of jury duty in Chicago . Star Wars is also referenced when Tracy takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . She said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . She attributed most of the references to Carlock , whom she described as " the resident expert " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Believe in the Stars " was watched by 8 @.@ 0 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was a decrease from the season premiere episode , " Do @-@ Over " , which was watched by 8 @.@ 7 million American viewers . Nonetheless , this episode was the eighth highest @-@ rated show on the NBC network during the week of November 3 – 9 , 2008 . Since airing , " Believe in the Stars " has received positive reception from television critics . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning praised the episode , saying that it was " an absolutely perfect episode with not a moment wasted [ and ] equally hilarious were the storylines between Jack and Kenneth , and Tracy and Jenna . The episode had everything that makes 30 Rock great . " Canning opined that Liz 's admissions to Oprah Winfrey were " painfully funny " , and that Tracy " was on fire " following his actions in this episode . In conclusion , Canning gave it a 10 out of 10 rating . Jeremy Medina of Paste was complimentary towards the episode , reporting that it had " madcap humor tirelessly delivered one joke after another at a lightning fast speed , adding up to one of the funniest episodes in the series . " Medina enjoyed the social experiment between Jenna and Tracy , noting that it was " hilarious " . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich commented that the episode was " Rock @-@ solid " , while Neal Justin of the Star Tribune believed it was " the most brilliant episode in the series ' history " . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that " Believe in the Stars " belonged to Tina Fey " who has grown by leaps and bounds as an actress over the past few years . The Princess Leia voice , her drunken panic on the plane [ ... ] and the religious fervor at the knowledge that Oprah would be coming to the studio were all hilarious , and played with the sort of confidence I don 't know that she would have had at the start of the series . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin said that the Jenna and Tracy subplot was not the most inspired idea , but admitted it introduced one of his " favorite gags in 30 Rock history " regarding two make @-@ up artists giving Tracy a monster claw to use as a white hand when they ran out of white powder . Rabin called it a " brilliant gag . " He was less enthusiastic with Winfrey in the episode , noting that her appearance " was treated as such a seismic cultural event that tonight 's episode couldn 't help but feel like a letdown . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that " the least effective plot " in this episode was Jenna and Tracy 's . 
 = Raid on Dunkirk ( 1800 ) = 
 The Raid on Dunkirk of 7 July 1800 was an attack by a British Royal Navy force on the well @-@ defended French anchorage of Dunkirk in the English Channel during the French Revolutionary Wars . French naval forces had been blockaded in their harbours during the conflict , and often the only method of attacking them was through fireships or " cutting @-@ out " expeditions , in which boats would carry boarding parties into the harbour at night , seize ships at anchor and bring them out . The attack on Dunkirk was a combination of both of these types of operation , aimed at a powerful French frigate squadron at anchor in Dunkirk harbour . The assault made use of a variety of experimental weaponry , some of which was tested in combat for the first time with mixed success . 
 Although assault by the heavily armed sloop HMS Dart proved successful , the fireships achieved little and various other British craft involved in the operation had little effect on the eventual outcome . The French response was disorganised and ineffectual , losing one frigate captured . Three others were almost destroyed , only escaping by cutting their anchor cables and fleeing into the coastal shoals where they ran aground . Although all three frigates were refloated and returned to service , the operation had cost the French heavy casualties . The British force suffered minimal losses , although the exact totals are uncertain . Many of the British officers involved were highly praised and rewarded with promotions and prize money . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the late French Revolutionary Wars ( 1793 – 1802 ) , a string of victories at sea ensured that the Royal Navy was dominant . The French Navy in particular had suffered heavy losses , and in Northern European waters had been forced back into its own harbours by British blockade squadrons . Although large ports were watched by fleets of ships of the line , small ports had their own blockade squadrons too , including the shallow French ports on the English Channel . These harbours could not accommodate ships of the line but were well situated for frigates that attacked shipping in British waters whenever they could escape the blockade . One such port was Dunkirk in French Flanders , which contained a squadron of four French frigates : the 44 @-@ gun <unk> under Commodore Jean @-@ Joseph <unk> , the 40 @-@ gun Carmagnole and the 36 @-@ gun Désirée and <unk> . Dunkirk was well defended , with gun batteries and gunboats overlooking the harbour . In addition , the port was surrounded by complicated coastal shoals into which the frigates could retreat if attacked . 
 The port was closely watched , it was determined that an attack by a squadron of smaller vessels on the frigates stood a chance of success and a number of ships were instructed to gather off the coast . Captain Henry Inman of the frigate HMS Andromeda , had overall command ; the force included HMS Nemesis under Captain Thomas Baker and 15 smaller vessels . The small craft included four fireships , small brigs designed to operate as minor warships until such time as they were deemed expendable in an attack on an anchored target , and the sloop HMS Dart under Commander Patrick Campbell . Dart was a highly unusual ship : her size meant that she was unrated even though her armament included 30 32 @-@ pounder carronades . The carronades were mounted to a new design that minimised recoil and made them faster and easier to load . 
 The squadron had assembled by 17 June 1800 , but for ten days the winds and tides prevented the operation . The French prepared for any attack by anchoring their frigates in a line running across the harbour from east to west , supported by gunboats that patrolled the harbour . The western @-@ most ships were positioned so that they could make their escape into the channels of the Braak Sands if they came under concerted attack . Inman knew that his largest ships , Andromeda and Nemesis , would prove liabilities in the narrow harbour . Both remained offshore , their crews dispersed into the smaller ships that would lead the attack , including the fireships HMS Wasp , HMS Falcon , HMS Comet and HMS Rosario , the brigs HMS Biter and HMS Boxer , and the hired ships Kent , Ann and Vigilant ( on which Inman sailed ) . The entire squadron was led by Dart , under Campbell , whose target was the eastern end of the French line , the frigate Désirée . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Inman 's squadron entered Dunkirk harbour on the late evening of 7 July 1800 , Dart slowly leading the way and the rest of the squadron sailing in a line behind the heavily armed sloop . Inman had crewed the hired ships Vigilant and Nile with men impressed from smugglers ships , and these men acted as guides for the British force . At midnight the shapes of the French frigates appeared from the darkness ahead and Dart gradually passed down their line , until a hail from one of the frigates demanded to know where Dart had come from . A French @-@ speaking officer replied " De Bordeaux " ( " from Bordeaux " ) and was then asked what the little ships behind Dart were , to which the officer replied " Je ne sais pas " ( " I do not know " ) . Apparently satisfied with this reply , there were no more questions from the frigate and Dart continued its passage until it came alongside the last French frigate but one . Lookouts on this ship recognised the shape of the strange vessel that had appeared out of the night and immediately opened fire , to which Dart swiftly responded . Campbell knew that his heavy carronades were devastating at close range , and had ordered them to be double @-@ shotted , meaning that each carronade carried twice the ordinary number of missiles . The effect was immediate , with heavy casualties and severe damage inflicted on the French vessel . The fast loading abilities of the carronades allowed the sloop 's 15 guns to keep up a steady fire as Dart swept on to the last ship in line , Désirée . 
 Using an anchor to steady his ship , Campbell placed Dart alongside the French frigate , with his bows between the French ship 's masts . This allowed a boarding party led by Lieutenant James M 'Dermeit to leap aboard Désirée and drive the French off the frigate 's deck in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . M 'Dermeit was wounded in the fighting , and called across for reinforcements as the French regrouped in the stern of the ship . Campbell used his anchors to swing Dart alongside the French frigate and a second boarding party under Lieutenant William Isaac Pearce charged aboard , routing the French reinforcements that were emerging from below decks . With the upper deck secure , Pearce severed the anchor cables , steered Désirée out of the harbour and over the sandbars that were rapidly being exposed by the receding tide . With his target captured , Campbell turned Dart towards the second British attack , against the head of the French line . 
 As Dart and Désirée fought at the southern end of the line , the British fireships attacked the van . The fireships had been stripped of all useful materials and been converted into their original role . Small crews of volunteers set alight to the vessels and all four bore down on the three northern French ships with supporting fire coming from Dart and the brigs . The smaller vessels , accompanied by a number of ship 's boats from the British frigates outside the harbour , attended the fireships and removed their crews once they were alight . Although all four fireships were well @-@ handled , the French were prepared for the tactic and the squadron severed its anchor cables and sailed into the channels around the Braak Sands . This manoeuvre took them past Biter and Boxer and also exposed them to continued fire from Dart , but , despite the damage , all three made the safety of the channel , into which the British could not follow without fear of grounding . One of the French ships did become stuck at low tide , but out of the range of the British ships and it suffered no serious damage . The fireships drifted aimlessly before exploding uselessly , succeeding only in wounding two British sailors whose boat was too close to Comet . While the frigates and fireships fought , a host of small French gunboats emerged from Dunkirk and were met by the hired ships , armed as brigs . In a sharp engagement the hired ships lost four wounded but successfully held back the gunboats during the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With his principal targets out of reach , Inman called off the attack during the early morning and withdrew his ships . He had lost one man killed and 17 wounded , all but six of the latter coming from Dart ( some sources only record the men wounded on Dart in the total ) . French casualties were far more severe , with more than 100 men killed or wounded , mostly on Désirée , which had taken the brunt of Dart 's attack . Recognising that he had no room for prisoners and that many of the French wounded required urgent treatment , Inman ordered the wounded men to be sent back to Dunkirk , although it appears this amnesty was subsequently extended to all the prisoners . By midday on 8 July 1800 the British squadron had returned to its position off the coast while Désirée was sent to Britain , later commissioned in the Royal Navy as HMS Desiree under the command of Captain Inman . Prize money was paid for the captured frigate , but head money , an award made for enemy servicemen killed , wounded or captured , was not paid , probably due to the return of the prisoners . For their services , Commander <unk> and Lieutenant M 'Dermeit were promoted , the former transferring from Dart into the much smaller sixth rate HMS <unk> . The French ships returned from the Braak Sand during the morning and repairs were conducted in Dunkirk . In 1847 the Admiralty awarded the Naval General Service Medal with clasp " Capture of the Desiree " to all surviving claimants from the action . 
 = La Masia = 
 La Masia de Can Planes , usually shortened to La Masia , ( Catalan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , English : " The Farmhouse " ) , is the name of FC Barcelona 's football training facilities , originally located near the Camp Nou in the Les Corts district of Barcelona , and is often used to generically describe the Barcelona youth academy . The youth academy of Barcelona holds more than 300 young players , and has been praised since 2002 as one of the best in the world , being a significant factor in FC Barcelona 's European success as well as the Spanish national team 's success at the 2010 FIFA World Cup , and the 2008 and 2012 European Championships . 
 In 2010 , La Masia achieved a record breaking honour becoming the first youth academy to have trained all three finalists for the Ballon d 'Or in a single year , with Andrés Iniesta , Lionel Messi and Xavi . 
 The original building itself was an ancient country residence ( In Catalan : <unk> ) built in 1702 , and once Camp Nou was inaugurated in 1957 , the building was remodelled and extended for use as the club 's social headquarters . With the gradual expansion of the club , the building became too small for headquarters , and on 20 October 1979 , La Masia was converted into a dormitory for young players from outside of Barcelona . On 30 June 2011 , the Masia building ceased housing the young sportsmen who are trained to become a part of the club ’ s professional teams . In a simple ceremony , the doors were closed and the Ciutat Esportiva Joan Gamper took over the function of the residential center for the youngsters . 
 = = History = = 
 La Masia de Can Planes was an old Catalan farmhouse , built in 1702 . In 1979 , it was first used by the club to house its young footballers who originated from outside of Barcelona . The idea for the youth academy was proposed to Núñez by Johan Cruyff , and Oriol Tort was put in charge of the facility . 
 In 2011 , it was announced that Barcelona would be moving all its football training activities to La Ciutat Esportiva Joan Gamper . 
 La Masia received more publicity after Barcelona B 's success with homegrown players ; Rory Smith reported in The Daily Telegraph that La Masia " has replaced the fabled Ajax Academy as football 's foremost production line " . The recent fame and success of La Masia as a talent school was ascribed by Ian Hawkey of The Times to the class of 1987 , which featured prominent members such as Cesc Fàbregas , Lionel Messi , Gerard Piqué and Pedro . In 2000 , Louis van Gaal , coach of Barcelona 's first team , was widely ridiculed by the city sports media for his dream to win the Champions League with 11 home @-@ grown players . The first team won the trophy in 2009 with eight home @-@ grown players . 
 From 1979 to 2009 , 440 youngsters have left their homes and families to stay at the academy . About half of them were from Catalonia , and the rest came from other regions of the Kingdom of Spain and beyond , including 15 from Cameroon , 7 from Brazil , 5 from Senegal and 3 from Argentina . Of those 440 , 40 made it into Barcelona 's first team . 
 = = Organization = = 
 La Masia houses about 60 players : 10 in the farmhouse , and the rest in rooms of the adjacent stadium ; the rest of the youth players must provide for their own accommodation . The academy is one of the most expensive in Europe , operating at a cost of £ 5 million a year . The main cost is the dormitory , La Masia itself . The minimum age for the youth program is six years ; each year , more than 1 @,@ 000 boys from the ages of six to eight try out for admittance . The best 200 are selected . The club also actively seeks for prospective students ; it employs a system in which 15 scouts are deployed in Catalonia , 15 in the rest of Spain and 10 scattered throughout the world . To alleviate the expenses of this scouting , the club has an agreement with 15 local clubs for them to train players who are not ready for entry into the youth academy . In return , FC Barcelona gives money , coaching and technical advice to these clubs for their services . While expanding its operations abroad , the club established five schools in Mexico and one in Egypt ; successful applicants to these schools become full @-@ time students , receiving academic education and football training . 
 When Guardiola re @-@ organised the reserve side , he set up a three @-@ staged program to formalise the advancement from Juvenil to Barcelona B and finally to the first team . The first stage of a youth player 's career involves a rotation scheme with Barcelona B. The second stage involves making the player aware of his importance to the team and the expectation that the player will improve cohesion and performance within the reserve side . In the last stage , he is designated a " key " player of the B team and might be called to the first team . One of the players in the third phase is made captain , regardless of the experience of older players . 
 The teams at Barcelona play from August to May ; mild weather at La <unk> allows players to train outdoors throughout the year . The youth teams train after school ; Barcelona B plays as a professional team , training in the morning and evening . All of the trainers at FC Barcelona are former professional footballers . 
 Barcelona B , the club 's main youth team , and the 12 other youth teams contained 24 coaches and more than 300 players . There are 56 other employees , including doctors , psychologists , nutritionists , cooks and physiologists . In the 2009 – 10 season , the B team qualified for the Segunda División again . Barcelona B play in a 4 – 3 – 3 formation , which is the same formation employed by the first team . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 " The player who has passed through La Masia has something different to the rest , it 's a plus that only comes from having competed in a Barcelona shirt from the time you were a child . " 
 Former technical director , Pep Segura , attributes the club 's success to its " philosophy of play " : " It is about creating one philosophy , one mentality , from the bottom of the club to the top " . The philosophy consists of the application of total football mixed with traditional Spanish one @-@ touch play ( <unk> @-@ taka ) . The total football approach was derived from the Netherlands football team through Cruyff . The total football approach requires the players to move in a fluid formation , where players can interchange positions quickly . In the youth academy , there is a large focus on technical ability , which is seen as a pre @-@ requisite for inter @-@ changes . An often @-@ quoted reason for Barcelona 's success is the continuity and commitment with which Barcelona follow the current philosophy of pass and move . Guardiola was the prototype of the pivotal midfielder ; current midfielders Xavi and Iniesta are its custodians . 
 Another aspect of La Masia is its marked Catalan national character — local talent in the service of a club with a strong , defining sense of the cultural make @-@ up of Catalonia . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In 2009 , Messi became the first player from La Masia to be awarded with the Ballon d 'Or prize for the best footballer in Europe , and the FIFA World Player award , for the best footballer in the world . 
 On 11 July 2010 , Spain won the World Cup final with eight players from Barcelona ; seven were from La Masia , and six of them were in the starting line @-@ up : Gerard Piqué , Carles Puyol , Andrés Iniesta , Xavi , Sergio Busquets , and Pedro . This set a record for the most players to be provided by a club side for a team in a World Cup final . Joachim Löw , coach of Germany , said after his side 's defeat by Spain that the opposition had a distinct Barcelona style : " You can see it in every pass , how Spain plays is how Barcelona plays . They can hardly be beaten . They are extremely confident and very calm in the way they circulate the ball . " 
 = = Alumni = = 
 Below is a sortable list of La Masia alumni who have played in more than 200 professional top @-@ tier league games . Only league appearances ( first and second division ) and goals are included . 
 FC Barcelona includes games of FC Barcelona B in second division . 
 = November 2008 Carolinas tornado outbreak = 
 The November 2008 Carolinas tornado outbreak was a brief but deadly tornado outbreak which began shortly after midnight ( local time ) , while many people were sleeping . Most of the eight tornadoes that touched down were produced by two supercell thunderstorms over North Carolina . At 12 : 25 a.m. EST , the National Weather Service issued a tornado watch for most of eastern North Carolina as the risk of tornadoes increased . Not long after , the first tornado of the outbreak , an EF2 , touched down in South Carolina . Almost an hour later , the second tornado touched down in Robeson County , North Carolina . Three other minor tornadoes , two EF0 and an EF1 , touched down over the next two hours . Around 3 : 10 a.m. EST , the first of two killer tornadoes touched down near Kenly , North Carolina . The EF2 tornado destroyed a few homes and damaged several others . Roughly 20 minutes later , an EF3 tornado touched down in Wilson County . This tornado killed one person and injured a few others after destroying several homes . Total damages from the outbreak amounted to $ 2 @.@ 5 million , about half of which was a result of the EF3 tornado . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 On November 14 , the National Weather Service issued a slight risk of severe weather for the early hours of November 15 for the Carolinas and northern Gulf coast . Although conditions were not favorable for a large @-@ scale severe weather event , the possibility of small clusters of thunderstorms existed . Strong wind shear was forecast to persist , which would allow small bow @-@ echo line of thunderstorms which could produce damaging winds . The result of a weak disturbance which passed through the area of slight risk lowered the chances of tornadic thunderstorms developing . At 12 : 25 a.m. EST , the Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) issued a Tornado watch for most of eastern North Carolina . A broken line of thunderstorms had already developed and the risk of tornadoes greatly increased , with the chances of an EF2 or stronger touching down reaching 20 % . The first tornado touched down shortly after in South Carolina . Over the following several hours , two supercell thunderstorms spawned seven more tornadoes throughout North Carolina . The final tornado dissipated around 4 : 36 a.m. EST , just 3 hours and 46 minutes after the outbreak started . The tornado watch remained in effect until before being cancelled at 8 : 00 a.m. EST . 
 = = Confirmed tornadoes = = 
 The first tornado of the outbreak touched down around 12 : 50 a.m. EST about 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Carolina Mills , South Carolina in Dillon County . Large pine trees were snapped and a mobile home was rolled about 20 yards ( 18 @.@ 2 m ) before being completely destroyed . A truck was also flipped outside a church parking lot before the tornado lifted . However , several minutes later it touched down again , destroying the roof and severely damaging the walls of a brick home . After traveling for about one third of a mile , the tornado destroyed the roof of another brick home . The tornado was estimated to have become a strong EF2 tornado with winds between 120 and 135 mph ( 193 and 217 km / h ) as it hit a third brick home , nearly destroying it . In all , the tornado damaged 25 structures and destroyed seven others . Three cars were also damaged and another three were destroyed along the tornado 's 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) path . No injures were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 325 @,@ 000 . 
 Around 1 : 35 a.m. EST , a weak tornado touched down near several mobile homes about 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east @-@ southeast of St. Pauls , North Carolina in Robeson County , one of which sustained severe damage . Afterwords , the tornado traveled towards the north @-@ northeast and crossed North Carolina Highway 20 . An auto repair shop located along the highway sustained significant damage with all of the bay windows being blown out and 17 nearby storage sheds were destroyed . Several trees were knocked down onto railroad tracks before the tornado damaged another mobile home and dissipated . No injuries were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 50 @,@ 000 . The tornado was rated as an EF0 with winds up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The third tornado touched down around 2 : 15 a.m. EST near the town of <unk> in Sampson County . Several trees were damaged along the tornado 's path and one home sustained notable damage . A carport near the home was blown down and twisted into nearby trees . No injuries were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 25 @,@ 000 . The tornado was rated as an EF0 by the National Weather Service . 
 The fourth tornado of the outbreak touched down around 2 : 45 a.m. EST near Peacocks Crossroads in Johnston County , knocking down several trees , some of which were mature . Significant roof damage occurred after the tornado struck a double @-@ wide mobile home and destroyed the porch of another home . Another mobile home had some of its siding torn off before the tornado dissipated . No injuries were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 30 @,@ 000 . The tornado was rated as an EF1 by the National Weather Service . The fifth tornado of the outbreak touched down around 3 : 03 a.m. EST near U.S. Route 70 , damaging several pine trees and causing minor roof damage . Tracking towards the northeast , the tornado destroyed a carport and the car inside . A trailer was rolled on its side and a nearby home sustained siding and shingle damage . Afterwords , the tornado struck a horse farm where it destroyed a small barn and damaged a stable . Before dissipating , the tornado blew out the windows in the garage of one home . No injuries were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 75 @,@ 000 . The tornado was rated as a high @-@ end EF0 by the National Weather Service . 
 The sixth and first killer tornado of the outbreak touched down around 3 : 10 a.m. EST and snapped several trees . After traveling for three quarters of a mile , it produced significant structural damage along North Carolina Highway 222 where a brick home was destroyed . A nearby trailer was rolled 30 ft down the driveway of the home . The four residents sustained no injures despite having not taken shelter before the tornado . A double @-@ wide mobile home was blown off its foundation and flipped for 50 ft before falling to the ground . One of the occupants , a 61 @-@ year @-@ old woman was killed and her husband sustained major injuries . Three other mobile homes were destroyed by the tornado before it crossed into Wilson County . Once in Wilson County , several more mobile homes sustained significant damage before the tornado lifted . Damages from the tornado in both counties amounted to $ 700 @,@ 000 . The tornado was rated as an EF2 by the National Weather Service . 
 The most significant tornado during the outbreak touched down around 3 : 30 a.m. EST near Harrison Drive where a tree was snapped . Traveling towards the northeast , the tornado blew a home off its foundation and completely destroyed it near Route 1330 . Local firefighters and rescue responders estimated that the home rolled four times before being destroyed . At the time the tornado struck , three people were in the home , one of which was killed . After destroying the home , the tornado caused major damage to the upper portion of another home and tore off the roof of another . Afterwords , the tornado tracked into Elm City where numerous trees were damaged and a porch was blown off a home . An estimated 8 @,@ 000 residents in Wilson County were left without power following the tornado . Four other people were injured as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 1 @.@ 2 million . About 100 people were also displaced due to the tornado . The tornado was rated as a low @-@ end EF3 along its discontinuous 8 mi ( 13 km ) track . 
 The final tornado of the outbreak touched down near U.S. Route 64 around 4 : 30 a.m. EST . The tornado traveled towards the northeast , damaging two mobile homes and a chapel . Several outbuildings were also damaged or destroyed near a farm before the tornado dissipated . The tornado was rated as an EF1 along its 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) track . No injuries were reported as a result of the tornado and damages amounted to $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The estimated cost to clean up debris from the two killer tornadoes was estimated at $ 500 @,@ 000 . The governor of Wilson County requested that the areas struck by the EF3 tornado and the EF2 prior as disaster areas to allow federal assistance . In Kenly , hospital staff raised about $ 300 to help a family whose home was completely destroyed . Up to 125 personnel were deployed to check on residents who were still at home and to assist those in need . Several volunteers helped remove trees and debris off roads to make way for aid . Two Red Cross teams set up a shelter at the Kenly Free Will Baptist Church . During church ceremonies , volunteers organized outside the church to feed residents who lost their homes . A Methodist church group from Virginia arrived in Johnston and Wilson counties the day after the tornadoes to assist with cleanup efforts . A fund was set up for the 11 @-@ year @-@ old boy , Joshua <unk> , who was killed by the Elm City tornado . By November 17 , the Red Cross funds were depleted funds needed to keep the organization out of debt were $ 38 million below what was required . About $ 20 @,@ 000 was spent in the charity effort in Kenly and the governor of Wilson County urged residents who were no affected by the storm to send donations to the Red Cross . The lack of funding for the Red Cross prompted the governor to allow up to $ 28 @,@ 000 in the state 's emergency funds to be used for assistance by the Red Cross . On November 21 , low @-@ interest loans were approved for residents in the affected counties . Homeowners in Johnston , Franklin , Harnett , Nash , Sampson , Wake , Wayne and Wilson counties were able to apply for loans up to $ 200 @,@ 000 to repair storm damage and businesses were allowed to apply for loans up to $ 2 million . On November 24 , an unknown member of the 82nd Airborne Division donated 50 cases of non @-@ perishable food and water to assist victims of the tornado . The relief goods were dropped off at the J.S. Waters School in Goldston without notice . 
 = George McGovern = 
 George Stanley McGovern ( July 19 , 1922 – October 21 , 2012 ) was an American historian , author , U.S. Representative , U.S. Senator , and the Democratic Party presidential nominee in the 1972 presidential election . 
 McGovern grew up in Mitchell , South Dakota , where he was a renowned debater . He volunteered for the U.S. Army Air Forces upon the country 's entry into World War II and as a B @-@ 24 Liberator pilot flew 35 missions over German @-@ occupied Europe . Among the medals bestowed upon him was a Distinguished Flying Cross for making a hazardous emergency landing of his damaged plane and saving his crew . After the war he gained degrees from Dakota Wesleyan University and Northwestern University , culminating in a PhD , and was a history professor . He was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1956 and re @-@ elected in 1958 . After a failed bid for the U.S. Senate in 1960 , he was a successful candidate in 1962 . 
 As a senator , McGovern was an exemplar of modern American liberalism . He became most known for his outspoken opposition to the growing U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . He staged a brief nomination run in the 1968 presidential election as a stand @-@ in for the assassinated Robert F. Kennedy . The subsequent McGovern – Fraser Commission fundamentally altered the presidential nominating process , by greatly increasing the number of caucuses and primaries and reducing the influence of party insiders . The McGovern – Hatfield Amendment sought to end the Vietnam War by legislative means but was defeated in 1970 and 1971 . McGovern 's long @-@ shot , grassroots @-@ based 1972 presidential campaign found triumph in gaining the Democratic nomination but left the party badly split ideologically , and the failed vice @-@ presidential pick of Thomas Eagleton undermined McGovern 's credibility . In the general election McGovern lost to incumbent Richard Nixon in one of the biggest landslides in American electoral history . Re @-@ elected Senator in 1968 and 1974 , McGovern was defeated in a bid for a fourth term in 1980 . 
 Throughout his career , McGovern was involved in issues related to agriculture , food , nutrition , and hunger . As the first director of the Food for Peace program in 1961 , McGovern oversaw the distribution of U.S. surpluses to the needy abroad and was instrumental in the creation of the United Nations @-@ run World Food Programme . As sole chair of the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs from 1968 to 1977 , McGovern publicized the problem of hunger within the United States and issued the " McGovern Report " , which led to a new set of nutritional guidelines for Americans . McGovern later served as U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture from 1998 to 2001 and was appointed the first UN Global Ambassador on World Hunger by the World Food Programme in 2001 . The McGovern @-@ Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program has provided school meals for millions of children in dozens of countries since 2000 and resulted in McGovern 's being named World Food Prize co ‑ laureate in 2008 . 
 = = Early years and early education = = 
 McGovern was born in the 600 ‑ person farming community of Avon , South Dakota . His father , Rev. Joseph C. McGovern , born in 1868 , was pastor of the local Wesleyan Methodist Church there . Joseph – the son of an alcoholic who had immigrated from Ireland – had grown up in several states , working in coal mines from the age of nine and parentless from the age of thirteen . He had been a professional baseball player in the minor leagues , but had given it up due to his teammates ' heavy drinking , gambling and womanizing , and entered the seminary instead . George 's mother was the former Frances McLean , born c . 1890 and initially raised in Ontario ; her family had later moved to Calgary , Alberta , and then she came to South Dakota looking for work as a secretary . George was the second oldest of four children . Joseph McGovern 's salary never reached $ 100 per month , and he often received compensation in the form of potatoes , cabbages , or other food items . Joseph and Frances McGovern were both firm Republicans , but were not politically active or doctrinaire . 
 When George was about three years old , the family moved to Calgary for a while to be near Frances ' ailing mother , and he formed memories of events such as the Calgary Stampede . When George was six , the family returned to the United States and moved to Mitchell , South Dakota , a community of 12 @,@ 000 . McGovern attended public schools there and was an average student . He was painfully shy as a child and was afraid to speak in class during first grade . His only <unk> behavior was going to see movies , which were among the worldly amusements forbidden to good Wesleyan Methodists . Otherwise he had a normal childhood marked by visits to the renowned Mitchell Corn Palace and what he later termed " a sense of belonging to a particular place and knowing your part in it " . He would , however , long remember the Dust Bowl storms and grasshopper plagues that swept the prairie states during the Great Depression . The McGovern family lived on the edge of the poverty line for much of the 1920s and 1930s . Growing up amid that lack of affluence gave young George a lifelong sympathy for underpaid workers and struggling farmers . He was influenced by the currents of populism and agrarian unrest and by the " practical divinity " teachings of cleric John Wesley that sought to fight poverty , injustice , and ignorance . 
 McGovern attended Mitchell High School , where he was a solid but unspectacular member of the track team . A turning point came when his tenth @-@ grade English teacher recommended him to the debate team , where he became quite active . His high @-@ school debate coach , a history teacher who capitalized on McGovern 's interest in that subject , proved to be a great influence in his life , and McGovern spent many hours honing his meticulous , if colorless , forensic style . McGovern and his debating partner won events in his area and gained renown in a state where debating was passionately followed by the general public . Debate changed McGovern 's life , giving him a chance to explore ideas to their logical end , broadening his perspective , and instilling a sense of personal and social confidence . He graduated in 1940 in the top ten percent of his class . 
 McGovern enrolled at small Dakota Wesleyan University in Mitchell and became a star student there . He supplemented a forensic scholarship by working a variety of odd jobs . With World War II underway overseas and feeling insecure about his own courage , McGovern took flying lessons in an Aeronca aircraft and received a pilot 's license through the government 's Civilian Pilot Training Program . McGovern recalled : " Frankly , I was scared to death on that first solo flight . But when I walked away from it , I had an enormous feeling of satisfaction that I had taken the thing off the ground and landed it without tearing the wings off . " In late 1940 or early 1941 , McGovern had a brief affair with an acquaintance that resulted in her giving birth to a daughter during 1941 , although this did not become public knowledge during his lifetime . In April 1941 , McGovern began dating fellow student Eleanor <unk> , who had grown up in Woonsocket , South Dakota . They had first encountered each other during a high school debate in which Eleanor and her twin sister Ila defeated McGovern and his partner . 
 McGovern was listening to a radio broadcast of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for a sophomore @-@ year music appreciation class when he heard the news of the December 7 , 1941 , attack on Pearl Harbor . In January 1942 he drove with nine other students to Omaha , Nebraska , and volunteered to join the United States Army Air Forces . The military accepted him , but they did not yet have enough airfields , aircraft , or instructors to start training all the volunteers , so McGovern stayed at Dakota Wesleyan . George and Eleanor became engaged , but initially decided not to marry until the war was over . During his sophomore year , McGovern won the statewide intercollegiate South Dakota Peace Oratory Contest with a speech called " My Brother 's Keeper " , which was later selected by the National Council of Churches as one of the nation 's twelve best orations of 1942 . Smart , handsome , and well @-@ liked , McGovern was elected president of his sophomore class and voted " Glamour Boy " during his junior year . In February 1943 , during his junior year , he and a partner won a regional debate tournament at North Dakota State University that featured competitors from thirty @-@ two schools across a dozen states ; upon his return to campus , he discovered that the Army had finally called him up . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Soon thereafter McGovern was sworn in as a private at Fort Snelling in Minnesota . He spent a month at Jefferson Barracks Military Post in Missouri and then five months at Southern Illinois Normal University in Carbondale , Illinois , for ground school training ; McGovern later maintained that both the academic work and physical training were the toughest he ever experienced . He spent two months at a base in San Antonio , Texas , and then went to <unk> Field in Muskogee , Oklahoma , for basic flying school , training in a single @-@ engined PT ‑ 19 . McGovern married Eleanor <unk> on October 31 , 1943 during a three @-@ day leave ( lonely and in love , the couple had decided to not wait any longer ) ; his father presided over the ceremony at the small Methodist church in Woonsocket . After three months in Muskogee , McGovern went to Coffeyville Army Airfield in Kansas for a further three months of training on the BT ‑ 13 . Around April 1944 , McGovern went on to advanced flying school at Pampa Army Airfield in Texas for twin @-@ engine training on the AT ‑ 17 and AT ‑ 9 . Throughout , Air Cadet McGovern showed skill as a pilot , with his exceptionally good depth perception aiding him . Eleanor McGovern followed him to these different duty stations , and was present when he received his wings and was commissioned a Second Lieutenant . 
 McGovern was assigned to Liberal Army Airfield in Kansas and its transition school to learn to fly the B ‑ 24 Liberator , an assignment he was pleased with . McGovern recalled later : " Learning how to fly the B ‑ 24 was the toughest part of the training . It was a difficult airplane to fly , physically , because in the early part of the war , they didn 't have hydraulic controls . If you can imagine driving a Mack truck without any power steering or power brakes , that 's about what it was like at the controls . It was the biggest bomber we had at the time . " Eleanor was constantly afraid of her husband 's suffering an accident while training , which claimed a huge toll of airmen during the entire war . This schooling was followed by a stint at Lincoln Army Airfield in Nebraska , where McGovern met his B @-@ 24 crew . Traveling around the country and mixing with people from different backgrounds proved to be a broadening experience for McGovern and others of his generation . The USAAF sped up training times for McGovern and others due to the heavy losses that bombing missions were suffering over Europe . Despite , and partly because of , the risk that McGovern might not come back from combat , the McGoverns decided to have a child , and Eleanor became pregnant . In June 1944 , McGovern 's crew received final training at Mountain Home Army Air Field in Idaho . They then shipped out via Camp Patrick Henry in Virginia , where McGovern found history books with which to fill downtime , especially during the trip overseas on a slow troopship . 
 In September 1944 , McGovern joined the 741st Squadron of the <unk> Bombardment Group of the Fifteenth Air Force , stationed at San Giovanni Airfield near <unk> in the Apulia region of Italy . There he and his crew found a starving , disease @-@ ridden local population wracked by the ill fortunes of war and far worse off than anything they had seen back home during the Depression . Those sights would form part of his later motivation to fight hunger . Starting on November 11 , 1944 , McGovern flew 35 missions over enemy territory from San Giovanni , the first five as co @-@ pilot for an experienced crew and the rest as pilot for his own plane , known as the Dakota Queen after his wife Eleanor . His targets were in Austria ; Czechoslovakia ; Germany ; Hungary ; Poland ; and northern , German @-@ controlled Italy , and were often either oil refinery complexes or rail marshalling yards , all as part of the U.S. strategic bombing campaign in Europe . The eight- or nine @-@ hour missions were grueling tests of endurance for pilots and crew , and while German fighter aircraft were a diminished threat by this time as compared to earlier in the war , his missions often faced heavy anti @-@ aircraft artillery fire that filled the sky with flak bursts . 
 On McGovern 's December 15 mission over Linz , his second as pilot , a piece of shrapnel from flak came through the windshield and missed fatally wounding him by only a few inches . The following day on a mission to <unk> , he nearly collided with another bomber during close @-@ formation flying in complete cloud cover . The following day , he was recommended for a medal after surviving a blown wheel on the always @-@ dangerous B @-@ 24 take @-@ off , completing a mission over Germany , and then landing without further damage to the plane . On a December 20 mission against the Škoda Works at Pilsen , Czechoslovakia , McGovern 's plane had one engine out and another in flames after being hit by flak . Unable to return to Italy , McGovern flew to a British airfield on Vis , a small island in the Adriatic Sea off the Yugoslav coast that was controlled by Josip Broz Tito 's Partisans . The short field , normally used by small fighter planes , was so unforgiving to four @-@ engined aircraft that many of the bomber crews who tried to make emergency landings there perished . But McGovern successfully landed , saving his crew , a feat for which he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 In January 1945 , McGovern used R & R time to see every sight that he could in Rome , and to participate in an audience with the Pope . Bad weather prevented many missions from being carried out during the winter , and during such downtime McGovern spent much time reading and discussing how the war had come about . He resolved that if he survived it , he would become a history professor . In February , McGovern was promoted to First Lieutenant . On March 14 , McGovern had an incident over Austria in which he accidentally bombed a family farmhouse when a jammed bomb <unk> released above the structure and destroyed it , an event which haunted McGovern . ( Four decades later , after a McGovern public appearance in that country , the owner of the farm approached the media to let the Senator know that he was the victim of that incident but that no one had been hurt and the farmer felt that it had been worth the price if that event helped achieve the defeat of Nazi Germany in some small way . McGovern was greatly relieved . ) On returning to base from the flight , McGovern was told his first child Ann had been born four days earlier . April 25 saw McGovern 's 35th mission , which marked fulfillment of the Fifteenth Air Force 's requirement for a combat tour , against heavily defended Linz . The sky turned black and red with flak – McGovern later said " Hell can 't be any worse than that " – and the Dakota Queen was hit multiple times , resulting in 110 holes in its fuselage and wings and an inoperative hydraulic system . McGovern 's waist gunner was injured , and his flight engineer was so unnerved by his experience that he would subsequently be hospitalized with battle fatigue , but McGovern managed to bring back the plane safely with the assistance of an improvised landing technique . 
 In May and June 1945 , following the end of the European war , McGovern flew food relief flights to northern Italy , then flew back to the United States with his crew . McGovern was discharged from the Army Air Forces in July 1945 , with the rank of First Lieutenant . He was also awarded the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters , one instance of which was for the safe landing on his final mission . 
 = = Later education and early career = = 
 Upon coming home , McGovern returned to Dakota Wesleyan University , aided by the G.I. Bill , and graduated from there in June 1946 with a B.A. degree magna cum laude . For a while he suffered from nightmares about flying through flak barrages or his plane being on fire . He continued with debate , again winning the state Peace Oratory Contest with a speech entitled " From Cave to Cave " that presented a Christian @-@ influenced Wilsonian outlook . The couple 's second daughter , Susan , was born in March 1946 . 
 McGovern switched from Wesleyan Methodism to less fundamentalist regular Methodism . Influenced by Walter <unk> and the Social Gospel movement , McGovern began divinity studies at Garrett Theological Seminary in Evanston , Illinois , near Chicago . He preached as a Methodist student supply minister at Diamond Lake Church in <unk> , Illinois , during 1946 and 1947 , but became dissatisfied by the minutiae of his pastoral duties . In late 1947 , McGovern left the ministry and enrolled in graduate studies at Northwestern University in Evanston , where he also worked as a teaching assistant . The relatively small history program there was among the best in the country and McGovern took courses given by noted academics Ray Allen Billington , Richard W. Leopold , and L. S. <unk> . He received an M.A. in history in 1949 . 
 McGovern then returned to his alma mater , Dakota Wesleyan , and became a professor of history and political science . With the assistance of a Hearst fellowship for 1949 – 1950 , he continued pursuing graduate studies during summers and other free time . The couple 's third daughter , Teresa , was born in June 1949 . Eleanor McGovern began to suffer from bouts of depression , but continued to assume the large share of household and child @-@ rearing duties . McGovern earned a PhD in history from Northwestern University in 1953 . His 450 @-@ page dissertation , The Colorado Coal Strike , 1913 – 1914 , was a sympathetic account of the miners ' revolt against Rockefeller interests in the Colorado Coalfield War . His thesis advisor , noted historian Arthur S. Link , later said he had not seen a better student than McGovern in 26 years of teaching . McGovern was influenced not only by Link and the " Consensus School " of American historians but also by the previous generation of " progressive " historians . Most of his future analyses of world events would be informed by his training as a historian , as well as his personal experiences during the Great Depression and World War II . Meanwhile , McGovern had become a popular if politically outspoken teacher at Dakota Wesleyan , with students dedicating the college yearbook to him in 1952 . 
 Nominally a Republican growing up , McGovern began to admire Democratic President Franklin Delano Roosevelt during World War II , even though he supported Roosevelt 's opponent Thomas Dewey in the 1944 presidential election . At Northwestern , his exposure to the work of China scholars John King Fairbank and Owen Lattimore had convinced him that unrest in Southeast Asia was homegrown and that U.S. foreign policy towards Asia was counterproductive . Discouraged by the onset of the Cold War , and never thinking well of incumbent President Harry S. Truman , in the 1948 presidential election McGovern was attracted to the campaign of former Vice President and Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace . He wrote columns supporting Wallace in the Mitchell Daily Republic and attended the Wallace Progressive Party 's first national convention as a delegate . There he became disturbed by aspects of the convention atmosphere , decades later referring to " a certain rigidity and fanaticism on the part of a few of the strategists . " But he remained a public supporter of Wallace afterward , although , because Wallace was kept off the ballot in Illinois where McGovern was now registered , McGovern did not vote in the general election . 
 By 1952 , McGovern was coming to think of himself as a Democrat . He was captivated by a radio broadcast of Governor Adlai Stevenson 's speech accepting the presidential nomination at the 1952 Democratic National Convention . He immediately dedicated himself to Stevenson 's campaign , publishing seven articles in the Mitchell Daily Republic newspaper outlining the historical issues that separated the Democratic Party from the Republicans . The McGoverns named their only son Steven , born immediately after the convention , after his new hero . Although Stevenson lost the election , McGovern remained active in politics , believing that " the engine of progress in our time in America is the Democratic Party " . In early 1953 , McGovern left a tenure @-@ track position at the university to become executive secretary of the South Dakota Democratic Party , the state chair having recruited him after reading his articles . Democrats in the state were at a low , holding no statewide offices and only 2 of the 110 seats in the state legislature . Friends and political figures had counseled McGovern against making the move , but despite his mild , unassuming manner , McGovern had an ambitious nature and was intent upon starting a political career of his own . 
 McGovern spent the following years rebuilding and revitalizing the party , building up a large list of voter contacts via frequent travel around the state . Democrats showed improvement in the 1954 elections , winning 25 seats in the state legislature . From 1954 to 1956 he also was on a political organization advisory group for the Democratic National Committee . The McGoverns ' fifth and final child , Mary , was born in 1955 . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 In 1956 , McGovern sought elective office himself , and ran for the House of Representatives from South Dakota 's 1st congressional district , which consisted of the counties east of the Missouri River . He faced four @-@ term incumbent Republican Party Representative Harold O. Lovre . Aided by the voter lists he had earlier accumulated , McGovern ran a low @-@ budget campaign , spending $ 12 @,@ 000 while borrowing $ 5 @,@ 000 . His quiet personality appealed to voters he met , while Lovre suffered from a general unhappiness over Eisenhower administration farm policy . When polls showed McGovern gaining , Lovre 's campaign implied that McGovern 's support for admitting the People 's Republic of China to the United Nations and his past support for Henry Wallace meant that McGovern was a Communist <unk> or sympathizer . In his closing speech , McGovern responded : " I have always despised communism and every other ruthless tyranny over the mind and spirit of man . " McGovern staged an upset victory , gaining 116 @,@ 516 votes to his opponent 's 105 @,@ 835 , and became the first Democrat elected to Congress from South Dakota in 22 years . The McGoverns established a home in Chevy Chase , Maryland . 
 Entering the 85th United States Congress , McGovern became a member of the House Committee on Education and Labor . As a representative , McGovern was attentive to his district . He became a staunch supporter of higher commodity prices , farm price supports , grain storage programs , and beef import controls , believing that such stored commodities programs guarded against drought and similar emergencies . He favored rural development , federal aid to small business and to education , and medical coverage for the aged under Social Security . In 1957 , he traveled and studied conditions in the Middle East under a fellowship from the American Christian Palestine Committee . McGovern first allied with the Kennedy family by supporting a House version of Senator John F. Kennedy 's eventually unsuccessful labor reform bill . 
 In his 1958 reelection campaign , McGovern faced a strong challenge from South Dakota 's two @-@ term Republican Governor and World War II Medal of Honor recipient Joe Foss , who was initially considered the favorite to win . But McGovern ran an effective campaign that showcased his political strengths of having firm beliefs and the ability to articulate them in debates and on the stump . He prevailed with a slightly larger margin than two years before . 
 In the 86th United States Congress , McGovern was assigned to the House Committee on Agriculture . The longtime chair of the committee , Harold D. Cooley , would subsequently say , " I cannot recall a single member of Congress who has fought more vigorously or intelligently for American farmers than Congressman McGovern . " He helped pass a new food @-@ stamp law . He was one of nine representatives from Congress to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly conferences of 1958 and 1959 . Along with Senator Hubert H. Humphrey , McGovern strongly advocated a reconstruction of Public Law 480 ( an agricultural surplus act which had come into being under Eisenhower ) with a greater emphasis on feeding the hungry around the world , the establishment of an executive office to run operations , and the goal of promoting peace and stability around the world . During his time in the House , McGovern was regarded as a liberal overall , and voted in accordance with the rated positions of Americans for Democratic Action ( ADA ) 34 times and against 3 times . Two of the themes of his House career , improvements for rural America and the war on hunger , would be defining ones of his legislative career and public life . 
 In 1960 , McGovern decided to run for the U.S. Senate and challenge the Republican incumbent Karl Mundt , a formidable figure in South Dakota politics whom McGovern loathed as an old @-@ style McCarthyite . The race centered mostly around rural issues , but John F. Kennedy 's Catholicism was a drawback at the top of the ticket in the mostly Protestant state . McGovern made careless charges during the campaign , and the press turned against him ; he would say eleven years later , " It was my worst campaign . I hated [ Mundt ] so much I lost my sense of balance . " McGovern was defeated in the November 1960 election , gaining 145 @,@ 217 votes to Mundt 's 160 @,@ 579 , but the margin was one @-@ third of Kennedy 's loss to Vice President Richard M. Nixon in the state 's presidential contest . 
 = = Food for Peace director = = 
 Having relinquished his House seat to run for the Senate , McGovern was available for a position in the new Kennedy administration . McGovern was picked to become a Special Assistant to the President and first director of Kennedy 's high @-@ priority Food for Peace program , which realized what McGovern had been advocating in the House . McGovern assumed the post on January 21 , 1961 . 
 As director , McGovern urged the greater use of food to enable foreign economic development , saying , " We should thank God that we have a food abundance and use the over @-@ supply among the under @-@ privileged at home and abroad . " He found space for the program in the Executive Office Building rather than be subservient to either the State Department or Department of Agriculture . McGovern worked with deputy director James W. Symington and Kennedy advisor Arthur M. Schlesinger , Jr. in visiting South America to discuss surplus grain distribution , and attended meetings of the United Nations ' Food and Agriculture Organization . In June 1961 , McGovern became seriously ill with hepatitis , contracted from an infected White House dispensary needle used to give him inoculations for his South American trip ; he was hospitalized and unable to come to his office for two months . 
 By the close of 1961 , the Food for Peace program was operating in a dozen countries , and 10 million more people had been fed with American surplus than the year before . In February 1962 , McGovern visited India and oversaw a greatly expanded school lunch program thanks to Food for Peace ; subsequently one in five Indian schoolchildren would be fed from it , and by mid @-@ 1962 , 35 million children around the world . During an audience in Rome , Pope John XXIII warmly praised McGovern 's work , and the distribution program was also popular among South Dakota 's wheat farmers . In addition , McGovern was instrumental in the creation of the United Nations @-@ run World Food Programme in December 1961 ; it started distributing food to stricken regions of the world the following year and would go on to become the largest humanitarian agency fighting hunger worldwide . 
 Administration was never McGovern 's strength , however , and he was restless for another try at the Senate . With the approval of President Kennedy , McGovern resigned his post on July 18 , 1962 . Kennedy said that under McGovern , the program had " become a vital force in the world " , improving living conditions and economies of allies and creating " a powerful barrier to the spread of Communism " . Columnist Drew Pearson wrote that it was one of the " most spectacular achievements of the young Kennedy administration , " while Schlesinger would later write that Food for Peace had been " the greatest unseen weapon of Kennedy 's third @-@ world policy " . 
