 = = U.S. Senator = = 
 = = = 1962 election and early years as a senator = = = 
 In April 1962 , McGovern announced he would run for election to South Dakota 's other Senate seat , intending to face incumbent Republican Francis H. Case . Case died in June , however , and McGovern instead faced an appointed senator , former Lieutenant Governor Joseph H. Bottum . Much of the campaign revolved around policies of the Kennedy administration and its New Frontier ; Bottum accused the Kennedy family of trying to buy the Senate seat . McGovern appealed to those worried about the <unk> of young people from the state , and had the strong support of the Farmers Union . Polls showed Bottum slightly ahead throughout the race and McGovern was hampered by a recurrence of his hepatitis problem in the final weeks of the campaign ( during this hospitalization , McGovern read Theodore H. White 's classic The Making of the President , 1960 and for the first time began thinking about running for the office someday ) . Eleanor McGovern campaigned for her ailing husband and may have preserved his chance of winning . The November 1962 election result was very close and required a recount , but McGovern 's 127 @,@ 458 votes prevailed by a margin of 597 , making him the first Democratic senator from the state in 26 years and only the third since statehood in 1889 . 
 When he joined the Senate in January 1963 for the 88th Congress , McGovern was seated on the Senate Agriculture and Forestry Committee and Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee . On the Agriculture Committee , McGovern supported high farm prices , full parity , and controls on beef importation , as well as the administration 's Feed Grains Acreage Diversion Program . McGovern had a fractious relationship with Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman , who was less sympathetic to farmers ; McGovern 's 1966 resolution to informally scold Freeman made the senator popular back in his home state . Fellow new senator Edward M. Kennedy saw McGovern as a serious voice on farm policy and often sought McGovern 's guidance on agriculture @-@ related votes . McGovern was largely inactive on the Interior Committee until 1967 , when he was given the chair of the Subcommittee on Indian Affairs . However , Interior Committee chair Henry M. Jackson , who did not get along with McGovern personally or politically , refused to allow McGovern his own staff , greatly limiting his effectiveness . McGovern regretted not accomplishing more for South Dakota 's 30 @,@ 000 Sioux Indians , although after a McGovern @-@ introduced resolution on Indian self @-@ determination passed in 1969 , the Oglala Sioux named McGovern " Great White Eagle " . 
 In his first speech on the Senate floor in March 1963 , McGovern praised Kennedy 's Alliance for Progress initiative , but spoke out against U.S. policy towards Cuba , saying that it suffered from " our Castro fixation " . In August 1963 , McGovern advocated reducing the $ 53 billion defense budget by $ 5 billion ; influenced by advisor Seymour Melman , he held a special antipathy towards the doctrine of nuclear " overkill " . McGovern would try to reduce defense appropriations or limit military expenditures in almost every year during the 1960s . He also voted against many weapons programs , especially missile and anti @-@ missile systems , and also opposed military assistance to foreign nations . In 1964 McGovern published his first book , War Against Want : America 's Food for Peace Program . In it he argued for expanding his old program , and a Senate measure he introduced was eventually passed , adding $ 700 million to the effort 's funding . 
 Preferring to focus on broad policy matters and speeches , McGovern was not a master of Senate legislative tactics , and developed a reputation among some other senators for " not doing his homework " . Described as " a very private , <unk> guy " , he was not a member of the Senate " club " nor did he want to be , turning down in 1969 a chance to join the powerful Senate Rules Committee . Relatively few pieces of legislation bore his name , and his legislative accomplishments were generally viewed as modest , although he would try to influence the contents of others ' bills . In terms of ideology , McGovern fit squarely within modern American liberalism ; through 1967 he had voted in accordance with the rated positions of the ADA 92 percent of the time , and when lacking specific knowledge on a particular matter , he would ask his staff , " What are the liberals doing ? " 
 = = = Opposition to Vietnam War = = = 
 In a speech on the Senate floor in September 1963 , McGovern became the first member to challenge the growing U.S. military involvement in Vietnam . Bothered by the Buddhist crisis and other recent developments , and with concerns influenced by Vietnam historian Bernard Fall , McGovern said : 
 However , the speech was little noticed , and McGovern backed away from saying anything publicly for over a year afterward , partly because of the November 1963 assassination of President Kennedy and partly to not appear strident . Though more skeptical about it than most senators , McGovern voted in favor of the August 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution , which turned out to be an essentially unbounded authorization for President Lyndon B. Johnson to escalate U.S. involvement in the war . McGovern thought the commander @-@ in @-@ chief should be given limited authority to retaliate against an attack ; subsequently he said his instinct had been to vote no , but that he had voted yes based on Senator J. William Fulbright 's urging to stand behind Johnson politically . Indeed , the day after the resolution vote , McGovern spoke concerning his fears that the vote would lead to greater involvement in the war ; Wayne Morse , one of only two senators to oppose the resolution , sardonically noted that this fell into the category of " very interesting , but very belated " . This would become the vote that McGovern most bitterly regretted . 
 In January 1965 , McGovern made his first major address on Vietnam , saying that " We are not winning in South Vietnam ... I am very much opposed to the policy , now gaining support in Washington , of extending the war to the north . " McGovern instead proposed a five @-@ point plan advocating a negotiated settlement involving a federated Vietnam with local autonomy and a UN presence to guarantee security and fair treatment . The speech gave McGovern national visibility as one of the " doves " in the debate over Vietnam . However , McGovern made moderate @-@ to @-@ hawkish statements at times too , flatly rejecting unconditional withdrawal of U.S. forces and criticizing anti @-@ war draft @-@ card burnings as " immature , impractical , and illegal " . He eschewed personal criticism of Johnson . In November 1965 , McGovern traveled to South Vietnam for three weeks . The human carnage he saw in hospital wards deeply upset him , and he became increasingly outspoken about the war upon his return , more convinced than ever that Vietnam was a political , not military , problem . Now he was ready , as he later said , " not merely to dissent , but to crusade " against the war . 
 McGovern voted in favor of Vietnam military appropriations in 1966 through 1968 , not wanting to deprive U.S. forces of necessary equipment . Nevertheless , his anti @-@ war rhetoric increased throughout 1967 . Over the years , Johnson had invited McGovern and other Senate doves to the White House for attempts to explain the rationale for his actions in Vietnam ; McGovern came away from the final such visit , in August 1967 , shaken by the sight of a president " tortured and confused ... by the mess he has gotten into in Vietnam . " 
 = = = 1968 presidential and Senate campaigns = = = 
 In August 1967 , activist Allard K. Lowenstein founded the Dump Johnson movement , and soon it was seeking a Democratic Party figure to make a primaries campaign challenge against Johnson in the 1968 presidential election . The group 's first choice was Senator Robert Kennedy , who declined , as did another , and by late September 1967 they approached McGovern . After much deliberation McGovern declined , largely because he feared such a run would significantly damage his own chances for reelection to his Senate seat in 1968 . A month later the anti @-@ Johnson forces were able to convince Senator Eugene McCarthy to run , who was one of the few " dove " senators not up for reelection that year . 
 In the 1968 Democratic primary campaign , McCarthy staged a strong showing . Robert Kennedy entered the race , President Johnson withdrew and Vice President Hubert Humphrey ran instead . While McGovern privately favored Kennedy , McCarthy and Humphrey were both from the neighboring state of Minnesota and publicly McGovern remained neutral . McGovern hosted all three as they campaigned for the June 4 South Dakota Democratic primary , which resulted in a strong win by Kennedy to go along with his win in the crucial California primary that night . McGovern spoke with Kennedy by phone minutes before Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles . The death of Bobby Kennedy left McGovern the most emotionally distraught he had ever been to that point in his life . 
 Within days , some of Kennedy 's aides were urging McGovern to run in his place ; their antipathy towards McCarthy and ideological opposition to Humphrey made them unwilling to support either candidate . McGovern delayed making a decision , making sure that Bobby 's brother Ted Kennedy did not want to enter , and with his staff still concerned about the senator 's own reelection prospects . Indeed , McGovern 's voting had changed during 1968 , with his ADA rating falling to 43 as he sought more middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road stances . In late July , McGovern 's decision became more complicated when his daughter Teresa was arrested in Rapid City on marijuana possession charges . She had led a troubled life since her teenage years , developing problems with alcohol and depression and suffering the consequences of a relationship with an unstable neighborhood boy . Based on a recently enacted strict state drugs law , Terry now faced a minimum five @-@ year prison sentence if found guilty . McGovern was also convinced that the socially conservative voters of South Dakota would reject him due to his daughter 's arrest . Charges against her were subsequently dropped due to a technically invalid search warrant . 
 McGovern formally announced his candidacy on August 10 , 1968 , in Washington , two weeks in advance of the 1968 Democratic National Convention , committing himself to " the goals for which Robert Kennedy gave his life " . Asked why he was a better choice than McCarthy , he said , " Well – Gene really doesn 't want to be President , and I do . " At the convention in Chicago , Humphrey was the near @-@ certain choice while McGovern became the initial rallying point for around 300 leaderless Kennedy delegates . The chaotic circumstances of the convention found McGovern denouncing the Chicago police tactics against demonstrators as " police brutality " . Given the internal politics of the party , it was difficult for McGovern to gain in delegate strength , and black protest candidate Channing E. Phillips drew off some of his support . In the actual roll call , McGovern came in third with 146 ½ delegates , far behind Humphrey 's 1760 ¼ and McCarthy 's 601 . 
 McGovern endorsed Humphrey at the convention , to the dismay of some anti @-@ war figures who considered it a betrayal . Humphrey went on to lose the general election to Richard Nixon . McGovern returned to his Senate reelection race , facing Republican former Governor Archie M. <unk> . While South Dakota voters sympathized with McGovern over his daughter 's arrest , he initially suffered a substantial drop in popularity over the events in Chicago . However , McGovern conducted an energetic campaign that focused on his service to the state , while <unk> ran a lackluster effort . In November , McGovern won 57 percent of the vote in what he would consider the easiest and most decisive victory of his career . 
 = = = Middle Senate years and continued opposition to the Vietnam War = = = 
 During the 1968 Democratic Convention , a motion had been passed to establish a commission to reform the Democratic Party nomination process . In 1969 , McGovern was named chair of the Commission on Party Structure and Delegate Selection , also known as the McGovern – Fraser Commission ; due to the influence of former McCarthy and Kennedy supporters on the staff , the commission significantly reduced the role of party officials and insiders in the nomination process , increased the role of caucuses and primaries , and mandated quotas for proportional black , female , and youth delegate representation . A somewhat unintended consequence of the commission 's reforms was a massive increase in the number of presidential primaries ; this became true for the Republican Party as well . The U.S. presidential nominating process has been different ever since , with scholars and politicians debating whether all the changes are for the better . 
 In the wake of several high @-@ profile reports about hunger and malnutrition in the United States , the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs had been created in July 1968 , with McGovern as its chair . Seeking to dramatize the problem , in March 1969 McGovern took the committee to Immokalee , Florida , the base for 20 @,@ 000 migrant farm workers . They saw graphic examples of hunger and malnutrition firsthand , but also encountered resistance and complaints about bad publicity from local and state officials . McGovern battled the Nixon administration and Southerners in Congress during much of the next year over an expanded Food Stamp Program ; he had to compromise on a number of points , but legislation signed in 1970 established the principles of free food stamps and a nationwide standard for eligibility . 
 McGovern generally lacked both interest and expertise in economics , but was outspoken in reaction to Nixon 's imposition of wage and price controls in 1971 . McGovern declared : " This administration , which pledged to slow inflation and reduce unemployment , has instead given us the highest rate of inflation and the highest rate of unemployment in a decade . " 60 Minutes included him in a 1971 report about liberal politicians and journalists who advocated integrated schooling while avoiding it for their children . 
 But most of all , McGovern was known for his continued opposition to the Vietnam War . In March 1969 , he became the first senator to explicitly criticize the new president 's policy there , an action that was seen as a breach of customary protocol by other Senate doves . The diversion during these years of much of Food for Peace 's aid to South Vietnam , instead of other badly stricken countries around the world , greatly upset him . By the end of 1969 , McGovern was calling for an immediate cease @-@ fire and a total withdrawal of all American troops within a year . In October 1969 , McGovern was a featured speaker before 100 @,@ 000 demonstrators in Boston at the Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam , and in November he spoke before 350 @,@ 000 at Moratorium / Mobilization 's anti @-@ war march to the Washington Monument . Afterward , he decided that radicalized peace demonstrations were counterproductive and criticized anti @-@ war figures such as Rennie Davis , Tom Hayden , Huey Newton , Abbie Hoffman , and Jerry Rubin as " reckless " and " irresponsible " . 
 Instead , McGovern focused on legislative means to bring the war to an end . The McGovern – Hatfield Amendment to the annual military procurement bill , co @-@ sponsored by Republican Mark Hatfield of Oregon , required via funding cutoff a complete withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina by the end of 1970 . It underwent months of public discussion and alterations to make it acceptable to more senators , including pushing the deadline out to the end of 1971 . In May 1970 , McGovern obtained a second mortgage on his Washington home in order to fund a half @-@ hour televised panel discussion on the amendment on NBC . The broadcast brought in over $ 500 @,@ 000 in donations that furthered work on passage , and eventually the amendment gained the support of the majority of the public in polls . The effort was denounced by opposition groups organized by White House aide Charles Colson , which called McGovern and Hatfield " apostles of retreat and defeat " and " salesmen of surrender " and maintained that only the president could conduct foreign policy . The amendment was defeated in September 1970 by a 55 – 39 vote , just short of what McGovern had hoped would constitute at least a moral victory . During the floor debate McGovern criticized his colleagues opposing the measure : 
 The Senate reacted in startled , stunned silence , and some faces showed anger and fury ; when one member told McGovern he had been personally offended by the speech , McGovern said , " That 's what I meant to do . " McGovern believed Vietnam an immoral war that was destroying much of what was pure , hopeful , and different about America 's character as a nation . 
 The defeat of the amendment left McGovern embittered and somewhat more radicalized . He accused Vice President of South Vietnam Nguyen Cao Ky of running a heroin trafficking operation that was addicting American soldiers . In a retort to the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee chair John Stennis ' suggestion that U.S. troops might have to return to Cambodia , McGovern declared , " I 'm tired of old men dreaming up wars for young men to fight . If he wants to use American ground troops in Cambodia , let him lead the charge himself . " He denounced Nixon 's policy of Vietnamization as " <unk> [ ing ] the continued killing of the people of Indochina by technology and mercenaries " . In a Playboy interview , he said that Ho Chi Minh was the North Vietnamese George Washington . 
 McGovern – Hatfield was put up for a vote again in 1971 , with somewhat weaker provisions designed to gain more support . In polls , a large majority of the public now favored its intent , and McGovern took his name off a final form of it , as some senators were just objecting to him . Nevertheless , in June 1971 , it failed to pass again , gaining only a few more votes than the year before . McGovern was now certain that the only way the war would come to a quick end was if there was a new president . 
 = = = 1972 presidential campaign = = = 
 McGovern announced his candidacy on January 18 , 1971 , during a televised speech from the studios of KELO @-@ TV in Sioux Falls , South Dakota . At the time of his announcement , McGovern ranked fifth among Democrats in a presidential preference Gallup Poll . The earliest such entry since Andrew Jackson was designed to give him time to overcome the large lead of the front @-@ runner , Maine Senator Edmund Muskie . Nevertheless , by January 1972 , McGovern had only 3 percent national support among Democrats in the Gallup Poll and had not attracted significant press coverage . McGovern 's campaign manager , Gary Hart , decided on a guerrilla @-@ like insurgency strategy of battling Muskie in only selected primaries , not everywhere , so as to focus the campaign 's organizational strength and resources . 
 Muskie fell victim to inferior organizing , an over @-@ reliance on party endorsements , and Nixon 's " dirty tricks " operatives , and in the March 7 , 1972 , New Hampshire primary , did worse than expected with McGovern coming in a close second . As Muskie 's campaign funding and support dried up , Hubert Humphrey , who had rejoined the Senate , became McGovern 's primary rival for the nomination , with Alabama governor George Wallace also in the mix after dominating the March 14 primary in Florida . McGovern won a key breakthrough victory over Humphrey and Wallace on April 4 in Wisconsin , where he added blue @-@ collar economic populism to his appeal . He followed that by dominating the April 25 primary in Massachusetts . At that point , McGovern had become the front runner . A late decision to enter the May 2 Ohio primary , considered a Humphrey stronghold , paid dividends when McGovern managed a very close second there amid charges of election fraud by pro @-@ Humphrey forces . The other two leading candidates for the nomination also won primaries , but Wallace 's campaign effectively ended when he was seriously wounded in a May assassination attempt , and McGovern 's operation was effective in garnering delegates in caucus states . The climactic contest took place in California , with Humphrey attacking McGovern in several televised debates ; in the June 6 vote , McGovern defeated him by five percentage points and claimed all the delegates due to the state 's winner @-@ take @-@ all rules . He then appeared to clinch the nomination with delegates won in the New York primary on June 20 . However , Humphrey 's attacks on McGovern as being too radical began a downward slide in the latter 's poll standing against Nixon . McGovern became tagged with the label " amnesty , abortion and acid " , supposedly reflecting his positions . 
 During his primary victories , McGovern used an approach that stressed grassroots @-@ level organization while bypassing conventional campaign techniques and traditional party power centers . He capitalized on support from anti @-@ war activists and reform liberals ; thousands of students engaged in door @-@ to @-@ door campaigning for him . He benefited by the eight primaries he won being those the press focused on the most ; he showed electoral weakness in the South and industrial Midwest , and actually received fewer primary votes overall than Humphrey and had only a modest edge over Wallace . 
 McGovern ran on a platform that advocated withdrawal from the Vietnam War in exchange for the return of American prisoners of war and amnesty for draft evaders who had left the country . McGovern 's platform also included an across @-@ the @-@ board , 37 @-@ percent reduction in defense spending over three years . He proposed a " <unk> " program that would give a $ 1 @,@ 000 payment to every citizen in America . Based around existing ideas such as the negative income tax and intended to replace the welfare bureaucracy and complicated maze of existing public @-@ assistance programs , it nonetheless garnered considerable derision as a poorly thought @-@ out " liberal giveaway " and was dropped from the platform in August . 
 An " Anybody But McGovern " coalition , led by southern Democrats and organized labor , formed in the weeks following the final primaries . McGovern 's nomination did not become assured until the first night of the 1972 Democratic National Convention in Miami Beach , Florida , where , following intricate parliamentary maneuverings led by campaign staffer Rick Stearns , a Humphrey credentials challenge regarding the California winner @-@ take @-@ all rules was defeated . <unk> arguments over the party platform then followed ; what resulted was arguably the most liberal one of any major U.S. party . On July 12 , 1972 , McGovern officially won the Democratic nomination . In doing so and in taking over the party 's processes and platform , McGovern produced what The New York Times termed " a stunning sweep " . The convention distractions led to a hurried process to pick a vice presidential running mate . Turned down by his first choice , Ted Kennedy , as well as by several others , McGovern selected – with virtually no vetting – Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton . On the final night of the convention , procedural arguments over matters such as a new party charter , and a prolonged vice presidential nomination process that descended into farce , delayed the nominee 's acceptance speech . As a result , McGovern delivered his speech , " Come home America ! " , at three o 'clock in the morning , reducing his television audience from about 70 million people to about 15 million . 
 Just over two weeks after the convention , it was revealed that Eagleton had been hospitalized and received electroshock therapy for " nervous exhaustion " and " depression " several times during the early to mid @-@ 1960s ( years later , Eagleton 's diagnosis was refined to bipolar II disorder ) . McGovern initially supported Eagleton , in part because he saw parallels with his daughter Terry 's battles with mental illness , and on the following day , July 26 , stated publicly , " I am 1 @,@ 000 percent for Tom Eagleton and have no intention of dropping him from the ticket . " Though many people still supported Eagleton 's candidacy , an increasing number of influential politicians and newspapers questioned his ability to handle the office of vice president and , potentially , president or questioned the McGovern campaign 's ability to survive the distraction . The resulting negative attention – combined with McGovern 's consultation with preeminent psychiatrists , including Karl Menninger , as well as doctors who had treated Eagleton – prompted McGovern to accept , and announce on August 1 , Eagleton 's offer to withdraw from the ticket . It remains the only time major party vice @-@ presidential nominee has been forced off the ticket . Five prominent Democrats then publicly turned down McGovern 's offer of the vice presidential slot : in sequence , Kennedy again , Abraham Ribicoff , Humphrey , Reubin Askew , and Muskie ( Larry O 'Brien was also approached but no offer made ) . Finally , he named United States Ambassador to France Sargent Shriver , a brother @-@ in @-@ law of John F. Kennedy . McGovern 's 1 @,@ 000 percent statement and subsequent reneging made him look both indecisive and an opportunist , and has since been considered one of the worst gaffes in presidential campaign history . McGovern himself would long view the Eagleton affair as having been " catastrophic " for his campaign . 
 The general election campaign did not go well for McGovern . Nixon did little campaigning ; he was buoyed by the success of his visit to China and arms @-@ control @-@ signing summit meeting in the Soviet Union earlier that year and , shortly before the election , Henry Kissinger 's somewhat premature statement that " peace is at hand " in Vietnam . Top Republican figures attacked McGovern for being weak on defense issues and " encouraging the enemy " ; Nixon asserted that McGovern was for " peace at any price " in Vietnam , rather than the " peace with honor " that Nixon said he would bring about . McGovern chose to not emphasize his own war record during the campaign . The McGovern Commission changes to the convention rules marginalized the influence of establishment Democratic Party figures , and McGovern struggled to get endorsements from figures such as former President Johnson and Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley . The AFL – CIO remained neutral , after having always endorsed the Democratic presidential candidate in the past . Some southern Democrats , led by former Texas governor John Connally , switched their support to the incumbent President Nixon through a campaign effort called " Democrats for Nixon " . Nixon outspent McGovern by more than two @-@ to @-@ one . 
 Nixon directly requested that his aides use government records to try to dig up dirt on McGovern and his top contributors . McGovern was publicly attacked by Nixon surrogates and was the target of various operations of the Nixon " dirty tricks " campaign . The infamous Watergate break @-@ in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in June 1972 was an alternate target after bugging McGovern 's headquarters was explored . The full dimensions of the subsequent Watergate scandal did not emerge during the election , however ; the vast majority of the press focused on McGovern 's difficulties and other news , rather than the break @-@ in or who was behind it , and a majority of voters were unaware of Watergate . In the end , Nixon 's covert operations had little effect in either direction on the election outcome . 
 By the final week of the campaign , McGovern knew he was going to lose . While he was appearing in Battle Creek , Michigan , on November 2 , a Nixon admirer heckled him . McGovern told the heckler , " I 've got a secret for you , " then said softly into his ear , " Kiss my ass . " The incident was overheard and reported in the press , and became part of the tale of the campaign . 
 In the general election on November 7 , 1972 , the McGovern – Shriver ticket suffered a 61 @-@ percent to 37 @-@ percent defeat to Nixon – at the time , the second biggest landslide in American history , with an Electoral College total of 520 to 17 . McGovern 's two electoral vote victories came in Massachusetts and Washington , D.C. ; McGovern failed to win his home state of South Dakota ( which had gone Democratic in only three of the previous eighteen presidential elections ) . 
 = = = Remaining Senate years = = = 
 After this loss , McGovern remained in the Senate . He was scarred by the enormous defeat , and his wife Eleanor took it even worse ; during the winter of 1972 – 1973 , the couple seriously considered moving to England . His allies were replaced in positions of power within the Democratic Party leadership , and the McGoverns did not get publicly introduced at party affairs they attended . On January 20 , 1973 , a few hours after Richard Nixon was re @-@ inaugurated , McGovern gave a speech at the Oxford Union that talked about the abuses of Nixon 's presidency ; it brought criticism , including from some Democrats , for being ill @-@ mannered . In order to get past the " bitterness and self @-@ pity " he felt , McGovern forced himself to deal with the defeat humorously before audiences ; starting at the March 1973 Gridiron Dinner , he frequently related his campaign misadventures in a self @-@ deprecating fashion , such as saying , " For many years , I wanted to run for the Presidency in the worst possible way – and last year I sure did . " Nevertheless , emotions surrounding the loss would remain with McGovern for decades , as it did with some other defeated presidential nominees . Nixon resigned in August 1974 due to the Watergate scandal . McGovern said President Gerald R. Ford 's subsequent September 1974 pardon of Nixon was difficult to understand given that Nixon 's subordinates were going to prison . 
 McGovern displayed the political resiliency he had shown in the past . In the 1974 U.S. Senate elections , McGovern faced possible political peril due to having neglected the state during his long presidential campaign , and by May 1973 , he had already begun campaigning for reelection . An Air Force pilot and Medal of Honor recipient , Leo K. Thorsness , had just been repatriated after six years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam ; he publicly accused McGovern of having given aid and comfort to the enemy and of having prolonged his time as a POW . McGovern replied that if there had been no war , there would have been no POWs , and that everything he had done had been towards the goal of ending the war sooner . Thorsness became the Republican nominee against McGovern , but despite the two men 's different roles in it , the war did not become a significant issue . Instead , the campaign was dominated by farm policy differences and economic concerns over the 1973 – 75 recession . Thorsness charged McGovern with being a " part @-@ time senator " more concerned with national office and with spending over $ 2 million on his re ‑ election bid , while McGovern labelled Thorsness a carpetbagger due to his having grown up in Minnesota . In a year in which Democrats were advantaged by the aftereffects of the Watergate scandal , McGovern won re @-@ election in November 1974 with 53 percent of the vote . 
 Following the victory , McGovern harbored thoughts of running in the 1976 presidential election , but given the magnitude of his presidential defeat , the Democratic Party wanted nothing to do with him then or later . Unfamiliar and uncomfortable with Democratic nominee Jimmy Carter , McGovern secretly voted for Ford instead . McGovern 's view on intervention in Southeast Asia took a turn in 1978 in reaction to the ongoing Cambodian genocide . Noting that it affected a percentage of the population which made " Hitler 's operation look tame " , he advocated an international military intervention in Cambodia to put the Khmer Rouge regime out of power . 
 McGovern 's Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs expanded its scope to include national nutrition policy . In 1977 it issued a new set of nutritional guidelines for Americans that sought to combat leading killer health conditions . Titled Dietary Goals for the United States , but also known as the " McGovern Report " , it suggested that Americans eat less fat , less cholesterol , less refined and processed sugars , and more complex carbohydrates and fiber . While many public health officials had said all of this for some time , the committee 's issuance of the guidelines gave it higher public profile . The recommendations proved controversial with the cattle , dairy , egg , and sugar industries , including from McGovern 's home state . The McGovern committee guidelines led to reorganization of some federal executive functions and became the predecessor to the more detailed Dietary Guidelines for Americans later issued twice a decade by the Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion . 
 In the 1980 Senate election in South Dakota , McGovern was one of several liberal Democratic senators targeted for defeat by the National Conservative Political Action Committee ( NCPAC ) , which put out a year 's worth of negative portrayals of McGovern . It and other pro @-@ life groups especially focused on McGovern 's support for pro @-@ choice abortion laws . McGovern faced a Democratic primary challenge for the first time , from a pro @-@ life candidate . McGovern 's Republican opponent was James Abdnor , a four @-@ term incumbent congressman who held identical positions to McGovern 's on farm issues , was solidly conservative on national issues , and was well liked within the state . Abdnor 's campaign focused on both McGovern 's liberal voting record and what it said was McGovern 's lack of involvement in South Dakota affairs . McGovern made an issue of NCPAC 's outside involvement , and that group eventually withdrew from the campaign after Abdnor denounced a letter it had sent out . Far behind in the polls earlier , McGovern outspent Abdnor 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 and repeatedly criticized Abdnor 's refusal to debate him , thereby drawing attention to a slight speech defect Abdnor had . Showing the comeback pattern of some of his past races in the state , McGovern closed the gap for a while . However , in November 1980 McGovern was solidly defeated for re @-@ election , getting only 39 percent of the vote to Abdnor 's 58 percent . McGovern became one of many Democratic casualties of that year 's Republican sweep , which became known as the " Reagan Revolution " . 
 = = Post @-@ Senate life and 1984 presidential campaign = = 
 McGovern did not mourn leaving the Senate . Although being rejected by his own state stung , intellectually he could accept that South Dakotans wanted a more conservative representative ; he and Eleanor felt out of touch with the country and in some ways liberated by the loss . Nevertheless , he refused to believe that American liberalism was dead in the time of Reagan ; remaining active in politics , in January 1981 he founded the political organization Americans for Common Sense . The group sought to rally liberals , encourage liberal thinking , and combat the Moral Majority and other new Christian right forces . In 1982 , he turned the group into a political action committee , which raised $ 1 @.@ 2 million for liberal candidates in the 1982 U.S. Congressional elections . McGovern shut the committee down when he decided to run for president again . 
 McGovern also began teaching and lecturing at a number of universities in the U.S. and Europe , accepting one @-@ year contracts or less . From 1981 to 1982 , McGovern replaced historian Stephen Ambrose as a professor at the University of New Orleans . McGovern also began making frequent speeches , earning several hundred thousand dollars a year . 
 McGovern attempted another presidential run in the 1984 Democratic primaries . Friends and political admirers of McGovern initially feared the effort would prove an embarrassment , and McGovern knew himself that his chances of winning were remote , but he felt compelled to try to influence the <unk> debate in a liberal direction . Freed from the practical concerns of trying to win , McGovern outlined a ten @-@ point program of sweeping domestic and foreign policy changes ; because he was not seen as a threat , fellow competitors did not attack his positions , and media commentators praised him as the " conscience " of the Democratic Party . 
 While having name recognition , McGovern had little funding or staff , although he did garner critical funding from some celebrities and statesmen . He won a surprise third @-@ place showing in the Iowa caucuses amidst a crowded field of candidates , but finished fifth in the New Hampshire primary . He announced he would drop out unless he finished first or second in the Massachusetts primary , and when he came in third behind his former campaign manager Gary Hart and former Vice President Walter Mondale , he made good on his promise . He later endorsed Mondale , the eventual Democratic nominee . McGovern hosted Saturday Night Live on April 14 , 1984 . 
 McGovern addressed the party 's platform committee , and his name was placed in nomination at the 1984 Democratic National Convention , where he delivered a speech that strongly criticized President Reagan and praised Democratic unity . He received the votes of four delegates . He went on to actively support the Mondale @-@ Geraldine Ferraro ticket , whose eventual landslide defeat bore some similarities to his own in 1972 . 
 During the 1980s , McGovern was a fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies , a think tank in Washington , D.C. 
 McGovern had made several real estate investments in the D.C. area and became interested in hotel operations . In 1988 , using the money he had earned from his speeches , the McGoverns bought , renovated , and began running a 150 @-@ room inn in Stratford , Connecticut , with the goal of providing a hotel , restaurant and public conference facility . It went into bankruptcy in 1990 and closed the following year . In 1992 , McGovern 's published reflections on the experience appeared in Wall Street Journal and the Nation 's Restaurant News . He attributed part of the failure to the early 1990s recession , but also part to the cost of dealing with federal , state and local regulations that were passed with good intentions but made life difficult for small businesses , and to the cost of dealing with frivolous lawsuits . McGovern wrote , " I ... wish that during the years I was in public office I had had this firsthand experience about the difficulties business people face every day . That knowledge would have made me a better U.S. senator and a more understanding presidential contender . " 
 After briefly exploring another presidential run in the 1992 contest , McGovern instead became president of the Middle East Policy Council ( a non @-@ profit organization that seeks to educate American citizens and policy makers about the political , economic and security issues impacting U.S. national interests in the Middle East ) in July 1991 ; he had previously served on its board since 1986 . He held this position until 1997 , when he was replaced by Charles W. Freeman , Jr . 
 On the night of December 12 – 13 , 1994 , McGovern 's daughter Teresa fell into a snowbank in Madison , Wisconsin , while heavily intoxicated and died of hypothermia . Heavy press attention followed , and McGovern revealed his daughter had battled her alcoholism for years and had been in and out of many treatment programs while having had one extended period of sobriety . He authored an account of her life , Terry : My Daughter 's Life @-@ and @-@ Death Struggle with Alcoholism ; published in 1996 , it presented a harrowing , unsparing view of the depths to which she had descended , the torment that he and the rest of his family had experienced in trying unsuccessfully to help her , and his ongoing thoughts and guilt about whether the demands of his political career and the time he had spent away from the family had made things worse for her . The book was a modest best @-@ seller , and with the proceeds , he founded the Teresa McGovern Center in Madison to help others suffering from the combination of alcoholism and mental health problems . He would later say that Terry 's death was by far the most painful event in his life : " You never get over it , I 'm sure of that . You get so you can live with it , that 's all . " 
 = = Ambassador to food agencies and other later activities = = 
 In April 1998 , McGovern returned to public service when he began a three @-@ year stint as United States Ambassador to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture , serving in Rome , Italy , after having been named to the post by President Bill Clinton . In an effort to meet the UN 's goal of reducing the number of hungry people in the world by half by 2015 , he formulated detailed plans , urging delivery of more surplus food to foreign school @-@ lunch programs and the establishment of specific targets such as had been done in old American programs . He began working again with fellow former Senator Bob Dole to convince the Senate to support this effort , as well as expanded school lunch , food stamps , and nutritional help for pregnant women and poor children in the U.S. 
 The George McGovern – Robert Dole International Food for Education and Nutrition Program that was created in 2000 , and funded largely through the Congress , would go on to provide more than 22 million meals to children in 41 countries over the next eight years . It was also credited with improving school attendance , especially among girls , who were more likely to be allowed to go to school if a meal was being provided . In August 2000 , President Clinton presented McGovern with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the nation 's highest civilian honor , in recognition of McGovern 's service in the effort to eradicate world hunger . McGovern 's book The Third Freedom : Ending Hunger In Our Time was published in January 2001 ; with its title making reference to Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms speech , it proposed a plan whereby chronic world hunger could be eliminated within thirty years . In January 2001 , McGovern was asked to stay on at the UN post for a while by the incoming George W. Bush administration and then concluded his stint in September 2001 . 
 In October 2001 , McGovern was appointed as the first UN Global Ambassador on World Hunger by the World Food Programme , the agency he had helped found forty years earlier . He was still active in this Goodwill Ambassador position as of 2011 and remained in it until his death . McGovern was an honorary life member of the board of Friends of the World Food Program . McGovern also served as a Senior Policy Advisor at Olsson Frank <unk> , a food and drug regulatory counseling law and lobbying firm in Washington , D.C. , where he specialized on issues of food , nutrition , and agriculture . 
 McGovern 's wartime story was at the center of Ambrose 's 2001 best @-@ selling profile of the men who flew B ‑ 24s over Germany in World War II , The Wild Blue . It was the first time much of the public became familiar with that part of his life ; throughout his political career , McGovern had rarely mentioned his war service or the medals he had won . 
 McGovern continued to lecture and make public appearances , sometimes appearing with Dole on college campuses . McGovern and Dole contributed essays to the 2005 volume Ending Hunger Now : A Challenge to Persons of Faith . From around 2003 to 2005 , McGovern owned a bookstore in his summer home of Stevensville in Montana 's Bitterroot Valley , until deciding to sell it due to lack of sufficient market . In 2003 , the McGoverns became part @-@ time residents of Marco Island , Florida ; by then , Eleanor was struggling with heart disease . 
 In October 2006 , the $ 8 @.@ 5 million George and Eleanor McGovern Library and Center for Leadership and Public Service was dedicated at Dakota Wesleyan University . The couple had helped raise the funds for it . It seeks to prepare the college 's best students for future careers in public service through classes , seminars , research , and internships , and also to raise the visibility of the university . The dignitaries in attendance were led by former President Clinton . McGovern 's wife Eleanor was too ill to attend the ceremony , and she died of heart disease on January 25 , 2007 , at their home in Mitchell . Later in 2007 , several events were held at Dakota Wesleyan and in Washington , D.C. , to celebrate McGovern 's 85th birthday and the 35th anniversary of his nomination for president . Hundreds of former staff , volunteers , supporters and friends attended , along with public officials . 
 McGovern still sought to have his voice heard in the American political scene . He became an outspoken opponent of the Iraq War , likening U.S. involvement in that country to that of the failed Vietnam effort , and in 2006 co @-@ wrote the book Out of Iraq : A Practical Plan for Withdrawal Now . In January 2008 , McGovern wrote an op @-@ ed in the Washington Post calling for the impeachment of President George W. Bush and Vice @-@ President Dick Cheney , saying they had violated the U.S. Constitution , transgressed national and international law , and repeatedly lied to the American people . The subtitle of the article read " Nixon Was Bad . These Guys Are Worse . " In the tumultuous 2008 Democratic Party presidential nomination campaign , he first endorsed U.S. Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and then later switched to Senator Barack Obama after concluding Clinton could no longer win . 
 On October 16 , 2008 , McGovern and Dole were made World Food Prize laureates for their efforts to curb hunger in the world and in particular for their joint program for school feeding and enhanced school attendance . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 By 2009 , McGovern had moved to St. Augustine Beach , Florida . McGovern 's seventh book ( as author , co @-@ author , or contributing editor ) issued in the first decade of the 2000s , Abraham Lincoln , was published by Times Books and released at the close of 2008 . Throughout 2009 , McGovern embarked on a book tour , including a prominent visit to the Nixon Presidential Library and Museum . 
 He was treated for exhaustion during 2011 and then was hospitalized after a serious fall in December 2011 on his way to participate in a live C @-@ SPAN program about his 1972 presidential campaign . By January 2012 , he was promoting his latest book , What It Means to Be a Democrat . He was hospitalized again in April 2012 due to fainting spells . McGovern 's 90th birthday was celebrated on July 19 , 2012 , with a Washington event hosted by World Food Program USA and attended by many liberal Democratic politicians , along with ( as the Washington Post termed it ) " one respectful conservative " , South Dakota 's Republican Senator John Thune . On July 27 , 2012 , McGovern 's son Steven died at age 60 . McGovern 's daughter Ann said , " Steve had a long struggle with alcoholism . We will all miss him deeply , but are grateful that he is now at peace . " In August 2012 , McGovern moved back to Sioux Falls , South Dakota , to be nearer to his family . His final public appearance was on October 6 , 2012 , when he introduced his recorded narration for Aaron Copland 's " Lincoln Portrait " with the South Dakota Symphony Orchestra . 
 On October 15 , 2012 , McGovern 's family announced he had entered Dougherty Hospice House , a Sioux Falls hospice ; his daughter Ann said , " He 's coming to the end of his life " . On the morning of October 21 , 2012 , McGovern died at the age of 90 at the Sioux Falls hospice , surrounded by family and lifelong friends . The family released this statement , " We are blessed to know that our father lived a long , successful and productive life advocating for the hungry , being a progressive voice for millions and fighting for peace . He continued giving speeches , writing and advising all the way up to and past his 90th birthday , which he celebrated this summer . " In addition to his three remaining children , he was survived by ten grandchildren and eight great @-@ grandchildren . President Obama paid tribute to him as " a champion for peace " and a " statesman of great conscience and conviction " . At a memorial service in Sioux Falls , Vice President Joe Biden eulogized McGovern , addressing McGovern 's World War II service and his opposition to the Vietnam War in saying to his family , " Your father was a genuine hero . ... Had your father not been in the Senate , so much more blood , so much more treasure would have been wasted . " His funeral was held in the Washington Pavilion of Arts and Science in Sioux Falls with his ashes to be buried alongside his wife and daughter Terry at Rock Creek Cemetery in Washington . 
 On July 26 , 2015 , the Argus Leader , the daily newspaper in Sioux Falls , South Dakota , published an article detailing the extensive files on McGovern compiled through the years by the Federal Bureau of Investigation , including letters and notations from FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover , revealing that Hoover had a direct interest in the FBI monitoring of McGovern . The newspaper also published the complete FBI file on McGovern , obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request filed shortly after McGovern 's death . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Due to his resounding loss to Nixon in the 1972 election and the causes behind it , " <unk> " became a label that a generation of Democratic politicians tried to avoid . In 1992 , nationally syndicated Chicago Tribune columnist Bob Greene wrote , " Once again politicians – mostly Republicans , but some Democrats , too – are using his name as a synonym for presidential campaigns that are laughable and out of touch with the American people . " Conservatives used McGovern 's name as a ready synonym for what they saw as liberal failures . Indeed , according to Daniel McCarthy of The American Conservative , the Republican Party began to act after 1972 as if " every Democratic leader , no matter how Southern , how pro @-@ war , how middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road , is really a <unk> . Indeed , for nearly 40 years the conservative movement has defined itself in opposition to the Democratic standard @-@ bearer of 1972 . Anti @-@ <unk> has come to play for the Right the unifying role that anticommunism once played , much to the detriment of older principles such as limited government , fiscal continence , and prudence in foreign policy . " The association with <unk> and weakness on defense has been especially prevalent , although McGovern publicly stated in 1972 that he was not a pacifist and that use of force was sometimes necessary , such as in World War II . McGovern later said in 2001 that his political image had been exaggerated : " I am a liberal and always have been – just not the wild @-@ eyed character the Republicans made me out to be . " He continued to feel that he was marginalized with his views miscast . He saw himself as a son of the prairie , in 2005 reciting his traditional upbringing and family values , culminating with " I 'm what a normal , healthy , ideal American should be like , " and in 2006 said , " How the hell do you get elected in South Dakota for twenty years if you 're a wild @-@ eyed radical ? " 
 In later decades the former senator remained a symbol , or standard @-@ bearer , of the political left , particularly in relation to the turbulent 1960s and early 1970s when the country was torn by U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War and the corruption and abuse of power of the Nixon administration . Throughout his career , McGovern 's positions reflected his own experiences as well as a personal synthesis of the traditions of American liberalism and progressivism . Southern Methodist University historian Thomas J. Knock wrote in 2003 that " [ McGovern 's ] career was extraordinary and historic ... primarily because of his impress as searching and prophetic critic " and that " few political careers offer an alternative understanding of the American Century as compelling and instructive as McGovern 's . " 
 As chair of the McGovern – Fraser Commission in 1969 – 1970 , McGovern instituted major changes in Democratic party rules that continue to this day and , to a large degree , were ultimately adopted by the Republican Party as well , with large institutional changes taking place in both . Among those was the centralization of decisions about the nominating process at the national party level , rather than with the states . His 1972 campaign fundamentally altered how presidential primary campaigns were waged . Within the Democratic Party , power shifted from the New Deal coalition to younger , more affluent , issue @-@ oriented activists ; the women 's movement and gay rights movement found a place ; skepticism about military buildups and foreign interventions took hold ; and the 1960s " New Politics " found its culmination in McGovern 's nomination . In turn , the overwhelming defeat of McGovern in the general election led to the liberal wing of the party 's being stigmatized for decades to come and a turn in the party towards centrist directions . McGovern himself recognized the mixed results of his 1972 candidacy , saying , " We made a serious effort to open the doors of the Democratic Party – and as soon as we did , half the Democrats walked out . " SUNY Albany political scientist Bruce <unk> wrote in 2007 that the McGovern campaign was the last time in presidential politics that liberals had " their chance to speak of their goals with enthusiasm and their dreams with fire ... Yet almost at the instant that the insurgents successfully stormed the heights of American politics , they found themselves on the brink of one of the worst free falls on record . " 
 Staffers who worked on McGovern 's 1972 campaign later became influential within the Democratic Party . Campaign manager Gary Hart staged his own presidential runs in 1984 and 1988 . Future president Bill Clinton , with assistance from his future wife and politician Hillary Rodham , had managed the McGovern campaign 's operations in Texas . Hart both embraced and moved away from aspects of his past affiliation with McGovern , while Clinton , and the Democratic Leadership Council movement of which he was a part , explicitly rejected McGovern 's ideology . But there was still a legacy in terms of staffing , as the Clinton White House would be full of former " <unk> " . 
 McGovern 's post @-@ political career generally enhanced his reputation ; Tom Brokaw , who referred to McGovern as part of the " Greatest Generation " , wrote in 1998 that " He remains one of the country 's most decent and thoughtful public servants . " McGovern 's legacy also includes his commitment to combating hunger both in the United States and around the globe . He said , " After I 'm gone , I want people to say about me : He did the best he could to end hunger in this country and the world . " In the view of Knock , McGovern in all his activities arguably accomplished more for people in need than most presidents or secretaries of state in U.S. history . Responding to the Serenity Prayer 's desire to " grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change " , McGovern said simply that he rejected that notion : " I keep trying to change them . " 
 = = Writings = = 
 = Robert Peake the Elder = 
 Robert Peake the Elder ( c . 1551 – 1619 ) was an English painter active in the later part of Elizabeth I 's reign and for most of the reign of James I. In 1604 , he was appointed picture maker to the heir to the throne , Prince Henry ; and in 1607 , serjeant @-@ painter to King James I – a post he shared with John De Critz . Peake is often called " the elder " , to distinguish him from his son , the painter and print seller William Peake ( c . 1580 – 1639 ) and from his grandson , Sir Robert Peake ( c . 1605 – 67 ) , who followed his father into the family print @-@ selling business . 
 Peake was the only English @-@ born painter of a group of four artists whose workshops were closely connected . The others were De Critz , Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger , and the miniature painter Isaac Oliver . Between 1590 and about 1625 , they specialised in brilliantly coloured , full @-@ length " costume pieces " that are unique to England at this time . It is not always possible to attribute authorship between Peake , De Critz , Gheeraerts and their assistants with certainty . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life and work = = = 
 Peake was born to a Lincolnshire family in about 1551 . He began his training on 30 April 1565 under Laurence Woodham , who lived at the sign of " The Key " in Goldsmith ’ s Row , <unk> . He was apprenticed , three years after the miniaturist Nicholas Hilliard , to the Goldsmiths ’ Company in London . He became a freeman of the company on 20 May 1576 . His son William later followed in his father 's footsteps as a freeman of the Goldsmiths ' Company and a portrait painter . Peake ’ s training would have been similar to that of John de Critz and Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger , who may have been pupils of the Flemish artist Lucas de Heere . 
 Peake is first heard of professionally in 1576 in the pay of the Office of the Revels , the department that oversaw court festivities for Elizabeth I. When Peake began practising as a portrait painter is uncertain . According to art historian Roy Strong , he was " well established " in London by the late 1580s , with a " fashionable clientele " . Payments made to him for portraits are recorded in the Rutland accounts at Belvoir in the 1590s . A signed portrait from 1593 , known as the " Military Commander " , shows Peake ’ s early style . Other portraits have been grouped with it on the basis of similar lettering . Its three @-@ quarter @-@ length portrait format is typical of the time . 
 = = = Painter to Prince Henry = = = 
 In 1607 , after the death of Leonard Fryer , Peake was appointed serjeant @-@ painter to King James I , sharing the office with John De Critz , who had held the post since 1603 . The role entailed the painting of original portraits and their reproduction as new versions , to be given as gifts or sent to foreign courts , as well as the copying and restoring of portraits by other painters in the royal collection . 
 In addition to copying and restoring portraits , the serjeant @-@ painters also undertook decorative tasks , such as the painting of banners and stage scenery . Parchment rolls of the Office of the Works record that De Critz oversaw the decorating of royal houses and palaces . Since Peake ’ s work is not recorded there , it seems as if De Critz took responsibility for the more decorative tasks , while Peake continued his work as a royal portrait painter . However , Peake and Paul <unk> painted the cabins , carvings , and armorials on the ship the Prince Royal in 1611 . 
 In 1610 , Peake was described as " painter to Prince Henry " , the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old prince who was gathering around him a significant cultural salon . Peake commissioned a translation of Books I @-@ V of Sebastiano Serlio ’ s <unk> , which he dedicated to the prince in 1611 . Scholars have deduced from payments made to Peake that his position as painter to Prince Henry led to his appointment as serjeant @-@ painter to the king . The payments were listed by the Prince 's household officer Sir David Murray as disbursements from the Privy Purse to " Mr Peck " . On 14 October 1608 , Peake was paid £ 7 for " pictures made by His Highness ’ command " ; and on 14 July 1609 , he was paid £ 3 " for a picture of His Highness which was given in exchange for the King ’ s picture " . At about the same time , Isaac Oliver was paid £ <unk> for each of three miniatures of the prince . Murray ’ s accounts reveal , however , that the prince was paying more for tennis balls than for any picture . 
 Peake is also listed in Sir David Murray 's accounts for the period between 1 October 1610 and 6 November 1612 , drawn up to the day on which Henry , Prince of Wales , died , possibly of typhoid fever , at the age of eighteen : " To Mr Peake for pictures and frames £ 12 ; two great pictures of the Prince in arms at length sent beyond the seas £ 50 ; and to him for washing , scouring and dressing of pictures and making of frames £ <unk> " . Peake is listed in the accounts for Henry ’ s funeral under " <unk> and officers of the Works " as " Mr Peake the elder painter " . For the occasion , he was allotted seven yards of mourning cloth , plus four for a servant . Also listed is " Mr Peake the younger painter " , meaning Robert 's son William , who was allotted four yards of mourning cloth . 
 After the prince 's death , Peake moved on to the household of Henry 's brother , Charles , Duke of York , the future Charles I of England . The accounts for 1616 , which call Peake the prince ’ s painter , record that he was paid £ 35 for " three several pictures of his Highness " . On 10 July 1613 , he was paid £ <unk> by the vice @-@ chancellor of the University of Cambridge , " in full satisfaction for Prince Charles his picture " , for a full @-@ length portrait which is still in the Cambridge University Library . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Peake died in 1619 , probably in mid @-@ October . Until relatively recently , it was believed that Peake died later . Erna Auerbach , Tudor Artists , London , 1954 , p . 148 , put his death at around 1625 , for example . The catalogue for The Age of Charles I exhibition at the Tate Gallery in 1972 , p . 89 , suggested Peake was active as late as 1635 . His will was made on 10 October 1619 and proved on the 16th . The date of his burial is unknown because the Great Fire of London later destroyed the registers of his parish church , St Sepulchre @-@ without @-@ Newgate . This was a time of several deaths in the artistic community . Nicholas Hilliard had died in January ; Queen Anne , who had done so much to patronise the arts , in March ; and the painter William Larkin , Peake ’ s neighbour , in April or May . Though James I reigned until 1625 , art historian Roy Strong considers that the year 1619 " can satisfactorily be accepted as the terminal date of Jacobean painting " . 
 = = Paintings = = 
 It is difficult to attribute and date portraits of this period because painters rarely signed their work , and their workshops produced portraits en masse , often sharing standard portrait patterns . Some paintings , however , have been attributed to Peake on the basis of the method of inscribing the year and the sitter 's age on his documented portrait of a " military commander " ( 1592 ) , which reads : " <unk> | <unk> " ( " made by Robert Peake " ) . Art historian Ellis Waterhouse , however , suspected that the letterer may have worked for more than one studio . 
 = = = Procession Picture = = = 
 The painting known as Queen Elizabeth going in procession to Blackfriars in 1601 , or simply The Procession Picture ( see illustration ) , is now often accepted as the work of Peake . The attribution was made by Roy Strong , who called it " one of the great visual mysteries of the Elizabethan age " . It is an example of the convention , prevalent in the later part of her reign , of painting Elizabeth as an icon , portraying her as much younger and more triumphant than she was . As Strong puts it , " [ t ] his is Gloriana in her sunset glory , the mistress of the set piece , of the calculated spectacular presentation of herself to her adoring subjects " . George Vertue , the eighteenth @-@ century antiquarian , called the painting " not well nor ill done " . 
 Strong reveals that the procession was connected to the marriage of Henry Somerset , Lord Herbert , and Lady Anne Russell , one of the queen ’ s six maids of honour , on 16 June 1600 . He identifies many of the individuals portrayed in the procession and shows that instead of a litter , as was previously assumed , Queen Elizabeth is sitting on a wheeled cart or chariot . Strong also suggests that the landscape and castles in the background are not intended to be realistic . In accordance with Elizabethan stylistic conventions , they are emblematic , here representing the Welsh properties of Edward Somerset , Earl of Worcester , to which his son Lord Herbert was the heir . The earl may have commissioned the picture to celebrate his appointment as Master of the Queen ’ s Horse in 1601 . 
 Peake clearly did not paint the queen , or indeed the courtiers , from life but from the " types " or standard portraits used by the workshops of the day . Portraits of the queen were subject to restrictions , and from about 1594 there seems to have been an official policy that she always be depicted as youthful . In 1594 , the Privy council ordered that unseemly portraits of the queen be found and destroyed , since they caused Elizabeth " great offence " . The famous Ditchley portrait ( c . 1592 ) , by Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger , was used as a type , sometimes called the " Mask of Youth " face @-@ pattern , for the remainder of the reign . It is clear that Gheeraerts ' portrait provided the pattern for the queen ’ s image in the procession picture . Other figures also show signs of being traced from patterns , leading to infelicities of perspective and proportion . 
 = = = Full @-@ length portraits = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1590s , the full @-@ length portrait came into vogue and artistic patrons among the nobles began to add galleries of such paintings to their homes as a form of cultural ostentation . Peake was one of those who met the demand . He was also among the earliest English painters to explore the full @-@ length individual or group portrait with active figures placed in a natural landscape , a style of painting that became fashionable in England . As principal painter to Prince Henry , Peake seems to have been charged with showing his patron as a dashing young warrior . 
 In 1603 , he painted a double portrait , now in the Metropolitan Museum , New York , of the prince and his boyhood friend John Harington , son of Lord Harington of Exton ( see above ) . The double portrait is set outdoors , a style introduced by Gheeraerts in the 1590s , and Peake 's combination of figures with animals and landscape also foreshadows the genre of the sporting picture . The country location and recreational subject lend the painting an air of informality . The action is natural to the setting , a fenced deer @-@ park with a castle and town in the distance . Harington holds a wounded stag by the antlers as Henry draws his sword to deliver the coup de grâce . The prince wears at his belt a jewel of St George slaying the dragon , an allusion to his role as defender of the realm . His sword is an attribute of kingship , and the young noble kneels in his service . The stag is a fallow deer , a non @-@ native species kept at that time in royal parks for hunting . A variant of this painting in the Royal Collection , painted c . 1605 , features Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex , in the place of John Harington and displays the Devereux arms . 
 In the same year , Peake also painted his first portrait of James I 's only surviving daughter , Elizabeth . This work , like the double portrait , for which it might be a companion piece , appears to have been painted for the Harington family , who acted as Elizabeth 's guardians from 1603 to 1608 . In the background of Elizabeth 's portrait is a hunting scene echoing that of the double portrait , and two ladies sit on an artificial mound of a type fashionable in garden design at the time . 
 Peake again painted Henry outdoors in about 1610 . In this portrait , now at the Royal Palace of Turin , the prince looks hardly older than in the 1603 double portrait ; but his left foot rests on a shield bearing the three @-@ feathers device of the Prince of Wales , a title he did not hold until 1610 . Henry is portrayed as a young man of action , about to draw a jewel @-@ encrusted sword from its scabbard . The portrait was almost certainly sent to Savoy in connection with a marriage proposed in January 1611 between Henry and the Infanta Maria , daughter of Charles Emmanuel I , Duke of Savoy . 
 James I 's daughter Elizabeth was also a valuable marriage pawn . She too was offered to Savoy , as a bride for the Prince of Piedmont , the heir of Charles Emanuel . The exchange of portraits as part of royal marriage proposals was the practice of the day and provided regular work for the royal painters and their workshops . Prince Henry commissioned portraits from Peake to send them to the various foreign courts with which marriage negotiations were underway . The prince ’ s accounts show , for example , that the two portraits Peake painted of him in arms in 1611 – 12 were " sent beyond the seas " . 
 A surviving portrait from this time shows the prince in armour , mounted on a white horse and pulling the winged figure of Father Time by the forelock . Art historian John Sheeran suggests this is a classical allusion that signifies opportunity . The old man carries Henry 's lance and plumed helmet ; and scholar Chris Caple points out that his pose is similar to that of Albrecht Dürer 's figure of death in Knight , Death and the Devil ( 1513 ) . He also observes that the old man was painted later than other components of the painting , since the bricks of the wall show through his wings . When the painting was restored in 1985 , the wall and the figure of time were revealed to modern eyes for the first time , having been painted over at some point in the seventeenth century by other hands than Peake 's . The painting has also been cut down , the only original canvas edge being that on the left . 
 = = = Lady Elizabeth Pope = = = 
 Peake 's portrait of Lady Elizabeth Pope may have been commissioned by her husband , Sir William Pope , to commemorate their marriage in 1615 . Lady Elizabeth is portrayed with her hair loose , a symbol of bridal virginity . She wears a draped mantle — embroidered with seed pearls in a pattern of ostrich plumes — and a matching turban . The mantle knotted on one shoulder was worn in Jacobean court masques , as the costume designs of Inigo Jones indicate . The painting ’ s near @-@ nudity , however , makes the depiction of an actual masque costume unlikely . Loose hair and the classical draped mantle also figure in contemporary personifications of abstract concepts in masques and paintings . Yale art historian Ellen <unk> argues that Peake is portraying Lady Elizabeth as a personification of America , since her father , Sir Thomas Watson , was a major shareholder in the Virginia Company . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 In 1598 , Francis Meres , in his Palladis Tamia , included Peake on a list of the best English artists . In 1612 , Henry Peacham wrote in The Gentleman 's Exercise that his " good friend Mr Peake " , along with Marcus Gheeraerts , was outstanding " for oil colours " . Ellis Waterhouse suggested that the genre of elaborate costume pieces was as much a decorative as a plastic art . He notes that these works , the " enamelled brilliance " of which has become apparent through cleaning , are unique in European art and deserve respect . They were produced chiefly by the workshops of Peake , Gheeraerts the Younger , and De Critz . Sheeran detects the influence of Hilliard ’ s brightly patterned and coloured miniatures in Peake ’ s work and places Peake firmly in the " iconic tradition of late Elizabethan painting " . He employed techniques from European Mannerism and followed the artificial and decorative style characteristic of Elizabethan painting . By the time he was appointed serjeant @-@ painter in 1607 , his compelling and semi @-@ naive style was somewhat old fashioned compared with De Critz and other contemporaries . However , Peake 's portraits of Prince Henry are the first to show his subject in ‘ action ’ poses . 
 Sheeran believes that Peake 's creativity waned into conservatism , his talent " dampened by mass production " . He describes Peake 's Cambridge portrait , Prince Charles , as Duke of York as poorly drawn , with a lifeless pose , in a stereotyped composition that " confirms the artist 's reliance on a much repeated formula in his later years " . Art historian and curator Karen Hearn , on the other hand , praises the work as " magnificent " and draws attention to the naturalistically rendered note pinned to the curtain . Peake painted the portrait to mark Charles ’ s visit to Cambridge on 3 and 4 March 1613 , during which he was awarded an M.A. — four months after the death of his brother . Depicting Prince Charles wearing the Garter and Lesser George , Peake here reverts to a more formal , traditional style of portraiture . The note pinned to a curtain of cloth of gold , painted in trompe @-@ l 'œil fashion , commemorates Charles ’ s visit in Latin . X @-@ rays of the portrait reveal that Peake painted it over another portrait . <unk> , or signs of alteration , can be detected : for example , Charles ’ s right hand originally rested on his waist . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = 2 / 17th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 17th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . Raised in April 1940 in New South Wales , it formed part of the 20th Brigade , and was eventually allocated to the 9th Division . After completing basic training in Australia , the unit was deployed to the Middle East . In early 1941 , it took part in the fighting at Tobruk , defending the port until relieved . A period of garrison duties followed in Syria and Lebanon before the battalion took part in the First and Second Battles of El Alamein in mid @-@ 1942 . As the focus of the Australian Army 's operations shifted to the Pacific theatre to fight the Japanese , the 2 / 17th Battalion returned to Australia early in 1943 . 
 In 1943 – 44 , the battalion fought in New Guinea , conducting an amphibious landing as part of operations to capture Lae in early September at the end of the Salamaua – Lae campaign , before participating in the follow @-@ up landing on the Huon Peninsula as Japanese forces withdrew inland from Lae . In early 1944 , the battalion was withdrawn to Australia for rest and reorganisation and a long period of inactivity followed before it returned to combat . Its final campaign came late in the war when it was committed to the fighting in Borneo in June 1945 , landing on Brunei . Following the end of the war , the battalion was disbanded in early 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Formed for service during the World War II , the 2 / 17th Battalion was raised on 26 April 1940 from Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) volunteers at Ingleburn , New South Wales . With an authorised strength of around 900 personnel , like other Australian infantry battalions of the time , the 2 / 17th was formed around a nucleus of four rifle companies – designated ' A ' through to ' D ' – each consisting of three platoons ; these were supported by a battalion headquarters and a headquarters company with six specialist platoons : signals , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administrative and mortars . 
 Upon formation , the battalion was placed under the command of Lieutenant Colonel John Crawford , who had previously served in the Militia and commanded the Sydney University Regiment and the 4th Battalion . The colours initially chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 17th Battalion , a unit which had served during World War I before being raised as a Militia formation in 1921 . These colours were black over green , in a diamond shape , although a border of gray was added to the UCP to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart ; this was later changed , though , following the unit 's involvement in the fighting at Tobruk , when it adopted a ' T ' -shaped UCP . 
 After completing individual training at Ingleburn , the battalion moved on foot to Bathurst to complete collective training . Following this , the 2 / 17th embarked for the Middle East from Sydney on 20 October 1940 , on board the Queen Mary . Moving in convoy the Queen Mary briefly stopped in Fremantle , before continuing to Bombay in early November where the battalion was disembarked . Following a few days in camp ashore they were transferred to the <unk> for the next leg of the voyage . The convoy continued , sailing via the African coast into the Gulf of Aden and then through the Suez Canal , before finally berthing at El Kantara in Egypt . The battalion was assigned to the 20th Brigade , along with the 2 / 13th and 2 / 15th Battalions , which were initially allocated to the 7th Division ; however , following its arrival in the Middle East in November 1940 , the battalion was transferred along with the rest of the brigade to the 9th Division . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Arriving in the Middle East in late November , the battalion undertook further training near Gaza in Palestine , before moving to Port Said in mid @-@ December to relieve the garrison there . Returning to Palestine in early January they conducted a number of exercises until late February . In March 1941 the battalions of the 9th Division were sent into the desert to relieve the 6th Division that was deploying to Greece ; as part of this the 2 / 17th garrisoned Mersa Brega , near Tripoli . Shortly after this , the Germans landed forces in Africa to reinforce the Italians and the British forces in Libya were forced to retreat from Benghazi to the strategically important port town of Tobruk . The 2 / 17th fell back as part of the general retreat and subsequently took part in the defence of Tobruk , remaining there for almost seven months during which time the battalion 's personnel alternated between conducting patrols in no man 's land , raiding , occupying the main defensive position and working in the rear areas . On the night of 13 / 14 April 1941 , a party of about 30 Germans broke into the Australian position and set up eight machine @-@ guns , a couple of mortars and two field guns . Seeing this , the nearest platoon commander , Lieutenant Austin <unk> , launched a counterattack with a small party of men consisting of one corporal and five soldiers . Covered by fire from a position on their flank , the small party was able to successfully attack the position , and as a result , Corporal John Edmondson , who single @-@ handedly accounted for a number of Germans despite being mortally wounded , was later posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , the nation 's highest military decoration . It was the first such award to a member of the 2nd AIF . The battalion 's losses during the fighting around Tobruk , including the withdrawal prior to the siege , consisted of 32 dead from all causes , 127 wounded and 14 captured . 
 Following their relief from Tobruk by units of the British 70th Division , the 2 / 17th Battalion was evacuated by the sea to Alexandria , and then moved to Palestine , arriving there in mid @-@ October , establishing a camp at Julis . Shortly afterwards , a company was detached from the battalion to undertake guard duties in <unk> , in Syria , and in January 1942 the rest of the battalion followed . There , they were tasked with undertaking garrison duties as part of the occupation force that had been established there after the Syria – Lebanon campaign , to defend against a possible German attack on the Allied flank through the Caucasus . Relieving the 2 / 12th Battalion , the battalion established itself around <unk> , north of Aleppo ; in March , after the 2nd New Zealand Division arrived , the battalion moved to Latakia . 
 Later , in July , as Axis forces launched an offensive in the Western Desert that threatened Egypt , during the First Battle of El Alamein the units of the 9th Division were moved back to North Africa to help stem the advance . The 2 / 17th Battalion subsequently carried out a blocking operation and then occupied a position around Tel el Eisa , from where it conducted patrols and observed German movements . In September , the 2 / 17th was relieved by the 2 / 15th Battalion , and went into reserve around <unk> to prepare for further operations . The battalion was subsequently tasked with active patrolling in the area , and clashed with German parties on a number of occasions , while its positions were also heavily shelled on a number of occasions which resulted in a few casualties . Meanwhile , several exercises and other training was undertaken prior to the upcoming offensive . During this time it had an effective strength of 30 officers and 731 other ranks . 
 In late October and early November 1942 , the battalion took part in the Second Battle of El Alamein as the British Commonwealth forces went on the offensive . Engaged on the right of the Allied line around the coast , at dawn on 24 October , the Australians left their assembly area and advanced westward astride the coast road towards Tel el Eisa , and then cut inland towards the " Kidney Ridge " , with the 2 / 17th on the right of the brigade during the initial advance , attacking with three companies forward . As the battle continued , they endured heavy counterattacks as the Germans sought to regain control of the strategically important coast road . Once these had been repelled , the focus of the fighting shifted away from the Australians as British forces were able to launch a break out , which subsequently forced the Germans to withdraw . The 9th Division was subsequently withdrawn to Gaza . During the battle , the 2 / 17th was heavily committed , losing 62 men killed in action or died of wounds , 203 wounded and four captured . 
 = = = Pacific = = = 
 In early 1943 , along with the rest of the 9th Division , the battalion was brought back to Australia in order to take part in fighting against the Japanese in the Pacific . This was the final stage in the withdrawal of the 2nd AIF divisions from the Middle East , as the Australian Army 's focus had shifted to operations in the Pacific theatre against the Japanese . As part of this process the 6th and 7th Divisions had been brought back to Australia earlier the previous year . Embarking upon the transport Aquitania on 27 January 1943 , the battalion sailed as part of a large convoy established as part of Operation Pamphlet ; this convoy included the transports Ile de France , Nieuw Amsterdam , and the armed merchant cruiser Queen of Bermuda , and was escorted by HMS Devonshire and several destroyers . The voyage lasted a month , with the troops arriving in Sydney on 27 February . 
 Converted to the jungle divisional establishment on their return to Australia , the battalions of the 9th Division were reorganised to prepare them for the rigours of jungle warfare . This saw their establishment drop to around 800 men , and the loss of much of their vehicles and heavy equipment . Following training on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland , the battalion was deployed to New Guinea where it took part in the Salamaua – Lae and Huon Peninsula campaigns in 1943 – 44 . During this time , after concentrating at Milne Bay in August 1943 , the 2 / 17th was involved in the first amphibious landing conducted by Australian soldiers since the landing at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 , when it took part in the landing at Lae as part of Operation Postern on 4 September 1943 . Lae fell more quickly than the Allied planners expected , and as a result , a quick follow @-@ up operation was planned to secure the Huon Peninsula . On 22 September , the battalion landed at Scarlet Beach and , tasked with securing the beachhead and the flank , proceeded to move inland towards Sattelberg as part of efforts to capture Finschhafen . Finding their way blocked , the battalion later took part in significant actions around Jivevaneng and Kumawa , and then , after Sattelberg finally fell , the drive towards Sio . The battalion 's casualties during this time amounted to 53 killed in action , 10 died of wounds , five died from accident , and 160 wounded in action . 
 In March 1944 , the battalion returned to Australia for rest and re @-@ organisation , sailing on the transport Clip <unk> . Although the Australian Army had been heavily committed to combat operations in the Pacific in the early years of the war against Japan , by 1944 the United States military had assumed primary responsibility for combat operations in the Pacific and this had resulted in uncertainty about the role of the Australian Army in future operations . As a result , a long period of training followed , and there was a significant turn over of personnel within the 9th Division as many men were discharged due to medical reasons or transferred to other units and young replacements were brought in . After concentrating at Ravenshoe in May 1944 , the battalion was rebuilt , focusing on individual training and then collective training up to battalion level . After this , in September 1944 , the battalion moved to Trinity Beach , close to Cairns , where amphibious training was conducted . Further training continued throughout October and November 1944 . At the end of the year , the tempo dropped off and the battalion 's personnel were occupied with sporting activities prior to leave in February and March 1945 . Finally , in early May 1945 , the battalion moved to Townsville where it boarded the transport David C. Shanks , bound for Morotai Island . 
 On Morotai , the 2 / 17th concentrated along with the rest of the 9th Division , which had been allocated to take part in operations to recapture Borneo as part of Operation Oboe . The battalion 's part in this plan saw them land on Brunei on 10 June 1945 as part of Operation Oboe Six . Coming ashore near <unk> , the battalion took part in capturing the capital before dispatching companies to secure individual objectives in the outlying areas as the Australians advanced along the coast towards the oilfields at Seria . In mid @-@ July , ' D ' Company carried out a patrol along the Baram River on board HMAS Tiger Snake . On 13 August , following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , the order to cease offensive action was received from 20th Brigade headquarters and two days later the war came to an end with Japan 's capitulation . Despite this , it was not until 10 September that the Japanese on Borneo formally surrendered , and the bulk of the battalion remained deployed until the end of the month . During this time they were involved in ensuring all Japanese forces in the area received the surrender instructions and complied with them , and with collecting and escorting surrendered Japanese soldiers and former Indian prisoners of war , with the battalion 's last operation being completed in early October . The battalion 's final campaign cost 24 men killed or wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of hostilities the demobilisation process began , and personnel began to be repatriated to Australia to return to civilian life or were transferred to units of the 34th Brigade for further service during the occupation of Japan . On 29 October , the battalion was declared " redundant " and was transferred to Labuan having been withdrawn from the Seria area ; personnel were subsequently occupied with various sporting competitions and education programs intended to help them transition into civilian life upon their return to Australia . This return was eagerly awaited , but the Australian troops remained for several months until British and Indian troops arrived to relieve the 9th Division of its occupation duties . In mid @-@ December what remained of the 2 / 17th embarked upon the Pachaug Victory for the return to Australia . Arriving in Brisbane , from there the battalion 's personnel moved to Sydney and went on Christmas leave . On 8 February 1946 , while at Ingleburn , the 2 / 17th Battalion was disbanded . 
 During the course of the war , a total of 2 @,@ 903 personnel served in the battalion , of whom 177 were killed in action or died of wounds , three died on active service , 542 were wounded in action and 18 were taken prisoner . Members of the 2 / 17th received the following decorations : one Victoria Cross , four Distinguished Service Orders and one bar , one British Empire Medal , 11 Military Crosses , three Distinguished Conduct Medals , 11 Military Medals and 46 Mentions in Despatches . In addition , three members of the battalion were appointed Officers of the Order of the British Empire , and one was appointed as a Member of the Order of the British Empire . In 1997 , a memorial to the 2 / 17th Battalion was built at Jivevaneng . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 For their service during World War II , the 2 / 17th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 North Africa 1941 – 42 , Defence of Tobruk , El Adem Road , El Alamein , Alam el Halfa , South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Lae – Nadzab , Finschhafen , Scarlet Beach , Defence of Scarlet Beach , <unk> – Kumawa , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Sio , Borneo , Brunei . 
 In 1961 , these battle honours were entrusted to the 17th / 18th Battalion ( North Shore Regiment ) , which had been formed in 1948 , when Australia 's part @-@ time military force was re @-@ raised under the guise of the Citizens Military Force . Through a series of re @-@ organisations , these battle honours were passed to the 2nd / 17th Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment , an Australian Army Reserve infantry battalion that is currently based in central New South Wales . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2 / 17th Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Crawford ( 26 April 1940 – 14 January 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Maurice Fergusson ( 15 January 1942 – 6 March 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Noel Simpson ( 7 March 1942 – 27 February 1944 ) ; and 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Broadbent ( 28 February 1944 – 8 February 1946 ) . 
 = Final Resolution ( 2006 ) = 
 Final Resolution ( 2006 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on January 15 , 2006 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the second event under the Final Resolution name and first event of the 2006 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches and two pre @-@ show matches were featured on the event 's card , two of which were for championships . 
 The main event was a tag team match pitting the team of Christian Cage and Sting against the team of Jeff Jarrett and Monty Brown . The team of Cage and Sting won the encounter . The TNA X Division Championship was defended by Samoa Joe against Christopher Daniels at the event , which Joe won to retain the title . America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) defeated Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) to retain the NWA World Tag Team Championship at the show . On the undercard , Sean Waltman fought Raven in a No Disqualification match with the stipulation that if Raven lost , he would be fired from TNA . Waltman won the encounter , causing Raven to be fired from TNA in the storyline . 
 Final Resolution is remembered for the TNA debut of Sting , which was ranked as the 2nd greatest moment in the company 's history due to it marking Sting 's return to national television after five years . Bob Kapur of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 , lower than the ratings given to the 2005 and 2007 installments . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) announced in early October 2005 that their January PPV would once again be called Final Resolution , until they pulled this release from their website . TNA later reinstated this piece of information with the official date of the show being January 15 , 2006 at the TNA Impact Zone in Orlando , Florida . TNA created a section of their website to promote the event . A promotional poster for the show was released prior by TNA featuring Christopher Daniels and Samoa Joe . A thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show was scheduled to take place prior to the telecast featuring two wrestling matches . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Final Resolution featured nine professional wrestling matches and two pre @-@ show matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Final Resolution was a Tag Team match pitting the team of Christian Cage and Sting against the team of Jeff Jarrett and Monty Brown . The background to this match began at TNA 's Genesis PPV event on November 13 , 2005 where Cage made his debut proclaiming he wanted to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship held by Jarrett . TNA advertised a major announcement to take place at their previous PPV event Turning Point on December 11 , 2005 . The announcement was the acquisition of Sting as a newly signed wrestler to the TNA roster . Cage then went on to defeat Brown at Turning Point to become number @-@ one contender to the title . This match was announced on the December 31 , 2005 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended at Final Resolution by then @-@ champion Samoa Joe against the challenger Christopher Daniels . This rivalry started at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on August 14 when Joe won the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament to become number @-@ one contender to the TNA X Division Championship held by Daniels . Joe went on to compete against A.J. Styles and Daniels in a Three Way match at TNA 's Unbreakable PPV event on September 11 , which Styles won to become the new champion . At Genesis , Joe and Daniels competed in a Four @-@ on @-@ Four Tag Team Elimination X match , which Joe and Daniels ' team won . After the bout , Joe attacked and injured Daniels , thus sidelining him in the storyline . Joe then went on to defeat Styles at Turning Point to become the new TNA X Division Champion . After their match , Joe attacked Styles and attempted to injure Styles in a manner similar to the way he injured Daniels . At this time Daniels returned from injury to save Styles from the attack . TNA promoted this match for Final Resolution on the January 7 , 2006 episode of Impact ! . 
 The NWA World Tag Team Championship was defended by then @-@ champions America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) against Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) at the event . The storyline behind this match began on the October 8 , 2005 episode of Impact ! where AMW and Jeff Jarrett assaulted Team 3D to the point they were left covered in blood . Afterwards , Team 3D were not seen due to a scripted injury , with Jarrett , AMW , and Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 , Bobby Roode , Eric Young , Petey Williams , and Coach Scott D 'Amore ) hosting a segment where they buried Team 3D 's careers on the October 15 , 2005 episode of Impact ! . Team 3D made their return from injury at TNA 's Bound for Glory PPV event on October 23 , 2005 attacking Jarrett and AMW . At Genesis , Team 3D teamed with Rhino to defeat AMW and Jarrett in a Six Man Tag Team match . At Turning Point , Team 3D defeated AMW in a Tag Team Elimination Tables match . TNA advertised Team 3D versus AMW for the tag team championship to take place at the event . 
 Raven and NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zybysko were involved in a rivalry heading into Final Resolution . At Bound for Glory , Raven requested an NWA World Heavyweight Championship match but was denied by Zybysko . This led to Raven assaulting him before being ejected from the arena by security in the storyline . At Genesis , Zybysko offered Raven the chance to be released from his contract , as this was what Zybysko wanted in the storyline . Raven declined the offer and tried to attack Zybysko once again . Instead , Zybysko forced Raven to face P.J. Polaco in a match , which Raven won . This led to Turning Point where Raven once again declined an offer to be released . Zybysko then revealed Chris K as Raven 's opponent for the night ; Raven was victorious in the encounter . On the December 17 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , Zybysko announced that at Final Resolution Raven would have another opponent and if he won the bout then he gained a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship match . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to the airing of Final Resolution , TNA held a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show . During the broadcast , Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 , Eric Young , and Petey Williams ) faced the team of Jay Lethal , Kenny King , and Lance Hoyt in a Six Man Tag Team match that lasted 5 minutes and 54 seconds . Williams pinned Lethal after forcing Lethal head @-@ first into the mat with his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver . Another contest was held , with The Latin American Exchange ( Homicide and Konnan ) defeating The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) in 3 minutes and 50 seconds . Homicide pinned Stevens after Konnan hit Stevens with a <unk> . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Final Resolution featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were the ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Shane Douglas handled the interview duties during the show . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , Coach D 'Amore , Gail Kim , Simon Diamond , Traci , Shannon Moore , Larry Zybysko , and James Mitchell all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The opening bout was a Six Man Tag Team match pitting the team of Alex Shelley , Austin Aries , and Roderick Strong against the team of Chris Sabin , Matt Bentley , and Sonjay Dutt . Traci accompanied Bentley to the ring . Shelley won the match for his team by using a small package pin on Bentley at 10 minutes and 32 seconds . 
 The James Gang ( Kip James and B.G. James ) fought The Diamonds in the Rough ( David Young and Elix Skipper ) next . Simon Diamond accompanied The Diamonds in the Rough to the ring . The duration of this contest was 7 minutes and 47 seconds . Kip pinned Skipper after a Missouri Boat Ride . 
 The third encounter was between A.J. Styles and Hiroshi Tanahashi , which lasted 11 minutes and 3 seconds . During the bout , Shannon Moore interfered trying to hit Styles with Styles ' Mr. TNA plague . Styles dodged the assault , causing Tanahashi to take the blow . Styles followed up by slamming Tanahashi face @-@ first into the mat with his signature Styles Clash maneuver and pinned him to win the bout . 
 Following the third match , Larry Zybysko revealed that Raven 's opponent for the night was Sean Waltman . The two then fought in a No Disqualification match with the stipulation that if Raven won he gained a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship match , but if he lost he would be fired from TNA . During the bout , the referee was knocked out with Zbyszko taking over his duties . Waltman won the contest after forcing Raven face @-@ first off of a ladder through a table with his signature X @-@ Factor maneuver . Zbyszko counted the pin despite Raven 's foot on the bottom rope at 10 minutes . As a result of his loss , Raven was fired from TNA in the storyline . 
 The following contest pitted Bobby Roode , who was accompanied by Coach D 'Amore , against Ron Killings . The duration of the match was 9 minutes and 53 seconds . Konnan interfered in the bout distracting Killings , which allowed Roode to sneak up behind Killings and hit him in the back of the head with Roode 's signature Northern Lariat maneuver . 
 The sixth encounter was between Abyss and Rhino , which lasted 9 minutes and 18 seconds . James Mitchell accompanied Abyss to the ring . Mitchell interfered in the contest by distracting the referee , allowing Abyss to bash Rhino with a steel chain . Abyss was the victor in the bout after slamming Rhino back @-@ first onto a steel chair with his signature Black Hole Slam maneuver . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The NWA World Tag Team Championship was defended by America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) against Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) next . Gail Kim accompanied AMW to the ring . Mid @-@ way through the bout , Team 3D performed their signature Whassup ? maneuver on Storm . Kim interfered in the bout , distracting the referee . Around this time , Devon retrieved a table from under the ring which both teams used as a weapon , however the referee did not disqualify anyone for the usage . AMW earned a near @-@ fall after a <unk> and a lariat combination on Ray . Team 3D followed with their own near @-@ fall on Harris , after they performed their signature Deadly Device maneuver on Storm . After this , Kim interfered trying to blow powder into Ray 's eyes , only for Ray to stop her and blow it back into her and the referee 's eyes . With the referee blinded , Team 3D performed their signature 3D maneuver on Harris and the referee counted the pin . Team Canada then attacked 3D , knocking out Ray in the process with a hockey stick . They placed Harris on top of Ray and left the ring . After the referee regained his vision , he declared AMW the victors at 12 minutes and 41 seconds . 
 Samoa Joe defended the TNA X Division Championship against Christopher Daniels in the eighth match of the show . Mid @-@ way through the contest , Joe avoided a moonsault by Daniels by casually walking away , a trademark action of his persona . Daniels earned a near @-@ fall after forcing Joe against the mat with a modified Death Valley Driver from the top of a padded turnbuckle . Joe followed up with his own near @-@ fall by slamming Daniels back @-@ first against the mat from the turnbuckle with a powerbomb . Daniels then performed his signature Best Moonsault Ever maneuver , gaining another near @-@ fall . Their fight spilled to the ringside area where Joe positioned Daniels ' head against the guardrail and kicked it against the rail . This move resulted in Daniels bleeding from the forehead , which Joe targeted for the rest of the bout . At this time , A.J. Styles came down to the ringside area . Joe performed his signature Muscle Buster maneuver and followed up by attempting to place Daniels in his trademarked Coquina Clutch submission maneuver , which Daniels fought off . Joe then dropped Daniels from the top of a turnbuckle onto a chair and continued to target Daniels ' bleeding forehead . With Daniels unconscious in the storyline , A.J. Styles threw in the towel for Daniels to stop the match at 15 minutes and 30 seconds , resulting in Joe being declared the victor . 
 The main event was a tag team match pitting the team of Christian Cage and Sting against the team of Jeff Jarrett and Monty Brown . The duration of the encounter was 15 minutes and 35 seconds . Jarrett was accompanied by Gail Kim . Cage and Brown started the match before they both quickly tagged in their partners . Kim interfered by distracting the referee , allowing Jarrett to hit Cage in the groin and throw him to the ringside mat . Kim then assaulted Cage in the ringside area . After several minutes of Jarrett and Brown having the advantage over a beaten Cage , Sting was tagged into the match and placed Jarrett in his signature Scorpion <unk> submission maneuver . Jarrett submitted to the maneuver , but the referee was unconscious . Team Canada then interfered in the bout , attacking Cage and Sting . Jarrett bashed Sting in the face with the NWA World Heavyweight Championship belt and covered for a near @-@ fall once the referee regained consciousness . Afterwards , Sting forced Jarrett 's head into the ring mat with his trademark Scorpion Death Drop maneuver and covered for the pinfall victory . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 900 people attended Final Resolution . Canadian Online Explorer writer Bob Kapur rated the entire event a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 , which was lower than the rating given to the 2005 installment . It was also lower than the 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 the 2007 event was given by Chris Sokol . The Final Resolution ranking was lower than Turning Point 's rating , which received a 7 out of 10 from Kapur . TNA 's next PPV event , Against All Odds , on February 12 , 2006 was also ranked higher than Final Resolution ; it received a rating of 7 out of 10 from Jason Clevett . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's ( WWE ) Royal Rumble PPV event which took place the same month , Final Resolution was ranked lower as Royal Rumble was given a 7 out of 10 by Dale Plummer and Nick Tylwalk . 
 The highest rating given by Kapur to an individual match went to the TNA X Division Championship bout , with an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The opening Six Man Tag Team match , the No Disqualification match , Bobby Roode versus Ron Killings , the NWA World Tag Team Championship match , and the main event all received a 7 out of 10 by Kapur in his review . Regarding the main event , Kapur said that " Sting looked good , but it remains to be seen if his return will be a turning point for the company in the long run . " Kapur commented on the X Division Championship match stating it was a " good match " that " reinforced Joe 's dominance , and left the door open for another match with either Daniels or Styles . " He thought the World Tag Team Championship bout had a " stupid ending " that " marred what was otherwise a good tag match . " 
 James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter reviewed the show and stated that the debut of Sting " answered a few questions " but that Sting " wasn 't involved in the match long enough to see how he 'll hold up over twelve months . However , he surpassed initial expectations with a strong effort and good energy . It was an encouraging return to TNA . " He also commented on the match that the " effectiveness of the finish was hurt by the usual interference and shortcuts . " Caldwell discussed the X Division Championship bout by praising it as the " best story told in the ring tonight " but that it was " too short of a match for the featured X Division . " As for the No Disqualification match , Caldwell said that it " set up the next chapter of the story " and that the " hardcore aspect had a place on the card . " 
 TNA released a DVD counting down the top 50 moments in their history in 2007 , with Sting 's debut at Final Resolution ranking at number 2 on the compilation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Christian Cage and Jeff Jarrett continued their feud after Final Resolution . Since Cage had defeated Monty Brown at Turning Point to become number one contender he was in line for an NWA World Heavyweight Championship match . On the January 21 episode of Impact ! , Larry Zybysko revealed an open contract for a future title match at Against All Odds . On the January 28 episode of Impact ! , it was announced that Cage would face Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Against All Odds . Cage defeated Jarrett to win the title at the event . He held the championship until TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 18 when Jarrett won a King of the Mountain match for the title that also involved Cage , Sting , Abyss , and Ron Killings . 
 Sting signed a one @-@ year contract and appeared on the January 28 episode of Impact ! where he announced his scripted retirement . Sting did not appear in TNA until their Destination X PPV event on March 12 when he appeared after the main event to save Cage from an assault by America 's Most Wanted , Abyss , Alex Shelley , Team Canada , Jarrett , and Brown before being attacked himself by the debuting Scott Steiner . Sting then teamed with Styles , Killings and Rhino as part of a team referred to as Sting 's Warriors against Jarrett 's Army , composed of Jarrett , Steiner , and America 's Most Wanted in a Four @-@ on @-@ Four Lethal Lockdown match at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on April 23 . Sting 's Warriors won the contest at the event . 
 Samoa Joe went on to defend the TNA X Division Championship in a Three Way match against A.J. <unk> and Christopher Daniels at Against All Odds in a rematch of their bout at Unbreakable in October 2005 . On the January 21 episode of Impact ! , it was announced that Styles would face Joe for the title at Against All Odds . In the same telecast , Daniels accused Styles of trying to take his spot as the contender for the championship due to Styles having thrown in the towel for Daniels . Styles argued that he was instead looking out for Daniels ' health in the storyline . The following week on the January 28 episode of Impact ! , Zybysko announced that the three would compete in a Three Way match for the title at the show . Joe retained the title at the spectacle . 
 Following Final Resolution , Team 3D faced Team Canada at Against All Odds in order to exact revenge for their actions at the event . Team 3D demanded a match against America 's Most Wanted and Team Canada from Zybysko on the January 21 episode of Impact ! with Zybysko granting the request but only against one of the teams , leaving it up to Team 3D to decide . Brother Ray announced on the January 28 episode of Impact ! that they were leaving the decision up to the TNA fans to decide who they faced at Against All Odds . On the February 4 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D announced that the fans voted for them to face Team Canada . Team 3D defeated Team Canada at the show . 
 As for other rivalries after Final Resolution , Rhino and Abyss fought in a rematch on the January 28 episode of Impact ! that ended in a no contest . TNA commentator Mike Tenay announced on the February 4 episode of Impact ! that Rhino and Abyss would face in a Falls Count Anywhere match at Against All Odds . Rhino went on to win the contest . America 's Most Wanted went on to successfully defend the NWA World Tag Team Championship at Against All Odds against the team of Chris Sabin and Sonjay Dutt . Raven did not appear in TNA for several months after the event due to his scripted firing . Sean Waltman was also not used by TNA following Final Resolution since TNA wanted to be " cautious about using him long @-@ term giving his track record . " 
 = = Results = = 
 = Tropical Storm Dorothy ( 1970 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Dorothy was the deadliest tropical cyclone of the 1970 Atlantic hurricane season . The fourth named storm and fifth tropical storm or hurricane of the season , Dorothy developed on August 17 from a tropical wave to the east of the Lesser Antilles . It tracked west @-@ northwestward throughout its entire duration , and despite forecasts of attaining hurricane status , Dorothy reached peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / ) – slightly below hurricane status . The storm struck Martinique on August 20 , and subsequently began a gradual weakening trend in the Caribbean Sea . On August 23 , Dorothy dissipated south of Hispaniola . 
 Most significantly affected by the storm was Martinique , which received 26 @.@ 8 in ( 680 mm ) of rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour period . The rainfall caused flooding and mudslides , resulting in about $ 34 million in damage ( 1970 USD ) ; 186 homes were destroyed , and 700 people were left homeless . The flooding killed up to 50 people on the island . Elsewhere in the Lesser Antilles , the storm killed one person on Dominica from heavy rainfall , and in Guadeloupe heavy damage to the banana crop was reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Dorothy were from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on August 13 . It tracked generally westward , developing into a tropical depression on August 17 about 1375 mi ( 2210 km ) east of Tobago in the Lesser Antilles . Two days later , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Dorothy , while located about 500 mi ( 800 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles , with its intensity confirmed by the Hurricane Hunters . 
 With light vertical wind shear and warm water temperatures , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) remarked on August 19 that " hurricane status would probably be attained this afternoon or tonight . " Its track was expected to continue generally west @-@ northwestward , influenced by a ridge near the Bahamas , and within 60 hours Dorothy was forecast to be north or over Puerto Rico . However , a subsequent Hurricane Hunters flight reported a more westerly motion , which would bring its track through the central Lesser Antilles . Tropical Storm Dorothy gradually intensified , reaching peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on August 20 just east @-@ northeast of Barbados . Hurricane Hunters confirmed the intensity , though the flight also reported a weakness of low @-@ level inflow . Despite maintaining winds of just below hurricane @-@ force , there was no evidence of an eyewall on radars as the storm approached the Lesser Antilles . Late on August 20 , the storm moved across Martinique into the Caribbean Sea , during which its low @-@ level circulation became disorganized . 
 As Tropical Storm Dorothy moved further into the Caribbean Sea , it began a gradual weakening trend initiated by a persistent tropical upper tropospheric trough , as well as the presence of strong wind shear and a lack of inflow . Hurricane Hunter flights late on August 21 and early on August 22 failed to locate a closed low @-@ level circulation , and as a result the storm was downgraded to a tropical depression . After another flight into the system could not detect a circulation , the NHC discontinued advisories on Dorothy to the south of Hispaniola late on August 22 . Around the same time , thunderstorms increased in association with the cyclone , and forecasters remarked the potential for re @-@ intensification over the western Caribbean Sea . However , the storm became more disorganized , and on August 23 Dorothy degenerated into a tropical wave . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 After the first tropical cyclone advisory was issued on Tropical Storm Dorothy , a hurricane watch and storm warning were issued for the Leeward Islands from Dominica northward . As its westward track became more apparent , the watches and warnings were extended southward to include Martinique and Saint Lucia . On Martinique , authorities released a statement that warned the public for the potential for strong winds , heavy rainfall , and rough waves . Also on the island , officials converted schools and government buildings into shelters for people in low @-@ lying areas . As a result of the storm , the Martinique Aimé Césaire International Airport in Le Lamentin was closed . 
 The storm dropped heavy rainfall while crossing the Lesser Antilles . In Martinique , the highest 24 ‑ hour total was 26 @.@ 8 inches ( 680 mm ) in Fourniols , which was twice the average rainfall for August . Additionally , the capital city of Fort @-@ de @-@ France reported 13 @.@ 4 in ( 341 mm ) . There , the rainfall broke all records for durations up to 24 hours ; about 1 inch ( 26 mm ) fell in 5 minutes , and in one hour a station reported 6 @.@ 02 inches ( 153 mm ) . The rainfall caused flooding and mudslides , as well as rivers exceeding their banks ; several bridges collapsed during the storm , and many homes were washed away . During the passage of the storm , sustained winds on the island reached 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) , with gusts reaching 99 mph ( 160 km / h ) in the Caravelle peninsula . Throughout the country , the storm destroyed 186 homes and left 700 people homeless . The passage of Dorothy left heavy crop damage on the island , totaling 32 million francs ( 1970 <unk> , $ 5 @.@ 8 million 1970 USD ) ; a total of 3 @.@ 75 mi ² ( 9 @.@ 72 km ² ) of banana crop was destroyed , and 2 @.@ 16 mi ² ( 5 @.@ 6 km ² ) of sugar cane was destroyed . Damage on the island totaled 190 million francs ( 1970 <unk> , $ 34 million 1970 USD ) . 
 Tropical Storm Dorothy caused several deaths on Martinique , although the exact death toll is unknown . The National Hurricane Center reported 50 deaths , although the post event report provided by the French meteorological agency reported 44 people dead or missing . Most of the deaths were in Saint @-@ Joseph , where 20 people drowned in the Riviere l 'Or . <unk> rescues had been made difficult due to washed out roads and poor communications after the storm . In addition to the deaths , several people were injured . After the passage of the storm , Martinique was temporarily left isolated , when communications were downed with other nearby islands . The French Red Cross distributed 500 blankets and one ton of condensed milk ; the agency also sought international assistance . 
 Elsewhere in the Lesser Antilles , the storm caused flooding and mudslides in Dominica . There , the storm caused one death , when flooding heavy rainfall washed out a bridge . Also , all of the capital city of Roseau lost power and water service due to the storm . In neighboring Guadeloupe , the storm left much of the banana crop destroyed . Later , after it entered the Caribbean Sea , small craft warnings were issued for the Leeward Islands , the Virgin Islands , and Puerto Rico . In its review of the storm , the National Hurricane Center did not mention any damage in the Greater Antilles . 
 = Last Exile = 
 Last Exile ( ラストエグザイル , Rasuto Eguzairu ) is a Japanese animated television series created by Gonzo . It featured a production team led by director Koichi Chigira , character designer Range Murata , and production designer Mahiro Maeda . The three had previously worked together in Blue Submarine No. 6 , one of the first CG anime series . Last Exile aired on TV Tokyo between April 7 , 2003 and September 29 , 2003 . A sequel series , Last Exile -Fam , The Silver Wing- ( ラストエグザイル ～ <unk> ～ , Rasuto Eguzairu Gin <unk> no <unk> ) , aired between October 15 , 2011 and March 23 , 2012 . A film adaptation of the series , Last Exile -Fam , The Silver Wing- : Over the Wishes , will be released on February 6 , 2016 . 
 The story is set on the fictional world of Prester , where its inhabitants use aerial vehicles known as <unk> as a means of transportation . On this world which is divided in eternal conflict between the nations of Anatoray and Disith , sky couriers Claus Valca and Lavie Head must deliver a girl who holds the key to uniting the two factions . Although Prester itself is not a representation of Earth , it features technology reminiscent of nineteenth @-@ century Europe at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution . Many of its designs were also inspired by Germany 's technological advances during the interwar period . 
 Last Exile was well received in North America , and the series was licensed for the English language by Geneon Entertainment ( then Pioneer Entertainment ) in June 2003 , two months after the first episode aired in Japan . Funimation Entertainment began licensing the series after Geneon ceased production of its titles , later licensing the sequel series . It was also licensed for English releases in the United Kingdom by originally ADV Films until its closure in 2009 and is now licensed by Manga Entertainment , and in Australia by Madman Entertainment . Other published media included two soundtracks , two manga adaptions and artbooks . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Last Exile is set on the fictional world of Prester . Prester 's two nations of Anatoray and Disith are separated by a turbulent region of the sky known as the Grand Stream and are engaged in eternal conflict according to the code of chivalric warfare . A superior faction known as the Guild enforces these rules . It also provides the two nations with technology but , unknown to them , has dishonorable intentions , to preserve the status quo and enforce its dominance of both sides . Although the story is set in the future , the technology employed differs from that in a typical space opera . Instead , the show 's retro @-@ futuristic <unk> setting resembles nineteenth @-@ century Europe at the height of the Industrial Revolution . Inhabitants of Prester operate aerial vehicles known as <unk> in the world 's Golden Age of Aviation ; it should be noted that although the technology is primitive , the aerial vehicles use a form of antigravity ( developed by the Guild ) and lighter @-@ than @-@ air methods of flight rather than the use of wings . 
 Various scenes in the series also show existing tension between the upper and lower classes . Anatoray 's nobility and military officers generally believe that commoners do not understand their codes of chivalry . On the other hand , the lower class also despise the aristocracy for their monopoly on resources . This tension extends to the accessibility of clean water , which varies in price according to purity grades . In the larger story , the advanced Guild society is portrayed as degenerate and lazy , while the people of Anatoray and Disith are creative and industrious . 
 The series introduces viewers to a wide range of naval and military vocabulary . More primitive navigational methods such as dead reckoning and instruments such as the sextant are also used in the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Last Exile = = = 
 The story revolves around fifteen @-@ year @-@ old pilot Claus Valca and navigator Lavie Head , who fly their vanship as sky couriers in the nation of Anatoray . Although they usually take up missions of relatively low difficulty , they are one day asked to complete the mission of a dying courier . The mission , rated seven stars out of ten , is to deliver a young girl named Alvis Hamilton to the mysterious battleship Silvana . Despite their fears , Claus and Lavie deliver Alvis to the battleship but decide to remain aboard to keep her safe . 
 Claus and Lavie are initially treated as intruders but eventually befriend the crew of the Silvana . They learn that the Guild intends to capture Alvis for reasons unknown to them . In the first battle between the Silvana and Guild forces , Guild member Dio <unk> takes an interest in Claus 's flying skills and his signature move , the Immelmann turn . Wanting to learn more about Claus , Dio willingly allows himself to be captured . He reveals to the Silvana 's captain , Alex Row , the existence of one of four Mysteria which act as a key to something known as Exile . 
 When the Silvana 's executive officer , Sophia Forrester , is revealed to be the Emperor 's daughter and heir , she returns to Anatoray at the request of the prime minister . Sophia assumes the throne after the Emperor is killed during a surprise attack at the capital by the Disith nation and pleads for an alliance with Disith in order to capture Exile and end the Guild 's control . Sophia reveals to Claus that Alvis is linked to the Mysteria , but as preparations for the assault are made , Alvis is captured by the Guild . 
 Delphine <unk> , the Maestro of the Guild , reveals that Exile is a colony ship used by those who first settled their world , and she intends to use Alvis and the Mysteria to take control of it . However , Claus and Alvis escape the Guild stronghold and are reunited with Lavie when the alliance fleet attacks . As the fleet follows Exile past the Grand Stream and enters Disith , it is able to destroy Delphine 's forces . After Claus and Alvis recite the four Mysteria , Exile reveals itself as a starship that will carry people back to their old home world . 
 = = = Last Exile : Travelers from the Hourglass = = = 
 A manga set right after the events of Last Exile and before Fam , The Silver Wing , Travelers from the Hourglass continues the story of Claus , Lavie , Alvis , and the others who left Prester and settled on Earth , their ancestors ' home world . As they get used to their new home , Al is pursued by the Earth Guild . 
 = = = Last Exile : Fam , The Silver Wing = = = 
 Taking place 4 years after the events of Last Exile , Last Exile : Fam , The Silver Wing is set on Earth , the original home world of the colonists of Prester . The new story focuses on Fam Fan Fan and Giselle Collette , two vespa vanship pilots who work as Sky Pirates , capturing and selling battleships for a living . 
 Fam and Giselle get into an adventure when they and the Sky Pirates rescue Liliana il <unk> Merlo Turan and her younger sister , Millia Il <unk> <unk> Turan , Princesses of the Turan Kingdom , from the clutches of the mighty Ades Federation . The Federation , led by Empress <unk> Augusta and Premier Luscinia <unk> , is on an all out war against nations who descended from immigrants who came back to Earth by Exile ships . As Ades was the only nation to stay on Earth when it was in a state of chaos and ruin , Luscinia believes that the Exile immigrants have no right to return to Earth since their ancestors abandoned Earth when it was in chaos only to return when Earth was viable to live on again and force the original inhabitants of Earth off their lands to form their own nations . To return these lands to their original inhabitants , Luscinia leads the Ades Federation to conquer the immigrant nations and destroy their armies , with Turan being one of them . 
 After Luscinia kidnaps Liliana , who has the ability to control an Exile , Luscinia summons an Exile to destroy <unk> , the capital of Turan , killing its soldiers and the King of Turan , leading to the surrender of Turan to Ades . With everything she cared for lost , Millia is given refuge by the Sky Pirates , where Fam promises to help Millia regain her kingdom . 
 = = Production = = 
 Last Exile was created by Gonzo in celebration of the company 's 10th anniversary . It featured a production team led by director Koichi Chigira , character designer Range Murata , and production designer Mahiro Maeda . The three had previously worked together to create Blue Submarine No. 6 , one of the first CG anime series . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 Conceptual designs were created by Range Murata , who was given complete freedom to create the setting . He began drawing detailed sketches of machines and everyday objects from a daily newspaper . His research was given no constraints with the exception of production deadlines . Gonzo initially intended for Last Exile to be shown in a space setting , but producers did not want the characters to wear sterile space suits . Instead , the final product was described by Jonathan Mays as an " ugly " world of " rusting bolts , lots of blues and grays . " Murata believed the design took " the course the story had laid out " . His character conceptualization included a great amount of time spent on costume design . Wanting to portray each character 's personality more fully , he " tried to draw in the kind of material that would have been used in creating their clothes and try to represent the stitches connecting the fabric . " In contrast to crewmembers of the battleship Silvana who wear modern and utilitarian uniforms , other characters wear traditionally aristocratic attire . High amount of attention was given to character animation . Animators especially experienced difficulties with Alex Row 's hair and flowing cape . 
 Production of Last Exile relied heavily on 3D computer animation . Of the 350 shots used in the first episode , more than 200 included computer @-@ generated animation . In comparison , Gonzo 's previous work <unk> used an average of 40 to 50 computer @-@ generated shots per episode . Animation was also supplemented with Victorian era flourishes . In order to combine hand @-@ drawn animation with computer @-@ generated ones , the production team used a technique for non @-@ photorealistic rendering , which could not be used for Blue Submarine No. 6 because of a stylistic conflict . At the 2003 Anime Expo , Maeda , who also worked with Studio Ghibli 's production of Castle in the Sky , commented that " [ Last Exile ] is very advanced in how it will incorporate the two mediums " . 
 = = = Historical references = = = 
 Real @-@ world historical designs were also adapted for the fictional world . Flying battleships of the Anatoray and Disith nations included components of Japanese dreadnoughts in commission at the turn of the twentieth century . Uniform designs for Anatoray 's musketeers were based on Napoleon Bonaparte 's army and American Civil War soldiers . On the other hand , Soviet Red Army fur coats provided the basis for Disith uniforms . Another inspiration for creators came from a silent film of the airship Hindenburg , which depicted the aircraft 's UFO @-@ like silver @-@ plated design in contrast to the traditional buildings below . This imagery was reproduced in the series . 
 Producers selected a specific historical time frame to serve as a point of reference . 
 We had this image of Germany at the beginning of the twentieth century . We thought that Germany of the interwar period had very interesting characteristics . People think of something of dark and negative because of the rise of the Nazism . But so much of things appeared at that time , like a rapid growth of the cities and richness . Industrial technology , chemistry , scientific discoveries , much of inventions also in the design . Bauhaus appears there , for example . [ ... ] I think that all that Germany produced at that time was extreme and unique . 
 Several characters were also named after historical figures . The name of Claus Valca 's father was derived from Hamilcar Barca , the leading commander of Carthaginian forces during the First Punic War and father of the talented tactician Hannibal . An Anatoray general was named after Vitellius , who led the Roman Empire for several months during the Year of the Four Emperors . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Last Exile premiered in Japan on April 7 , 2003 , and aired on TV Tokyo until the airing of its final episode on September 29 . A total of 13 DVD compilations were released by Victor Entertainment between July 23 , 2003 , and July 21 , 2004 . A complete seven @-@ disc boxed set was released on November 21 , 2004 . The deluxe edition of this set included a model of Tatiana 's and Alister 's red vanship , a short story on the fictional Battle of Otranto , unpublished articles on the series , and illustrations by character designer Range Murata . 
 After receiving a respectable amount of attention in the United States , Pioneer Entertainment ( later Geneon Entertainment ) licensed the series in June 2003 , two months after the first episode aired in Japan , and the first compilation DVD was released on November 18 . TechTV premiered the series in English language during its Anime Unleashed programming block on March 8 , 2004 . The first thirteen episodes aired nightly until March 14 , and remaining episodes premiered on December 6 after channel was merged into G4techTV , with new episodes airing each weeknight until the series concluded on December 22 . All 26 episodes were also aired in a marathon broadcast on Christmas Day . <unk> Television and G4techTV Canada also broadcast the series in 2007 . After Geneon ceased distribution of its licensed titles in North America , rights to the series were transferred to Funimation Entertainment , and a four @-@ disc boxed set was released on May 5 , 2009 , and again on June 14 , 2011 , under the " Anime Classics " line . 
 ADV Films originally owned the license for the series ' English release in the United Kingdom until its parent company 's shutdown in 2009 and has now been re @-@ licensed by Manga Entertainment , while distribution rights in Australia and New Zealand are owned by Madman Entertainment . Last Exile is also licensed for regional language release in France , Germany , Sweden , Russia , and Taiwan . It has been hosted at the streaming media website Crunchyroll . 
 On February 1 , 2011 , Gonzo revealed that a new Last Exile anime was planned titled Last Exile -Fam , The Silver Wing- , described as " a new series of Last Exile [ with ] new story , [ main ] characters , and mechanical designs . " Koichi Chigira and Hitomi Kuroishi returned to direct and score the anime , respectively . The series aired in Japan between October 15 , 2011 and March 23 , 2012 and was also simulcasted on the same day in Asia by Animax Asia , making it the fifth anime to be simulcasted the same time as its Japanese premiere on the channel , after Tears to Tiara , Fullmetal Alchemist : Brotherhood , <unk> : The Final Act , and Maid Sama ! . Funimation Entertainment licensed the series for streaming and home video release and simulcast the series as it aired . A film adaptation of the series , titled Last Exile -Fam , The Silver Wing- : Over the Wishes , will be released in theaters on February 6 , 2016 . The film will <unk> the events of the television series with newly animated shots of footage . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Two pieces of theme music were used for the series . " Cloud Age Symphony " , performed by <unk> Okino , was used as the opening theme for all 26 episodes . It was released by Victor Entertainment as a maxi single on May 21 , 2003 , and remained on the Oricon music charts for six weeks , where it peaked at 52nd position . Hitomi Kuroishi 's " Over The Sky " was used as the ending theme . 
 Music trio Dolce <unk> , which includes Kuroishi , produced two CD soundtracks for the series . Last Exile <unk> was released by Victor Entertainment on June 21 , 2003 , and remained on the Oricon music charts for seven weeks , where it peaked at 52nd position . It includes both theme songs and 17 additional instrumental tracks . The second soundtrack , Last Exile <unk> 2 was released on September 3 , 2003 , and remained on the Oricon music charts for five weeks , where it peaked at 55th position . It includes an alternate version of the ending theme song and 19 additional instrumental tracks . Geneon Entertainment licensed both soundtracks for release in North America . The first soundtrack was released on February 17 , 2004 , and the second was released on April 13 . However , both soundtracks are out of print in North America after Geneon ceased production of its licensed titles in 2007 . 
 = = = Art book = = = 
 A 136 @-@ page art book titled Last Exile Aerial Log was published in February 2005 but has since been discontinued . It was published in Japanese and was never translated for English @-@ language release . The book contains detailed character sketches and descriptions as well as technical manuals for aircraft that appeared in the series . It also includes exclusive interviews with members of the production staff . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Currently there are two manga . The first is a manga adaptation of Last Exile : Fam , The Silver Wing written by Gonzo and illustrated by Robo Miyamoto and is serialized in Young Ace magazine and published by Kadokawa Shoten . The second , titled Last Exile – Travelers from the Hourglass ( ラストエグザイル – <unk> , Rasuto Eguzairu – <unk> no <unk> ) , tells what happened to the Claus and his friends after the events of Last Exile and before the events of Last Exile : Fam , The Silver Wing . The manga is written by Gonzo and illustrated by Minoru <unk> , one of the original animators of the Last Exile anime . Last Exile – Travelers from the Hourglass is serialized in Newtype Ace and published by Kadokawa . 
 = = = Live @-@ action film = = = 
 On February 11 , 2005 , a report on Anime News Network mentioned a possible live @-@ action Last Exile film . It was based on a blog post by Patrick Macias , writer for Animerica and author of several books on Japanese pop culture and anime , which noted that while he was attending the Tokyo International Anime Fair , a Gonzo employee suggested that an unnamed New Line Cinema producer was interested in adapting the series for a live @-@ action production . On July 8 , 2009 , a concept art image was leaked on the Internet but was removed at the request of filmmakers . However , as of 2013 , there has been no new news about the Live @-@ action film , suggesting it has been canceled . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After receiving a respectable amount of attention in the United States , the series was licensed to Pioneer Entertainment ( later Geneon Entertainment ) in June 2003 , only two months after the first episode aired in Japan . When Geneon 's compilation DVDs were released , reviewers such as IGN praised them despite the use of Dolby Digital 2 @.@ 0 audio mix over a 5 @.@ 1 mix . " The separation is masterfully taken care of with voices , music , and sound effects leveled off very cleanly for both the Japanese and English audio tracks . " In an interview with director Koichi Chigira given in July 2004 , he was surprised to find that the series had reached a great level of popularity among fans in the United States . 
 Last Exile has been likened to Hayao Miyazaki 's classic work Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind and the early steampunk novel trilogy A Nomad of the Time Streams . It received numerous praises for its artwork and production , placing it as one of Gonzo 's best work . By integrating music and sounds of a European theme , the soundtrack contributed to the series ' unique flavor . Anime News Network rated the series as " a must @-@ have for all anime fans . " However , the complex storyline tested viewers ' patience because " mysteries pile upon one another before the answers start spilling forth in the second half [ of the series ] . " Despite this complaint , Last Exile 's action sequences and cliffhangers compelled viewers to wait and see these mysteries resolved . 
 TechTV vice president Laura <unk> stated that Last Exile " had more universal appeal than other types of anime shown on the network , which often contained lots of references recognizable only by hard @-@ core fans . " When the series premiered on the network , The New York Times recommended it for younger viewers as well with the headline " An Anime Marathon , and It 's Not Just for Adults . " The network moved its Anime Unleashed programming block into prime time to take advantage of the quality of the series , eventually launching it into a top ten position on the Nielsen VideoScan anime survey in the middle of 2004 . Sony Pictures Entertainment selected Last Exile , Blood + , <unk> : The Count of Monte Cristo , and <unk> the TV as part its promotional campaign throughout 2007 and 2008 targeting audiences ages 15 – 35 . It streamed the four series throughout Europe , Latin America , and other parts of Asia on Animax and Animax Asia through various 3G mobile phone services . 
 = Switzerland in the Roman era = 
 The territory of modern Switzerland was a part of the Roman Republic and Empire for a period of about six centuries , beginning with the step @-@ by @-@ step conquest of the area by Roman armies from the 2nd century BC and ending with the decline of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century AD . 
 The mostly Celtic tribes of the area were subjugated by successive Roman campaigns aimed at control of the strategic routes from Italy across the Alps to the Rhine and into Gaul , most importantly by Julius Caesar 's defeat of the largest tribal group , the Helvetii , in 58 BC . Under the Pax Romana , the area was smoothly integrated into the prospering Empire , and its population assimilated into the wider Gallo @-@ Roman culture by the 2nd century AD , as the Romans enlisted the native aristocracy to engage in local government , built a network of roads connecting their newly established colonial cities and divided up the area among the Roman provinces . 
 Roman civilization began to retreat from Swiss territory when it became a border region again after the Crisis of the Third Century . Roman control of most of Switzerland ceased in 401 AD , after which the area began to be occupied by Germanic peoples . 
 = = Switzerland prior to the Roman conquest = = 
 The Swiss plateau , within the natural borders of the Alps to the South and East , Lake Geneva and the Rhône to the west and the Rhine to the north , was recognized as a contiguous territory by Julius Caesar . 
 This area had been dominated by the La Tène culture since the 5th century BC , settled by a mostly Celtic population ( Gauls ) , of which the Helvetii were the most numerous , but which also included the Rauraci in north @-@ west Switzerland centered on Basel , and the Allobroges around Geneva . South of the Swiss plateau were the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> in the Valais , the <unk> in the Ticino , while the Raetians controlled the Grisons as well as large areas around it . 
 = = The Roman conquest = = 
 = = = Early contact = = = 
 The first part of what is now Switzerland to fall to Rome was the southern Ticino , annexed after the Roman victory over the <unk> in 222 BC . The territory of the Allobroges around Geneva came under Roman sway by 121 BC and was incorporated into the province of Gallia Narbonensis prior to the Gallic Wars ( 58 – 51 BC ) . 
 In around 110 BC , two Helvetic tribes under <unk> – the Tigurini and the <unk> , sometimes identified with the Teutons – joined the wandering Germanic Cimbri on a march to the West . In the course of the Cimbrian War they defeated a Roman force under Lucius Cassius Longinus at the Battle of <unk> in 107 BC , but after the Roman victory over the Teutons at Aquae Sextiae in 102 BC , the Tigurini returned to settle in the Swiss Plateau . 
 = = = Defeat of the Helvetii = = = 
 In 61 BC , the Helvetii , led by <unk> , decided to leave their lands and move to the West , burning their settlements behind them – twelve oppida , according to Caesar , and some 400 villages . They were decisively beaten by Caesar in the Battle of Bibracte in 58 BC . After their surrender , Caesar sent the Helvetii home , according them the status of foederati or Roman allies , but not yet ( as has previously been believed ) fully subjugating them to Roman sovereignty . 
 Caesar 's policy aimed at controlling the territory west of the Jura and Rhine , as well as at blocking the potential incursion routes from the East along the Jura . The Raetians , described as savage warriors by Strabo , continued to launch incursions into the Swiss Plateau and also had to be contained . To that end , Caesar charged the Helvetii and the Rauraci with defending their territory and established two colonies of veterans – one , the Colonia Julia Equestris ( now Nyon ) on the shores of Lake Geneva and the other through Lucius <unk> Plancus in northwestern Switzerland , preceding the larger Augusta Raurica founded by Augustus in around 6 AD . 
 = = = Conquest of the Alps = = = 
 Caesar 's attempt to open the Great St Bernard Pass for Roman traffic failed in 57 BC due to strong opposition by the local <unk> . Concerted and successful efforts to gain control over the Alpine region were undertaken by his successor , Augustus , as the rapid development of Lugdunum ( Lyon ) made the establishment of a safe and direct route from Gaul to Italy a priority . 
 In 25 BC , an army under Aulus Terentius Varro Murena wiped out the <unk> in the Aosta Valley . At some time between 25 and 7 BC – either following the Aosta campaign or , more likely , in the course of the conquest of Raetia in 15 BC – a campaign also subjugated the Celtic tribes of the Valais and opened the Great St Bernard Pass . 
 That conquest was a consequence of the Augustan imperative of securing the Imperial borders . To effectively control the Alps as the shield of northern Italy , Rome needed to control both flanks of the mountain range . Thus it had to extend its power to the Rhine and Danube , thereby also opening a direct route to Germania and all of Central Europe . The last obstacle in this path were the Raetians . After a first expedition against them by Publius Silius Nerva in 16 BC , a more thorough campaign by Drusus and the later emperor Tiberius brought Raetia – and thereby all of Switzerland – firmly under Roman control . 
 The <unk> <unk> , built by Augustus in 7 BC to celebrate his conquest of the Alps , lists among the defeated peoples the tribes of Raetia and of the Valais , but not the Helvetii . It appears that they were absorbed peacefully into the Empire during the first century AD , except for their part in the conflicts of the Year of the Four Emperors , AD 69 . 
 = = Roman Switzerland = = 
 The history of Switzerland under Roman rule was , from the Augustan period up until 260 AD , a time of exceptional peace and prosperity . The Pax Romana was made possible by the protection of well @-@ defended and distant Imperial borders and a peaceful and smooth Romanization of the local population . The Romans urbanized the territory with numerous settlements and built a network of high @-@ quality Roman roads connecting them , allowing for the integration of Helvetia into the imperial economy . 
 = = = Roman settlements = = = 
 While the Roman presence was always strong in the Alps , where the crucial North @-@ South connection had to be kept open , the Swiss plateau was not really Romanized until decades after the conquest . The principal Roman settlements in Switzerland were the cities of Iulia Equestris ( Nyon ) , Aventicum ( Avenches ) , Augusta Raurica ( <unk> ) and Vindonissa ( Windisch ) . Evidence has also been found of almost twenty Roman villages ( vici ) established in the 1st to 3rd century AD , as well as hundreds of villas of varying sizes built in the western and central part of the Swiss Plateau . The known vici include : 
 in the Romandie : <unk> ( <unk> @-@ les @-@ Bains ) , <unk> ( Geneva ) , <unk> ( Lausanne ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , Urba ( Orbe ) , <unk> ( Oron ) , <unk> ( Vevey ) ; 
 in the Valais : <unk> or <unk> ( St. Maurice ) , Forum Claudii <unk> ( Martigny ) , <unk> , <unk> ( Sitten ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) ; 
 in central and northern Switzerland : Aquae <unk> ( Baden ) , Ad Fines ( <unk> ) , Bern , <unk> ( Basel ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) , Centum Prata ( <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) , Pierre <unk> , <unk> or <unk> ( Solothurn ) , <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Zurzach ) , <unk> ( Zürich ) , <unk> or <unk> ( Winterthur ) ; 
 in Raetia : Ad <unk> ( <unk> ) , Arbor Felix ( Arbon ) , <unk> ( Bellinzona ) , Curia ( Chur ) , Magia ( Maienfeld ) , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> @-@ Rona ) . 
 The colonies of Nyon and Augusta Raurica at first had little cultural influence beyond their immediate surroundings . After Roman military defeats in Germania in 12 – 9 BC and 6 – 9 AD , the frontier was moved back to the Rhine and guarded by eight legions , of which one , originally Legio XIII Gemina , was based in the permanent camp of Vindonissa ( Windisch ) . 
 Aventicum ( Avenches ) was likely the capital of the Helvetii since its founding at the beginning of the 1st century . In the 40s , it benefited from the traffic brought over the St Bernard pass over a street expanded by Claudius , and in 71 it acquired the status of a Roman colony and of an allied city . This is believed to have been a favor of Vespasian for the city in which he had lived for a time , or a measure to better control the Helvetii after the events of 69 by implanting a colony of veterans in their midst . 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 The Alps were first administered by a legatus pro <unk> in Augusta <unk> ( Augsburg ) , then by the procurator of the new province of Raetia . The Valais was split from Raetia by Claudius in AD 43 and merged with the province of Alpes Graiae to form a new province , Alpes Graiae et Poeninae . 
 As for the Swiss plateau , its western and central part up to Ad Fines ( <unk> ) was administratively part of the province of Belgica and for military purposes part of Germania Superior . Its eastern part belonged to Raetia . 
 This division , established by Augustus in 22 BC , was accompanied by a redistribution of tribal settlement areas . It remained essentially unchanged until Diocletian 's reforms in the third century , when parts of Switzerland each belonged to the provinces of <unk> , Vienna , Raetia Prima , Liguria and Alpes Graiae et Poeninae . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 The colonies of Nyon , Aventicum and Augusta Raurica were governed under republican constitutions similar to that of Rome . Most governmental powers were exercised by a pair of magistrates , the <unk> , elected annually first by all citizens older than 25 , and in later times by the city council or ordo <unk> . The 100 members of this council , which corresponded to the Roman Senate , were selected by the <unk> among former officials or priests according to their wealth , and held office for life . 
 Augusta Raurica and Aventicum were also the civitates , or capitals , of the non @-@ Roman tribes of the Rauraci and Helvetii , respectively . In that capacity , the magistrates of Aventicum , as <unk> <unk> <unk> , also governed the entire Helvetic population , which had the legal status of <unk> ( inhabitants ) invested with the Latin Right . The rights of the Roman <unk> , or colonists , were represented by a special authority , the curatores <unk> <unk> ( " Heads of the colonists of Aventicum " ) . Moreover , the Roman citizens of the entire territory established the cives Romani <unk> <unk> ( " Association of Roman citizens in Helvetia " ) . 
 The civitas ( tribal community ) of the Helvetii was similar to that of the Celtic tribes of the Valais , which were merged into a single civitas <unk> probably around 40 AD , and given Forum Claudii <unk> ( Martigny ) as their capital . Parts of the modern Ticino belonged to the colony of <unk> ( Como ) , founded in the 1st century AD . On the local level , the basic administrative units were the vici , replacing the Helvetic <unk> , or tribes , which were dissolved at the time of colonization . These villages enjoyed a certain autonomy and were governed by popularly elected magistrates ( magistri or curatores ) . 
 While the governmental system in the central and western part of Switzerland , as described above , is well documented , nothing of substance is known about the political and administrative system in eastern Raetia . However , records of the time show that a great number of local nobles held political and religious offices in Raetia , indicating that the Romans successfully co @-@ opted the local elite . 
 = = = Culture and society = = = 
 Testaments of Roman culture such as baths , floor heating and imported goods ( pottery , glass , religious icons and artworks ) have been found in even the poorest Roman era dwellings , indicating that Romanization was effective at all levels of society . Roman public baths were found in all villages , temples with integrated theaters – showing animal or gladiatorial combat – in most . 
 While the superimposition of Roman culture on the local population appears to have been unproblematic and thorough , the Celtic traditions did not disappear entirely , resulting in a fusion of Roman and local culture that characterized all aspects of society . Latin , the language of government and instruction , only gradually replaced the local Celtic dialects in everyday use . Local artworks and religious icons of the period exhibit influences of ornamental Celtic art , classical Greco @-@ Roman art and even Oriental styles from the far reaches of the Empire . An important incentive for the local people to <unk> was the perspective of obtaining the various degrees of Roman citizenship and the rights conferred thereby , including the right to vote , to hold public office and to render military service . 
 The hundreds of villae found in Switzerland , some very luxurious , attest to the existence of a wealthy and cultured upper class of landowners . Many villae belonged not to Roman immigrants , but to members of the Celtic aristocracy who continued to hold their lands and their rank after the Roman conquest . Of the lower classes , much less is known , although there are inscriptions attesting to the existence of guilds ( collegia ) of boat skippers , doctors , teachers and traders , as well as to the existence of a trade in slaves . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In the course of Romanization , the Celtic polytheism of the local tribes was merged – syncretized – with the Roman religion . The Celtic deities came to be worshiped under the names of their Roman counterparts . Thus <unk> was replaced by Mercury , <unk> by Apollo , Taranis by Jupiter and so forth , in a practice called interpretatio romana by Caesar , who pioneered it . Roman gods also acquired the names of local gods as epithets ; thus Mars was venerated as Mars <unk> , Mercury as Mercurius <unk> and Jupiter as Jupiter <unk> after the god of the Pennine Alps . 
 As oriental religions grew more popular in the later Empire – unlike the traditional Roman cults , they promised rewards in the afterlife – they also percolated into Gaul . Artifacts related to the cults of gods such as Isis , Osiris , Serapis , <unk> , <unk> , Dionysos or Mithras have been found at the site of every Roman settlement in Switzerland . 
 The great significance of religion in the culture of Roman Switzerland is illustrated by the imposing size and central location of the Roman temples in the cities , as well as by the great number of religious artifacts found by archaeologists . As everywhere in the Empire , the Imperial cult was practiced in Switzerland ; it had a particularly prominent temple in the center of the forum of Nyon . 
 = = = = Christianity = = = = 
 The first clear testaments to Christian communities in Switzerland date after 313 , when the religion was officially tolerated with the Edict of Milan . It is however certain that , as in Gaul , the Christian faith had already had adherents for some time prior to 313 . 
 The first bishop in Switzerland was either Justinianus , bishop of the <unk> , in 340 ( his historicity is not certain ) or Theodorus , bishop of <unk> , in 381 or earlier . The first Christian religious buildings date to the 4th century ; they are found in Geneva , Chur and Saint @-@ Maurice , known for the legend of the Theban Legion . 
 = = Decline of Roman civilization in Switzerland = = 
 = = = The catastrophe of 260 = = = 
 The order and prosperity that the Pax Romana had brought to Switzerland ended , as elsewhere in the Empire , with the Crisis of the Third Century . In 260 , when the Gallic Empire briefly seceded from Rome , the emperor Gallienus withdrew the legions from the Rhine to fight the usurper <unk> , allowing the warlike Alemanni to enter the Swiss plateau . There , cities , villages and most villae were raided or sacked by marauding bands . The numerous caches of coins recovered from the period between 250 and 280 attest to the severity of the crisis . Only the Valais , shielded by mountains , escaped these predations . 
 = = = Borderlands = = = 
 As the Empire 's frontiers receded to the Rhine , Switzerland once again became a border area . Its defenses were strengthened , especially under Diocletian and Constantine , who rebuilt the roads and built castles ( castra ) alongside . Numerous fortifications were built along the Rhine border and further south , providing for a defense in depth . The border fortifications were completed by Valentinian I in 371 , who established a chain of watchtowers along the Rhine from Lake Constance to Basel , with each tower no more than 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away from the next one . 
 But even these efforts could not restore peace and order in Switzerland , and numerous settlements were abandoned as their inhabitants fled to more defensible places or to the South . Urban culture faded away as the cities of Nyon and Augusta Raurica were permanently abandoned during the 4th century , the stones of their ruins serving to fortify Geneva and Basel . Aventicum never recovered from its pillages : Ammianus Marcellinus noted in around 360 that " the city was once very illustrious , as its half @-@ ruined buildings attest . " 
 = = = Transition to the Middle Ages = = = 
 The Roman era of Switzerland is traditionally held to have ended in 401 AD , when Stilicho withdrew all troops from the Rhine and the Danube . However , it has been argued that the withdrawal was only temporary and partial , and that Roman control of these rivers was reestablished in 411 – 413 with the assistance of tribes moving south from Germania . 
 In any case , the fifth century saw the apparently non @-@ violent takeover of western Switzerland by the Burgundians ( placed there by Flavius Aetius in 443 as a shield against the invading Huns ) and of Northern and Central Switzerland by the Alamanni , a move not opposed by either absent or weakened Roman forces . These settlements established the most important cultural and linguistic division in modern Switzerland : the Burgundian areas eventually became the French @-@ speaking Romandie , while the people in the larger Eastern half – called la suisse <unk> in French – still speak variants of Alemannic German . 
 Raetia maintained its Roman traditions longer than the rest of Switzerland , but most of it was eventually assimilated as well , leaving only a small territory where a Vulgar Latin dialect , Romansh , is spoken to this day . The assassination of Aetius in 454 and the subsequent retreat of Roman forces to the south of the Alps marked the definitive end of Roman power in Switzerland , and the beginning of the transition to the Middle Ages . 
 = Kaumodaki = 
 Kaumodaki is the gada ( mace ) of the Hindu god Vishnu . Vishnu is often depicted holding the Kaumodaki in one of his four hands ; the other attributes are the chakra , the conch and the lotus . The gada is also found in iconography of some of Vishnu 's avatars . 
 The name " Kaumodaki " first appears in the Hindu epic Mahabharata , where it is associated with Vishnu 's avatar Krishna . The gada is depicted in images of Vishnu since c . 200 BCE . While initially unadorned , the size and shape of Kaumodaki vary in depictions . More elaborate design features like flutes and segments were added in depictions of Vishnu 's gada . 
 Though the weapon may be depicted as an inanimate gada , Kaumodaki sometimes appears personified as a woman known as Gadadevi or <unk> in sculptures of Vishnu . In depictions that use this version , Vishnu rests one of his hands on her head , while she herself holds the gada , is seen emerging from it or has the gada carved on her head / crown . 
 The gada , regarded one of the oldest and strongest weapons , is a symbol of Vishnu 's powers . Various texts discuss the symbolism of Kaumodaki in Vishnu 's iconography . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of " Kaumodaki " is unclear . According to a popular etymology , Kaumodaki derives its name from the Sanskrit word <unk> , the blue water @-@ lily or the blue lotus ( Nymphaea <unk> ) . Another theory suggests that the mace may derive its name from the epithet of Vishnu , <unk> or vice versa . The literal synonym of Kaumodaki , <unk> is interpreted as " joy on the earth " . Based on the Vishnu Purana , Alain Daniélou translates Kaumodaki as " <unk> of the mind " . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 Vishnu is usually depicted as four @-@ armed with the four attributes in his hands : the shankha ( conch ) , the Sudarshana chakra , the padma ( lotus ) and the Kaumodaki gada . A popular epithet of Vishnu is Shankha @-@ chakra @-@ gada @-@ pani , " he who holds in his hands shankha , chakra and gada " . Generally , the gada is held in the lower ( natural ) left hand of Vishnu in contemporary images . The gada sometimes also appears in the depictions of Vishnu 's avatars Matsya , Kurma , Varaha and Narasimha . 
 The gada appears as an attribute in the oldest known sculpture of Vishnu ( from Malhar , Madhya Pradesh ) , dated to c . 200 BCE . One of the earliest images of Vishnu date to the Kushan period ( 30 – 375 CE ) found around Mathura , the gada does not appear in a stylised design as in later depictions , but the mace is a simple " round top @-@ heavy rod " held in his upper ( back ) right hand and lifted above the shoulders . In another Kushan sculpture , the gada is depicted as a long rod which is almost the height of Vishnu and is held in his upper right hand . It is depicted similar to a long pestle ( musala ) . A similar image found in <unk> as well as early images from Western India depict Vishnu resting his upper right hand on the mace or holding the mace in this hand . Gupta images continue the trend of having upper ( back ) right hand resting on or holding the gada . The gada started being depicted in other arms . Twenty @-@ four configurations of Vishnu images are noted , where the order of the four attributes is changed . 
 While the hand holding the gada changed , the design of the weapon transformed too . In late medieval art , especially Pala ( 8th – 12th century CE ) , the size of the handle of the gada is reduced to a flute , while the top takes a highly decorated round form . In Uttar Pradesh , the handle is tapered and expands at the top ; sphere on the top also depicted with flutes . The Chalukyan gada is thick and " barrel " -shaped , while the Pallava gada is depicted thick throughout . The Cholas carve Kaumodaki thinner , but is ridged and segmented . 
 The Vishnudharmottara Purana describes the iconography of Vishnu . While the lotus and shankha are held in the upper hands , the lower hands rest on two dwarf figures : the personified gada and chakra . The gada personified as a slim @-@ waisted woman , holds a chamara ( chowry ) in her hands and is adored with ornaments , with Vishnu 's right hand resting on her head ; chakra stands as a man on Vishnu 's left . The personified weapons known as Ayudhapurusha emerge in Gupta era ( 320 – 550 CE ) sculptures . The personified Kaumodaki is also known as Gada @-@ devi ( the suffix devi means goddess ) or Gada @-@ nari ( " gada @-@ woman " ) . Since the Sanskrit word gada is feminine , gada is regarded as a woman . A Gupta Vishnu in Udayagiri Caves depicts Vishnu accompanied by Gadadevi and the personified chakra . Gadadevi often appears in Vishnu images from Kashmir , including Vishnu 's four @-@ headed form Vaikuntha Chaturmurti . She holds a chamara and looks in adoration towards her master , whose hand rests on her head . She wears a crown or has an elaborate hairstyle . Apart from a lower garment , she might wear a blouse or have a bare torso . She is depicted emerging from the gada . 
 Gadadevi may be depicted as a dwarf or as a normal human as in the Sheshashayi Vishnu panel of the Gupta Deogarh temple . She is depicted holding the gada . The motif of Kaumodaki holding the gada is mostly found in Uttar Pradesh and Bengal art . In another variation , Kaumodaki stands besides Vishnu with folded hands ( in anjali mudra posture ) with the gada depicted on the head as part of the crown or the weapon mark on her forehead , as in Chola era bronzes of the gada . 
 = = Development and symbolism = = 
 The mace or club is one of the oldest weapons known to man . The popularity of the weapons with Vishnu worshippers may have led to its depiction with the deity . The gada – a symbol of strength – was a common weapon for hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and was regarded as the strongest of weapons . Vishnu 's attributes originate from his avatars , Rama and Krishna , the heroes of the ancient Hindu epics Ramayana and Mahabharata ( existing in the 5th to 4th century BCE ) respectively . Both the epics narrate various characters – gods , men and demons alike – using the gada . 
 In the philosophical meaning expounded by the Vishnu @-@ worshipping Vaishnava sect , Kaumodaki symbolizes " the intellect , the power of knowledge and the power of time " . While explaining the symbolism of four attributes in Vishnu 's hands , the Gopala Tapani Upanishad says that the gada – which represents primordial knowledge – is held in the lower left hand , which denotes " individual existence " . The Vishnu Purana calls the gada the power of knowledge . Kaumodaki is said to " intoxicate " the mind . 
 According to the Vishnudharmottara Purana , Kaumodaki represents Vishnu 's wife Lakshmi , the goddess of wealth and beauty . The Krishna Upanishad equates the gada to the goddess Kali , " the power of time " . The text further says that like the invincible Time , the mace is the destroyer of all opponents . 
 Another interpretation suggests that the Kaumodaki symbolizes the life @-@ force ( prana ) from which all " physical and mental powers " arise . Vishnu 's gada also stands for discipline , complemented by his lotus , that denotes praise . While the lotus and shankha in his hands are water symbols representing life and love , the gada and the chakra are fire symbols denoting pain and destruction and command adherence to the rules of society and nature . The Varaha Purana says the gada is to teach a lesson to irreligious rulers . Vishnu is also said to clear illusion by his gada . 
 = = Legends = = 
 In the Mahabharata , Kaumodaki is described to sound like the lightning and was capable of slaying many <unk> ( demons ) . It is granted to Vishnu @-@ Krishna by Varuna , the god of the seas . The Pandava princes were given the <unk> Forest to build their kingdom . The fire @-@ god Agni wanted to " eat " the forest to cure his indigestion . But Lord Indra opposed and created heavy rain as his friend Takshaka was living in that forest . He asked the Pandava Arjuna and his friend Krishna to aid him , as he feared the king of the gods and protector of the forest , Indra , will interfere . Arjuna and Krishna agreed and were given celestial weapons by Varuna . Krishna was given the Sudarshana chakra and Kaumodaki gada , while Arjuna got the bow <unk> and various divine arrows . The duo defeat Indra and Agni burns down the forest , pacing way for the establishment of the Pandava capital Indraprastha . 
 The Mahabharata describes Vishnu holding a gada and a chakra , possibly indicating two @-@ armed images of Vishnu . The Mahabharata also records at the time of the chakra @-@ musala war , Krishna 's Kaumodaki along with other weapons appear in human form from the heavens to watch the battle . The Harivamsa , an appendix to the Mahabharata describes four of Vishnu 's weapons fall from the heavens to aid Krishna and his brother Balarama in his battle against <unk> . Balarama uses the plough and the club called <unk> ; while Krishna battles with Kaumodaki and the bow Sharanga . 
 The <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " envoy 's message " ) of the Sanskrit playwright Bhasa ( c . 2nd century BCE – 2nd century CE ) describes an episode from the Mahabharata when Krishna depicts his Vishvarupa ( all pervading " Universal form " ) in the Hastinapur court and summons his weapons , who appear as humans , including the Kaumodaki . The Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa mentions about dwarf @-@ like ayudhapurushas including Vishnu 's mace . 
 = Joan Crawford = 
 Joan Crawford ( born Lucille Fay LeSueur ; March 23 , c . 1904 – May 10 , 1977 ) was an American film and television actress who started as a dancer and stage <unk> . In 1999 , the American Film Institute ranked Crawford tenth on their list of the greatest female stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema . 
 Beginning her career as a dancer in travelling theatrical companies before debuting as a chorus girl on Broadway , Crawford signed a motion picture contract with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer in 1925 . In the 1930s , Crawford 's fame rivaled , and later outlasted , MGM colleagues Norma Shearer and Greta Garbo . Crawford often played hard @-@ working young women who find romance and success . These stories were well received by Depression @-@ era audiences and were popular with women . Crawford became one of Hollywood 's most prominent movie stars and one of the highest paid women in the United States , but her films began losing money , and , by the end of the 1930s , she was labelled " Box Office Poison " . But her career gradually improved in the early 1940s , and she made a major comeback in 1945 by starring in Mildred Pierce , for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress . She would go on to receive Best Actress nominations for Possessed ( 1947 ) and Sudden Fear ( 1952 ) . 
 In 1955 , she became involved with the Pepsi @-@ Cola Company through her marriage to company Chairman Alfred Steele . After his death in 1959 , Crawford was elected to fill his vacancy on the board of directors but was forcibly retired in 1973 . She continued acting in film and television regularly through the 1960s , when her performances became fewer ; after the release of the British horror film Trog in 1970 , Crawford retired from the screen . Following a public appearance in 1974 , after which unflattering photographs were published , Crawford withdrew from public life and became increasingly reclusive until her death in 1977 . 
 Crawford married four times . Her first three marriages ended in divorce ; the last ended with the death of husband Alfred Steele . She adopted five children , one of whom was reclaimed by his birth mother . Crawford 's relationships with her two older children , Christina and Christopher , were acrimonious . Crawford disinherited the two , and , after Crawford 's death , Christina wrote a " tell @-@ all " memoir titled , Mommie Dearest . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crawford was born Lucille Fay LeSueur in San Antonio , Texas , on March 23 ; the year is disputed , with 1904 , 1905 , and 1906 the most likely estimates , all cited in varying sources , the third child of Thomas E. LeSueur ( died January 1 , 1938 ) , a laundry laborer , and Anna Bell Johnson ( died August 15 , 1958 ) , neither of whose years of birth can be conclusively established . Anna Bell Johnson was of English , French Huguenot , Swedish , and Irish ancestry . Her elder siblings were Daisy LeSueur ( ƒ 1902 ) and Hal LeSueur . 
 Thomas LeSueur abandoned the family a few months before Crawford 's birth but reappeared in Abilene , Texas , in 1930 as a reportedly 62 @-@ year @-@ old construction laborer . However , after his death on January 1 , 1938 , his age was given as 71 . Crawford 's mother subsequently married Henry J. Cassin ( died October 25 , 1922 ) . This marriage is listed in census records as Crawford 's mother 's first marriage , calling into question whether Thomas LeSueur and Anna Bell Johnson were ever legally wed . 
 The family lived in Lawton , Oklahoma , where Cassin , a minor impresario , ran the Ramsey Opera House . Despite his own relatively minor status as an impresario , Cassin managed to get such diverse and noted performers as Anna Pavlova and Eva Tanguay during his career . Young Lucille was reportedly unaware that Cassin , whom she called " Daddy " , was not her biological father until her brother Hal told her . Lucille preferred the nickname " Billie " as a child and she loved watching vaudeville acts perform on the stage of her stepfather 's theatre . The instability of her family life affected her education and her schooling never formally progressed beyond elementary school . 
 Her ambition was to be a dancer . However , one day , in an attempt to escape piano lessons to play with friends , she leaped from the front porch of her home and cut her foot deeply on a broken milk bottle . She had three operations and was unable to attend elementary school for 18 months . She eventually fully recovered and returned to dancing . 
 Cassin was accused of embezzlement and although acquitted in court , was blacklisted in Lawton , and the family moved to Kansas City , Missouri , around 1916 . Cassin was first listed in the City Directory in 1917 , living at 403 East Ninth Street . A Catholic , Cassin placed Crawford at St. Agnes Academy in Kansas City . After her mother and stepfather broke up , she stayed on at St. Agnes as a work student , where she spent far more time working , primarily cooking and cleaning , than studying . 
 Later , she went to Rockingham Academy , also as a work student . While attending Rockingham she began dating and had her first serious relationship , with a trumpet player named Ray Sterling , who reportedly inspired her to begin challenging herself academically . 
 In 1922 , she registered at Stephens College in Columbia , Missouri , giving her year of birth as 1906 . She attended Stephens for only a few months before withdrawing after she realized she was not prepared for college . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Under the name Lucille LeSueur , Crawford began dancing in the choruses of traveling revues and was spotted dancing in Detroit by producer Jacob J. Shubert . Shubert put her in the chorus line for his 1924 show , Innocent Eyes , at the Winter Garden Theatre on Broadway in New York City . While appearing in Innocent Eyes Crawford met a saxophone player named James Welton . The two were allegedly married in 1924 and lived together for several months , although this supposed marriage was never mentioned in later life by Crawford . 
 Crawford wanted additional work and approached Loews Theaters publicist Nils Granlund . Granlund secured a position for her with producer Harry Richmond 's act and arranged for her to do a screen test which he sent to producer Harry <unk> in Hollywood . ( Stories have persisted that Crawford further supplemented her income by appearing in one or more stag , or soft @-@ core pornographic , films , although this has been disputed . ) 
 <unk> notified Granlund on December 24 , 1924 that Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( or MGM for short ) had offered Crawford a contract at $ 75 a week . Granlund immediately wired LeSueur – who had returned to her mother 's home in Kansas City – with the news ; she borrowed $ 400 for travel expenses . She departed Kansas City on December 26 and arrived in Culver City , California on January 1 , 1925 . 
 Credited as Lucille LeSueur , her first film was Lady of the Night in 1925 , as the body double for MGM 's most @-@ popular female star , Norma Shearer . She also appeared in The Circle and Pretty Ladies ( both 1925 ) , starring comedian ZaSu Pitts . This was soon followed by equally small and unbilled roles in two other 1925 successes , The Only Thing and The Merry Widow . 
 MGM publicity head Pete Smith recognized her ability to become a major star , but felt her name sounded fake ; he told studio head Louis B. Mayer that her last name — LeSueur — reminded him of a sewer . Smith organized a contest called " Name the Star " in Movie Weekly to allow readers to select her new stage name . The initial choice was " Joan Arden " but , after another actress was found to have prior claim to that name , the alternate surname " Crawford " became the choice . Crawford later said that she wanted her first name to be pronounced " Jo @-@ Anne " , and that she hated the name Crawford because it sounded like " <unk> fish " , but also admitted she " liked the security " that went with the name . 
 = = = Self @-@ promotion and early successes = = = 
 Growing increasingly frustrated over the size and quality of the parts she was given , Crawford embarked on a campaign of self @-@ promotion . As MGM screenwriter Frederica <unk> Maas recalled , " No one decided to make Joan Crawford a star . Joan Crawford became a star because Joan Crawford decided to become a star . " She began attending dances in the afternoons and evenings at hotels around Hollywood , where she often won dance competitions with her performances of the Charleston and the Black Bottom . 
 Her strategy worked , and MGM cast her in the film where she first made an impression on audiences , Edmund Goulding 's Sally , Irene and Mary ( 1925 ) . From the beginning of her career , Crawford considered Norma Shearer — the studio 's most @-@ popular actress — her professional nemesis . Since Shearer was married to MGM Head of Production Irving Thalberg , she had the first choice of scripts and had more control than other stars in what films she would and would not make . Crawford was quoted to have said , " How can I compete with Norma ? She sleeps with the boss ! " 
 In 1926 , Crawford was named one of the <unk> Baby Stars along with Mary Astor , Dolores del Río , Janet Gaynor , and Fay Wray among others . That same year , she starred in Paris , co @-@ starring Charles Ray . Within a few years , she became the romantic female lead to many of MGM 's top male stars , including Ramón Novarro , John Gilbert , William Haines , and Tim McCoy . 
 Crawford appeared in The Unknown ( 1927 ) , starring Lon Chaney , Sr. who played a carnival knife thrower with no arms . Crawford played his <unk> @-@ clad young carnival assistant whom he hopes to marry . She stated that she learned more about acting from watching Chaney work than from anyone else in her career . " It was then , " she said , " I became aware for the first time of the difference between standing in front of a camera , and acting . " Also in 1927 , she appeared alongside her close friend , William Haines , in Spring Fever , which was the first of three movies the duo made together . 
 In 1928 , Crawford starred opposite Ramón Novarro in Across to Singapore , but it was her role as Diana Medford in Our Dancing Daughters ( 1928 ) that catapulted her to stardom . The role established her as a symbol of modern 1920s @-@ style femininity which rivaled Clara Bow , the original It girl , then Hollywood 's foremost flapper . A stream of hits followed Our Dancing Daughters , including two more flapper @-@ themed movies , in which Crawford embodied for her legion of fans ( many of whom were women ) an idealized vision of the free @-@ spirited , all @-@ American girl . 
 F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote of Crawford : 
 Joan Crawford is doubtless the best example of the flapper , the girl you see in smart night clubs , <unk> to the apex of sophistication , toying iced glasses with a remote , faintly bitter expression , dancing deliciously , laughing a great deal , with wide , hurt eyes . Young things with a talent for living . 
 On June 3 , 1929 , Crawford married Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. at Saint Malachy 's Roman Catholic Church ( known as " The Actors ' Chapel " due to its proximity to Broadway theatres ) in Manhattan , although neither was Catholic . Fairbanks was the son of Douglas Fairbanks and the stepson of Mary Pickford , who were considered Hollywood royalty . Fairbanks Sr. and Pickford were opposed to the marriage and did not invite the couple to their home , Pickfair , for eight months after the marriage . 
 The relationship between Crawford and Fairbanks , Sr. eventually warmed ; she called him " Uncle Doug " and he called her " Billie " , her old childhood nickname . Following that first invitation , Crawford and Fairbanks , Jr. became more frequent guests , which was hard on Crawford . While the Fairbanks men played golf together , Crawford was left either with Pickford or alone . 
 To rid herself of her Southwestern accent , Crawford tirelessly practiced diction and elocution . She said : 
 If I were to speak lines , it would be a good idea , I thought , to read aloud to myself , listen carefully to my voice quality and enunciation , and try to learn in that manner . I would lock myself in my room and read newspapers , magazines and books aloud . At my elbow I kept a dictionary . When I came to a word I did not know how to pronounce , I looked it up and repeated it correctly fifteen times . 
 = = = Transition to sound and continued success = = = 
 After the release of The Jazz Singer in 1927 — the first major Hollywood movie with synchronized sound — sound films , or talkies as they became nicknamed , were all the rage . The transition from silent to sound panicked many — if not all — involved with the film industry ; many silent film stars found themselves unemployable because of their undesirable voices and hard @-@ to @-@ understand accents or simply because of their refusal to make the transition to talkies . Many studios and stars avoided making the transition as long as possible , especially MGM , which was the last studio to switch over to sound . The Hollywood Revue of 1929 ( 1929 ) was one of the studio 's first all @-@ sound films , and their first attempt to showcase their stars ' ability to make the transition from silent to sound . Crawford was among the dozen or more MGM stars included in the movie ; she sang the song " Got a Feeling for You " during the film 's first act . 
 Crawford made a successful transition to talkies . Her first starring role in an all @-@ sound feature @-@ length film was in Untamed in 1929 , co @-@ starring Robert Montgomery . Despite the success of the film at the box office , it received mixed reviews from critics , who noted that while Crawford seemed nervous at making the transition to sound , also noted that she had become one of the most popular actresses in the world . 
 Montana Moon ( 1930 ) , an uneasy mix of Western clichés and music , teamed her with John Mack Brown and Ricardo Cortez . Although the film had problems with censors , it was a major success at the time of its release . Our <unk> Brides ( 1930 ) , co @-@ starring Robert Montgomery and Anita Page , was the final installment in the so @-@ called Our Dancing Daughters franchise . It was a greater success – both critically and financially – than her previous talkies , and became one of her personal favorites . 
 Her next movie , Paid ( 1930 ) , paired her with Robert Armstrong and was another success . During the early sound era , MGM began to place Crawford in more sophisticated roles , rather than continuing to promote her flapper @-@ inspired persona of the silent era . 
 In 1931 , MGM cast Crawford in five films . Three of them teamed her opposite the studio 's biggest male star and King of Hollywood , Clark Gable . Dance , Fools , Dance , released in February 1931 , was the first pairing of Crawford and Gable . Their second movie together , Laughing Sinners , released in May 1931 , was directed by Harry Beaumont and also co @-@ starred Neil Hamilton . Possessed , their third film together , released in October , was directed by Clarence Brown . 
 These films were immensely popular with audiences , and were generally well received by critics , stapling Crawford 's position as one of MGM 's top female stars of the decade , along with Norma Shearer , Greta Garbo , and Jean Harlow . Her only other notable film of 1931 , This Modern Age , was released in August , and despite unfavorable reviews , was a moderate success . 
 MGM next cast her in the film Grand Hotel , directed by Edmund Goulding . As the studio 's first all @-@ star production , Crawford co @-@ starred opposite Greta Garbo , John and Lionel Barrymore , and Wallace Beery among others . Receiving third billing , she played the middle @-@ class stenographer to Beery 's controlling general director . Crawford later admitted to being nervous during the filming of the movie because she was working with " very big stars " , and that she was disappointed that she had no scenes with the " divine Garbo " . Grand Hotel was released in April 1932 to critical and commercial success . It was the highest @-@ grossing movie of the year , and won the Academy Award for Best Picture . 
 Crawford achieved continued success in Letty Lynton ( 1932 ) . Soon after this movie 's release , a plagiarism suit forced MGM to withdraw it . For many years it was never shown on television nor made available on home video and is therefore considered the " lost " Crawford film . The gown with large ruffled sleeves , designed by Adrian , which Crawford wore in the movie , became a popular style that same year , and was even copied by Macy 's . 
 On a loan out to United Artists , she played prostitute Sadie Thompson in Rain ( 1932 ) , a film version of John Colton 's 1923 play . Actress Jeanne <unk> played the role on stage and Gloria Swanson had originated the part on screen in the 1928 film version . Crawford 's performance was panned and the film was not a success . 
 Despite the failure of Rain , in 1932 the publishing of the first " Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll " placed Crawford third in popularity at the box office , behind only Marie Dressler and Janet Gaynor . She remained on the list for the next several years , last appearing on it in 1936 . 
 In May 1933 , Crawford divorced Fairbanks . Crawford cited " grievous mental cruelty " , claiming Fairbanks had " a jealous and suspicious attitude " toward her friends and that they had " loud arguments about the most trivial subjects " lasting " far into the night " . 
 Following her divorce , she was again teamed with Clark Gable , along with Franchot Tone and Fred Astaire , in the hit Dancing Lady ( 1933 ) , in which she received top billing . She next played the title role in Sadie McKee ( 1934 ) opposite Tone and Gene Raymond . She was paired with Gable for the fifth time in Chained ( 1934 ) and for the sixth time in Forsaking All Others ( 1934 ) . Crawford 's films of this era were some of the most @-@ popular and highest @-@ grossing films of the mid @-@ 1930s . 
 In 1935 , Crawford married Tone , a stage actor from New York who planned to use his film earnings to finance his theatre group . The couple built a small theatre at Crawford 's Brentwood home and put on productions of classic plays for select groups of friends . Tone and Crawford had first appeared together in Today We Live ( 1933 ) but Crawford was hesitant about entering into another romance so soon after her split from Fairbanks . 
 Before and during their marriage , Crawford worked to promote Tone 's Hollywood career , but Tone was ultimately not interested in being a movie star and Crawford eventually wearied of the effort . After Tone reportedly began drinking and becoming physically abusive , she filed for divorce , which was granted in 1939 . Crawford and Tone much later rekindled their friendship and Tone even proposed in 1964 that they remarry . When he died in 1968 , Crawford arranged for him to be cremated and his ashes scattered at Muskoka Lakes , Canada . 
 Crawford continued her reign as a popular movie actress well into the mid @-@ 1930s . No More Ladies ( 1935 ) co @-@ starred Robert Montgomery and then @-@ husband Franchot Tone , and was a success . Crawford had long pleaded with MGM 's head Louis B. Mayer to cast her in more dramatic roles , and although he was reluctant , he cast her in the sophisticated comedy @-@ drama I Live My Life ( 1935 ) , directed by W.S. Van Dyke . It was well received by critics and made a larger profit than the studio had expected . 
 She next starred in The Gorgeous <unk> ( 1936 ) , opposite Robert Taylor and Lionel Barrymore as well as Tone , a critical and box office success , become one of Crawford 's biggest hits of the decade . Love on the Run ( 1936 ) , a romantic comedy directed by W.S. Van Dyke , was her seventh film co @-@ starring Clark Gable . It was , at the time of its release , called " a lot of happy nonsense " by critics , but a financial success nonetheless . 
 = = = Box Office Poison = = = 
 Even though Crawford remained a respected MGM actress and her films still earned profits , her popularity declined in the late 1930s . In 1937 , Crawford was proclaimed the first " Queen of the Movies " by Life magazine . She unexpectedly slipped from seventh to sixteenth place at the box office that year , and her public popularity also began to wane . Richard Boleslawski 's comedy @-@ drama The Last of Mrs. Cheyney ( 1937 ) teamed her opposite William Powell in their sole screen pairing . The film was also Crawford 's last box @-@ office success before the onset of her " Box @-@ Office Poison " period . 
 She co @-@ starred opposite Franchot Tone for the seventh and final time in The Bride Wore Red ( 1937 ) . The film was generally unfavorably reviewed by the majority of critics , with one critic calling it the " same ole rags @-@ to @-@ riches story " Crawford had been making for years . It also ran a financial loss , becoming one of MGM 's biggest failures of the year . Mannequin did , as the New York Times stated , " restore Crawford to her throne as queen of the working girls " . Most other reviews were positive , and the film managed to generate a minor profit , but it did not resurrect Crawford 's popularity . 
 On May 3 , 1938 , Crawford — along with Greta Garbo , Norma Shearer , Luise Rainer , and John Barrymore , Katharine Hepburn , Fred Astaire , Dolores del Río and others — was dubbed " Box Office Poison " in an open letter in the Independent Film Journal . The list was submitted by Harry Brandt , president of the Independent Theatre Owners Association of America . Brandt stated that while these stars had " unquestioned " dramatic abilities , their high salaries did not reflect in their ticket sales , thus hurting the movie exhibitors involved . Her follow @-@ up movie , The Shining Hour ( 1938 ) , co @-@ starring Margaret <unk> and Melvyn Douglas , was well received by critics , but a box office flop . 
 She made a comeback in 1939 with her role as home @-@ wrecker Crystal Allen in The Women opposite her professional nemesis , Norma Shearer . A year later , she played against type , playing the unglamorous role of Julie in Strange Cargo ( 1940 ) , her eighth and final film with Clark Gable . She later starred as a facially disfigured blackmailer in A Woman 's Face ( 1941 ) , a remake of the Swedish film En <unk> <unk> which had starred Ingrid Bergman in the lead role three years earlier . While the film was only a moderate box office success , her performance was hailed by many critics . 
 Crawford adopted her first child , a daughter , in 1940 . Because she was single , California law prevented her from adopting within the state so she arranged the adoption through an agency in Las Vegas . The child was temporarily called Joan until Crawford changed her name to Christina . She married actor Phillip Terry on July 21 , 1942 after a six @-@ month courtship . Together the couple adopted a son whom they named Christopher , but his birth mother reclaimed the child . The couple adopted another boy , whom they named Phillip Terry , Jr . After the marriage ended in 1946 , Crawford changed the child 's name to Christopher Crawford . 
 After eighteen years , Crawford 's contract with MGM was terminated by mutual consent on June 29 , 1943 . In lieu of the last film remaining under her contract , MGM bought her out for $ 100 @,@ 000 . During World War II she was a member of American Women 's Voluntary Services . 
 = = = Move to Warner Brothers = = = 
 For $ 500 @,@ 000 , Crawford signed with Warner Brothers for a three movie deal and was placed on the payroll on July 1 , 1943 . Her first film for the studio was Hollywood Canteen ( 1944 ) , an all @-@ star morale @-@ booster film that teamed her with several other top movie stars at the time . Crawford said one of the main reasons she signed with Warner Brothers was because she wanted to play the character " Mattie " in a proposed 1944 film version of Edith Wharton 's novel Ethan Frome ( 1911 ) . 
 She wanted to play the title role in Mildred Pierce ( 1945 ) , but Bette Davis was the studio 's first choice . However , Davis turned the role down . Director Michael Curtiz did not want Crawford to play the part , and he instead lobbied for the casting of Barbara Stanwyck . Warners went against Curtiz , however , and cast Crawford in the film . Throughout the entire production of the movie , Curtiz criticized Crawford . He has been quoted as having told Jack Warner , " She comes over here with her high @-@ hat airs and her goddamn shoulder pads ... why should I waste my time directing a has @-@ been ? " Curtiz demanded Crawford prove her suitability by taking a screen test . After the test , Curtiz agreed to Crawford 's casting . Mildred Pierce was a resounding critical and commercial success . It epitomized the lush visual style and the hard @-@ boiled film noir sensibility that defined Warner Bros. movies of the late forties , earning Crawford the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . 
 The success of Mildred Pierce revived Crawford 's movie career . For several years , she starred in what were called " a series of first @-@ rate melodramas " . Her next film was <unk> ( 1946 ) , co @-@ starring John Garfield , a romantic drama about a love affair between an older woman and a younger man . She starred alongside Van Heflin in Possessed ( 1947 ) , for which she received a second Academy Award nomination , although she did not win . In Daisy Kenyon ( 1947 ) , she appeared opposite Dana Andrews and Henry Fonda , and in Flamingo Road ( 1949 ) she played a carnival dancer opposite Zachary Scott and David Brian . She made a cameo appearance in It 's a Great Feeling ( 1949 ) , poking fun at her own screen image . In 1950 , she starred in the film noir , The Damned Don 't Cry ! , and starred in Harriet Craig . 
 After the completion of This Woman Is Dangerous ( 1952 ) , a film Crawford called her " worst " , she asked to be released from her Warner Brothers contract . By this time she felt Warners was losing interest in her and she decided it was time to move on . Later that same year , she received her third and final Academy Award nomination for Sudden Fear for RKO Radio Pictures . In 1953 , she appeared in her final film for MGM , Torch Song . The movie received favorable reviews and moderate success at the box office . 
 Crawford adopted two more children in 1947 , identical twins whom she named Cindy and Cathy . 
 = = = Radio and television = = = 
 Crawford worked in the radio series The Screen Guild Theater on January 8 , 1939 ; Good News ; Baby , broadcast March 2 , 1940 on Arch Oboler 's Lights Out ; The Word on Everyman 's Theater ( 1941 ) ; Chained on the Lux Radio Theater and Norman Corwin 's Document A / 777 ( 1948 ) . She appeared in episodes of anthology television series in the 1950s and , in 1959 , made a pilot for her series , The Joan Crawford Show . 
 = = = Al Steele and Pepsi Cola Company = = = 
 Crawford married her fourth and final husband , Alfred Steele , at the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas on May 10 , 1955 . Crawford and Steele met at a party in 1950 when Steele was an executive at PepsiCo . They renewed their acquaintance at a New Year 's Eve party in 1954 . Steele by that time had become President of Pepsi Cola . Alfred Steele would later be named Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Pepsi Cola . She traveled extensively on behalf of Pepsi following the marriage . She estimated that she traveled over 100 @,@ 000 miles for the company . 
 Steele died of a heart attack in April 1959 . Crawford was initially advised that her services were no longer required . After she told the story to Louella Parsons , Pepsi reversed its position and Crawford was elected to fill the vacant seat on the board of directors . 
 Crawford received the sixth annual " Pally Award " , which was in the shape of a bronze Pepsi bottle . It was awarded to the employee making the most significant contribution to company sales . In 1973 , Crawford was forced to retire from the company at the behest of company executive Don Kendall , whom Crawford had referred to for years as " Fang " . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After her Academy Award nominated performance in 1952 's Sudden Fear , Crawford continued to work steadily throughout the rest of the decade . In 1954 , she starred in Johnny Guitar , a camp western film , co @-@ starring Sterling Hayden and Mercedes McCambridge . She also starred in Female on the Beach ( 1955 ) with Jeff Chandler , and in Queen Bee ( 1955 ) alongside John Ireland . The following year , she starred opposite a young Cliff Robertson in Autumn Leaves ( 1956 ) and filmed a leading role in The Story of Esther Costello ( 1957 ) , co @-@ starring Rossano Brazzi . Crawford , who had been left near @-@ penniless following Alfred Steele 's death accepted a small role in The Best of Everything ( 1959 ) . Although she was not the star of the film , she received positive reviews . Crawford would later name the role as being one of her personal favorites . However , by the early 1960s , Crawford 's status in motion pictures had declined considerably . 
 Crawford starred as Blanche Hudson , an old , wheelchair @-@ bound former A @-@ list movie star in conflict with her psychotic sister , in the highly successful psychological thriller What Ever Happened to Baby Jane ? ( 1962 ) . Despite the actresses ' earlier tensions , Crawford reportedly suggested Bette Davis for the role of Jane . The two stars maintained publicly that there was no feud between them . The director , Robert Aldrich , explained that Davis and Crawford were each aware of how important the film was to their respective careers and commented , " It 's proper to say that they really detested each other , but they behaved absolutely perfectly . " 
 After filming was completed , their public comments against each other propelled their animosity into a lifelong feud . The film was a huge success , recouping its costs within 11 days of its nationwide release , and temporarily revived Crawford 's career . Davis was nominated for an Academy Award for her performance as Jane Hudson . Crawford secretly contacted each of the other Oscar nominees in the category ( Katharine Hepburn , Lee Remick Geraldine Page and Anne Bancroft , all East Coast @-@ based actresses ) , to let them know that if they could not attend the ceremony , she would be happy to accept the Oscar on their behalf ; all agreed . Both Davis and Crawford were backstage when the absent Anne Bancroft was announced as the winner , and Crawford accepted the award on her behalf . Davis claimed for the rest of her life that Crawford had campaigned against her , a charge Crawford denied . 
 That same year , Crawford starred as Lucy Harbin in William Castle 's horror mystery Strait @-@ Jacket ( 1964 ) . Robert Aldrich cast Crawford and Davis in Hush ... Hush , Sweet Charlotte ( 1964 ) . After a purported campaign of harassment by Davis on location in Louisiana , Crawford returned to Hollywood and entered a hospital . After a prolonged absence , during which Crawford was accused of feigning illness , Aldrich was forced to replace her with Olivia de Havilland . Crawford claimed to be devastated , saying " I heard the news of my replacement over the radio , lying in my hospital bed ... I cried for 9 hours . " Crawford nursed grudges against Davis and Aldrich for the rest of her life , saying of Aldrich , " He is a man who loves evil , horrendous , vile things " , to which Aldrich replied , " If the shoe fits , wear it , and I am very fond of Miss Crawford . " 
 In 1965 she played Amy Nelson in I Saw What You Did ( 1965 ) , another William Castle vehicle . She starred as Monica Rivers in Herman Cohen 's horror thriller film Berserk ! ( 1967 ) . After the film 's release , Crawford guest @-@ starred as herself on The Lucy Show . The episode , " Lucy and the Lost Star " , first aired on February 26 , 1968 . Crawford struggled during rehearsals and drank heavily on @-@ set , leading series star Lucille Ball to suggest replacing her with Gloria Swanson . However , Crawford was letter @-@ perfect the day of the show , which included dancing the Charleston , and received two standing ovations from the studio audience . 
 In October 1968 , Crawford 's 29 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Christina ( who was then acting in New York on the CBS soap opera The Secret Storm ) , needed immediate medical attention for a ruptured ovarian tumor . Despite the fact that Christina 's character was a 28 @-@ year @-@ old and Crawford was in her sixties , Crawford offered to play her role until Christina was well enough to return , to which producer Gloria Monty readily agreed . Although Crawford did well in rehearsal , she lost her composure while taping and the director and producer were left to struggle to piece together the necessary footage . 
 Crawford 's appearance in the 1969 television film Night Gallery ( which served as pilot to the series that followed ) , marked one of Steven Spielberg 's earliest directing jobs . She made a cameo appearance as herself in the first episode of the situation comedy The Tim Conway Show , which aired on January 30 , 1970 . She starred on the big screen one final time , playing Dr. Brockton in Herman Cohen 's science fiction horror film Trog ( 1970 ) , rounding out a career spanning 45 years and more than eighty motion pictures . Crawford made three more television appearances , as Stephanie White in a 1970 episode ( " The Nightmare " ) of The Virginian and as Joan Fairchild ( her final performance ) in a 1972 episode ( " Dear Joan : We 're Going to Scare You to Death " ) of The Sixth Sense . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In 1970 , Crawford was presented with the Cecil B. DeMille Award by John Wayne at the Golden Globes , which was telecast from the Coconut Grove at The Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . She also spoke at Stephens College , which she had attended for four months in 1922 . 
 Crawford published her autobiography , A Portrait of Joan , co @-@ written with Jane <unk> Ardmore , in 1962 through Doubleday . Crawford 's next book , My Way of Life , was published in 1971 by Simon & Schuster . Those expecting a racy tell @-@ all were disappointed , although Crawford 's meticulous ways were revealed in her advice on grooming , wardrobe , exercise , and even food storage . Upon her death there was found in her apartment photographs of John F. Kennedy , for whom she had reportedly voted in the 1960 presidential election . 
 In September 1973 , Crawford moved from apartment 22 @-@ G to a smaller apartment next door ( 22 @-@ H ) at the Imperial House . Her last public appearance was September 23 , 1974 , at a party honoring her old friend Rosalind Russell at New York 's Rainbow Room . Russell was suffering from breast cancer and arthritis at the time . When Crawford saw the unflattering photos that appeared in the papers the next day , she said , " If that 's how I look , then they won 't see me anymore . " Crawford cancelled all public appearances , began declining interviews and left her apartment less and less . Dental @-@ related issues , including surgery which left her needing round @-@ the @-@ clock nursing care , plagued her from 1972 until mid @-@ 1975 . While on antibiotics for this problem in October 1974 , her drinking caused her to pass out , slip and strike her face . The incident scared her enough to give up drinking , although she insisted it was because of her return to Christian Science . The incident is recorded in a series of letters sent to her insurance company held in the stack files on the 3rd floor of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts ; it is also documented by Carl <unk> in his biography of the actress , Joan Crawford : The Last Years . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On May 8 , 1977 , Crawford gave away her beloved Shih Tzu , " Princess Lotus Blossom , " being too weak to care for it . She died two days later at her New York apartment from a heart attack . A funeral was held at Campbell Funeral Home , New York , on May 13 , 1977 . In her will , which was signed October 28 , 1976 , Crawford bequeathed to her two youngest children , Cindy and Cathy , $ 77 @,@ 500 each from her $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 estate . She explicitly disinherited the two eldest , Christina and Christopher , writing , " It is my intention to make no provision herein for my son , Christopher , or my daughter , Christina , for reasons which are well known to them . " She also bequeathed nothing to her niece , Joan Lowe ( 1933 @-@ 1999 ; born Joan Crawford LeSueur , the only child of her estranged brother , Hal ) . Crawford left money to her favorite charities : the <unk> of New York , the Motion Picture Home , the American Cancer Society , the Muscular Dystrophy Association , the American Heart Association , and the <unk> School for Boys . 
 A memorial service was held for Crawford at All Souls ' Unitarian Church on Lexington Avenue in New York on May 16 , 1977 , and was attended by , among others , her old Hollywood friend Myrna Loy . Another memorial service , organized by George Cukor , was held on June 24 in the Samuel Goldwyn Theater at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills . Crawford was cremated and her ashes were placed in a crypt with her fourth and final husband , Alfred Steele , in Ferncliff Cemetery , Hartsdale , New York . 
 Joan Crawford 's handprints and footprints are immortalized in the forecourt of Grauman 's Chinese Theater on Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood . She has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1750 Vine Street . Playboy listed Crawford as # 84 of the " 100 Sexiest Women of the 20th century " . Crawford was also voted the tenth greatest female star of the classic American cinema by the American Film Institute . 
 = = Mommie Dearest = = 
 In November 1978 , Christina Crawford published Mommie Dearest , which contained allegations that her late adoptive mother was emotionally and physically abusive to Christina and her brother Christopher because she only cared for her career instead of being a mother . Many of Crawford 's friends and co @-@ workers , including Van Johnson , Ann Blyth , Marlene Dietrich , Myrna Loy , Katharine Hepburn , Cesar Romero , Gary Gray , Betty Barker ( Joan 's secretary for nearly fifty years ) , Douglas Fairbanks Jr . ( Crawford 's first husband ) , and Crawford 's two other younger daughters — Cathy and Cindy — denounced the book , categorically denying any abuse . But others , including Betty Hutton , Helen Hayes , James MacArthur ( Hayes ' son ) , June Allyson , Liz Smith , Rex Reed , and Vincent Sherman stated they had witnessed some form of abusive behavior . Crawford 's secretary , Jeri Binder Smith , confirmed Christina 's account . Mommie Dearest became a bestseller and was made into the 1981 biography film Mommie Dearest , starring Faye Dunaway as Crawford . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Radio appearances = = 
 = = Autobiographies = = 
 — ( 1962 ) . A Portrait of Joan : The Autobiography of Joan Crawford . Doubleday . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 258 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 — ( 1971 ) . My Way of Life . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = SMS Greif = 
 SMS Greif was an aviso built by the Imperial German Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) , the only ship of her class . She was built at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel ; her keel was laid in 1885 , she was launched in July 1886 , and she was commissioned in July 1887 . Unlike the other avisos built by Germany , Greif was equipped only with a gun armament . Greif served with the fleet from 1887 until 1911 , though she was not a particularly successful design and so saw little active service , having spent most of her time in reserve . In 1912 , she was reduced to a training ship for engine @-@ room personnel . In 1917 , she was hulked for minelayers in Kiel . She was ultimately sold for scrapping in 1921 in Hamburg . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Greif was 99 @.@ 5 meters ( 326 ft ) long at the waterline and 102 @.@ 6 m ( 337 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 9 @.@ 75 m ( 32 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 22 m ( 13 @.@ 8 ft ) forward and 4 @.@ 34 m ( 14 @.@ 2 ft ) aft . The ship was designed to displace 2 @,@ 050 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 020 long tons ; 2 @,@ 260 short tons ) , and at combat loading , she displaced 2 @,@ 266 t ( 2 @,@ 230 long tons ; 2 @,@ 498 short tons ) . Her hull was constructed with transverse steel frames and it contained twelve watertight compartments . 
 Greif was a mediocre sea boat and was moderately handy . She pitched slightly but rolled significantly more . Her transverse metacentric height was .48 m ( 1 ft 7 in ) . The ship had a crew of seven officers and 163 enlisted men , though the latter later increased to 178 . Greif carried several smaller boats , including one picket boat , two cutters , one yawl , and one dinghy . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Greif 's propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double expansion engines built by AG Germania , which drove a pair of four @-@ bladed screws that were 4 m ( 13 ft ) wide in diameter . Steam for the engines was provided by six cylindrical , double @-@ ended , coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers split in three boiler rooms . In 1906 , she was reequipped with eight new cylindrical boilers in two boiler rooms , which slightly improved her performance . She was equipped with a pair of generators for electrical power ; they had a combined output of 20 kilowatts ( 27 hp ) at 67 volts . Steering was controlled with a single rudder . 
 The ship 's propulsion system was rated at 5 @,@ 400 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . On trials , Greif reached 5 @,@ 431 ihp ( 4 @,@ 050 kW ) and 18 @.@ 2 kn ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) . With the new boilers , her engines could reach 5 @,@ 795 ihp ( 4 @,@ 321 kW ) and 19 @.@ 1 kn ( 35 @.@ 4 km / h ; 22 @.@ 0 mph ) on speed trials . She could carry up to 350 t ( 340 long tons ; 390 short tons ) of coal , which provided a range of approximately 2 @,@ 180 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 040 km ; 2 @,@ 510 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . After her refit , she could carry 436 t ( 429 long tons ; 481 short tons ) of coal , which increased her range to 3 @,@ 960 nmi ( 7 @,@ 330 km ; 4 @,@ 560 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Unlike the other avisos built by the German navy , which carried torpedo tubes as their primary armament , Greif was armed only with guns . As built , the ship was armed with two 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) K L / 35 guns placed in pivot mounts . The ship was also equipped with ten machine guns . In 1906 , the ship was rearmed with eight 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 34 guns in single mounts and six machine guns . Later in her career , two of the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns and two machine guns were removed . Greif carried no armor protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The ship was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1885 and launched on 29 July 1886 . Fitting @-@ out work followed her launch , and was completed by 9 July 1887 , when she was commissioned into the German fleet . Following her commissioning , Greif served with the active duty fleet , though she saw little service , as she was an unsuccessful design . In 1897 , Greif was assigned to the II Division of the Maneuver Squadron for the annual summer training exercises in August and September . After the conclusion of the maneuvers , the II Division returned to its home port in Kiel for the winter . In early 1898 , Gefion returned to service in the II Division . 
 In August and September 1900 , Greif was assigned to the Maneuver Squadron during the annual summer training exercises . During the maneuvers , she served in the cruiser screen for the hostile squadron , along with the old frigate Carola . On 21 June 1911 , Greif was reduced to a special purpose ship for experimentation , and she was hulked on 25 October 1915 . She was thereafter used as a training ship for engine room personnel . In 1917 , she was converted into a hulk for minelayers and based in <unk> outside Kiel . She served in this capacity for the last year of World War I. In 1921 , she was sold for scrapping and broken up in Hamburg . 
 = What Maisie Knew ( film ) = 
 What Maisie Knew is a 2012 American drama film written by Carroll Cartwright and Nancy Doyne and directed by Scott McGehee and David Siegel . It stars Julianne Moore , Alexander Skarsgård , Onata Aprile , Joanna Vanderham and Steve Coogan , and is a modern adaptation of Henry James ' 1897 novel What Maisie Knew . The film finds six @-@ year @-@ old Maisie in the middle of a custody battle between her neglectful parents and their new partners . 
 Cartwright and Doyne wrote the film 's script in 1995 but the project languished in development hell until McGehee and Siegel were hired as directors . It was filmed in New York over seven weeks in 2011 with music scored by DeVotchKa 's Nick Urata . The film premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival , and was theatrically released on May 3 , 2013 , by Millennium Entertainment . It earned $ 2 @.@ 7 million at the global box office and received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Six @-@ year @-@ old Maisie ( Onata Aprile ) lives in a New York apartment with her parents , Susanna ( Julianne Moore ) , a singer in a rock band , and Beale ( Steve Coogan ) , an international art dealer . Susanna and Beale argue with each other viciously and constantly , often ignoring Maisie and leaving her in the care of their nanny , Margo ( Joanna Vanderham ) . Maisie does not always understand her parents ' actions , such as when Susanna hires a locksmith to change the lock on the apartment 's front door to keep Beale out . When they decide to separate , both parents are granted joint custody of Maisie . 
 After the separation , Margo moves into Beale 's apartment and they get married soon afterwards . In response to the marriage , Susanna impulsively marries Lincoln ( Alexander Skarsgård ) , a bartender whom she barely knows . Maisie bonds with Lincoln , but Susanna quickly grows resentful of how much Maisie has warmed to him . 
 Although both Susanna and Beale think they deserve full custody , their desire to keep Maisie is primarily to spite the other , and they are quick to pawn her off on the other parent when looking after her becomes inconvenient . Maisie 's time is split between staying with each of her parents , but her primary caregivers become Lincoln and Margo as Susanna leaves on a tour and Beale disappears on business trips . With his relationship with Margo disintegrating , Beale eventually decides to move to the UK . 
 With Beale and Susanna gone , Margo , Lincoln and Maisie begin to spend time together . While Susanna is supposedly on tour , the three run into her in New York . After an angry confrontation in which Susanna accuses Lincoln and Margo of stealing Maisie from her , Lincoln declares their relationship over , telling Susanna that she does not deserve Maisie . 
 When Susanna suddenly leaves the city , Maisie once again ends up in Margo 's care . Margo takes her to stay in her cousin 's beach house . She invites Lincoln to visit , much to Maisie 's delight , and Lincoln and Margo kiss . One night , Susanna stops by the beach house unannounced in her tour bus to pick Maisie up , but Maisie chooses to stay with Margo and Lincoln instead . After shouting at her , Susanna realizes that Maisie is scared of her and that it is in Maisie 's best interests to stay behind . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Julianne Moore as Susanna 
 Alexander Skarsgård as Lincoln 
 Onata Aprile as Maisie 
 Joanna Vanderham as Margo 
 Steve Coogan as Beale 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 What Maisie Knew was written by Carroll Cartwright and Nancy Doyne in 1995 , based on the 1897 novel What Maisie Knew by Henry James . At the time , Cartwright was involved in a legal dispute over the custody of his daughter . Director Scott McGehee later said that Cartwright had used James ' novel " as a lens " through which to write about his own divorce and raising his daughter . According to Cartwright , he and Doyne struggled to find producers , financiers and directors interested in making the film because of the challenges of working with a young child at its center . Producer Charles Weinstock was involved in the project for a number of years and was eventually responsible for obtaining financing from Red Crown Productions and hiring McGehee and David Siegel as directors . McGehee and Siegel were initially apprehensive about the script but decided to read it after hearing from their agent that actress Julianne Moore was interested in playing one of the roles ; they accepted the directing job after talking to Moore about the story . Although McGehee and Siegel were reluctant to make a film about divorce , they liked that the script focused on Maisie 's perspective , noting that it was unusual for a film aimed at adults to have a story told from the perspective of a child . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting for the role of Maisie took eight weeks . Casting director Avy Kaufman suggested about 100 young girls to McGehee and Siegel while the directors independently visited New York elementary schools to hold auditions . Six @-@ year @-@ old Onata Aprile auditioned relatively late , and was cast three weeks before production started . She met with two of her adult co @-@ stars , Julianne Moore and Alexander Skarsgård , for a brief rehearsal period before filming began . Moore , who had read the film 's script before directors McGehee and Siegel , was anxious about having to sing as part of her role . She prepared by meeting with music producer Peter Nashel , singer Elaine Caswell , and Alison Mosshart , the lead singer of The Kills , whose songs Moore performed in the film . 
 Steve Coogan was the directors ' first choice to play Beale , although the film 's producers wanted to cast another English actor . McGehee and Siegel felt Coogan was suited to the role because " no matter what awful things he does and says , somehow there 's something sympathetic about him " . Joanna Vanderham , the last actor to be cast in the film , secured her role two weeks before production started after talking with McGehee , Siegel and Kaufman on Skype from Glasgow . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 What Maisie Knew was filmed in New York for 35 days over seven weeks in the summer of 2011 . It was shot on 35 mm film using an Arri camera . Filming took place in mainly Lower Manhattan , and scenes at the beach house were shot on Long Island . One scene featuring Maisie and Lincoln taking a day trip together was shot on the High Line . A scene in which Susanna performs at a concert was filmed at Webster Hall using a pre @-@ recorded vocal track , a backing band and a small audience . According to McGehee and Siegel , a significant challenge during filming was the limited time with which they were able to work with Aprile each day due to her early bedtime . While shooting one of the film 's final scenes wherein Susanna arrives at the beach house at night to pick up Maisie , Aprile fell asleep and could not be woken up ; the shoot had to be postponed until two weeks later . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Nick Urata of the musical group DeVotchKa . It was inspired by rock music , to which McGehee and Siegel thought Maisie would have been exposed with a musician mother . McGehee described Urata 's score as " us [ ing ] rock language but in a more childlike way " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 What Maisie Knew premiered at the 2012 Toronto Film Festival on September 7 , 2012 . Millennium Films purchased the film 's U.S. distribution rights soon after its premiere . The film was released in the United States on May 3 , 2013 . Opening in a single theater in New York , it earned $ 21 @,@ 480 on its opening weekend and $ 31 @,@ 152 by the end of its first week . It expanded to three theaters in its second week of release , was playing in 27 theaters by its fourth week , and reached its widest release of 122 theaters in its sixth week . It was in release for a total of thirteen weeks and grossed $ 1 @,@ 066 @,@ 471 in that time . In the United Kingdom , the film was released by Curzon Film World in cinemas and through video on demand ( VOD ) services on August 23 , 2013 , with £ 150 @,@ 000 pledged by the British Film Institute towards the film 's £ 244 @,@ 000 marketing budget . It earned £ 330 @,@ 186 in box office revenue from four weeks of release and £ 65 @,@ 832 from VOD rentals in the first six weeks it was available . In other territories , the film performed best in Australia ( grossing US $ 334 @,@ 651 ) , Spain ( $ 196 @,@ 668 ) , New Zealand ( $ 140 @,@ 696 ) and Brazil ( $ 100 @,@ 453 ) . It earned a total of $ 1 @,@ 644 @,@ 908 outside of the U.S. for a total worldwide gross of $ 2 @,@ 711 @,@ 379 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 What Maisie Knew received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 87 % , based on 101 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 . The site 's consensus states : " It 's undeniably difficult to watch at times , but What Maisie Knew ultimately rises on the strength of its solidly sourced script , powerful performances , and empathetic direction . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 74 out of 100 , based on reviews from 32 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 In a review for Variety magazine , Justin Chang summarized What Maisie Knew as a " beautifully observed drama " and wrote that , although the plot was consistently dark , it contained " enough sensitivity and emotional variation to make the experience cumulatively heartrending " . New York magazine 's David Edelstein praised the subtleties in the writing and performances of the adult characters and opined that the cinematography was " as open and graceful as any [ he had ] seen all year " . A. O. Scott of The New York Times described the film as a " brilliant , haunting adaptation " of Henry James ' novel , praising Aprile 's performance as Maisie in particular . The Los Angeles Times critic Betsy Sharkey also commended Aprile , Moore and Coogan 's acting and felt that the " beautifully rendered film " was able to achieve emotional resonance without becoming melodramatic . The Boston Globe 's Ty Burr , who awarded the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , opined that its success was largely attributable to Aprile 's performance . John DeFore of The Hollywood Reporter noted the film 's " uniformly strong performances " and praised McGehee and Siegel for maintaining a sense of plausibility in spite of the melodramatic plot . For the New York Observer , Rex Reed wrote of the film 's " warmth , intelligence and grace " and concluded his review : " poignant and exemplary , this is one of the best films of 2013 " . 
 The New York Post 's Kyle Smith likened What Maisie Knew to a public service announcement about parenting and divorce and felt that the presentation of the story from Maisie 's perspective was a " gimmick " ( although it is true to James 's novel ) . Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly found the film unoriginal , " pointless and inert " and awarded it a C grade . Slant Magazine 's Chris Cabin felt that the characters were one @-@ dimensional and stereotypical , and described the film as " an abhorrent slice of tasteless familial drama " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 What Maisie Knew was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on August 13 , 2013 . The Blu @-@ ray edition includes an audio commentary with the directors and a selection of deleted scenes . 
 = Hurricane Celeste ( 1972 ) = 
 Hurricane Celeste of August 1972 was the first known tropical cyclone to strike Johnston Atoll as a hurricane . Forming from a disturbance in the East Pacific on August 6 , the storm began a general westward movement it would take throughout most of its life . The storm intensified steadily , becoming a Category 1 hurricane on August 10 . It kept steady at this intensity until it reached the Central Pacific . Upon entering the Central Pacific , intensification began anew , and by August 14 , the hurricane reached a peak intensity of 135 mph ( 217 km / h ) . After maintaining this intensity for twelve hours , the hurricane began to weaken while passing south of Hawaii . The weakening phase was similar to its intensification in that the storm lost intensity slowly . Celeste then made a turn to the northwest and dropped below hurricane intensity on August 21 . The storm then entered an area of vertical wind shear , causing it to dissipate soon after . 
 Celeste was responsible for damage to shipping and for causing high waves to hit Hawai 'i . The biggest impact from the hurricane , however , was on Johnston Atoll . There , the hurricane caused damage to a meteorology station on the island as well as damaging several military installations , including those related to Program 437 , an anti @-@ satellite weapons system . Additionally , there was a threat of contamination on the island from stored Agent Orange and other herbicides brought from Vietnam by the Defense Department for eventual destruction at sea by the Dutch @-@ owned incinerator ship MT Vulcanus . An inspection of the island following the hurricane indicated that there was no contamination , but the 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 gallons of herbicides sat in steel barrels on salt beaches for nearly 5 years . Overall , damage from the hurricane totalled $ 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The precursor to Celeste was a tropical disturbance that had stalled roughly 520 miles ( 840 km ) south of La Paz , Mexico on August 4 , though the disturbance was tracked starting two days before . The disturbance slowly intensified into a tropical storm on August 6 and was given the name Celeste . The next day , a ship called the Star Track reported winds of 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) and an atmospheric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 millibars ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) at a point 105 miles ( 169 km ) south of the center of the storm . At this point , the storm began a general westward motion it would continue on for most of its life due to high @-@ pressure areas north of its track . While traversing the East Pacific , the storm kept a consistent intensity until late on August 9 , when it started intensifying again , becoming a hurricane the next day . On August 12 , the hurricane passed 140 ° W longitude and entered the Central Pacific just as it reached Category 2 strength . 
 Upon entering the Central Pacific , the hurricane began intensifying at a steady rate . On August 14 , it peaked as a minimum Category 4 hurricane , an intensity it would keep for twelve hours . Afterwards , the hurricane began a slow weakening trend , despite reaching its lowest pressure – 940 millibars ( 28 inHg ) – after its wind speeds decreased . On August 16 , the hurricane made a turn to the west @-@ northwest , which brought it on a path towards Johnston Atoll . The hurricane passed 30 miles ( 48 km ) to the northeast of Johnston on August 19 , subjecting the atoll to nearly six hours of hurricane @-@ force winds . After passing the atoll , Celeste turned to the northwest and eventually weakened to a tropical storm on August 21 . Shortly after weakening to a tropical storm , it entered an area of higher vertical wind shear which ultimately led to its dissipation by August 22 . 
 The best track intensity of Celeste largely varies between the HURDAT and the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) . The best track on HURDAT lists Celeste as strengthening in intensity from tropical storm to its Category 4 peak and then weakening to dissipation in a straightforward manner , skipping Category 3 intensity while strengthening . The CPHC track , however , varies in that it shows a weakening to Category 1 shortly after entering the basin , followed by reintensification into a Category 3 . Another difference is that the CPHC shows Celeste as having reached Category 3 a second time on August 18 after prior weakening , during which it reached its peak intensity . Finally , the CPHC best track gives a peak intensity of Category 3 rather than Category 4 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 During its initial intensification in the East Pacific , Celeste was responsible for damaging a ship in the area . The ship , the barquentine Regina Maris ( schooner ) with 58 people aboard was impacted by high winds and rough seas , resulting in damage that led to the ship taking on 2000 gallons of water an hour . A Hurricane Hunter aircraft en route to the hurricane found the ship after receiving news that it was in the area and helped guide a rescue aircraft to the vessel before resuming its reconnaissance flight . The Vishva Tirth an Indian freighter , was the first vessel to arrive and it towed the Regina Maris to Los Angeles which took about 10 days . The Vishva Tirth took aboard most of the passengers from the Regina Maris . The Captain , Paul Maskell , along with the crew stayed on board the Regina Maris . The US Coast Guard Cutter Mellon arrived the day after the Vishva Tirth took the Regina Maris under tow and escorted both vessels for a few days . The Regina Maris was towed the entire way to Los Angeles by the Vishva Tirth . The towing was affected by Celeste and later by Hurricane Diana . While stranded , two people were treated for injuries on board the vessel . Another rescue attempt was affected when a homemade yacht called the Little Ark was briefly threatened by the hurricane . Prior to Celeste , it had rescued the crew of the ship Pipedream II , which had been damaged 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) off the coast of California . However , the Coast Guard reported that the yacht would have little trouble in avoiding the hurricane . While passing south of Hawaii , the hurricane affected the Puna , Kau , and South Kona Coasts of the Big Island with waves measuring 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) high . In addition , the threat of swells caused high surf warnings to be posted for the entire Hawaiian chain . 
 The worst impact was on Johnston Island , which had never experienced a hurricane prior to Celeste . The year before , 13 @,@ 000 tons of nerve gas and mustard gas had been transferred to the atoll from Okinawa . After a hurricane watch was posted , the idea of evacuation was considered and a decision was to be reached the day before the storm was to arrive . However , the threat of the stored gas being dispersed led to the island being evacuated as a precaution . The need of evacuation was increased by the hurricane gaining speed towards the island . After the decision , the arsenal on the island was secured and most of the personnel on the island were evacuated to Honolulu . Initially , ten people , including the base commander , volunteered to stay behind in shelters in order to clear the runway using bulldozers after the hurricane passed . However , the ten volunteers were evacuated after the risk was found to be too great . During the hurricane , the island was hit by high winds and 45 feet ( 14 m ) waves for six hours , although fears that the island would be inundated never materialized . A total rainfall of 6 @.@ 21 inches ( 158 mm ) was measured , but this is likely lower than the actual total since the instrument measuring the rainfall was partially clogged by a piece of coral . After the storm had passed , a flight had reported that damage looked minor . A decontamination team then arrived at the island to inspect whether any gas had escaped and whether the runway was usable . The unit later reported that the island was all clear . The north and northwest sides of structures on the island were reported to be hit by a combination of sand and coral . Roofs were blown off and the weather station on the island had lost one third of its roof and ceiling tiles , but the interior and instruments remained intact . None of the vehicles and heavy equipment on the island were reported to have been moved by the storm . An inspection by UNIVAC indicated that several computers on the island incurred rust , corrosion and , in one case , fungal growth . The biggest impact was to Program 437 , a defense project that used anti @-@ satellite weapons , with facilities and guidance computers destroyed . The system was repaired but Program 437 was terminated shortly afterwards on 6 March 1975 . During Hurricane Keli in 1984 , a figure of $ 3 @.@ 5 million in damage was reported as having been caused by Celeste . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 In addition to being the first hurricane to strike Johnston , Celeste set many other records while active , most of them related to its impact on Johnston . The evacuations marked the first time that a major U.S. base was left unmanned , although the base was still under surveillance . Following the storm , the weather station on the island measured a wind speed of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) , the highest recorded in 13 years of measurements , besting the previous record of 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) recorded on two occasions . However , the gust recorder at the station remained inactive during the storm . The station also recorded a record low pressure of 983 millibars ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The previous lowest was 1 @,@ 003 millibars ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) at an unknown time . 
 = Azazel ( Supernatural ) = 
 Azazel is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's drama and horror television series Supernatural . He serves as the primary antagonist during the first two seasons . A demon , he feeds his blood to infants so that they will grow up to develop demonic abilities . His goal of using one such child to release Lucifer is not revealed until much later in the series . Azazel is referred to by nicknames such as " The Demon " , " The Yellow @-@ Eyed Demon " , or " Yellow Eyes " throughout the first two seasons , his true name not being revealed until the third season . Due to the character 's demonic nature of taking different hosts , Azazel has been portrayed by numerous actors , but all have maintained his sadistic sense of humor and Jack Nicholson @-@ like mannerisms . Critics and fans alike have met him with nearly universal praise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The tyrannical leader of an army of demons , Azazel first appears in the pilot episode of the series , but plot devices such as flashbacks and time travel detail his background in later seasons . His earliest chronological depiction occurs in the fourth season finale , " Lucifer Rising " . Having spent years searching , Azazel ( Rob LaBelle ) finally located the doorway to Lucifer 's prison in 1972 . The fallen angel tasked him with freeing the demon Lilith from Hell — she is needed to break the 66 seals holding Lucifer captive — and to find him a " special child " . By the following year , Azazel began making demonic pacts with young individuals ; in exchange for a wish , he would be allowed to enter their homes ten years later . Azazel ( Christopher B. MacCabe ) eventually comes across Mary Campbell , the future mother of series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester . After taking possession of her father ( Mitch Pileggi ) , he kills her mother and stabs himself to kill his host . Mary 's fiance , John Winchester , is the demon 's next victim . Azazel makes his usual offer , giving her the chance to resurrect John , and she reluctantly agrees . 
 In 1983 , Mary discovers Azazel standing over baby Sam 's crib ; he had been feeding his blood to the infant . Upon being interrupted , the demon pins her to the ceiling , slashes her stomach and causes her to burst into flames . Mary 's death inspires John to dedicate his life to hunting down Azazel , at the same time training Sam and Dean to hunt supernatural creatures . As revealed in the fifth season finale , " Swan Song " , Azazel sent demons to possess important people in Sam 's life , secretly manipulating him as he grew up . However , Sam eventually leaves the life of hunting to attend college . Azazel orders the assassination of Sam 's girlfriend Jessica Moore , whose death prompts Sam to return to hunting . 
 Because demons cannot be killed by conventional means , the Winchesters track down the Colt — a mystic gun capable of killing anything — in " Dead Man 's Blood " . In the following episode , " Salvation " , they trace the omens caused by the demon 's presence to Salvation , Iowa . Like he has done with Sam and countless others , Azazel plans to visit a six @-@ month @-@ old and feed her his blood so she will later develop demonic abilities . Although Sam interrupts the demon 's plans and saves the family , Azazel escapes . Meanwhile , the demonic Meg Masters and her " brother " Tom kidnap John , and then set their sights on Sam and Dean . The brothers exorcise Meg in the season finale " Devil 's Trap " , and her host discloses John 's location . Sam and Dean rescue him and kill Tom . After being taken to a secluded location , however , John is revealed to be possessed . An angry Azazel ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) chastises them for killing Meg and Tom — he deems them his " children " — and begins to torture the brothers . John temporarily retakes control , giving Sam the opportunity to grab the Colt . Unable to kill his father , Sam shoots John in the leg , and the demon flees from his host . As the Winchesters make their escape , a demonically @-@ possessed truck driver crashes into their car . Dean is left dying in a coma , forcing John to sell his soul and the Colt to Azazel ( Fredric Lehne ) to save him . The demon possesses a reaper ( Lindsey McKeon ) to save Dean from death and fulfill his part of the deal . 
 Azazel 's last appearance chronologically is in the second season finale " All Hell Breaks Loose " , where he kidnaps Sam and the other young adults that he had infected . He visits Sam in a dream , and reveals that his " special children " must fight to the death to determine who will lead his army . Although Sam is the demon 's favorite , the super @-@ strong Jake Talley becomes the winner . As Dean sells his soul to another demon in exchange for Sam 's resurrection , Azazel gives Jake the Colt and coerces him to travel to a cemetery in the middle of a giant devil 's trap . Though Sam and Dean , along with other hunters , attempt to stop him , Jake uses the Colt as a key to unlock a mausoleum there . This action briefly opens a gateway to Hell , releasing Lilith and hundreds of other demons . With the devil 's trap around the cemetery now broken , Azazel confronts the Winchesters and easily overpowers them . However , John 's soul also escapes through the Gate , and distracts Azazel long enough for Dean to shoot him dead with the Colt . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Deeming Azazel to be " an angry soul " , actor Fredric Lehne believed that the character having been " denied Heaven and everything else that 's good in the universe " has " [ translated ] into anger and vengeance " . A demon with a sense of humor , Azazel takes pleasure in seeing people suffer . " The more pain — mostly psychological pain — he causes , the happier he is , " Lehne explained . " He gets off on the power of turning people to his will . " This quality suggests to the actor why the demon favored Sam as the potential leader of his army . Being the " most ripe for picking " because he had the " sweetest " heart , Sam was " most desirable for corrupting " of all the children ; Lehne described Azazel 's thought process as , " If I could turn him , then I had truly won . " The character 's ultimate motivation , however , is to free Lucifer from his imprisonment in Hell . On this , Supernatural co @-@ executive producer Ben Edlund mentioned his view of Azazel as one of " a little cult of demonic true believers " that encompasses many of the important demon characters in the series . 
 = = Development = = 
 For Azazel 's first full appearance on the series in " Devil 's Trap " , the writers initially could not decide which Winchester — Sam , Dean , or John — to have the demon possess . However , actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan 's busy schedule made them realize that having John kidnapped and possessed , and therefore absent from much of the episode , would be the only practical choice . Noting that the first season focuses on Sam and Dean trying to find both their father and Azazel , series creator Eric Kripke noted that from a storytelling perspective " it had to be " that " they 'd find both of them at the same time ... in the same body " . Though the writers modeled Azazel 's personality after Al Pacino 's demonic sense of humor in the film The Devil 's Advocate , they gave Morgan free rein over the character 's mannerisms . Only directed to " be different from John " , Morgan changed his voice and mimicked Jack Nicholson 's " freaky " speech pattern from The Shining . 
 Morgan 's " Nicholson @-@ esque quality " continues with actor Fredric Lehne . Though uncertain of why he was specifically sought out — Lehne chalks it up to his previous working experience with executive producers Kim Manners and Robert Singer — the role was offered to him without an audition . The actor avoided copying Morgan 's portrayal , but noted that the writing " lends itself to doing it in a certain way " . Since Azazel changes human hosts periodically , Lehne 's initial appearance in the second season premiere , " In My Time of Dying " , was intended to be a one @-@ time deal . Thoroughly impressed , however , the show runners kept him for the season finale . Despite the character 's death , Lehne returned to the role in the sixth season premiere as a hallucination . 
 A dream sequence in " All Hell Breaks Loose " hints at Mary Winchester 's connection to Azazel . Although the writers intended to address this in the third season , it was pushed back to the fourth season episode " In the Beginning " due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Kripke asked Mitch Pileggi to enact this revelation — the two had previously worked together on the series Tarzan — and the actor accepted because Kim Manners and much of the Supernatural crew had also worked on The X @-@ Files . While Pileggi emulated Lehne 's performance , he also tried to " put his own spin on it " . 
 Morgan , Lehne , and actress Lindsey McKeon wore hard , colored contact lenses during their portrayals of Azazel . The lenses eventually became painful , and would greatly obscure their vision . The production crew placed sandbags on the floor to help Morgan and Lehne locate their marks , and a grip held Lehne 's hand as he walked around a campfire in " All Hell Breaks Loose " . McKeon 's brief scene in " In My Time of Dying " — she touches actor Jensen Ackles ' forehead — took nine takes to film because she kept missing . Although Pileggi was fitted for the lenses , production ultimately added the effect digitally at " appropriate moments " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Azazel has been met with universal praise from critics and fans alike , with the latter voting him as the best villain of the series in a poll conducted by BuddyTV . " [ You ] have to realize that without [ Azazel ] there would be no reason for the boys to hunt in the first place , " viewers wrote , also calling him the " oldest arch nemesis " and a " classic supernatural badass " . The results of the poll revealed that Azazel had won with 75 % of the votes , with the second @-@ highest percentage of votes for another character ( Alastair ) being only 9 % . 
 Both Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune and Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune felt that Morgan gave " his best and most believable performance of the season " in " Devil 's Trap " , with the latter adding , " He was really on fire in that scene , and it brought a whole new intensity to his performance . " Diana Steenbergen of IGN found him " menacing , with his low voice and the cruel words ... trying to tear them apart emotionally before tearing Dean apart literally " , and enjoyed the sadistic and " vicious humor " that makes the character " more sinister " . However , she believed that Azazel having a family was an unnecessary parallel with the Winchesters that " doesn 't quite make sense " . After viewing the episode , Brian Tallerico of UGO gave his opinion that the series should follow Buffy the Vampire Slayer 's format of having a different recurring villain each season . " If the <unk> demon is the Big Bad for the first two seasons , that 's fine , " he commented , " but don 't drag it out longer than that . Fans will get bored . And there 's nothing scarier than that . 
 Tina Charles of TV Guide was happy to see the " appropriately creepy " Lehne return to the role in " All Hell Breaks Loose " . " The second he popped in at ghost town central , " she wrote , " the scare factor went up . " Likewise , Tom Burns of UGO deemed all of Lehne 's scenes " damn near riveting " , while Brett Love of TV Squad described him as " a perfect evil menace " . Diana Steenbergen of IGN deemed Lehne 's performance " charismatic and quietly sadistic without being overdone " . Despite this praise , she was happy to see the character die because " it frees the show from bogging down by having the Winchesters chasing after the same villain endlessly " and " opens up the opportunity to explore new plots " . 
 Pileggi 's casting in " In the Beginning " was " a cool move " for Charles , who found his performance " scary " . Similarly , Steenbergen called Pileggi " a force to be reckoned " who " has a chance to be both funny and disturbing " . According to publicists of Warner Bros. , the fans " were very happy with what [ they ] did " in the episode . 
 = Arthropod = 
 An arthropod ( from Greek <unk> , joint + podos , foot ) is an invertebrate animal having an exoskeleton ( external skeleton ) , a segmented body , and jointed appendages ( paired appendages ) . Arthropods form the phylum Arthropoda , which includes the insects , arachnids , myriapods , and crustaceans . Arthropods are characterized by their jointed limbs and cuticle made of chitin , often mineralised with calcium carbonate . The arthropod body plan consists of segments , each with a pair of appendages . The rigid cuticle inhibits growth , so arthropods replace it periodically by moulting . Their versatility has enabled them to become the most species @-@ rich members of all ecological guilds in most environments . They have over a million described species , making up more than 80 % of all described living animal species , some of which , unlike most animals , are very successful in dry environments . 
 Arthropods range in size from the microscopic crustacean Stygotantulus up to the Japanese spider crab . Arthropods ' primary internal cavity is a hemocoel , which accommodates their internal organs , and through which their haemolymph - analogue of blood - circulates ; they have open circulatory systems . Like their exteriors , the internal organs of arthropods are generally built of repeated segments . Their nervous system is " ladder @-@ like " , with paired ventral nerve cords running through all segments and forming paired ganglia in each segment . Their heads are formed by fusion of varying numbers of segments , and their brains are formed by fusion of the ganglia of these segments and encircle the esophagus . The respiratory and excretory systems of arthropods vary , depending as much on their environment as on the subphylum to which they belong . 
 Their vision relies on various combinations of compound eyes and pigment @-@ pit ocelli : in most species the ocelli can only detect the direction from which light is coming , and the compound eyes are the main source of information , but the main eyes of spiders are ocelli that can form images and , in a few cases , can swivel to track prey . Arthropods also have a wide range of chemical and mechanical sensors , mostly based on modifications of the many setae ( bristles ) that project through their cuticles . Arthropods ' methods of reproduction and development are diverse ; all terrestrial species use internal fertilization , but this is often by indirect transfer of the sperm via an appendage or the ground , rather than by direct injection . Aquatic species use either internal or external fertilization . Almost all arthropods lay eggs , but scorpions give birth to live young after the eggs have hatched inside the mother . Arthropod hatchlings vary from miniature adults to grubs and caterpillars that lack jointed limbs and eventually undergo a total metamorphosis to produce the adult form . The level of maternal care for hatchlings varies from nonexistent to the prolonged care provided by scorpions . 
 The evolutionary ancestry of arthropods dates back to the Cambrian period . The group is generally regarded as monophyletic , and many analyses support the placement of arthropods with <unk> ( or their constituent clades ) in a superphylum Ecdysozoa . Overall however , the basal relationships of Metazoa are not yet well resolved . Likewise , the relationships between various arthropod groups are still actively debated . 
 Arthropods contribute to the human food supply both directly as food , and more importantly as pollinators of crops . Some specific species are known to spread severe disease to humans , livestock , and crops . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word arthropod comes from the Greek <unk> <unk> , " joint " , and πούς pous ( gen. podos ) , i.e. " foot " or " leg " , which together mean " jointed leg " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Arthropods are invertebrates with segmented bodies and jointed limbs . The exoskeleton or cuticles consists of chitin , a polymer of glucosamine . The cuticle of crustaceans are also biomineralized with calcium carbonate . 
 = = = Diversity = = = 
 Estimates of the number of arthropod species vary between 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 and 5 to 10 million and account for over 80 % of all known living animal species . The number of species remains difficult to determine . This is due to the census modeling assumptions projected onto other regions in order to scale up from counts at specific locations applied to the whole world . A study in 1992 estimated that there were 500 @,@ 000 species of animals and plants in Costa Rica alone , of which 365 @,@ 000 were arthropods . 
 They are important members of marine , freshwater , land and air ecosystems , and are one of only two major animal groups that have adapted to life in dry environments ; the other is amniotes , whose living members are reptiles , birds and mammals . One arthropod sub @-@ group , insects , is the most species @-@ rich member of all ecological guilds in land and fresh @-@ water environments . The lightest insects weigh less than 25 micrograms ( millionths of a gram ) , while the heaviest weigh over 70 grams ( 2 @.@ 5 oz ) . Some living crustaceans are much larger ; for example , the legs of the Japanese spider crab may span up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) , with the heaviest of all living arthropods being the American lobster , topping out at over 20 kg ( 44 lbs ) . 
 = = = Segmentation = = = 
 The embryos of all arthropods are segmented , built from a series of repeated modules . The last common ancestor of living arthropods probably consisted of a series of undifferentiated segments , each with a pair of appendages that functioned as limbs . However , all known living and fossil arthropods have grouped segments into tagmata in which segments and their limbs are specialized in various ways ; The three @-@ part appearance of many insect bodies and the two @-@ part appearance of spiders is a result of this grouping ; in fact there are no external signs of segmentation in mites . Arthropods also have two body elements that are not part of this serially repeated pattern of segments , an acron at the front , ahead of the mouth , and a telson at the rear , behind the anus . The eyes are mounted on the acron . 
 The original structure of arthropod appendages was probably biramous , with the upper branch acting as a gill while the lower branch was used for walking . In some segments of all known arthropods the appendages have been modified , for example to form gills , mouth @-@ parts , antennae for collecting information , or claws for grasping ; arthropods are " like Swiss Army knives , each equipped with a unique set of specialized tools . " In many arthropods , appendages have vanished from some regions of the body , and it is particularly common for abdominal appendages to have disappeared or be highly modified . 
 The most conspicuous specialization of segments is in the head . The four major groups of arthropods – Chelicerata ( includes spiders and scorpions ) , Crustacea ( shrimps , lobsters , crabs , etc . ) , <unk> ( arthropods that breathe via channels into their bodies ; includes insects and myriapods ) , and the extinct trilobites – have heads formed of various combinations of segments , with appendages that are missing or specialized in different ways . In addition some extinct arthropods , such as Marrella , belong to none of these groups , as their heads are formed by their own particular combinations of segments and specialized appendages . Working out the evolutionary stages by which all these different combinations could have appeared is so difficult that it has long been known as " the arthropod head problem " . In 1960 R. E. Snodgrass even hoped it would not be solved , as trying to work out solutions was so much fun . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Arthropod exoskeletons are made of cuticle , a non @-@ cellular material secreted by the epidermis . Their cuticles vary in the details of their structure , but generally consist of three main layers : the epicuticle , a thin outer waxy coat that moisture @-@ proofs the other layers and gives them some protection ; the exocuticle , which consists of chitin and chemically hardened proteins ; and the endocuticle , which consists of chitin and <unk> proteins . The exocuticle and endocuticle together are known as the procuticle . Each body segment and limb section is encased in hardened cuticle . The joints between body segments and between limb sections are covered by flexible cuticle . 
 The exoskeletons of most aquatic crustaceans are biomineralized with calcium carbonate extracted from the water . Some terrestrial crustaceans have developed means of storing the mineral , since on land they cannot rely on a steady supply of dissolved calcium carbonate . <unk> generally affects the exocuticle and the outer part of the endocuticle . Two recent hypotheses about the evolution of biomineralization in arthropods and other groups of animals propose that it provides tougher defensive armor , and that it allows animals to grow larger and stronger by providing more rigid skeletons ; and in either case a mineral @-@ organic composite exoskeleton is cheaper to build than an all @-@ organic one of comparable strength . 
 The cuticle may have setae ( bristles ) growing from special cells in the epidermis . <unk> are as varied in form and function as appendages . For example , they are often used as sensors to detect air or water currents , or contact with objects ; aquatic arthropods use feather @-@ like setae to increase the surface area of swimming appendages and to filter food particles out of water ; aquatic insects , which are air @-@ breathers , use thick felt @-@ like coats of setae to trap air , extending the time they can spend under water ; heavy , rigid setae serve as defensive spines . 
 Although all arthropods use muscles attached to the inside of the exoskeleton to flex their limbs , some still use hydraulic pressure to extend them , a system inherited from their pre @-@ arthropod ancestors ; for example , all spiders extend their legs hydraulically and can generate pressures up to eight times their resting level . 
 = = = Moulting = = = 
 The exoskeleton cannot stretch and thus restricts growth . Arthropods therefore replace their exoskeletons by moulting , or shedding the old exoskeleton after growing a new one that is not yet hardened . Moulting cycles run nearly continuously until an arthropod reaches full size . 
 In the initial phase of moulting , the animal stops feeding and its epidermis releases moulting fluid , a mixture of enzymes that digests the endocuticle and thus detaches the old cuticle . This phase begins when the epidermis has secreted a new epicuticle to protect it from the enzymes , and the epidermis secretes the new exocuticle while the old cuticle is detaching . When this stage is complete , the animal makes its body swell by taking in a large quantity of water or air , and this makes the old cuticle split along predefined weaknesses where the old exocuticle was thinnest . It commonly takes several minutes for the animal to struggle out of the old cuticle . At this point the new one is wrinkled and so soft that the animal cannot support itself and finds it very difficult to move , and the new endocuticle has not yet formed . The animal continues to pump itself up to stretch the new cuticle as much as possible , then hardens the new exocuticle and eliminates the excess air or water . By the end of this phase the new endocuticle has formed . Many arthropods then eat the discarded cuticle to reclaim its materials . 
 Because arthropods are unprotected and nearly immobilized until the new cuticle has hardened , they are in danger both of being trapped in the old cuticle and of being attacked by predators . Moulting may be responsible for 80 to 90 % of all arthropod deaths . 
 = = = Internal organs = = = 
 Arthropod bodies are also segmented internally , and the nervous , muscular , circulatory , and excretory systems have repeated components . Arthropods come from a lineage of animals that have a coelom , a membrane @-@ lined cavity between the gut and the body wall that accommodates the internal organs . The strong , segmented limbs of arthropods eliminate the need for one of the coelom 's main ancestral functions , as a hydrostatic skeleton , which muscles compress in order to change the animal 's shape and thus enable it to move . Hence the coelom of the arthropod is reduced to small areas around the reproductive and excretory systems . Its place is largely taken by a hemocoel , a cavity that runs most of the length of the body and through which blood flows . 
 Arthropods have open circulatory systems , although most have a few short , open @-@ ended arteries . In chelicerates and crustaceans , the blood carries oxygen to the tissues , while hexapods use a separate system of tracheae . Many crustaceans , but few chelicerates and <unk> , use respiratory pigments to assist oxygen transport . The most common respiratory pigment in arthropods is copper @-@ based hemocyanin ; this is used by many crustaceans and a few centipedes . A few crustaceans and insects use iron @-@ based hemoglobin , the respiratory pigment used by vertebrates . As with other invertebrates the respiratory pigments of those arthropods that have them are generally dissolved in the blood and rarely enclosed in corpuscles as they are in vertebrates . 
 The heart is typically a muscular tube that runs just under the back and for most of the length of the hemocoel . It contracts in ripples that run from rear to front , pushing blood forwards . Sections not being squeezed by the heart muscle are expanded either by elastic ligaments or by small muscles , in either case connecting the heart to the body wall . Along the heart run a series of paired ostia , non @-@ return valves that allow blood to enter the heart but prevent it from leaving before it reaches the front . 
 Arthropods have a wide variety of respiratory systems . Small species often do not have any , since their high ratio of surface area to volume enables simple diffusion through the body surface to supply enough oxygen . Crustacea usually have gills that are modified appendages . Many arachnids have book lungs . <unk> , systems of branching tunnels that run from the openings in the body walls , deliver oxygen directly to individual cells in many insects , myriapods and arachnids . 
 Living arthropods have paired main nerve cords running along their bodies below the gut , and in each segment the cords form a pair of ganglia from which sensory and motor nerves run to other parts of the segment . Although the pairs of ganglia in each segment often appear physically fused , they are connected by commissures ( relatively large bundles of nerves ) , which give arthropod nervous systems a characteristic " ladder @-@ like " appearance . The brain is in the head , encircling and mainly above the esophagus . It consists of the fused ganglia of the acron and one or two of the foremost segments that form the head – a total of three pairs of ganglia in most arthropods , but only two in chelicerates , which do not have antennae or the ganglion connected to them . The ganglia of other head segments are often close to the brain and function as part of it . In insects these other head ganglia combine into a pair of subesophageal ganglia , under and behind the esophagus . Spiders take this process a step further , as all the segmental ganglia are incorporated into the subesophageal ganglia , which occupy most of the space in the cephalothorax ( front " super @-@ segment " ) . 
 There are two different types of arthropod excretory systems . In aquatic arthropods , the end @-@ product of biochemical reactions that metabolise nitrogen is ammonia , which is so toxic that it needs to be diluted as much as possible with water . The ammonia is then eliminated via any permeable membrane , mainly through the gills . All crustaceans use this system , and its high consumption of water may be responsible for the relative lack of success of crustaceans as land animals . Various groups of terrestrial arthropods have independently developed a different system : the end @-@ product of nitrogen metabolism is uric acid , which can be excreted as dry material ; the Malpighian tubule system filters the uric acid and other nitrogenous waste out of the blood in the hemocoel , and dumps these materials into the hindgut , from which they are expelled as feces . Most aquatic arthropods and some terrestrial ones also have organs called nephridia ( " little kidneys " ) , which extract other wastes for excretion as urine . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 = = = = Optical = = = = 
 The stiff cuticles of arthropods would block out information about the outside world , except that they are penetrated by many sensors or connections from sensors to the nervous system . In fact , arthropods have modified their cuticles into elaborate arrays of sensors . Various touch sensors , mostly setae , respond to different levels of force , from strong contact to very weak air currents . Chemical sensors provide equivalents of taste and smell , often by means of setae . Pressure sensors often take the form of membranes that function as eardrums , but are connected directly to nerves rather than to auditory ossicles . The antennae of most hexapods include sensor packages that monitor humidity , moisture and temperature . 
 Most arthropods have sophisticated visual systems that include one or more usually both of compound eyes and pigment @-@ cup ocelli ( " little eyes " ) . In most cases ocelli are only capable of detecting the direction from which light is coming , using the shadow cast by the walls of the cup . However , the main eyes of spiders are pigment @-@ cup ocelli that are capable of forming images , and those of jumping spiders can rotate to track prey . 
 Compound eyes consist of fifteen to several thousand independent ommatidia , columns that are usually hexagonal in cross section . Each <unk> is an independent sensor , with its own light @-@ sensitive cells and often with its own lens and cornea . Compound eyes have a wide field of view , and can detect fast movement and , in some cases , the polarization of light . On the other hand , the relatively large size of ommatidia makes the images rather coarse , and compound eyes are shorter @-@ sighted than those of birds and mammals – although this is not a severe disadvantage , as objects and events within 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) are most important to most arthropods . Several arthropods have color vision , and that of some insects has been studied in detail ; for example , the ommatidia of bees contain receptors for both green and ultra @-@ violet . 
 Most arthropods lack balance and acceleration sensors , and rely on their eyes to tell them which way is up . The self @-@ righting behavior of cockroaches is triggered when pressure sensors on the underside of the feet report no pressure . However , many <unk> crustaceans have statocysts , which provide the same sort of information as the balance and motion sensors of the vertebrate inner ear . 
 The <unk> of arthropods , sensors that report the force exerted by muscles and the degree of bending in the body and joints , are well understood . However , little is known about what other internal sensors arthropods may have . 
 = = = = Olfaction = = = = 
 = = Reproduction and development = = 
 A few arthropods , such as barnacles , are hermaphroditic , that is , each can have the organs of both sexes . However , individuals of most species remain of one sex their entire lives . A few species of insects and crustaceans can reproduce by parthenogenesis , for example , without mating , especially if conditions favor a " population explosion " . However , most arthropods rely on sexual reproduction , and parthenogenetic species often revert to sexual reproduction when conditions become less favorable . Aquatic arthropods may breed by external fertilization , as for example frogs also do , or by internal fertilization , where the ova remain in the female 's body and the sperm must somehow be inserted . All known terrestrial arthropods use internal fertilization . Opiliones ( harvestmen ) , millipedes , and some crustaceans use modified appendages such as gonopods or penises to transfer the sperm directly to the female . However , most male terrestrial arthropods produce spermatophores , waterproof packets of sperm , which the females take into their bodies . A few such species rely on females to find spermatophores that have already been deposited on the ground , but in most cases males only deposit spermatophores when complex courtship rituals look likely to be successful . 
 Most arthropods lay eggs , but scorpions are viviparous : they produce live young after the eggs have hatched inside the mother , and are noted for prolonged maternal care . Newly born arthropods have diverse forms , and insects alone cover the range of extremes . Some hatch as apparently miniature adults ( direct development ) , and in some cases , such as silverfish , the hatchlings do not feed and may be helpless until after their first moult . Many insects hatch as grubs or caterpillars , which do not have segmented limbs or hardened cuticles , and metamorphose into adult forms by entering an inactive phase in which the larval tissues are broken down and re @-@ used to build the adult body . Dragonfly larvae have the typical cuticles and jointed limbs of arthropods but are flightless water @-@ breathers with extendable jaws . Crustaceans commonly hatch as tiny nauplius larvae that have only three segments and pairs of appendages . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 = = = Last common ancestor = = = 
 The last common ancestor of all arthropods is reconstructed as a modular organism with each module covered by its own sclerite ( armor plate ) and bearing a pair of biramous limbs . Whether the ancestral limb was uniramous or biramous is far from a settled debate , though . This Ur @-@ arthropod had a ventral mouth , pre @-@ oral antennae and dorsal eyes at the front of the body . It was a non @-@ discriminatory sediment feeder , processing whatever sediment came its way for food . 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 It has been proposed that the Ediacaran animals Parvancorina and Spriggina , from around 555 million years ago , were arthropods . Small arthropods with bivalve @-@ like shells have been found in Early Cambrian fossil beds dating 541 to 539 million years ago in China . The earliest Cambrian trilobite fossils are about 530 million years old , but the class was already quite diverse and worldwide , suggesting that they had been around for quite some time . Re @-@ examination in the 1970s of the Burgess Shale fossils from about 505 million years ago identified many arthropods , some of which could not be assigned to any of the well @-@ known groups , and thus intensified the debate about the Cambrian explosion . A fossil of Marrella from the Burgess Shale has provided the earliest clear evidence of moulting . 
 The earliest fossil crustaceans date from about 513 million years ago in the Cambrian , and fossil shrimp from about 500 million years ago apparently formed a tight @-@ knit procession across the seabed . Crustacean fossils are common from the Ordovician period onwards . They have remained almost entirely aquatic , possibly because they never developed excretory systems that conserve water . 
 Arthropods provide the earliest identifiable fossils of land animals , from about 419 million years ago in the Late Silurian , and terrestrial tracks from about 450 million years ago appear to have been made by arthropods . Arthropods were well pre @-@ adapted to colonize land , because their existing jointed exoskeletons provided protection against desiccation , support against gravity and a means of locomotion that was not dependent on water . Around the same time the aquatic , scorpion @-@ like eurypterids became the largest ever arthropods , some as long as 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . 
 The oldest known arachnid is the trigonotarbid Palaeotarbus jerami , from about 420 million years ago in the Silurian period . Attercopus fimbriunguis , from 386 million years ago in the Devonian period , bears the earliest known silk @-@ producing spigots , but its lack of spinnerets means it was not one of the true spiders , which first appear in the Late Carboniferous over 299 million years ago . The Jurassic and Cretaceous periods provide a large number of fossil spiders , including representatives of many modern families . Fossils of aquatic scorpions with gills appear in the Silurian and Devonian periods , and the earliest fossil of an air @-@ breathing scorpion with book lungs dates from the Early Carboniferous period . 
 The oldest definitive insect fossil is the Devonian Rhyniognatha hirsti , dated at 396 to 407 million years ago , but its mandibles are of a type found only in winged insects , which suggests that the earliest insects appeared in the Silurian period . The Mazon Creek lagerstätten from the Late Carboniferous , about 300 million years ago , include about 200 species , some gigantic by modern standards , and indicate that insects had occupied their main modern ecological niches as herbivores , detritivores and insectivores . Social termites and ants first appear in the Early Cretaceous , and advanced social bees have been found in Late Cretaceous rocks but did not become abundant until the Middle Cenozoic . 
 = = = Evolutionary family tree = = = 
 From 1952 to 1977 , zoologist <unk> Manton and others argued that arthropods are polyphyletic , in other words , that they do not share a common ancestor that was itself an arthropod . Instead , they proposed that three separate groups of " arthropods " evolved separately from common worm @-@ like ancestors : the chelicerates , including spiders and scorpions ; the crustaceans ; and the <unk> , consisting of onychophorans , myriapods and hexapods . These arguments usually bypassed trilobites , as the evolutionary relationships of this class were unclear . Proponents of polyphyly argued the following : that the similarities between these groups are the results of convergent evolution , as natural consequences of having rigid , segmented exoskeletons ; that the three groups use different chemical means of hardening the cuticle ; that there were significant differences in the construction of their compound eyes ; that it is hard to see how such different configurations of segments and appendages in the head could have evolved from the same ancestor ; and that crustaceans have biramous limbs with separate gill and leg branches , while the other two groups have uniramous limbs in which the single branch serves as a leg . 
 Further analysis and discoveries in the 1990s reversed this view , and led to acceptance that arthropods are monophyletic , in other words they do share a common ancestor that was itself an arthropod . For example , Graham Budd 's analyses of Kerygmachela in 1993 and of Opabinia in 1996 convinced him that these animals were similar to onychophorans and to various Early Cambrian " lobopods " , and he presented an " evolutionary family tree " that showed these as " aunts " and " cousins " of all arthropods . These changes made the scope of the term " arthropod " unclear , and Claus Nielsen proposed that the wider group should be labelled " <unk> " ( " all the arthropods " ) while the animals with jointed limbs and hardened cuticles should be called " <unk> " ( " true arthropods " ) . 
 A contrary view was presented in 2003 , when Jan Bergström and Xian @-@ Guang Hou argued that , if arthropods were a " sister @-@ group " to any of the anomalocarids , they must have lost and then re @-@ evolved features that were well @-@ developed in the anomalocarids . The earliest known arthropods ate mud in order to extract food particles from it , and possessed variable numbers of segments with unspecialized appendages that functioned as both gills and legs . <unk> were , by the standards of the time , huge and sophisticated predators with specialized mouths and grasping appendages , fixed numbers of segments some of which were specialized , tail fins , and gills that were very different from those of arthropods . This reasoning implies that <unk> , which has legs and a backward @-@ pointing mouth like that of the earliest arthropods , is a more credible closest relative of arthropods than is Anomalocaris . In 2006 , they suggested that arthropods were more closely related to lobopods and tardigrades than to anomalocarids . 
 Higher up the " family tree " , the Annelida have traditionally been considered the closest relatives of the <unk> , since both groups have segmented bodies , and the combination of these groups was labelled Articulata . There had been competing proposals that arthropods were closely related to other groups such as nematodes , priapulids and tardigrades , but these remained minority views because it was difficult to specify in detail the relationships between these groups . 
 In the 1990s , molecular phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences produced a coherent scheme showing arthropods as members of a superphylum labelled Ecdysozoa ( " animals that moult " ) , which contained nematodes , priapulids and tardigrades but excluded annelids . This was backed up by studies of the anatomy and development of these animals , which showed that many of the features that supported the Articulata hypothesis showed significant differences between annelids and the earliest <unk> in their details , and some were hardly present at all in arthropods . This hypothesis groups annelids with molluscs and brachiopods in another superphylum , Lophotrochozoa . 
 If the Ecdysozoa hypothesis is correct , then segmentation of arthropods and annelids either has evolved convergently or has been inherited from a much older ancestor and subsequently lost in several other lineages , such as the non @-@ arthropod members of the Ecdysozoa . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Arthropods are typically classified into five subphyla , of which one is extinct : 
 Trilobites are a group of formerly numerous marine animals that disappeared in the Permian – Triassic extinction event , though they were in decline prior to this killing blow , having been reduced to one order in the Late Devonian extinction . 
 Chelicerates include horseshoe crabs , spiders , mites , scorpions and related organisms . They are characterised by the presence of chelicerae , appendages just above / in front of the mouth . <unk> appear in scorpions and horseshoe crabs as tiny claws that they use in feeding , but those of spiders have developed as fangs that inject venom . 
 Myriapods comprise millipedes , centipedes , and their relatives and have many body segments , each bearing one or two pairs of legs . They are sometimes grouped with the hexapods . 
 Crustaceans are primarily aquatic ( a notable exception being woodlice ) and are characterised by having biramous appendages . They include lobsters , crabs , barnacles , crayfish , shrimp and many others . 
 <unk> comprise insects and three small orders of insect @-@ like animals with six thoracic legs . They are sometimes grouped with the myriapods , in a group called <unk> , though genetic evidence tends to support a closer relationship between hexapods and crustaceans . 
 Aside from these major groups , there are also a number of fossil forms , mostly from the Early Cambrian , which are difficult to place , either from lack of obvious affinity to any of the main groups or from clear affinity to several of them . Marrella was the first one to be recognized as significantly different from the well @-@ known groups . 
 The phylogeny of the major extant arthropod groups has been an area of considerable interest and dispute . Recent studies strongly suggest that Crustacea , as traditionally defined , is paraphyletic , with Hexapoda having evolved from within it , so that Crustacea and Hexapoda form a clade , Pancrustacea . The position of Myriapoda , Chelicerata and Pancrustacea remains unclear as of April 2012 . In some studies , Myriapoda is grouped with Chelicerata ( forming <unk> ) ; in other studies , Myriapoda is grouped with Pancrustacea ( forming Mandibulata ) , or Myriapoda may be sister to Chelicerata plus Pancrustacea . 
 The placement of the extinct trilobites is also a frequent subject of dispute . One of the newer hypotheses is that the chelicerae have originated from the same pair of appendages that evolved into antennae in the ancestors of Mandibulata , which would place trilobites , which had antennae , closer to Mandibulata than Chelicerata . 
 Since the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature recognises no priority above the rank of family , many of the higher @-@ level groups can be referred to by a variety of different names . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 Crustaceans such as crabs , lobsters , crayfish , shrimp and prawns have long been part of human cuisine , and are now raised commercially . Insects and their grubs are at least as nutritious as meat , and are eaten both raw and cooked in many cultures , excluding most European , Hindu and Islamic cultures . Cooked tarantulas are considered a delicacy in Cambodia , and by the Piaroa Indians of southern Venezuela , after the highly irritant hairs – the spider 's main defense system – are removed . Humans also unintentionally eat arthropods in other foods , and food safety regulations lay down acceptable contamination levels for different kinds of food material . The intentional cultivation of arthropods and other small animals for human food , referred to as <unk> , is now emerging in animal husbandry as an ecologically sound concept . Commercial butterfly breeding provides Lepidoptera stock to butterfly conservatories , educational exhibits , schools , research facilities and cultural events . 
 However , the greatest contribution of arthropods to human food supply is by pollination : a 2008 study examined the 100 crops that FAO lists as grown for food , and estimated pollination 's economic value as € 153 billion , or 9 @.@ 5 % of the value of world agricultural production used for human food in 2005 . Besides pollinating , bees produce honey , which is the basis of a rapidly growing industry and international trade . 
 The red dye cochineal , produced from a Central American species of insect , was economically important to the Aztecs and Mayans , and while the region was under Spanish control , becoming Mexico 's second most @-@ lucrative export ; and it is now regaining some of the ground it lost to synthetic competitors . The blood of horseshoe crabs contains a clotting agent Limulus <unk> <unk> which is now used to test that antibiotics and kidney machines are free of dangerous bacteria , and to detect spinal meningitis and some cancers . Forensic entomology uses evidence provided by arthropods to establish the time and sometimes the place of death of a human , and in some cases the cause . Recently insects have also gained attention as potential sources of drugs and other medicinal substances . 
 The relative simplicity of the arthropods ' body plan , allowing them to move on a variety of surfaces both on land and in water , have made them useful as models for robotics . The redundancy provided by segments allows arthropods and biomimetic robots to move normally even with damaged or lost appendages . 
 Although arthropods are the most numerous phylum on Earth , and thousands of arthropod species are venomous , they inflict relatively few serious bites and stings on humans . Far more serious are the effects on humans of diseases carried by blood @-@ sucking insects . Other blood @-@ sucking insects infect livestock with diseases that kill many animals and greatly reduce the usefulness of others . Ticks can cause tick paralysis and several parasite @-@ borne diseases in humans . A few of the closely related mites also infest humans , causing intense itching , and others cause allergic diseases , including hay fever , asthma and eczema . 
 Many species of arthropods , principally insects but also mites , are agricultural and forest pests . The mite Varroa destructor has become the largest single problem faced by beekeepers worldwide . Efforts to control arthropod pests by large @-@ scale use of pesticides have caused long @-@ term effects on human health and on biodiversity . Increasing arthropod resistance to pesticides has led to the development of integrated pest management using a wide range of measures including biological control . Predatory mites may be useful in controlling some mite pests . 
 = Western University of Health Sciences = 
 Western University of Health Sciences ( WesternU ) is a private , non @-@ profit , graduate school for the health professions , with a main campus located on 22 acres ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) in downtown Pomona , California , and an additional medical school campus on 50 acres in Lebanon , Oregon . WesternU offers degrees in osteopathic medicine , dental medicine , optometry , podiatric medicine , nursing , physician assistant studies , physical therapy , pharmacy , biomedical sciences , and veterinary medicine . With an enrollment of 3 @,@ 862 students ( 2014 – 15 ) , WesternU is one of the largest graduate schools for the health professions in California , offering 21 academic programs in nine colleges . The university also operates two patient care centers , and has a pet wellness center on its Pomona campus . The WesternU Pomona campus is also home to the The Center for Oral Health ( a non @-@ profit organization focusing on promoting oral health ) , the Southern California Museum of Medical History , and the Harris Family Center for Disability and Health Policy . 
 Founded in 1977 , the first program at WesternU was its medical school , the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific ( COMP ) . Since that time , several additional programs have opened . When the College of Veterinary Medicine opened in 2003 , it was the first veterinary school to open in the United States in 20 years . In 2007 , WesternU became the first university in the nation to appoint a female as dean of a veterinary medical school . In 2009 , three new colleges opened : dental medicine , optometry , and podiatric medicine . In 2011 , the university opened an additional campus in Lebanon , Oregon known as the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific - Northwest ( COMP @-@ Northwest ) . In 2015 , the university 's founding president , Dr. Philip Pumerantz , retired . He was the longest serving founding president of any university in the United States , and the longest serving current university president in the country . 
 All of the programs at WesternU have professional accreditation , and the university is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges . The medical school ( COMP ) is also accredited by the American Osteopathic Association 's Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation . 
 = = History = = 
 The school originally opened in 1977 as the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific ( COMP ) , offering the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree ( D.O. ) . COMP was the first osteopathic medical school in California to open after the California College of Osteopathic Physicians and Surgeons became an M.D. granting school , eventually becoming the University of California , Irvine School of Medicine . By 1977 , COMP was the only osteopathic medical school west of the Rocky Mountains , and it remained the only one in California until 1997 , when Touro University California opened in Vallejo . The inaugural class at COMP consisted of 36 students . 
 In 1986 , the college began offering a second degree , the Master of Science in Health Professions Education . Four years later , the physician assistant program opened , which developed into a masters level program in 2000 . In 1992 , the physical therapy program opened . The Western Association of Schools and Colleges granted the school accreditation in March 1996 , and later that same year , the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific was restructured into a university and given the name " Western University of Health Sciences . " The same year , the first classes in the College of Pharmacy began . 
 After difficulties with accreditation through the American Veterinary Medical Association 's Council on Education , the College of Veterinary Medicine opened in 1998 . It was the first veterinary medical school to open in the United States since 1983 , and at the time , no member on the Council on Education had ever been involved in accrediting a new veterinary medical school . Classes began in 2003 , and the college earned full accreditation in 2010 . The college was the first veterinary medical school in the United States to appoint a female to the position of dean . In 2008 , the university opened the Banfield Pet Hospital to the public . In 2014 , WesternU assumed sole operation and management of the pet hospital . 
 In 2009 , three new colleges opened at WesternU : podiatric medicine , optometry , and dental medicine . The following year , in 2010 , the Patient Care Center opened , offering medical , dental , optometric , podiatric and pharmacy services to the community . In 2011 , Western University of Health Sciences opened a new medical school campus in Lebanon , Oregon called the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest . The university plans to eventually open additional colleges at the Lebanon campus . 
 In 2015 , the founding president of WesternU retired after serving 38 years as president . At the time , he was the longest serving founding president in the US , and 2nd longest serving current university president in the country . In 2016 , Dr. Daniel R. Wilson became president of the university . 
 The Chronicle of Higher Education named WesternU as a great college to work for every year from 2012 through 2015 . In 2014 , U.S. News & World Report ranked WesternU 18th among all US medical schools for the percentage of COMP graduates going into primary care residents . The same year ( 2014 ) , WesternU received the tenth most applications of any medical school in the United States . The university is the fourth @-@ largest employer in Pomona , with more than 1 @,@ 000 employees , and has greatly contributed to the economic development of downtown , bringing millions of dollars to the area . 
 = = Academics and accreditation = = 
 Through its nine colleges , WesternU offers 21 academic programs , each on a semester schedule . Each program at WesternU is post @-@ baccalaureate , focuses on a health sciences profession , and is professionally accredited . The university is regionally accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges . Doctoral degrees include the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine , Doctor of Dental Medicine , Doctor of Optometry , Doctor of Veterinary Medicine , Doctor of Pharmacy , Doctor of Nursing Practice , Doctor of Physical Therapy , and Doctor of <unk> Medicine . 
 Several Master of Science ( MS ) programs are also offered and include the following : Pharmaceutical Sciences , Health Sciences , Physician Assistant Studies , Nursing , Biomedical Sciences , and Medical Sciences . A Master of Science in Health Professions Education is offered to provide educational skills to health professionals interested in teaching . Two distance education programs are offered : the Doctor of Nursing Practice ( DNP ) and Master of Science Nursing ( MSN ) . All other programs are traditional on @-@ campus programs . 
 = = = <unk> education = = = 
 WesternU operates an <unk> Education ( IPE ) program , involving all nine of its colleges . Planning for the program began in 2007 and the first phase was implemented later that year . The program 's goals are to improve understanding of other health professions and to provide and promote a team approach to patient @-@ centered care and health care management , leading to improved patient care . While a debate exists on the effectiveness of interprofessional education in encouraging collaborative practice , interprofessional education is becoming a more common component of medical school curriculum in the United States , and many groups , including the World Health Organization , view it as a means of reducing medical errors and improving the health care system . 
 As a part of the interprofessional education program , students meet in small groups with a faculty facilitator and discuss the non @-@ clinical aspects of complex cases , such as interprofessional knowledge and awareness , financial or ethical challenges and communication barriers . In the 2010 – 11 academic year , the IPE program involved 850 students and 150 faculty members from the 9 colleges at the university . The development of clinical IPE rotations with grand rounds and journal clubs is being explored . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 WesternU conducts research on several subjects in the basic and clinical sciences . The three primary research areas include : neurobiology , molecular / metabolic diseases , and infectious disease / immunology . Specific neurobiology subjects include : Alzheimer 's disease , central nervous system diseases , genetic disorders , environmental pathologies , and stem cell therapy . Specific molecular and metabolic disease subjects include : cancer , cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and obesity . Research on infections and immunology includes tuberculosis , Mad cow disease , avian flu , and <unk> @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus . Research is funded by the National Institute of Health , the <unk> Foundation , The Potts Foundation , American Cancer Society , American Heart Association , the American Lung Association , and the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine . 
 = = Patient care and education = = 
 Western University of Health Sciences has two patient care centers , one in Rancho Cucamonga , California , and the other on its main campus in Pomona , California . WesternU opened its first patient care center , a family practice clinic , in 1984 . The Pomona Patient Care Center opened in May 2010 , and serves more than 10 @,@ 000 patients per year . The Patient Care Center includes a Medical Center , Foot & Ankle Center , Eye Care Center , Dental Center and Pharmacy . The center is also home to the Western Diabetes Institute , an accredited diabetes education center . The institute is a patient @-@ centered practice unit designed to provide efficient , high quality care to diabetic patients . The Rancho Cucamonga Patient Care Center opened in 2008 and provides family medicine , internal medicine , and foot and ankle care . WesternU is a member of the Association of Academic Health Centers . 
 In 1998 , the university established the Harris Family Center for Disability and Health Policy . The Center advocates for the health needs of individuals with disabilities and provides consultation and training to organizations , companies , and hospitals to help them meet the needs of disabled individuals . 
 The Pumerantz Library provides a diabetes education program to the community in a partnership with the Pomona Public Library . The project aims to help Spanish @-@ speaking members of the community access reliable information about diabetes . 
 = = Campus = = 
 = = = Pomona campus = = = 
 The main campus of WesternU is located in downtown Pomona , California , with an official address of 309 East 2nd Street . The Pomona campus consists of 19 major buildings on 22 acres ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) , and it has been the main campus since WesternU was founded in 1977 . Upon the school 's founding , a portion of the campus was extensively renovated from an outdoor shopping mall . Since that time , several buildings have been acquired and built , including a patient care center , a pet hospital , classrooms , and research facilities . There are two parks located on the urban campus . 
 The northeastern corner of campus contains the Health Education Center and Patient Care Center . Both buildings opened in 2010 , along with a parking structure , as a part of a $ 100 million expansion project at WesternU . The Health Education Center is a 180 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot teaching and research facility that houses the medical , dentistry , podiatry and optometry schools . The fourth floor of the Health Education Center is dedicated to research . The concrete parking structure has seven levels and contains 600 parking spaces . 
 Directly west of the Health Education Center is the pet hospital on campus , the WesternU Pet Wellness Center . The facility was established in 2008 as the Banfield Pet Hospital and transitioned to solely WesternU operation in 2014 . The center provides primary care services such as vaccinations , spaying and neutering , <unk> , surgery , dental exams and cleanings , as well as flea , tick and <unk> control . The center includes a surgical suite , an x @-@ ray room , a half dozen exam rooms and isolation facilities . 
 A mixed @-@ use building is located south of the pet hospital . The building , called The Daumier , is a 173 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot mixed @-@ use building with student housing located at 3rd and Linden Street . The building was completed in June 2014 , at an estimated cost of $ 45 million . The building is located on 3 @.@ 6 acres and provides housing for WesternU students , as well as a fitness center , community pool , media room , and office space for the university . The Daumier was designed to LEED silver specifications . The building was named the Daumier after the 19th century French artist Honoré Daumier . 
 The central portion of campus contains Ethan Allan Park , the Health Professions Center ( HPC ) , the Veterinary Medicine Center , and the Health Sciences Center . Ethan Allen Park is located directly west of the Pet Wellness Center . In 2006 , the park was named in honor of Dr. Ethan Allen , founding chairman of the school 's Board of Trustees . The other park on campus is Centennial Park , a Pomona city park on the west end of campus . Directly south of Ethan Allan Park , the Health Professions Center houses the College of Pharmacy and contains several classrooms , research facilities , and a student commons area . The building was built in 1962 and was previously the Pomona <unk> 's department store . The university acquired the building in 1992 , after first receiving the option to buy . The Center for Oral Health , a non @-@ profit organization focusing on promoting oral health , is based in the Health Professions Center . In late 2012 , the Center for Oral Health moved its headquarters from the bay area of California to the WesternU campus and established an affiliation with the university . The Health Sciences Center is located directly west of the Health Professions Center . The HSC is a two @-@ story , 72 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot building that contains the anatomy laboratory , an osteopathic manipulative medicine laboratory , and classroom space . The physical therapy program is based in this building , as well as the tutoring program . The Health Sciences Center was formerly a Nash Department Store . The university began using the building in 1990 , and then purchased it in 1993 . 
 The western portion of campus contains the Rodney P. Weinberg Center , which is home to the university 's research center , the Pumerantz Library , and the Anderson Tower , formerly known as the Chase Bank building . The Weinberg Center contains 8 @,@ 550 square feet dedicated to research purposes . The Weinberg Center building was originally a JCPenney . The Pumerantz Library , a 35 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot building , is located on the west edge of campus ( 3rd Street ) . The library opened at this location in August 2001 , after the university acquired the building in 1998 . The building was originally constructed in 1929 , and previously housed a switching station for the Pacific Telephone & Telegraph company . In 2015 , the Southern California Medical Museum opened at a new location on the WesternU campus . 
 On the western edge of campus , located on Garey avenue and Second Street , is the Anderson Tower , a seven @-@ story , 70 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot building . It was built in 1963 , and WesternU purchased the building from JP Morgan Chase in September 2013 . The same month , WesternU reached an agreement with a power company , Washington Gas , to build 2 @,@ 688 solar panels on three campus buildings . The solar panels were completed in February 2014 , and will produce more than 1 @,@ 100 megawatt hours of energy each year . 
 = = = Oregon branch campus = = = 
 WesternU also operates a second branch campus on 50 acres in the town of Lebanon . The official address of the Oregon campus is 200 Mullins Drive . The sole program offered at the Oregon campus is osteopathic medicine ( DO ) , although the university plans to establish additional programs at that campus . 
 The Oregon campus is across the street from Samaritan Health Services ' Lebanon Community Hospital , Groundbreaking for the medical school campus began in June 2009 , and it opened for classes in August 2011 . The new 55 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 5 @,@ 100 m2 ) building cost about $ 15 million , and is the main component of a 50 @-@ acre medical campus . 
 = = = Campus safety = = = 
 Each year , WesternU publishes a safety report , cataloguing any crimes that occur on campus . In 2014 on the Pomona campus , there were three cases of burglary , 7 cases of larceny , one motor vehicle theft , and no cases of aggravated assault or robbery . In 2014 , no crimes were reported on the Oregon campus . 
 = = Students = = 
 A total of 3 @,@ 862 students are in attendance at WesternU for the 2014 – 15 academic year . The average student age is 28 years . About 62 percent of WesternU students are female ; 38 percent are male . About 36 % are White / Non @-@ Hispanic , 33 % Asian / Pacific Islander , 11 % Hispanic , 11 % identify as two or more ethnicities , 3 % African @-@ American , and the remaining students are of unknown ethnicity ( 6 % ) . 
 Students at WesternU participate in a number of clubs on campus and an active student government association . There are several professional fraternities on campus , including Sigma Sigma Phi , Kappa Psi , Beta Sigma Kappa , Delta Sigma Delta , and Phi Lambda Sigma . 
 There is a theater troupe on campus , which hosts regular performance events . Students from the medical school ( COMP ) originally formed the theater group in 1985 . The students named their troupe " <unk> , " which is the Latin word for " sanity . " The students said they used the opportunity to act and perform plays as means of relieving stress . The theater troupe remains active , and students from other colleges also participate . 
 Other officially recognized student organizations on campus include the following : 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 WesternU employs 313 full @-@ time faculty and 38 part @-@ time faculty . Some notable faculty members include : 
 Clinton E. Adams , DO , MPA , <unk> , a former Rear Admiral in the US Navy . 
 Brion <unk> , MD , MSc editor of ' Gray 's Anatomy 40th edition ' and ' <unk> 's Atlas of Human <unk> 
 Lawrence B. <unk> , DPM , founding member of the ADA Council on the Diabetic Foot ; sometimes described as the " father of diabetic foot care . " 
 Joseph Gambone , DO , MPH , author of Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology . Gambone Peak on Antarctica was named in his honor in 1970 . 
 Lee Rogers , DPM , professor of podiatry and prior democratic nominee for US Congress in California 's 25th district in 2012 . 
 Matt J. Wedel , PhD , paleontologist and professor of anatomy , authored papers naming Aquilops ( 2014 ) , <unk> ( 2011 ) , and Sauroposeidon ( 2000 ) . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 As of 2015 , a total of 12 @,@ 435 graduates completed study at WesternU . At the completion of the 2014 @-@ 15 academic year , 1 @,@ 124 students graduated from WesternU . Some notable alumni include : 
 Jon W. Fong , DO class of 1984 , medical advisor to the former hit television show ER . 
 Susan Melvin , DO class of 1984 , is a professor of medicine ( UCI and WesternU ) and Chief Medical Officer at Long Beach Memorial Hospital . 
 Stan Flemming , DO class of 1985 , a former Washington State Republican Legislator , University Place councilman , and retired United States Army Reserve general . 
 William W. Henning , DO class of 1986 , the Chief Medical Officer for Inland Empire Health Plan . 
 Cynthia Stotts , DO class of 1988 , the first female and the first DO physician in the 158 @-@ year history of LA County / USC Medical Center to be elected Chief of Medical Staff . 
 James Lally , DO class of 1991 , the President and Chief Medical Officer of Chino Valley Medical Center . Also the team physician for the US Olympic Shooting Team . 
 Lee Burnett , DO class of 1997 , a U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel , is also the founder and executive director of Student Doctor Network . 
 Lindsey <unk> , DO class of 2013 , author of Bow Ties , Butterflies and Band @-@ Aids . 
 = Mr. Monk and the Actor = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Actor " is the first episode of the fifth season of the American comedy @-@ drama detective television series Monk , and the show 's 62nd episode overall . The series follows Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) , a private detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias , and his assistant Natalie Teeger ( Traylor Howard ) . In this episode , Monk has to link two different cases while an actor hired to play him in a film emotionally disturbs him . 
 Written by Hy Conrad and Joe <unk> , and directed by Randall Zisk , " Mr. Monk and the Actor " guest starred Stanley Tucci . The staff envisioned the episode after imagining the possibility of Monk becoming a famous detective . When the episode first aired in the United States on the USA Network on July 7 , 2006 , it was watched by over 5 @.@ 1 million viewers . Critics gave it positive reception , praising specially Tucci 's performance . It also led Tucci to win an Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While a man , Jack Leverett ( Greg Grunberg ) , is cheating on his wife with a woman named Michelle Cullman ( Susan Ward ) , he finds a hidden camera and , fighting for the camera , kills her . The following day , Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) announces to his therapist , Dr. Charles Kroger ( Stanley Kamel ) , he will go on his first vacation since the murder of his wife , Trudy . Later , Monk goes to the crime scene to investigate and is informed by Captain Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) and Lieutenant Disher ( Jason Gray @-@ Stanford ) that a film about him will be produced . As method actor David Ruskin ( Stanley Tucci ) — set to play Monk in the film — is there to observe his mannerism , Monk tries to impress him . 
 The next day , Ruskin follows Monk again as he investigates a case at a pawnshop in which its owner was shot during a robbery . Monk is intrigued as to why the burglar entered through the wall and only stole a small amount of money and a wristwatch . After discussing if Ruskin 's presence can harm Monk , Natalie ( Traylor Howard ) and Monk find the crime 's weapon . Monk finds the same glitter he found on Cullman 's hair in the gun and argues the thief stole the watch to replace his one , deducing that the same person committed both crimes . 
 Later , Stottlemeyer and Disher watch the film 's shooting and Natalie 's prediction is right : Ruskin has impersonated Monk to the point that he is unable to complete the sequence because he is hassled by the setting 's disorder . He leaves the studio , goes to Monk 's house to know what are his reasons to do his job , and explores Monk 's files on Trudy 's murder , grieving Monk . An afflicted Monk goes to Natalie 's house , where he solves the case when he sees torn paper by Julie to prevent Natalie from reading it . The pawnshop is adjacent to a restaurant , where clients are drawn on the wall . On the crime 's night , Leverett and Cullman were sketched and Leverett tried to destroy the evidence . 
 Meanwhile , Ruskin is at the Trudy 's murder scene when a guard , believing Ruskin to be Monk , informs him Leverett is the killer . When Stottlemeyer and Disher arrive at Leverett 's car dealership to arrest him , Ruskin has already arrived and is keeping him as a hostage . Monk enters the dealership and stops Ruskin but is emotionally shaken when Ruskin says he could have saved Trudy . At the end , he talks with Dr. Kroger and cancels his trip . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Actor " was co @-@ written by Hy Conrad and Joe <unk> , and was directed by Randall Zisk . The concept for the episode first emerged while the staff was working on fourth season episode " Mr. Monk and the Astronaut " , and they wondered if Monk would become famous . The first idea was to use the same set and actors from " Mr. Monk and the Astronaut " to create an episode in which a made @-@ for @-@ TV film is recorded about that case . It was not done but writers still wanted to create an episode focusing on a TV film , which eventually became " Mr. Monk and the Actor " . On its original script , it exceeded the runtime by about six minutes so a scene involving a child mistaking a gun for a toy was cut . It would be the murder weapon , and even though a six @-@ year @-@ old actor was hired for the scene it was not filmed . 
 Shalhoub and Tucci had been friends since they met each other at the Yale Repertory Theater in 1989 when they acted on John Guare 's play Moon Over Miami . In 1996 , they co @-@ starred the film Big Night , which Conrad said was the main reason Tucci " always our first choice for the actor role . " Tucci said it was a " funny thing " since the role of Monk was offered to him after Big Night but he declined it . Shalhoub affirmed he had requested Tucci to appear on Monk for a long time before this episode but Tucci always rejected because of schedule reasons . Another guest star for the episode , Peter Weller was on set to direct " Mr. Monk , Private Eye " and volunteered for the role of the actor who plays Stottlemeyer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Actor " was first available via video on demand service on June 30 , 2006 , and its television premiere through USA Network was on July 7 , 2006 at 9 pm EST . According to an USA 's press release , the episode was viewed by an estimated number of 5 @.@ 3 million viewers , while Nielsen Media Research indicated a viewership of 5 @.@ 1 million and a 3 @.@ 89 rating . Gary Levin of USA Today called it a " shy " if compared to season four premiere 's figure of 6 @.@ 4 million . USA , however , said it was the most watched scripted hour in basic cable ever from its time slot . 
 The episode was well @-@ received ; IGN 's Colin Moriarty gave it a score of 9 out 10 , it was deemed " excellent " by John White of The Digital Fix , and it was elected by The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan the 49th best television episode of the year . Kevin McDonough , a critic for the United Feature Syndicate , called it " a great episode " and compared it to a Seinfeld episode with a similar premise . Diane Werts wrote for Newsday , " Which one 's nuttier ? It 's a toss @-@ up , and a fascinating one with the terrific Tucci as Shalhoub 's emotional tango partner . " 
 Several critics praised Tucci 's performance and his interactions with Shalhoub . A reviewer for Times Colonist commented " Watching Shalhoub pretend to be Monk pretending to be a suave , sophisticated sleuth is a delight in its own right . Watching Tucci take Monk 's nervous tics to ridiculous extremes is even more of a delight , especially when its appears that Monk 's nervous disorder may be catching . " In contrast to other reviewers , Adam Finley of AOL TV elected the best moment of the episode Disher 's reaction to the fact his role is played by a woman who dates Stottlemeyer . 
 Moriarty , Matt Crowley of The A.V. Club and Variety 's Paula Hendrickson used it as example of how Monk can fit comedy scenes during dramatic ones . Ann <unk> , a writer for the North County Times , commented , " Watching Tucci and Shalhoub play this for laughs would have been enough for some shows , but the Monk writers take the opportunity to let the movie actor share with Monk the insights he 's learned about the detective , which may help , or hurt , Monk . " Finley and David Kronke of Los Angeles Daily News also highlighted the line " [ Ruskin ] wanted to play a character that wasn 't so depressing and dark . He 's in England doing Hamlet . " 
 Criticism to the episode was done by Finley who said , " So much of this show is dependent on Monk 's subtle mannerisms , but he exaggerates them to an absurd degree as he tries to impress the actor who 's playing him . " Similarly , Werts said " Shalhoub pushes a tad too far with the compulsions . " Robert Bianco of USA Today was also critical of its " excessive quirks and overall credibility @-@ busting silliness . " Although praised Shalhoub – Tucci dynamic , Rich Heldenfels of Akron Beacon Journal criticized it as " the actor @-@ imitating @-@ life thing has been done before on TV and in the movies , and the gag well is pretty dry . " 
 At the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , Tucci won the award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for his role on this episode . 
