 = Fritz the Cat = 
 Fritz the Cat is a comic strip created by Robert Crumb . Set in a " <unk> " of anthropomorphic animals , the strip focuses on Fritz , a feline con artist who frequently goes on wild adventures that sometimes involve sexual escapades . Crumb began drawing this character in homemade comic books when he was a child . Fritz became one of his most famous characters , thanks largely to the motion picture adaptation by Ralph Bakshi . 
 The strip appeared in Help ! and Cavalier magazines . It subsequently gained prominence in publications associated with the underground comix scene between 1965 and 1972 . Fritz the Cat comic compilations elevated the strip into one of the most iconic features of the underground scene . 
 The strip received further attention when it was adapted into a 1972 animated film with the same name . The directorial debut of animator Bakshi , it became a worldwide success . It was the first animated feature film to receive an X rating in the United States and the most successful independent animated feature to date . 
 Crumb ended the strip in 1972 due to disagreements with the filmmakers . He published a story in which Fritz was murdered by an ex @-@ girlfriend . A second animated film , The Nine Lives of Fritz the Cat , was produced in 1974 without the involvement of either Bakshi or Crumb . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Fritz the Cat was created in 1959 by Robert Crumb in a homemade comic book story called " Cat Life " , based on the experiences of Fred , the family cat . The character 's next appearance was in a 1960 story entitled " Robin Hood " . By this point , the cat had become anthropomorphic and had been renamed Fritz , a name derived from a minor unrelated character who appeared briefly in " Cat Life " . Fritz appeared in the early 1960s Animal Town strips drawn by Charles and Robert Crumb . Sometimes Fritz was accompanied by Fuzzy the Bunny , who served as an alter ego for Charles , his creator . 
 Fritz the Cat is set in a " modern ' <unk> ' of millions of animals . " Stories begin simply and become increasingly chaotic and complex as the narrative responds to uncontrollable forces . The look of Fritz the Cat comics was characterized by the use of the Rapidograph technical pen and a simple drawing style Robert Crumb used to facilitate his story telling . Crumb states that much of the comic books he enjoyed as a child were funny animal comics , particularly those of Carl Barks . Crumb was later influenced by Walt Kelly 's daily anthropomorphic funny animal comic strip Pogo ; Crumb did not copy Kelly 's comics directly , but states that he imitated his drawing style closely ; Crumb admired Kelly 's storytelling style , which " seemed [ to be ] plotless and casually done . The characters talked to each other and nothing much happened . Just a lot of foolishness takes place " . Robert Crumb stated of his anthropomorphic work : 
 I can express something [ with animals ] that is different from what I put into my work about humans ... I can put more nonsense , more satire and fantasy into the animals ... they 're also easier to do than people ... With people I try more for realism , which is probably why I 'm generally better with animals . 
 In 1964 , when he was not working at American Greetings , Crumb drew many Fritz the Cat strips for his own amusement . Some of these strips would later be published in Help ! and Cavalier magazines and in the underground comix . Fritz also appears briefly in Crumb 's graphic novel Big Yum Yum Book : The Story of <unk> and the Beanstalk , drawn in 1964 , but not published until 1975 . Several characters from the anthropomorphic universe of Fritz the Cat appeared in another Crumb comic strip , The Silly Pigeons , drawn in 1965 and intended for Help ! In 1970 , Crumb redrew an early Fuzzy the Bunny story written by Charles Crumb in 1952 ; it was published in Zap Comix # 5 . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Marty Pahls , Crumb 's childhood friend , describes Fritz as " a poseur " , whose posturing was taken seriously by everyone around him . Fritz is self @-@ centered and hedonistic , lacking both morals and ethics . Thomas Albright describes Fritz as " a kind of updated Felix with overtones of Charlie Chaplin , Candide , and Don Quixote . " Fritz had a " glib , smooth and self @-@ assured " personality , characteristics Crumb felt he was lacking in . According to Pahls , " To a great extent , Fritz was his wish @-@ fulfillment ... [ the character allowed Robert to ] do great deeds , have wild adventures , and undergo a variety of sex experiences , which he himself felt he couldn 't . Fritz was bold , poised , had a way with the ladies — all attributes which Robert coveted , but felt he lacked . " 
 Crumb denied any personal attachment to the character , stating , " I just got into drawing him ... He was fun to draw . " As Crumb 's personal life changed , Fritz would too . According to Pahls , " For years , [ Crumb ] had few friends and no sex life ; he was forced to spend many hours at school or on the job , and when he came home he ' escaped ' by drawing home @-@ made comics . When he suddenly found a group of friends that would accept him for himself , as he did in Cleveland in 1964 , the ' compensation ' factor went out of his drawing , and this was pretty much the end of Fritz 's impetus . " 
 An early untitled 10 @-@ page story , drawn in 1964 and released in 1969 as part of R. Crumb 's Comics and Stories , depicts Fritz as a beatnik caricature who has an incestuous tryst with his sister . In " Fred , the Teen @-@ Age Girl Pigeon , " Fritz is portrayed as a pop music star . The strips " Fritz the Cat " and " Fritz Bugs Out " portray him as a hip poet and college dropout in the hippie scene . " Fritz Bugs Out " uses anthropomorphic characters to comment on race relations , with crows representing African Americans . Fritz is portrayed as a self @-@ conscious hypocrite , obsessed with his racism and associated guilt , while crows are portrayed as " hip innocents " . " Fritz the Cat , Secret Agent for the C.I.A. , " inspired by the popularity of the James Bond series , portrays Fritz as a member of the Central Intelligence Agency . " Fritz the No @-@ Good " depicts Fritz becoming involved with terrorist revolutionaries ; he also abuses and rapes one of the group member 's girlfriends . 
 Fritz has an on @-@ again / off @-@ again relationship with a female fox named Winston , they break up at the beginning of " Fritz Bugs Out " . Later in the story , she attempts to convince him not to " bug out " , but eventually agrees to go on a road trip with him . When her car runs out of gas in the desert , Fritz abandons her . Winston is also a character featured in the 1972 film , as is this storyline — Fritz 's Volkswagen Beetle dodging big rig trucks on the highway in the middle of the night and later running out of gas in the middle of nowhere . She reappears in " Fritz the Cat Doubts His Masculinity " and in " Fritz the No @-@ Good " , where the two reunite after Fritz is thrown out of his wife 's apartment . Fuzzy the Bunny , who appeared in the early Animal Town strips , reappears as a college student in " Fritz Bugs Out " and as a revolutionary in " Fritz the No @-@ Good " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Help ! , a magazine published by former Mad editor Harvey Kurtzman , published two stories featuring Fritz , including the character 's first public appearance in January 1965 , " Fritz Comes on Strong " . In this debut story , Fritz brings a young female cat home and strips all her clothes off before getting on top of her to pick fleas off of her . Preceding the publication of the story , Kurtzman sent Crumb a letter which read , " Dear R. Crumb , we think the little pussycat drawings you sent us were just great . Question is , how do we print them without going to jail ? " 
 Although Kurtzman agreed to publish the story , he requested that Crumb alter the final two panels ; the published version depicted Fritz standing next to her . Crumb later recalled that the original ending " wasn 't that dirty ... only slightly risque by today 's standards " . In May 1965 , Help ! published a second Fritz story , " Fred , the Teen @-@ Age Girl Pigeon " . In this episode Fritz is a guitar @-@ playing pop idol and he brings Fred , a female pigeon groupie , to his hotel room and proceeds to eat her . John <unk> 's New York magazine review of Head Comix describes this punch line as " outrageous brilliance [ that ] is rivaled only by Evelyn Waugh 's last lines in The Loved One . " 
 " Fritz Bugs Out " was serialized in Cavalier from February to October 1968 . In the summer of 1968 , Fritz the Cat strips appeared in the Viking Press compilation titled Head Comix , which focused exclusively on Crumb 's material . In 1969 , Ballantine Books paid Crumb a $ 5 @,@ 000 advance for the publication rights to a compilation of three stories featuring Fritz . Crumb used the money to purchase a three @-@ acre lot . Crumb abandoned the character that year , but previously unpublished stories appeared in Promethean No. 3 & 4 in 1971 and Artistic in 1973 . " Fritz the Cat ' Superstar ' " was the last new story released ; it was published in The People 's Comics in 1972 . 
 In 1978 , Bélier Press published The Complete Fritz the Cat , which brought together all the published stories featuring Fritz , as well as previously unpublished drawings and unfinished comics . At the artist 's request , a 10 @-@ page story drawn in 1964 and previously published in R. Crumb 's Comics and Stories in 1969 was excluded from this collection . In April 1993 , Fantagraphics Books published The Life & Death of Fritz the Cat , compiling nine major strips , including the 1964 story previously excluded from The Complete Fritz the Cat . Fritz the Cat strips also appear in The Complete Crumb Comics series . An unpublished page featuring Fritz that had been intended for Help ! , as well as comics featuring other characters related to the anthropomorphic universe of Fritz the Cat , appeared in The R. Crumb Coffee Table Art Book in 1998 . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Following the publication of the compilations Head Comix and R. Crumb 's Fritz the Cat , Crumb received increased attention and Fritz the Cat became one of the most familiar features on the underground comix scene and Crumb 's most famous creation . These stories served as the basis for a pair of film adaptations produced by Steve Krantz , Fritz the Cat 1972 , directed by Ralph Bakshi , and The Nine Lives of Fritz the Cat 1974 , directed by Robert Taylor . According to Dez <unk> , author of Comix : The Underground Revolution , the strip served as an inspiration for Omaha the Cat Dancer . In Graphic Novels : A Bibliographic Guide to Book @-@ Length Comics , D. Aviva Rothschild criticized the stories printed in the collection The Life & Death of Fritz the Cat as being misogynist , racist , and violent . He felt that , " They also tend to ramble , as if Crumb were making them up as he went along . " Rothschild concluded that , " Even though Fritz the Cat is a classic , there are better , more coherent Crumb books around . " The 1972 film adaptation of Fritz the Cat was ranked 51st on the Online Film Critics Society 's list of the top 100 greatest animated films of all time and 56th on Channel 4 's list of the 100 Greatest Cartoons . 
 = = = Animated adaptations = = = 
 In 1969 , New York animator Ralph Bakshi came across a copy of R. Crumb 's Fritz the Cat and suggested to producer Steve Krantz that it would work as a film . After meeting with Bakshi , Crumb loaned him one of his sketchbooks as a reference , but was unsure of the film 's production and refused to sign the contract . Bakshi and Crumb were unable to reach an agreement after two weeks of negotiations but Krantz secured the film rights from Crumb 's wife , Dana , who had a power of attorney . Crumb received $ 50 @,@ 000 , distributed over the course of production and ten percent of Krantz 's proceeds . 
 Fritz the Cat was the first animated feature film to receive an X rating from the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) . The film 's distributor capitalized on the rating in the film 's advertising material , which touted the film as being " X rated and animated ! " Released on 12 April 1972 , it opened simultaneously in Hollywood and Washington , D.C. The film went on to become a worldwide hit , grossing over $ 100 million ( USD ) and was the most successful independent animated feature ever . The film is credited with extending Crumb 's reputation beyond the underground comix scene . Crumb disliked how the film presented the sexual content and politics , denouncing Fritz 's dialogue in the final sequences of the film , which includes a quote from The Beatles song " The End " , as " red @-@ neck and fascistic " . Following the film 's release , The People 's Comics published the story " Fritz the Cat ' Superstar ' " , in which Crumb satirized Bakshi and Krantz . Crumb portrayed Fritz in a script conference for a fictional sequel Fritz Goes to India . The strip ends with a neurotic ex @-@ girlfriend killing Fritz . She stabs him in the back of the head with an ice pick due to Fritz 's overt sexism . 
 After the film 's release , the American humor magazine The National Lampoon ran a story written by mordant humorist Michael O 'Donoghue and drawn in a parody of Crumb 's style called " Fritz the Star in ' Kitty Glitter ' " portraying the Fritz character as a jaded and complacent Hollywood star going through all the motions of celebrities of the day , going on talk shows and mouthing vaguely liberal platitudes before cynically guiding the conversation over to promotion of whatever his next movie would be . The strip ends with a nightmarish full @-@ page vista of " <unk> " where all of Crumb 's countercultural icons have been turned into commercial commodities . In 1974 , Krantz produced the sequel The Nine Lives of Fritz the Cat , without any participation from Bakshi or Crumb . 
 = 1978 Gillette Cup Final = 
 The 1978 Gillette Cup Final was a cricket match between Somerset County Cricket Club and Sussex County Cricket Club played on 2 September 1978 at Lord 's in London . It was the sixteenth final of the Gillette Cup , which had been the first domestic tournament to pit first @-@ class cricket sides against each other in a knock @-@ out competition . This was Sussex 's sixth appearance in the final , which they had previously won twice , while Somerset had lost in their only previous final . 
 Both teams entered the competition in the first round ; Somerset faced first @-@ class opposition in each of the four rounds prior to the final . In their semi @-@ final match against Essex , Somerset only progressed as they had lost fewer wickets in a tied match . Sussex played against minor counties in each of the first two rounds , but only beat Staffordshire by two runs to advance from the second round , before more straightforward victories against first @-@ class opposition in the later stages . Somerset batted first , but with the exception of Ian Botham , the batsmen struggled to score runs fluently . They scored 207 runs for 7 wickets , of which Botham scored 80 and Viv Richards 44 . Sussex began their run @-@ chase well , with a first @-@ wicket partnership of 93 , before losing four wickets in quick succession . A second partnership , between Paul Parker and Paul Phillipson led Sussex to victory by five wickets , chasing down Somerset 's total with more than six overs to spare . Parker was named as the man of the match for his score of 62 not out . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Gillette Cup was first contested in 1963 , as the first English domestic knock @-@ out competition between first @-@ class sides . Sussex had appeared in the Gillette Cup Final on five previous instances ; they won the tournament in each of the first two years ( 1963 and 1964 ) , and were runners @-@ up in 1968 , 1970 and 1973 . In contrast , Somerset had only reached the final of the competition once previously , losing to Kent in 1967 . Somerset were one of only two first @-@ class counties in 1978 to have never won a domestic competition . Tony Greig , who had been the Sussex captain from 1973 to 1977 , was released from his contract midway through the 1978 season . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Somerset entered the tournament in the first round , in which they beat Warwickshire by six wickets , aided primarily by a score of 139 not out by Viv Richards , who was later named man of the match . In their second round match against Glamorgan , Somerset scored 330 for 4 , the highest total in that year 's competition . Peter Denning scored 145 runs , while Joel Garner bowled six overs and conceded just five runs . Garner 's bowling was once again miserly in the quarter @-@ final against Kent ; he conceded five runs in nine overs , though Colin Dredge was named as the man of the match for his four wickets , which helped Somerset to a five @-@ wicket victory . In the semi @-@ final , Somerset batted first , and helped by another century from Richards , scored 287 for 6 . In their response , Essex kept up with the required run rate , and needed three runs to win from the final ball of the match . The batsmen managed two runs , but Neil Smith was run out attempting the third run , and as a result the scores were tied . Somerset advanced to the final , as they had lost fewer wickets ; six to ten . 
 Sussex also took part in the first round , facing Suffolk , one of the minor cricket counties who did not play first @-@ class cricket . Suffolk were bowled out for 101 runs , a total which Sussex chased down with 161 deliveries remaining . Another minor county , Staffordshire , were Sussex 's second round opponents , but the margin of victory was far narrower . Sussex batted first and scored 221 for 6 , in which Paul Parker scored his second half @-@ century of the competition . In their response , Staffordshire fell three runs short , finishing with 219 for 9 ; each of Imran Khan and Geoff Arnold collecting four wickets . In the quarter @-@ final , Sussex faced Yorkshire . The match began on 2 August , but after 52 overs of Yorkshire 's innings no further play was possible , even though the match had two reserve days . On 4 August , the match was abandoned , and replaced with a match in which each side would bat for 10 innings . In that match , Sussex batted first and scored 68 for 6 , and then restricted Yorkshire to 59 for 8 . Imran Khan and Arnold bowled through the entire ten overs , taking three wickets each . A more facile victory provided Sussex with their place in the final ; facing Lancashire , Sussex scored 277 for 8 , helped by another half @-@ century from Parker , and 75 runs from Javed Miandad , and then bowled their opponents out for 141 runs . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 In his preview of the final , John Woodcock , the cricket correspondent for The Times rated Somerset as the favourites . He cited the talent of Richards as their primary asset , but asserted that they were " not a one man side " . He noted that Sussex also relied upon their overseas players , Javed Miandad and Imran Khan , but that they would need to be backed up by Sussex 's other players for them to have a chance of victory . The match was played at Lord 's in London , as had every previous final of the competition , and play began at 10 : 30 , with a lunch break scheduled for 12 : 45 to 13 : 25 , and a 15 @-@ minute tea interval after 25 overs of the second innings . 
 The Sussex captain , Arnold Long , won the toss and chose to bowl first , hoping that morning dew might give his bowlers an advantage . Brian Rose scored 14 runs from the first over , bowled by Imran , who later took Somerset 's first wicket , bowling Denning before the batsman had scored a run . That brought Richards to the crease , and Long immediately changed both of his bowlers , replacing the quick bowling of the openers with the slower deliveries of Giles Cheatle and John Spencer . Cheatle dismissed Rose in his first over , caught down the leg side by the wicket @-@ keeper , Long after scoring 44 runs . Peter Roebuck also got out to Cheatle , scoring nine runs before being caught by Mendis . Botham joined Richards in the middle , and immediately scored a four with a straight drive , followed by two hooks for sixes . Cheatle and Spencer each bowled their entire allocation of 12 overs without a break , and were followed by the introduction of another slow bowler , John Barclay . Although Richards finished as the competition 's leading run @-@ scorer , Woodcock said that he struggled to score fluently , particularly against the spin bowling of Barclay and Cheatle . In the Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack 's summary of the season , Jack <unk> praised Long 's captaincy in the final , highlighting the use of slower bowling against Richards and Ian Botham as being particularly commendable . Vic Marks , who also played in the match for Somerset , suggested that Botham was the only Somerset batsman to play with freedom , and said that the rest of the team were nervous and intimidated by the prospect of winning Somerset 's first trophy . Richards scored 44 runs , and Botham 80 , including three sixes , but none of the rest of the middle- or lower @-@ order batsmen made a significant score and Somerset finished their innings on 207 for 7 . Along with Barclay , Spencer bowled particularly economically for Sussex . 
 Sussex began their run @-@ chase well ; Barclay and <unk> Mendis scored 93 runs together , surviving a spell of attacking fast bowling from Garner and Dredge early on . Mendis had broken his thumb shortly before the final , and in the third over , it was fractured again , but he continued to bat . When Somerset did make a breakthrough , after 24 overs , they collected four wickets for the addition of seventeen runs . Mendis was the first man out , caught by Marks off the bowling of Graham Burgess , followed by Barclay who was caught hooking a delivery from Botham . Miandad was dismissed without scoring , and shortly thereafter , Imran was caught and bowled by Botham for three . Rose then chose to replace his bowlers , and against the less incisive bowling of Keith Jennings and Burgess , Parker and Paul Phillipson were able to establish a 97 @-@ run partnership , which brought Sussex to within five runs of their winning target , before Phillipson was by caught by the wicket @-@ keeper , Derek Taylor off the bowling of Dredge . Woodcock thought that Botham in particular bowled too short against Phillipson , who he suggested would have been susceptible to a yorker . In Wisden , Eric Hill opined that Botham 's short @-@ pitched bowling , which was a feature of his play late in the season , was due to him being overused by England and Somerset through the year . Parker scored the winning runs to secure a five @-@ wicket victory for Sussex with 41 deliveries remaining . 
 = = = Scorecard = = = 
 Umpires : 
 Dickie Bird and Barrie Meyer 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Parker was selected as the man of the match by Ken Barrington . Somerset , who had started the weekend with the potential of winning both the Gillette Cup and the John Player League , returned to their home ground in Taunton needing to avoid defeat against Essex to guarantee winning the latter competition . They lost by two runs , prompting Alan Gibson of The Times to write " So we are saying , as we have said at the end of so many seasons , ' well tried Somerset ' , and no more than that . " Somerset returned to the final in 1979 , when they beat Northamptonshire to win their first trophy . Sussex did not reach the final again until 1986 , though they won the 1982 John Player League in the interim . 
 = The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket = 
 The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket ( 1838 ) is the only complete novel written by American writer Edgar Allan Poe . The work relates the tale of the young Arthur Gordon Pym , who stows away aboard a whaling ship called the Grampus . Various adventures and misadventures befall Pym , including shipwreck , mutiny , and cannibalism , before he is saved by the crew of the Jane Guy . Aboard this vessel , Pym and a sailor named Dirk Peters continue their adventures further south . Docking on land , they encounter hostile black @-@ skinned natives before escaping back to the ocean . The novel ends abruptly as Pym and Peters continue toward the South Pole . 
 The story starts out as a fairly conventional adventure at sea , but it becomes increasingly strange and hard to classify . Poe , who intended to present a realistic story , was inspired by several real @-@ life accounts of sea voyages , and drew heavily from Jeremiah N. Reynolds and referenced the Hollow Earth theory . He also drew from his own experiences at sea . Analyses of the novel often focus on the potential autobiographical elements as well as hints of racism and the symbolism in the final lines of the work . 
 Difficulty in finding literary success early in his short story @-@ writing career inspired Poe to pursue writing a longer work . A few serialized installments of The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket were first published in the Southern Literary Messenger , though never completed . The full novel was published in July 1838 in two volumes . Some critics responded negatively to the work for being too gruesome and for cribbing heavily from other works , while others praised its exciting adventures . Poe himself later called it " a very silly book " . Nevertheless , The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket became an influential work , notably for Herman Melville and Jules Verne . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The book comprises a preface , 25 chapters , and an afterword , with a total of around 72 @,@ 000 words . 
 = = = On board the Ariel ( Chapter I ) = = = 
 Arthur Gordon Pym was born on the island of Nantucket , famous for its fishing harbor and whaling . His best friend , Augustus Barnard , is the son of the captain of a whaling ship . One night , the two boys become drunk and decide , on Augustus 's whim , to take advantage of the breeze and sail out on Pym 's sailboat , the Ariel . The breeze , however , turns out to be the beginnings of a violent storm . The situation gets critical when Augustus passes out drunk , and the inexperienced Pym must take control of the dinghy . The Ariel is overtaken by the Penguin , a returning whaling ship . Against the captain 's wishes , the crew of the Penguin turns back to search for and rescue both Augustus and Pym . After they are safely back on land , they decide to keep this episode a secret from their parents . 
 = = = On board the Grampus ( Chapters II – XIII ) = = = 
 His first ocean misadventure does not dissuade Pym from sailing again ; rather , his imagination is ignited by the experience . His interest is further fueled by the tales of a sailor 's life that Augustus tells him . Pym decides to follow Augustus as a stowaway aboard the Grampus , a whaling vessel commanded by Augustus 's father that is bound for the southern seas . Augustus helps Pym by preparing a hideout in the hold for him and smuggling Tiger , Pym 's faithful dog , on board . Augustus promises to provide Pym with water and food until the ship is too far from shore to return , at which time Pym wants to reveal himself . 
 Due to the stuffy atmosphere and vapors in the dark and cramped hold , Pym becomes increasingly comatose and delirious over the days . He can 't communicate with Augustus , and the promised supplies fail to arrive , so Pym runs out of water . In the course of his ordeal , he discovers a letter written in blood attached to his dog Tiger , warning Pym to remain hidden , as his life depends on it . 
 Augustus finally sets Pym free , explaining the mysterious message , as well as his delay in retrieving his friend : a mutiny had erupted on the whaling ship . Part of the crew was slaughtered by the mutineers , while another group , including Augustus 's father , were set adrift in a small boat . Augustus survived because he had befriended one of the mutineers , Dirk Peters , who now regrets his part in the uprising . 
 Peters , Pym , and Augustus hatch a plan to seize control of the ship : Pym , whose presence is unknown to the mutineers , will wait for a storm and then dress in the clothes of a recently dead sailor , masquerading as a ghost . In the confusion sure to break out among the superstitious sailors , Peters and Augustus , helped by Tiger , will take over the ship again . Everything goes according to plan , and soon the three men are masters of the Grampus : all the mutineers are killed or thrown overboard except one , Richard Parker , whom they spare to help them run the vessel . 
 The storm increases in force , breaking the mast , tearing the sails and flooding the hold . All four manage to survive by lashing themselves to the hull . As the storm abates , they find themselves safe for the moment , but without provisions . Over the following days , the men face death by starvation and thirst . 
 They sight an erratically moving Dutch ship with a grinning red @-@ capped seaman on deck , nodding in apparent greeting as they approach . Initially delighted with the prospect of deliverance , they quickly become horrified as they are overcome with an awful stench . They soon realize that the apparently cheerful sailor is , in fact , a corpse propped up in the ship 's rigging , his " grin " a result of his partially decomposed skull moving as a seagull feeds upon it . As the ship passes , it becomes clear that all its occupants are rotting corpses . 
 As time passes , with no sign of land or other ships , Parker suggests that one of them should be killed as food for the others . They draw straws , following the Custom of the Sea and Parker is sacrificed . This gives the others a reprieve , but Augustus soon dies from wounds received when they reclaimed the Grampus , and several more storms batter the already badly damaged ship . Pym and Peters float on the upturned hull and are close to death when they are rescued by the Jane Guy , a ship out of Liverpool . 
 = = = On board the Jane Guy ( Chapters XIV – XX ) = = = 
 On the Jane Guy , Pym and Peters become part of the crew and join the ship on its expedition to hunt sea calves and seals for fur , and to explore the southern oceans . Pym studies the islands around the Cape of Good Hope , becoming interested in the social structures of penguins , albatrosses , and other sea birds . Upon his urging , the captain agrees to sail further south towards the unexplored Antarctic regions . 
 The ship crosses an ice barrier and arrives in open sea , close to the South Pole , albeit with a mild climate . Here the Jane Guy comes upon a mysterious island called Tsalal , inhabited by a tribe of black , apparently friendly natives led by a chief named Too @-@ Wit . The color white is alien to the island 's inhabitants and unnerves them , because nothing that color exists there . Even the natives ' teeth are black . The island is also home to many undiscovered species of flora and fauna . Even its water is different from water elsewhere , being strangely thick and exhibiting multicolored veins . 
 The natives ' relationship with the sailors is initially cordial , so Too @-@ Wit and the captain begin trading . Their friendliness , however , turns out to be a ruse and on the eve of the ship 's proposed departure , the natives ambush the crew in a narrow gorge . Everyone except Pym and Peters is slaughtered , and the Jane Guy is overrun and burned by the malevolent tribe . 
 = = = Tsalal and further south ( Chapters XXI – XXV ) = = = 
 Pym and Peters hide in the mountains surrounding the site of the ambush . They discover a labyrinth of passages in the hills with strange marks on the walls , and disagree about whether these are the result of artificial or natural causes . Facing a shortage of food , they make a desperate run and steal a pirogue from the natives , narrowly escaping from the island and taking one of its inhabitants prisoner . 
 The small boat drifts further south on a current of increasingly warm water , which has become milky white in color . After several days they encounter a rain of ashes and then observe a huge cataract of fog or mist , which splits open to accommodate their entrance upon approach . The native dies as a huge shrouded white figure appears before them . 
 Here the novel ends abruptly . A short post @-@ script , ostensibly written by the book 's editors , compares the shapes of the labyrinth and the wall marks noted by Pym to Arabian and Egyptian letters and hieroglyphs with meanings of " Shaded " , " White " , and " Region to the South " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket has defied a universally accepted interpretation . Scholar Scott Peeples wrote that it is " at once a mock nonfictional exploration narrative , adventure saga , bildungsroman , hoax , largely plagiarized travelogue , and spiritual allegory " and " one of the most elusive major texts of American literature . " Biographer James M. <unk> writes that the plot both " soars to new heights of fictional ingenuity and descends to new lows of silliness and absurdity " . 
 One reason for the confusion comes from many continuity errors throughout the novel . For example , Pym notes that breaking a bottle while trapped in the hold saved his life because the sound alerted Augustus to his presence while searching . However , Pym notes that Augustus did not tell him this until " many years elapsed " , even though Augustus is dead eight chapters later . Nevertheless , much of the novel is carefully plotted . Novelist John Barth notes , for example , that the midway point of the novel occurs when Pym reaches the equator , the midway point of the globe . 
 Scholar Shawn Rosenheim believes that the use of hieroglyphs in the novel served as a precursor to Poe 's interest in cryptography . The pictographs themselves were likely inspired by The <unk> in New @-@ York ( 1834 ) by William Alexander Caruthers , where similar writing is the work of a black slave . Unlike the previous sea @-@ voyage tales that Poe had written , such as " MS. Found in a Bottle " , Pym is undertaking this trip on purpose . It has been suggested that the journey is about establishing a national American identity as well as discovering a personal identity . 
 Poe also presents the effects of alcohol in the novel . The opening episode , for example , shows that intoxicated people can sometimes seem entirely sober and then , suddenly , the effects of alcohol show through . Such a depiction is a small version of a larger focus in the novel on contradictions between chaos and order . Even nature seems unnatural . Water , for example , is very different at the end of the novel , appearing either colorful or " unnaturally clear . " The sun by the end shines " with a sickly yellow lustre emitting no decisive light " before seemingly being extinguished . 
 = = = Autobiographical elements = = = 
 Elements of the novel are often read as autobiographical . The novel begins with Arthur Gordon Pym , a name similar to Edgar Allan Poe , departing from Edgartown , Massachusetts on Martha 's Vineyard . Interpreted this way , the protagonist is actually sailing away from himself , or his ego . The middle name of " Gordon " , in replacing Poe 's connection to the Allan family , was turned into a reference to George Gordon Byron , a poet whom Poe deeply admired . The scene where Pym disguises himself from his grandfather while noting that he intends to inherit wealth from him also indicates a desire for Poe to free himself from family obligation and , specifically , scorning the patrimony of his foster @-@ father John Allan . 
 Dates are also relevant to this autobiographical reading . According to the text , Pym arrives at the island of Tsalal on January 19 — Poe 's birthday . Scholars , including Burton R. Pollin and Richard Wilbur , suggest that the character of Augustus was based on Poe 's childhood friend Ebenezer Burling or on Poe 's brother William Henry Leonard Poe , who served in South America and elsewhere as a sailor aboard the USS Macedonian . In the novel , the date of Augustus 's death corresponds to that of the death of Poe 's brother . The first chapter features Pym 's sloop named the Ariel , the name of a character once played by Poe 's mother Eliza Poe , and also the name of Percy Bysshe Shelley 's boat , on which he died , originally named Don Juan in honor of Lord Byron . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 One thread of critical analysis of this tale focuses on the possibly racist implications of Poe 's plot and imagery . One such plot element is the black cook who leads the mutiny on the Grampus and is its most bloodthirsty participant . Dirk Peters , a hybrid of white and Native American ancestry , is described as having a ferocious appearance , with long , protruding teeth , bowed legs , and a bald head like " the head of most negroes . " The brilliant whiteness of the final figure in the novel contrasts with the dark @-@ skinned savages and such a contrast may call to mind the escalating racial tensions over the question of slavery in the United States as Poe was writing the novel . 
 Additionally , the novel drew from prevalent assumptions during the time that dark @-@ skinned people were somehow inherently inferior . One critic of the use of race in The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket is Toni Morrison . In " Playing in the Dark : Whiteness and the Literary Imagination , " Morrison discusses how the Africanist presence in the novel is used as an " Other " against which the author defines " white , " " free , " and " individual " . In her explorations of the depiction of African characters in white American literature , Morrison writes that " no early American writer is more important to the concept of American Africanism than Poe " because of the focus on the symbolism of black and white in Poe 's novel . This possible racial symbolism is explored further in Mat Johnson 's satirical fantasy Pym ( 2011 ) . 
 = = = Ending = = = 
 The novel ends abruptly with the sudden appearance of a bizarre enshrouded figure having skin hued " of the perfect whiteness of the snow . " Many readers were left unsatisfied by this ending because , as Poe relative and scholar Harry Lee Poe wrote , " it didn 't match the kind of clear ending they expected from a novel . " Poe may have purposely left the ending subject to speculation . Some scholars have suggested that the ending serves as a symbolic conclusion to Pym 's spiritual journey and others suggest that Pym has actually died in this scene , as though his tale is somehow being told posthumously . Alternatively , Pym may die in the retelling of the story at precisely the same point he should have died during the actual adventure . Like other characters in works by Poe , Pym seems to submit willingly to this fate , whatever it is . Kenneth Silverman notes that the figure radiates ambivalence and it is not clear if it is a symbol of destruction or of protection . 
 The chasms that open throughout the sea in the final moments of the book derive from the Hollow Earth theory . The area closest to the Pole is also , surprisingly , warm rather than cold , as Symmes believed . Symmes also believed there were civilizations inside this Hollow Earth and the enshrouded figure who appears at the end may indicate one such civilization near the Pole . 
 = = Composition and publication history = = 
 Poe had intended to collect a number of his early short stories into a volume titled Tales of the Folio Club in the 1830s . The collection would be unified as a series of tales presented by members of a literary club designed as burlesques of contemporary literary criticism . Poe had previously printed several of these stories in the Philadelphia Saturday Courier and the Baltimore Saturday Visiter . 
 An editor , James Kirke Paulding , tried to assist him in publishing this collection . However , Paulding reported back to Poe that the publishers at Harper & Brothers declined the collection , saying that readers were looking for simple , long works like novels . They suggested , " if he will lower himself a little to the ordinary comprehension of the generality of readers , and prepare ... a single work ... they will make such arrangements with him as will be liberal and satisfactory . " They suggested " if other engagements permit ... undertake a Tale in a couple volumes , for that is the magical number . " The response from Harper & Brothers inspired Poe to begin a long work and began writing The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket . Poe arranged with his boss at the Southern Literary Messenger to publish his novel in several serialized installments at a pay rate of $ 3 per page . 
 However , Poe retired from his role at the Messenger on January 3 , 1837 , as the installments were being published ; some scholars suggest he was fired and this led him to abandoning the novel . His split with the Messenger began a " blank period " where he did not publish much and suffered from unemployment , poverty , and no success in his literary pursuits . Poe soon realized writing a book @-@ length narrative was a necessary career decision , partly because he had no steady job and the economy was suffering from the Panic of 1837 . He also set part of the story as a quest to Antarctica to capitalize the public 's sudden interest in that topic . 
 After his marriage to Virginia Clemm , Poe spent the following winter and spring completing his manuscript for this novel in New York . He earned a small amount of money by taking in a boarder named William Gowans . During his fifteen months in New York , amidst the harsh economic climate , Poe published only two tales , " Von Jung , the <unk> " and " <unk> . A Fable " . Harper & Brothers announced Poe 's novel would be published in May 1837 , but the Panic forced them to delay . 
 The novel was finally published in book form under the title The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket in July 1838 , although it did not include Poe 's name and was instead presented as an account by Pym himself . Poe excused the earlier serialized version by noting that the Messenger had mistakenly adapted it " under the garb of fiction " . As Harper & Brothers recommended , it was printed in two volumes . Its full subtitle was : 
 Comprising the Details of Mutiny and <unk> <unk> on Board the American Brig Grampus , on Her Way to the South Seas , in the Month of June , 1827 . With an Account of the Recapture of the Vessel by the <unk> ; Their Shipwreck and Subsequent Horrible Sufferings from Famine ; Their Deliverance by Means of the British Schooner Jane Guy ; the Brief Cruise of this Latter Vessel in the Atlantic Ocean ; Her Capture , and the Massacre of Her Crew Among a Group of Islands in the Eighty @-@ Fourth Parallel of Southern Latitude ; Together with the Incredible Adventures and Discoveries Still Farther South to Which That <unk> Calamity Gave Rise . 
 The first overseas publication of The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket appeared only a few months later when it was printed in London without Poe 's permission , although the final paragraph was omitted . This early publication of the novel initiated British interest in Poe . 
 = = Literary significance and reception = = 
 Contemporary reviews for The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket were generally unfavorable . Fifteen months after its publication , it was reviewed by Lewis Gaylord Clark , a fellow author who carried on a substantial feud with Poe . His review printed in The Knickerbocker said the book was " told in a loose and slip @-@ shod style , seldom chequered by any of the more common graces of composition . " Clark went on , " This work is one of much interest , with all its defects , not the least of which is that it is too liberally stuffed with ' horrid circumstances of blood and battle . ' " 
 Many reviewers commented on the excess of violent scenes . In addition to noting the novel 's gruesome details , a review in Burton 's Gentleman 's Magazine ( possibly William Evans Burton himself ) criticized its borrowed descriptions of geography and errors in nautical information . The reviewer considered it a literary hoax and called it an " impudent attempt at <unk> the public " and regretted " Mr. Poe 's name in connexion with such a mass of ignorance and effrontery " . Poe later wrote to Burton that he agreed with the review , saying it " was essentially correct " and the novel was " a very silly book " . 
 Other reviews condemned the attempt at presenting a true story . A reviewer for the Metropolitan Magazine noted that , though the story was good as fiction , " when palmed upon the public as a true thing , it cannot appear in any other light than that of a bungling business — an impudent attempt at imposing on the credulity of the ignorant . " Nevertheless , some readers believed portions of Poe 's novel were true , especially in England , and justified the absurdity of the book with an assumption that author Pym was exaggerating the truth . Publisher George Putnam later noted that " whole columns of these new ' discoveries , ' including the hieroglyphics ( sic ) found on the rocks , were copied by many of the English country papers as sober historical truth . " 
 In contrast , the renowned 20th century Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges , who admitted Poe as a strong influence , praised the novel as " Poe 's greatest work " . H. G. Wells noted that " Pym tells what a very intelligent mind could imagine about the south polar region a century ago " . Even so , most scholars did not engage in much serious discussion or analysis of the novel until the 1950s , though many in France recognized the work much earlier . 
 The financial and critical failure of The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket was a turning point in Poe 's career . For one , he was driven to literary duties that would make him money , notably his controversial role as editor of The <unk> 's First Book in April 1839 . He also wrote a short series called " Literary Small Talk " for a new Baltimore @-@ based magazine called American Museum of Science , Literature and the Arts . 
 In need of work , Poe accepted a job at the low salary of $ 10 per week as assistant editor for Burton 's Gentleman 's Magazine , despite their negative review of his novel . He also returned to his focus on short stories rather than longer works of prose ; Poe 's next published book after this , his only completed novel , was the collection Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque in 1840 . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Scholars , including Patrick F. Quinn and John J. McAleer , have noted parallels between Herman Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick and The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket and other Poe works . Quinn noted that there were enough similarities that Melville must have studied Poe 's novel and , if not , it would be " one of the most extraordinary accidents in literature " . McAleer noted that Poe 's short story " The Fall of the House of Usher " inspired " Ahab 's flawed character " in Moby @-@ Dick . Scholar Jack <unk> also noted similarities between Moby @-@ Dick and Poe 's " MS. Found in a Bottle " . 
 The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket became one of Poe 's most @-@ translated works ; by 1978 , scholars had counted over 300 editions , adaptations , and translations . This novel has proven to be particularly influential in France . French poet and author Charles Baudelaire translated the novel in 1857 as Les Aventures d 'Arthur Gordon Pym . Baudelaire was also inspired by Poe 's novel in his own poetry . " Voyage to Cythera " rewrites part of Poe 's scene where birds eat human flesh . 
 French author Jules Verne greatly admired Poe and wrote a study , Edgar Poe et ses <unk> , in 1864 . Poe 's story " Three Sundays in a Week " may have inspired Verne 's novel Around the World in Eighty Days ( 1873 ) . In 1897 , Verne published a sequel to The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket called An Antarctic Mystery . Like Poe 's novel , Verne attempted to present an imaginative work of fiction as a believable story by including accurate factual details . The two @-@ volume novel explores the adventures of the <unk> as its crew searches for answers to what became of Pym . Translations of this text are sometimes titled The Sphinx of Ice or The Mystery of Arthur Gordon Pym . 
 An informal sequel to The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket is the 1899 novel A Strange Discovery by Charles Romeyn Dake where the narrator , Doctor Bainbridge , recounts the story his patient Dirk Peters told him of his journey with Gordon Pym in Antarctica , including a discussion of Poe 's poem " The Raven " . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Prince Amerigo in Henry James 's novel The Golden Bowl ( 1904 ) remembered The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket : " He remembered to have read as a boy a wonderful tale by Allan Poe ... which was a thing to show , by the way , what imagination Americans could have : the story of the shipwrecked Gordon Pym , who ... found ... a thickness of white air ... of the color of milk or of snow . " 
 Poe 's novel was also an influence on H. P. Lovecraft , whose 1936 novel At the Mountains of Madness follows similar thematic direction and borrows the cry <unk> @-@ li from the novel . Chaosium 's role @-@ playing adventure Beyond the Mountains of Madness ( 1999 ) , a sequel to Lovecraft 's novel , includes a " missing ending " of Poe 's novel , in which Pym encounters some of Lovecraft 's creatures at their Antarctic city . 
 Rene Magritte 's 1937 painting Not to be Reproduced depicts a copy of Poe 's book in the lower right of the work . 
 Another French sequel was La <unk> de l <unk> ( 1947 ) by Dominique André . 
 Georges <unk> 's 1969 novel A Void , notable for not containing a single letter e , contains an e @-@ less rewriting of Poe 's " The Raven " that is attributed to Arthur Gordon Pym in order to avoid using the two es found in Poe 's name . 
 On May 5 , 1974 author and journalist Arthur Koestler published a letter from reader Nigel Parker in The Sunday Times of a striking coincidence between a scene in Poe 's novel and an actual event that happened decades later : In 1884 , the yacht <unk> sank , with four men cast adrift . They drew lots to decide which of them should be sacrificed as food for the other three , just as in Poe 's novel . The loser was a sailor named Richard Parker , coincidentally the same name as Poe 's fictional character . Parker 's shipmates , Tom Dudley and Edwin Stephens , were later tried for murder in a precedent @-@ setting common law trial , the renowned R v Dudley and Stephens . 
 In Paul Theroux 's travelogue The Old Patagonian Express ( 1979 ) , Theroux reads parts of The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket to Jorge Luis Borges . Theroux describes it in this book as being the " most terrifying " story he had ever read . 
 In Paul Auster 's City of Glass ( 1985 ) , the lead character Quinn has a revelation that makes him think of the discovery of the strange hieroglyphs at the end of Poe 's novel . 
 In a 1988 Young All @-@ Stars comic book written by Roy and Dann Thomas , Arthur Gordon Pym is a 19th @-@ century explorer who discovered the lost Arctic civilization of the alien <unk> . Pym goes on to become Jules Verne 's Captain Nemo , eventually sinking the RMS Titanic . This story also uses elements of Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton 's 1871 novel <unk> . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Yann Martel named a character in his Man Booker Prize @-@ winning novel Life of Pi ( 2001 ) after Poe 's fictional character , Richard Parker . Mat Johnson 's 2011 novel Pym is a satirical fantasy exploring racial politics in the United States , drawing its inspiration from The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket , as well as being modeled very closely on the original . 
 Funeral Doom band Ahab based their 2012 album The Giant on The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket . 
 = Frémont Emancipation = 
 The Frémont Emancipation was part of a military proclamation issued by Major General John C. Frémont ( 1813 – 1890 ) on August 30 , 1861 in St. Louis , Missouri during the early months of the American Civil War . The proclamation placed the state of Missouri under martial law and decreed that all property of those bearing arms in rebellion would be confiscated , including slaves , and that confiscated slaves would subsequently be declared free . It also imposed capital punishment for those in rebellion against the federal government . 
 Frémont , a career army officer , frontiersman and politician , was in command of the military Department of the West from July 1861 to October 1861 . Although Frémont claimed his proclamation was intended only as a means of deterring secessionists in Missouri , his policy had national repercussions , potentially setting a highly controversial precedent that the Civil War would be a war of liberation . 
 For President Abraham Lincoln the proclamation created a difficult situation , as he tried to balance the agendas of Radical Republicans who favored abolition and slave @-@ holding Unionists in the American border states whose support was essential in keeping the states of Missouri , Kentucky and Maryland in the Union . 
 Nationwide reaction to the proclamation was mixed . <unk> enthusiastically supported the measure while conservatives demanded Frémont 's removal . Seeking to reverse Frémont 's actions and maintain political balance , Lincoln eventually ordered Frémont to rescind the edict on September 11 , 1861 . Lincoln then sent various government officials to Missouri to build a case for Frémont 's removal founded on Frémont 's alleged incompetence rather than his abolitionist views . On these grounds , Lincoln sent an order on October 22 , 1861 , removing Frémont from command of the Department of the West . Although Lincoln opposed Frémont 's method of emancipation , the episode had a significant impact on Lincoln , shaping his opinions on the appropriate steps towards emancipation and eventually leading , sixteen months later , to Lincoln 's own Emancipation Proclamation . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Frémont = = = 
 Born in Savannah , Georgia in 1813 , John Charles Frémont would become one of the nation 's leading antislavery politicians in the 1850s . Frémont was granted a second lieutenant 's commission in the U.S. army 's Bureau of Topographical Engineers in 1838 , primarily through the support of Secretary of War Joel Poinsett . As a young army officer , Frémont took part in several exploratory expeditions of the American West in the 1840s . For his success in mapping a route across the Rocky Mountains to then Mexican California via the Oregon Trail , Frémont earned the nickname , " the Pathfinder " and attained the status of a national hero . During the Mexican @-@ American War ( 1846 – 1848 ) , Major Frémont took command of the Californian revolt of American settlers against Mexico and was appointed military governor of California in 1847 . Frémont 's independent actions ran at cross @-@ purposes with the senior U.S. army officer in California during the Mexican War — Stephen Watts Kearny . Frémont was arrested , brought to Washington , D.C. for a court @-@ martial and resigned from the army in 1848 . Returning to the Pacific coast , Frémont became one of the first senators from California when it was granted statehood in 1850 . In 1856 , Frémont became the first Presidential candidate of the new Republican Party which established a platform advocating the limitation of slavery to those states in which it already existed . Frémont won 33 percent of the popular vote , but lost to Democratic Party candidate James Buchanan . 
 At the onset of the Civil War in April 1861 , Frémont sought to resume his service in the Regular Army and was commissioned major general , becoming the third highest ranking general in the U.S. army ( according to date of appointment ) , just behind Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan . Frémont was placed in command of the Department of the West which included all states and territories between the Mississippi River and the Rockies as well as the state of Illinois and the western part of Kentucky . The department was headquartered in St. Louis , Missouri . Frémont arrived there and assumed command on July 25 , 1861 . His chief task was to establish control within the state of Missouri . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 At the commencement of the Civil War , Missouri was a deeply divided state . Missouri had chosen to remain in the Union , and initially maintained a policy of neutrality towards both the Union and the Confederacy . However , Missouri was also a state in which slavery was still legal , a factor which generated sympathy for the Confederacy and secession . The governor of Missouri at the start of the war , Claiborne Jackson , was in favor of secession and attempted to use the Missouri State Militia to resist the build @-@ up of Union forces in his state . 
 Before Frémont , two generals had previously served as head of the Department of the West during the first four months of the war . Brigadier General William S. Harney had taken a diplomatic approach in Missouri , attempting to respect Missouri 's neutrality through the Price @-@ Harney Truce , negotiated with Sterling Price , commander of the Missouri State Militia . The truce was unacceptable to many Unionists and particularly to President Lincoln , as continued neutrality in Missouri would result in the state 's refusal to supply men for the Union army . Harney was removed on May 30 and replaced with the hard @-@ line Radical Republican Brig. Gen. Nathaniel Lyon . Earlier , while still a subordinate of Harney 's , Lyon had raised tensions in Missouri to a fever @-@ pitch by acting independently and capturing a portion of the Missouri State Militia during the Camp Jackson Affair on May 10 , 1861 . Although the maneuver eliminated a threat to the St. Louis Arsenal , it also caused a riot in St. Louis . As commander of the Department of the West , Lyon met with Gov. Jackson and informed him that , " rather than concede to the State of Missouri for one single instant the right to dictate to my government in any matter ... I would see you ... and every man and woman and child in the State dead and buried . " After this , open warfare commenced between pro @-@ Confederate militia and Union forces in Missouri . Gov. Jackson fled St. Louis , and the Missouri State Militia was re @-@ organized to become the Missouri State Guard — a pro @-@ secession force under the command of Sterling Price and Governor @-@ in @-@ Exile Jackson . 
 By the time Frémont took command in St. Louis on July 25 , 1861 , Union forces under Lyon had fought in several engagements against the Missouri State Guard . On August 10 , a combined force of Missouri State Guard , Confederate States Army , and Arkansas Militia , consisting of about 11 @,@ 000 troops , closed in on Lyon 's Union force numbering approximately 5 @,@ 000 near Springfield , Missouri . During the ensuing Battle of Wilson 's Creek , Lyon was killed and the federal force routed . Pro @-@ secession sentiment surged throughout Missouri following the Battle of Wilson 's Creek . Estimates by Union army officials placed the number of armed secessionists in Missouri at roughly 60 @,@ 000 . Alarmed by the increasing turbulence , Frémont declared martial law in the state of Missouri on August 30 , 1861 . 
 = = Proclamation and reaction = = 
 Just before dawn on August 30 , Frémont finished penning his proclamation of martial law and read it to his wife and a trusted advisor , Edward Davis of Philadelphia . Davis warned that officials in Washington would never stand for such a sweeping edict . Frémont responded that he had been given full power to put down secession in Missouri and that , as a war measure , the proclamation was entirely warranted . 
 The most controversial passage of the proclamation , and the one with the greatest political consequences , was the following : 
 All persons who shall be taken with arms in their hands within these lines shall be tried by court @-@ martial , and , if found guilty , will be shot . The property , real and personal , of all persons in the State of Missouri who shall take up arms against the United States , and who shall be directly proven to have taken active part with their enemies in the field , is declared to be confiscated to the public use ; and their slaves , if any they have , are hereby declared free . 
 The two extreme measures described within this passage threatened to alienate Unionists in each of the border states . Drawing a line from Cape Girardeau , Missouri to Leavenworth , Kansas , Frémont declared capital punishment would be administered to any secessionists bearing arms north of that line . Further , the proclamation freed the slaves of any secessionists who took up arms against the government . Frémont issued his proclamation without consulting any authority in Missouri or Washington . 
 The proclamation freed very few slaves . First , and most prominently , two slaves belonging to an aide of the former Gov. Jackson , Frank Lewis and Hiram Reed , were given their manumission papers . This act received significant coverage by the St. Louis press . Frémont then issued papers to 21 other slaves . However , the greatest significance of the proclamation came in the form of political ramifications . The proclamation set a political precedent , over which there was tremendous disagreement , that the Civil War was a war against slavery . This threatened to tip the delicate political balance in border states . Missouri , Kentucky , and Maryland all might have been pushed towards secession if such a precedent had been backed by the federal government at the beginning of the war . 
 Unionists in Missouri were divided in their reaction . Radical Republicans , who favored abolition , were overjoyed . This included much of the St. Louis press . Frémont surrounded himself with men of this faction , and several Radical Republican politicians had come to St. Louis with him as aides and advisors . These included Illinois Congressman Owen Lovejoy ( brother of the antislavery journalist Elijah Lovejoy who had been murdered in 1837 by an anti @-@ abolitionist mob ) , Ohio Congressman John A. Gurley and Indiana Congressman John P.C. Shanks . All ardent abolitionists , these men encouraged and influenced Frémont 's proclamation . More moderate Unionists were troubled by Frémont 's proclamation and pro @-@ slavery conservatives were outraged . Most important , among the moderates in Missouri alienated by Frémont 's proclamation was the new governor of Missouri , Hamilton Rowan Gamble , whose authority Frémont had now superseded by declaring martial law . Feeling that Frémont had greatly overstepped his authority , Gamble began to work for Frémont 's removal . In neighboring Kentucky , there was widespread outrage . Although the proclamation pertained only to the state of Missouri , Kentuckians feared that a similar edict might be applied by Frémont to their state . Most slaves in Kentucky belonged to Unionists and threatening to free them could have pushed the state into the Confederacy . 
 = = Lincoln 's reaction and Frémont 's removal = = 
 President Lincoln learned of Frémont 's proclamation by reading it in the newspaper . Disturbed by Frémont 's actions , Lincoln felt that emancipation was " not within the range of military law or necessity " and that such powers rested only with the elected federal government . Lincoln also recognized the monumental political problem that such an edict posed to his efforts to keep the border states in the Union . He was particularly worried about reports he heard of the furor in Kentucky over the edict , writing , " I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game . " According to Lincoln in a letter to a supporter of Frémont , a unit of Kentucky militia fighting for the Union , upon hearing of Frémont 's proclamation , threw down their weapons and disbanded . Lincoln determined the proclamation could not be allowed to remain in force . However , to override the edict or to directly order Frémont to strike out or modify the paragraph had its own political dangers — such an act would outrage abolitionists throughout the North . Sensitive to the political pitfalls on all sides , Lincoln wrote to Frémont , " Allow me to therefore ask , that you will , as of your own motion , modify that paragraph ... " 
 Frémont wrote a reply to Lincoln 's request on September 8 , 1861 and sent it to Washington in the hands of his wife , Jessie Benton Frémont , who met with the President in the White House on September 10 . In the letter , Frémont stated that he knew the situation in Missouri better than the President and that he would not rescind the proclamation unless directly ordered . Angered , Lincoln wrote Frémont the next day , directly ordering him to modify the emancipation clause to conform with existing federal law — that only slaves themselves acting in armed rebellion could be confiscated and freed . 
 Lincoln could not allow Frémont 's insubordination to go unpunished . However , his dilemma again lay in politics . Removal of Frémont over the emancipation issue would infuriate radicals in Congress . Lincoln determined that if Frémont were to be removed , it would have to be for matters unrelated to the proclamation . He therefore sent Postmaster General Montgomery Blair and Quartermaster General Montgomery Meigs to Missouri to evaluate Frémont 's management of his department . On his return , Blair reported that a tremendous state of disorganization existed in Missouri and Frémont " seemed <unk> ... and is doing absolutely nothing . " When Adjutant General Lorenzo Thomas made his own inspection and reported to Lincoln that Frémont was , " wholly incompetent , " Lincoln decided to leak Thomas 's report to the press . Amidst the resulting public outrage against Frémont , Lincoln sent an order on October 22 , 1861 , removing him from command of the Department of the West . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 For Frémont , the personal repercussions of his proclamation were disastrous . His removal from command of the Western Department did irreparable damage to his reputation . Giving Frémont a second chance , Lincoln approved his appointment to command the strategically important Mountain Department , overseeing the mountainous region surrounding the Virginia and Kentucky border . Frémont 's forces were badly defeated , however , in the Battle of Cross Keys in Virginia on June 8 , 1862 . He eventually resigned from frustration at being passed over when Lincoln appointed Maj. Gen. John Pope to command of the Army of Virginia , and spent the rest of the war awaiting a new appointment which never came . 
 For Lincoln , the immediate effects of Frémont 's removal resulted in the furor the president had anticipated from northern abolitionists . Massachusetts Governor John Albion Andrew , a Radical Republican and abolitionist , wrote that Lincoln 's actions had a " chilling influence " on the antislavery movement . The outrage was only a short @-@ term effect , however , and soon subsided . 
 The most significant long @-@ term consequence of the Frémont Emancipation was the effect it had on Lincoln 's perceptions of emancipation and , specifically , how it should be accomplished . As historian Allen Guelzo describes , Lincoln became determined , after Frémont 's failed proclamation , that emancipation could not be a matter of martial law or some other temporary measure that would later be challenged in courts . To ensure its permanence , Lincoln felt , emancipation would have to be put into effect by the federal government in a manner that was incontrovertibly constitutional . Equally important , the timing of emancipation would need to be orchestrated carefully , so as not to interfere with the war effort . Although in 1861 , Lincoln had not yet espoused the idea of immediate emancipation and still hoped to work with state governments to accomplish gradual and perhaps even a compensated emancipation , the Frémont incident solidified Lincoln 's belief that emancipation was the President 's responsibility and could not be accomplished by scattered decrees from Union generals . This realization was one of several factors that led to Lincoln 's own Emancipation Proclamation in September 1862 . 
 = Democracy ( Judge Dredd storyline ) = 
 Democracy in the fictional future city of Mega @-@ City One has been a significant recurring theme in the Judge Dredd comic strip in 2000 AD . In particular , a number of stories published since 1986 have addressed the issue of the Judges ' dictatorial system of government , and efforts by the citizens to re @-@ establish democracy . Besides being a notable story arc in itself , the " Democracy " stories also had wider repercussions which led directly to the events depicted in the story " Necropolis " . 
 The stories include " America " , which is regularly voted by fans in polls as the best Dredd story ever written , and is Dredd creator John Wagner 's favourite Judge Dredd story . Editor David Bishop called it " the best Judge Dredd story ever written . " The first Democracy story , " Letter From a Democrat " , is co @-@ writer Alan Grant 's favourite Dredd story . 
 All of the stories in the " Democracy " arc were written by Wagner or under his direction . 
 = = Backstory = = 
 The Judge Dredd comic strip is mostly set in Mega @-@ City One in the 22nd century , on the east coast of the former United States . When President Robert L. Booth started the Third World War in 2070 ( see Atomic Wars ) , the Judges – until then no more than a police force with extraordinary powers – deposed Booth , overthrew the Constitution and seized control of all institutions of government . Disillusioned with the elected politicians who had caused so much destruction to their country , much of the American public supported this move at the time . For the next four decades America was a dictatorship . ( Mega @-@ City One and the other American mega @-@ cities became sovereign city @-@ states early during this period , and the US ceased to exist . ) Although the Judges were initially popular , the citizens soon grew to resent their new leaders as much as they had the old , until activists began calling for a return to democratic government . 
 Although the events of 2070 were established early in the Judge Dredd strip ( in 1978 ) , the issue of the Justice Department 's position in society was largely ignored for the first nine years of the strip 's history . The only other references to the political relationship between the Judges and the citizens were the occasional brief appearances of the elected mayor of Mega @-@ City One , who was shown to be subordinate to the unelected head of state : the chief judge . However , in 1986 and 1987 co @-@ writers John Wagner and Alan Grant finally addressed this topic seriously in two stories set in <unk> and <unk> . As Wagner later explained : 
 Grant recalls a more random genesis : 
 = = Early stories = = 
 = = = " Letter From a Democrat " : The martyrdom of Hester Hyman = = = 
 A seven @-@ page story in 2000 AD # 460 called " Letter From a Democrat " ( 1986 ) was the first story to show readers what life under the oppressive rule of the Judges actually meant . David Bishop has since described it as " a crucial story − the politicising of Dredd . " It was notable not only for that , but also for marking the beginning of a darker , more mature tone in the strip generally , and a tendency to show the character of Dredd in a harsher light than before . Although light @-@ hearted and humorous stories still continued unabated , " Letter " was followed by several other stories in a similar vein , more and more illustrating Dredd 's role as the agent of a fascist system . Only three weeks earlier the writers had introduced a new character , Judge Silver , as the new chief judge , who proved to be more hardline and right @-@ wing than his predecessor ( and who played a very significant role in the <unk> and Necropolis @-@ related stories which were to follow ) . 
 The story was told in the form of a letter from a wife and mother to her husband . The writer , Hester Hyman , had written the letter to explain why she had decided to sacrifice her life for the cause of democracy . While the text of the letter was shown in captions , the pictures first illustrated events described in the early part of the letter , and then showed the circumstances of her death at the hands of a squad of judges led by Judge Dredd . 
 The letter begins by describing how Hester and her family ( who in the story represent all citizens ) live in fear of the Judges , and have virtually no say over their lives . Even on a family picnic in the park they are threatened and intimidated by a judge when their young son accidentally throws a ball at him . Finally deciding that enough is enough , Hester reveals that she has decided to join a terrorist group and take over a television studio at gunpoint to announce their manifesto for reform to the whole city . 
 Surrounded by judges , the group refuses to surrender , reasoning that they will only be remembered if they are killed . Dredd duly obliges them . 
 The story ends with Dredd 's stern warning : " Democracy 's not for the people . " 
 The story is also ( less ) notable for the first appearance of the recurring comedy character Bishop Desmond Snodgrass in a cameo role . 
 = = = The Democratic March = = = 
 According to series artist John Higgins : " Letter From A Democrat actually moistened my eyes and , maybe because of that , John and Alan wrote Revolution for me to draw . For me this story is fully effective political satire . " 
 Revolution , published a year later , told of how Hester Hyman 's sacrifice had inspired millions to demonstrate for democracy . Political campaign groups , including Hester 's husband Gort Hyman , organised a massive protest march through the streets which would end at the Grand Hall of Justice . Chief Judge Silver did not want to ban the " Democratic March " outright , as such overt action would only play into the Democrats ' hands . Instead he ordered Dredd to undermine the March by covert action . When Dredd asked if his orders included breaking the law , Silver replied : " on this one you write the law . " This moment was itself a turning point in the history of the strip , as a fundamental feature of Dredd 's character had always been his utmost regard for , and obedience to , the law . His subsequent actions within the strip can be explained if Silver is regarded as invoking the fictional Security of the City Act , which had been mentioned in earlier stories and which allows judges to act outside the law if necessary to protect national security . Nevertheless , later stories would depict Dredd 's profound regret for the actions he took to thwart the March , and his disillusionment with the Judge System would have very significant consequences for the strip . 
 Dredd used various " dirty tricks " to undermine the March . He blackmailed the organisers by fabricating evidence against them and threatening to leak it to the press . He told Gort Hyman that if he did not withdraw he would conscript his children into the Academy of Law to be trained as cadet judges ( the Academy does not require parental consent ) . He arrested an elderly leader on a trumped @-@ up charge and made him stand all night without sleep or food , before releasing him minutes before the March was due to start , so that he would collapse from exhaustion along the way , undermining morale . Dredd ordered Weather Control to produce rain to reduce attendance . By the time the March started , numbers were well below the expected turnout . Undercover judges planted as agitators in the crowd first undermined morale by defeatist talk , and then incited violence by throwing things at uniformed judges , giving Dredd the excuse he needed to send in riot squads to break up the March and make arrests . The organisers were sentenced to significant terms of incarceration . Yet publicly , the Judges appeared to have the moral high ground . 
 = = Connection to " Necropolis " = = 
 = = = Departure of Alan Grant = = = 
 Although no more Democracy stories were published for another three years , Judge Dredd continued to be portrayed more and more as an uncompromising fascist , to a large extent due to the influence of co @-@ writer Alan Grant , who felt that " any attempt to soften Dredd destroys the character . " However , John Wagner preferred a more human approach to Dredd 's character , and their creative differences finally came to a head in the 26 @-@ part story " Oz " ( which was not a Democracy story ) . Grant later explained : 
 Grant stopped writing Dredd stories when " Oz " ended in 1988 ( in 2000 AD # 570 ) . 
 Now the strip 's sole writer , Wagner was free to return to the Democracy theme , this time with a more sympathetic depiction of Dredd 's character in which Dredd began to have misgivings about his role in suppressing the Democratic March . Dredd 's qualms would become the catalyst to take the whole Judge Dredd strip in a new direction . 
 Wagner used the Democracy theme to add depth to a separate story arc that he had already begun to develop in two sequels to " Oz " , which had introduced the character Judge Kraken . Tying together the hitherto unrelated Democracy and Kraken storylines in " Tale of the Dead Man " ( 1990 ) , Wagner laid the foundations for another 26 @-@ part epic , " Necropolis " , which in turn would reciprocate by changing the direction of the Democracy stories . 
 Interviewed in 2005 , Grant observed : " I rather think that stories like " Dead Man " ... could never have been written by the two of us together . " 
 = = = " A Letter to Judge Dredd " = = = 
 " A Letter to Judge Dredd " ( 1990 ) was a six @-@ page story written in the same style as " Letter From a Democrat " , which had begun the Democracy story arc four years earlier . Set in 2112 , the story was written from the perspective of a schoolboy writing a letter to Dredd as part of a school project about the Judge System . Despite his youthful naivety , the boy identified a multitude of problems with the dysfunctional system that Dredd stands for . Dredd was no doubt already aware of these problems to some extent , but the letter succinctly and starkly listed them at a time when Dredd was already growing disillusioned with the system due to his feelings of guilt in respect of the dubious and underhand methods he had used to subdue the Democratic March in <unk> . The boy also described a neighbour who had been struck on the head by a judge on the March , receiving permanent brain damage as a result , which caused him to have violent mood swings and hallucinations . On the way to post his letter , the boy was murdered by the neighbour during one of his violent episodes . Attending the crime scene , Dredd read the letter and felt indirectly responsible for the boy 's death . 
 " A Letter to Judge Dredd " was a significant story in its own right , as it brought Dredd 's doubts about his role to a head . But its main significance is as the prologue to the seven @-@ part story which immediately followed , " Tale of the Dead Man . " 
 = = = " Tale of the Dead Man " = = = 
 Kraken was a clone who shared Dredd 's DNA . He had been created by rogue judge Morton Judd as part of a clone army to overthrow the judges and conquer Mega @-@ City One ( though not to restore democracy ) . Of the survivors , Kraken alone was spared and was rehabilitated at the Academy of Law , with a view to having him one day replace Dredd when Dredd finally retired or died . Having graduated from the Academy , Kraken was due to take his Final Assessment , the test which cadets take to prove they are fit to become a full judge . Dredd was assigned as Kraken 's examiner . 
 In the course of the assessment ( which takes the form of the cadet performing the role of a street judge with full powers ) , Kraken killed a group of Democracy terrorists who had taken hostages . Shortly afterwards Judge Morphy , Dredd 's best friend and mentor ( who had supervised Dredd on his own Final Assessment ) , was killed on a routine vehicle stop . Furious , Dredd almost murdered one of the perpetrators , pulling back at the last moment when Kraken urged him to control himself . Despite Kraken 's impeccable performance , Dredd 's <unk> decision was to fail him , believing that " a leopard can 't change its spots . Not this one , anyway . " At the moment of announcing his verdict , Dredd tendered his resignation and requested permission to take the Long Walk , leaving the city forever . 
 During his preparations to leave the city , Dredd released every prisoner still in custody from the Democratic March . 
 = = = " Necropolis " = = = 
 Dredd 's resignation was a significant event in the build @-@ up to " Necropolis " ( besides being inherently momentous in its own right ) . Chief Judge Silver ordered a news blackout on Dredd 's resignation and then faked Kraken 's execution after <unk> sentence of death for Kraken 's crimes in the service of Judd . Reviving Kraken in secret , Silver overturned Dredd 's verdict on him and made him a full judge , but on the condition that he impersonated Dredd , so that nobody would know that Dredd had left . Silver believed that Dredd had become such a symbol of law and order to the citizens that news of his departure would provoke a <unk> . 
 Consequently , when the Sisters of Death arrived in Mega @-@ City One , they found Kraken there instead of Dredd . Finding Kraken to be vulnerable to manipulation by their psychic powers , as he was still torn by latent subconscious loyalty to his late master Judd , they were able to use him as their agent to free Judge Death from captivity and begin their conquest of the city . Had Dredd not resigned , they might not have found their task so easy . Dredd eventually returned to the city and defeated them . 
 As a result of the Necropolis disaster , Dredd realised that running away from his problems was no answer to them , and he rejoined the force . This time he confronted his doubts about the Judge System head on . 
 = = = Democracy Referendum = = = 
 Dredd persuaded new chief judge McGruder to permit the citizens to vote in a referendum on whether democratic government should be restored , or the existing Judge System should be retained . McGruder agreed because the Judges had lost much of their credibility in failing to protect the citizens from the Dark Judges during Necropolis : since the Judges ' argument in favour of their dictatorial rule rested largely on their allegedly unique ability to protect the city and preserve order ( which the last elected government had conspicuously failed to do ) , the Democrats ' calls for reform were consequently more compelling than ever . The Democracy Referendum was scheduled for <unk> , and was not popular among the rank @-@ and @-@ file judges , or even the senior ranks , since almost everybody predicted that the unpopular Judges would lose the vote by a landslide . So much did the Referendum depend on Dredd 's personal support that Judge Grice and other judges even tried to assassinate him to prevent the vote from going ahead . 
 Dredd himself had few doubts of the outcome . In an interview he pointed out that although there was room for reform , the basic idea of the Judge System was still for the best : " better the devil you know " , as the interviewer summarised it . Dredd 's ultimate argument was that the people had to decide whether , while being mugged , they would rather rely on him or on their elected representative . 
 In spite of Grice 's efforts the vote was held as planned , and to the surprise of everyone except Dredd , the Democrats actually lost . Democratic government had not existed for over forty years , and most citizens could not remember it . Most did not even bother to vote at all , and of those who did , the majority decided to retain the status quo . A two @-@ million @-@ strong mass of democrats marched on the Grand Hall , believing this to be a fix , but Dredd was able to both convince <unk> Dupre that the result was accurate and break her will in front of the others , pressuring her to state in public " you are the law . " Discredited and disheartened , mainstream support for democracy faded away . 
 = = After the Referendum = = 
 The Democracy storyline is generally regarded as having concluded with the Referendum story , which was published in 1991 . However , although the main Democracy campaign had indeed ended , repercussions continued in the strip for years afterwards . This took three forms . 
 First , various circumstances originating in " Necropolis " eventually led to the resignation of Chief Judge McGruder , whose rule had been marked by an unprecedented concentration of political power in her own hands . Responding to concerns about the way Mega @-@ City One was governed , new chief judge Volt instituted constitutional reforms in 2117 designed to restore a limited measure of democracy to Mega @-@ City politics . The Justice Department still retained supreme overall control , but some say over decisions at the municipal level was delegated to a new elected mayor and City Council . 
 Secondly , a trilogy published in 2001 – 2003 featured an assassin known as the " Chief Judge 's Man " , who murdered leading democracy activists , allegedly on the orders of Chief Judge Hershey . 
 Thirdly , although mainstream public support for popular sovereignty had dissipated , there were still diehard extremist groups who were willing to fight for the abolition of the Judge System . The most notorious of these was terrorist group Total War . 
 = = = Total War = = = 
 Total War first appeared in the 1990 story " America " ( before the Referendum story ) . Their methods involved assassinating judges in the street and other violent tactics . They attempted to blow up the Statue of Liberty , to draw attention to the fact that the concept of liberty had already been destroyed by the Judges . They failed to do so in that story , but succeeded later ( which was referred to in " America II " ) . 
 Total War has not been used often in the strip , but made a reappearance in two stories in 2004 , including a 12 @-@ part story of the same name , set in 2126 . In " Total War " the terrorists tried to blackmail the Judges into relinquishing power by detonating nuclear bombs in random locations around the city at regular intervals . Three bombs exploded , killing millions , before Dredd stopped them . The attempt was counter @-@ productive , since the public was appalled at the enormous loss of life which was supposedly caused for their benefit , and any remaining mainstream support for democracy dwindled still further . Also , once Total War 's leaders were apprehended , Dredd was able to identify its members by working from the top down , by arresting group leaders , then cell leaders , and finally foot soldiers . Any hope of restoring democratic government was most likely obliterated , but Total War would return in subsequent strips , first in the mutants storyline and then in Day of Chaos . 
 Dredd 's crackdown on the terrorist group was used as an opportunity in the 2005 story " Caught in the Act " , to satirise real @-@ life anti @-@ terrorist policies in Britain and America , such as incarceration without trial and withholding evidence from prisoners . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 " Tale of the Dead Man " has been reviewed as " A piece of super @-@ lean storytelling from Wagner ... This story has everything . Action , emotion , pathos , humour . Great characterisation ... And it contains my all @-@ time favourite action scene as Kraken takes out a gang of terrorists [ while ] unarmed and handcuffed ! How cool is that ? " 
 The Referendum was depicted in " Twilight 's Last Gleaming " ( 1991 ) , written by Garth Ennis . One reviewer credited this story with having " a brilliant understanding of society , " while another described it as " One of the darkest and most political of all Judge Dredd stories ... This is a chilling reminder of how we can easily lose our rights if we don ’ t stand up for them . " 
 Political cartoonist and writer Martin Rowson wrote : 
 Maybe we should see it as a dark satire on the failures of democracy , not as an ironic celebration of the triumphs of fascism ... [ T ] he greatest enemy of democracy is not fascism , but apathy . In the referendum , the Judges won with 68 % of all votes cast . But there was a turnout of only 35 % . In other words , the Judges won with the backing of only 23 @.@ 8 % of the possible electorate . And that is just 2 % less than the percentage of the American population which first elected Ronald Reagan in 1980 . 
 " Revolution " , the story featuring the Democratic March , was reviewed as follows : 
 [ T ] he most eye @-@ opening story was " Revolution " ... This is probably the first time Dredd was ever portrayed unambiguously as the bad guy ... It had repercussions in the strip for years to come , but for me it was comparing the incidents of this strip with the events in Tiananmen Square two years later which made me realise this was rather too close to reality for comfort . 
 = = = Main stories = = = 
 " Letter From a Democrat " ( written by John Wagner and Alan Grant , with art by John Higgins , in 2000 AD # 460 , 1986 ) 
 Death of Hester Hyman . 
 " Revolution " ( written by John Wagner and Alan Grant , with art by John Higgins , in 2000 AD # 531 – 533 , 1987 ) 
 The Democratic March . 
 " Politics " ( Written by Alan Grant , with art by Jeff Anderson , in 2000 AD # 656 , 1989 ) 
 Not described above . A democracy activist is kidnapped . 
 " A Letter to Judge Dredd " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Will Simpson , in 2000 AD # 661 , 1990 ) 
 Prologue to " Tale of the Dead Man . " 
 " Tale of the Dead Man " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Will Simpson and Jeff Anderson , in 2000 AD # 662 – 668 , 1990 ) 
 Story sets scene for " Necropolis " ( in # 674 – 699 ) . 
 See also The Dead Man ( Judge Dredd spin @-@ off in # 650 – 662 ) . 
 " Nightmares " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Steve Dillon , in 2000 AD # 702 – 706 , 1990 ) 
 Dredd makes the case for the Referendum on the future of the Judge System . 
 " The Devil You Know " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Jeff Anderson , in 2000 AD # 750 – 753 , 1991 ) 
 Judges try to kill Dredd to prevent the Referendum . 
 " Twilight 's Last Gleaming " ( written by Garth Ennis , with art by John Burns , in 2000 AD # 754 – 756 , 1991 ) 
 Referendum takes place and result announced . 
 = = = Later stories = = = 
 " The Decision " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Andrew Currie , in 2000 AD # 957 , 1995 ) 
 Chief judge announces limited political reforms . 
 " Sleaze " ( written by John Wagner , with art by John Burns , in Judge Dredd Megazine vol . 3 # 40 , 1998 ) 
 Not described above , but features the city council and mayor . 
 " Origins " ( written by John Wagner , with art by Carlos <unk> , in 2000 AD # 1505 – 1519 and 1529 – 1535 , 2006 – 07 ) 
 Not described above , but tells in flashbacks how the Judges ended democracy in America in 2070 . 
 = = = = Chief Judge 's Man stories = = = = 
 All written by John Wagner . 
 " Chief Judge ’ s Man " ( with art by Will Simpson , in 2000 AD # 1244 – 1247 , 2001 ) 
 " On The Chief Judge ’ s Service " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in 2000 AD # 1263 – 1266 , 2001 ) 
 " Revenge Of The Chief Judge ’ s Man " ( with art by John Burns , in 2000 AD # 1342 – 1349 , 2003 ) 
 = = = = Total War stories = = = = 
 All written by John Wagner . 
 " America " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in Judge Dredd Megazine vol . 1 # 1 – 7 , 1990 – 1991 ) 
 " America : Fading Of The Light " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in Judge Dredd Megazine vol . 3 # 20 – 25 , 1996 ) 
 " Terror " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in 2000 AD # 1392 – 1399 , 2004 ) 
 " Total War " ( with art by Henry Flint , in 2000 AD # 1408 – 1419 , 2004 ) 
 " Caught in the Act " ( with art by Phil <unk> and Len O ’ Grady , in 2000 AD # 1450 – 1451 , 2005 ) 
 " America III : Cadet " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in Judge Dredd Megazine # 250 – 252 , 2006 ) 
 " Hot Night in 95 " ( with art by Staz Johnson , in Judge Dredd Megazine # 307 – 308 and 310 , 2011 ) 
 " Terror Rising " ( with art by Colin MacNeil , in Judge Dredd Megazine # 365 – 367 , 2015 ) 
 = United States v. Drayton = 
 United States v. Drayton , 536 U.S. 194 ( 2002 ) , was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified the applicability of Fourth Amendment protections to searches and seizures that occur on buses , as well as the function of consent during searches by law enforcement . During a scheduled stop in Tallahassee , Florida , police officers boarded a Greyhound bus as part of a drug interdiction effort and interviewed passengers . After talking to two of the passengers and asking if they could " check [ their ] person " , officers discovered the two passengers had taped several packages of cocaine to their legs . At trial , the passengers argued that officers violated their Fourth Amendment rights against unreasonable searches and seizures because the police engaged in coercive behavior and never informed them that their participation in the drug interdiction efforts was voluntary . 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Anthony Kennedy held officers need not personally advise passengers of their right to refuse consent to a search on a bus . Furthermore , Justice Kennedy ruled that the search was not unreasonable because passengers were free to leave the bus and the individuals who were searched provided voluntary consent . Although some commentators have praised the Court 's ruling for encouraging citizens " to stand up for their rights " , others have criticized it for failing to reflect the realities of " real @-@ life confrontations occurring on the street " between citizens and law enforcement . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Fourth Amendment guidelines for arrests and temporary detentions = = = 
 The Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution applies to both arrests and temporary detentions of criminal suspects , both of which have been defined by the Supreme Court of the United States as " seizures " of a person . Before conducting an arrest , an officer must demonstrate probable cause that a suspect has engaged in criminal activity . However , police officers may also conduct temporary detentions when officers have reasonable , articulable suspicion that " criminal activity may be afoot " . These temporary detentions are also known as Terry stops , which take their name from the Supreme Court 's ruling in Terry v. Ohio . The level of suspicion that is required to conduct a temporary detention is lower than is necessary for probable cause and is “ considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence ” ; however officers cannot rely upon a mere " hunch " . 
 = = = The Fourth Amendment Consent to Search Doctrine = = = 
 Although the Fourth Amendment generally prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures , the Supreme Court of the United States has clarified that searches and seizures are not unreasonable when citizens consent to them . Scholars have traced the origins of the Consent to Search Doctrine as far back as the 1920s , but it was not until the 1970s that the Court clarified that searches are reasonable if , under a " totality of the circumstances " , the search is " voluntary " . Courts generally look to whether officers believed , at the time of the search , the individual being searched provided voluntary consent . Officers may also rely on the consent of someone who reasonably appears to have authority to consent to a police search , even if that person actually has no such authority . However , if officers obtain consent after engaging in an unconstitutional seizure , the consent is considered " tainted " and evidence obtained from such a search cannot be admitted during a subsequent criminal prosecution . 
 In <unk> v. Bustamonte , the United States Supreme Court established a framework for determining whether a suspect 's consent is voluntary . The Court noted that historically , when " determining whether a defendant 's will was overborne in a particular case , the Court has assessed the totality of all the surrounding circumstances — both the characteristics of the accused and the details of the interrogation " . Consequently , the Court held that <unk> should be determined " from the totality of all the circumstances " . The Court also clarified that judges should examine the " possibly vulnerable subjective state of the person who consents " to determine whether a suspect was coerced into consenting , and " account must be taken of subtly coercive police questions " . However , the Court also held that suspects may still give valid consent even if they do not know that that they can refuse to consent to the search . 
 = = = Fourth Amendment searches and seizures on buses = = = 
 The United States Supreme Court first clarified the applicability of the Fourth Amendment to searches and seizures on buses in the 1991 case Florida v. Bostick , where the Court held that police officers may approach bus passengers on a random basis and ask questions and request their consent to searches , " provided a reasonable person would understand that he or she is free to refuse " . The Court rejected the argument that police questioning on board a bus constitutes a per se seizure under the Fourth Amendment , and instead held that courts should use a " totality of the circumstances " test to determine whether a passenger would have felt " free to decline the officers ' requests or otherwise terminate the encounter " , or whether a passenger was free " to ignore the police presence and go about his business " . Additionally , the Court ruled that even if law enforcement officers have no basis for suspecting individuals are engaged in criminal activity , officers may still approach passengers , ask them questions , request identification , and request consent to search luggage , so long as officers do not coerce passengers to cooperate with their efforts . 
 = = Arrest and trial of Christopher Drayton and Clifton Brown , Jr . = = 
 On February 4 , 1999 , Christopher Drayton and Clifton Brown , Jr. were traveling on a Greyhound bus bound for Detroit , Michigan . When the bus made a planned stop in Tallahassee , Florida , passengers were told to get off the bus so it could be cleaned and refueled . After the passengers re @-@ boarded , the driver allowed Officers Blackburn , Hoover , and Lang of the Tallahassee Police Department to enter the bus " as part of a routine drug and weapons interdiction effort " . Although the officers displayed visible badges , they carried concealed weapons and were not in uniform . Upon entering the bus , Officer Hoover knelt on the driver 's seat , Officer Blackburn stood at the back of the bus , and Officer Land walked along the aisle of the bus to talk to passengers . He asked passengers which luggage was theirs and where they were going . None of the officers blocked the aisle or otherwise obstructed the exit , and passengers were free to leave while the officers conducted their investigation . However , the officers did not inform passengers of their right to refuse to cooperate with the investigation . 
 Drayton and Brown sat next to each other on the bus , Drayton by the aisle and Brown by the window . When Officer Lang arrived at their row , he identified himself as a police investigator and showed his badge . In a voice " just loud enough " to hear , he said he was a police officer " conducting bus interdiction [ sic ] , attempting to deter drugs and illegal weapons being transported on the bus " . When Lang asked Drayton and Brown if they had any luggage on the bus , they both pointed to the same green bag on the overhead luggage rack . Lang asked , " [ d ] o you mind if I check it ? " , and Brown replied , " [ g ] o ahead " . The officers inspected the bag and discovered no contraband inside . 
 Officer Lang observed that Drayton and Brown were wearing " heavy jackets and baggy pants " , despite warm weather that day . Lang suspected Brown and Drayton might have been using their baggy clothing to conceal weapons or drugs , so he asked Brown , " [ d ] o you mind if I check your person ? " Brown responded , " [ s ] ure " , leaned up in his seat , removed a cellular phone from his pocket , and opened his jacket . Lang patted down the outside of his clothing and felt small packages " similar to drug packages detected on other occasions " . Officer Lang then arrested Brown , handcuffed him , and Officer Hoover walked him off the bus . Lang then asked Drayton , " [ m ] ind if I check you ? " , to which Drayton responded " by lifting his hands about eight inches from his legs " . Lang detected similar objects during a pat down of Drayton 's legs , placed him under arrest , and escorted him off the bus . A further search determined that Brown had duct @-@ taped three bundles containing 483 grams of cocaine between several layers of boxer shorts , and Drayton had duct @-@ taped two bundles between several layers of boxer shorts containing 295 grams of cocaine . 
 = = = Trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida = = = 
 Drayton and Brown were charged with conspiring to distribute cocaine and possession with the intent to distribute cocaine , in violation of 21 U.S.C. § § 841 ( a ) ( 1 ) and 846 . At trial , Drayton and Brown filed a motion to suppress the cocaine on the grounds that their consent to the search of their clothing was invalid . The United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida denied their motion , finding that " the police conduct was not coercive and respondents ' consent to the search was voluntary " . The District Court found that officers did not block the exit of the bus , and it was " obvious " that Drayton and Brown were free to leave the bus . Consequently , the District Court concluded that the encounter was " cooperative " , and there was " nothing coercive " or " confrontational " about the encounter . 
 = = = Appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit = = = 
 The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed the decision of the District Court , holding that the cocaine should have been suppressed and that Drayton and Brown 's convictions should be reversed . The Eleventh Circuit stated that its holding was compelled by circuit precedent , which held that bus passengers do not feel free to decline police officers ' requests to search without " some positive indication that consent could have been refused " . Applying circuit precedent to the facts of the case , the Eleventh Circuit concluded that Drayton and Brown were not aware that they could have refused the search , and the evidence discovered through the pat down must be excluded at trial . The Eleventh Circuit emphasized that officers gave no reassurances that passengers were free to leave , and the fact that an officer stood next to the exit " might make a reasonable person feel less free to leave the bus " . On January 4 , 2002 , the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the decision of the Eleventh Circuit . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Anthony Kennedy held that Drayton and Brown were not seized and their consent to the search was voluntary . He explained that " [ l ] aw enforcement officers do not violate the Fourth Amendment 's prohibition of unreasonable seizures merely by approaching individuals on the street or in other public places and putting questions to them if they are willing to listen " . Additionally , Justice Kennedy emphasized that " [ i ] f a reasonable person would feel free to terminate the encounter , then he or she has not been seized " . Citing the Court 's analytic framework established in Florida v. Bostic , Justice Kennedy concluded that a reasonable person would have felt free to " leav [ e ] the bus or otherwise <unk> [ e ] the encounter " . Justice Kennedy noted that the officers did not brandish weapons , they did not make " intimidating movements " , they left the aisle clear , and they " spoke to passengers one by one and in a polite , quiet voice " . He noted that " [ i ] t is beyond question that had this encounter occurred on the street , it would be constitutional " , and the fact that the encounter occurred on a bus does not make it illegal . 
 Justice Kennedy rejected Drayton 's argument that that officers coerced passengers by showing their badges , noting that the sight of police officers should be a " cause for assurance , not discomfort " . Likewise , he rejected the argument that placing an officer near the door of the bus constituted a seizure , because the officer " did nothing to intimidate passengers " and " left the aisle clear " . Justice Kennedy also held that the nature of the encounter did not change after Brown was arrested , because " [ t ] he arrest of one person does not mean that everyone around him has been seized by police " . Rather , witnessing Brown 's arrest " should have put Drayton on notice of the consequences of continuing the encounter by answering the officers ' questions " . 
 Furthermore , Justice Kennedy held the searches were not unreasonable because both Drayton and Brown voluntarily consented to the <unk> search . He noted that police officers need not inform citizens of their right to refuse when conducting a search and that the Court has traditionally applied a " totality of the circumstances " test when determining whether a search is " unreasonable " . Because officers requested consent to search Drayton and Brown , Justice Kennedy concluded the search was consensual and voluntary . Justice Kennedy also mentioned in dicta that , absent consent , officers likely had reasonable suspicion to conduct a Terry stop . Consequently , Justice Kennedy ordered the case to be remanded to Eleventh Circuit for reconsideration in light of the Supreme Court 's decision . 
 = = = Dissenting opinion of Justice Souter = = = 
 Justice David Souter wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the cocaine should have been suppressed because Drayton and Brown would not have felt free to leave the bus and they likely were not aware that they could have refused consent to the search . He noted that " [ t ] he commonplace precautions of air travel have not , thus far , been justified for ground transportation " and that " no such conditions have been placed on passengers getting on trains or buses " . Additionally , Justice Souter argued that police officers " exercise power free from immediate check , and when the attention of several officers is brought to bear on one civilian the imbalance of immediate power is unmistakable " . He argued that this imbalance of power may rise to a " threatening " level , which " may <unk> a normal person 's ability to act freely , even in the absence of explicit commands or the formalities of detention " . 
 After analyzing the encounter between Drayton , Brown , and the police , Justice Souter concluded that the interdiction " was not a consensual exercise " . He argued that the manner in which the police conducted the interdiction created an " atmosphere of obligatory participation " . He concluded that Drayton and Brown were " pinned @-@ in by the officers " , and that " it was reasonable to suppose no passenger would tend to his own business until the officers were ready to let him " . Consequently , Justice Souter concluded that officers engaged in " threatening " behavior that constituted an unreasonable , non @-@ <unk> search and seizure . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 On remand , the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit issued a per curiam opinion affirming Drayton and Brown 's convictions . Five years after issuing its opinion in Drayton , the Supreme Court of the United States offered further clarification of the meaning of " coercion " in <unk> v. California . Writing for a unanimous Court , Justice Souter cited Bostick and Drayton to hold that coercion should be judged according to the experiences of a " reasonable person " in the situation . He wrote , " when a person has no desire to leave for reasons unrelated to the police presence , the coercive effect of the encounter can be measured better by asking whether a reasonable person would feel free to decline the officers ’ requests or otherwise terminate the encounter " . 
 = = = Interpretation by Circuit Courts of Appeals = = = 
 Some Circuit Courts have applied the Court 's ruling in Drayton to hold that citizens are not coerced when police officers approach individuals on the street and ask them questions . The District of Columbia Circuit , for example , wrote that " while the passengers in Drayton were questioned while inside a bus with an officer positioned near the exit ... the street encounter [ posed ] no physical impediment to [ the suspect ] ’ s freedom to walk away " . However , the Seventh Circuit has held that according to the Supreme Court 's ruling in Drayton , a suspect was unlawfully detained when police approached him in a dark alley and asked him questions . The Seventh Circuit described the encounter as " coercive " and distinguished it from the events that transpired in Drayton because " [ a ] <unk> are distinguishable from the sorts of open , populated spaces in which police questioning is typically deemed consensual " . The court noted that " ' a reasonable person may feel ... more secure in his or her decision not to cooperate with police on a bus than in other circumstances ' because ' many fellow passengers are present [ on a bus ] to witness officers ’ conduct ' " . 
 = = Analysis and commentary = = 
 In the years following the Court 's ruling in Drayton , scholars have offered a range of opinions about the case 's impact and significance . Some analysts have suggested that Drayton reflects a concern among members of the Court for " ensuring that individuals retain the power to stand up for their rights " . However , other scholars , such as Tracey Maclin , argue that Justice Kennedy improperly assumed that citizens will always feel free to refuse consent , and that many citizens cooperate with the police because of " fear of police reprisal if they don 't " . Criminal law scholar Janice Nadler commented that Justice Kennedy 's conclusions were products of " intuitive reflections on [ his and the other Justices ' ] own experience and about the imagined experience of other citizens " . Additionally , Ric Simmons criticized the Court 's ruling for failing to reflect the realities of " real @-@ life confrontations occurring on the street " between citizens and law enforcement . Other scholars , such as Thomas W. Hughes and Joshua Fitch , argued that the Court 's decision in Drayton would impact the balance between individual liberties and heightened national security interests in the wake of the September 11 attacks . 
 Jeremy R. <unk> criticized the Court 's ruling for failing to account for psychological pressures inherent in the " perceived legitimacy of the [ police 's ] authority " . <unk> argued that police should be required to inform citizens that consent is voluntary , and that this kind of " prophylactic warning would serve as a natural corollary to a Miranda warning mandated by the Fifth Amendment " . Likewise , Marissa Reich also argued that passengers feel significant " psychological pressures " to cooperate with police searches on buses , and police should therefore warn passengers that consent is voluntary . Joshua Fitch also criticized the Court for ignoring the impact of " racial disparagement " with respect to an individual 's ability to walk away from encounters with police . He argued that " [ g ] iven the historical treatment of black males by members of law enforcement , it is entirely possible that Drayton and Brown feared refusing the officers ' requests because they feared violent consequences " . Fitch also argued that police should provide warnings similar to Miranda warnings that " inform citizens of their right to refuse consent " , and that decisions like Drayton " consistently [ endorse ] rules that require citizens to fend for themselves when it comes to constitutional rights " . 
 = = = Departure from Bustamonte 's subjective framework = = = 
 Scholars have observed that Justice Kennedy 's majority opinion " embraced Bustamonte 's premise that when police request consent to search , the request itself carries the implication that an alternative of refusal exists " . Other scholars , such as Ric Simmons , have noted that Drayton reflects " the Court at the midpoint of this evolution , moving from a subjective binary test that focuses on whether or not the subject acted voluntarily , to a more nuanced objective test that focuses on the amount of compulsion used by the law enforcement officer " . Additionally , Matthew Phillips wrote that Drayton " illustrates the metamorphosis of the totality @-@ of @-@ the @-@ circumstances test into a purely objective test " because Justice Kennedy 's opinion " did not explicitly consider any subjective factors " with respect to whether Drayton and Brown felt they could deny consent when questioned by the police . Phillips suggested that the decision to abandon subjective factors could lead to " bizarre results " in cases , like this , where " circumstances of the search indicate at least some level of coercion " . 
 = New Jersey Route 48 = 
 Route 48 is an east – west state highway in Salem County in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It is a 4 @.@ 26 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 86 km ) route running from U.S. Route 130 ( US 130 ) and County Route 675 ( CR 675 ) in Penns Grove to US 40 in Carneys Point Township . It is known as East Main Street from US 130 to DuPont Road , and as the Harding Highway from DuPont Road to its terminus at US 40 . Route 48 is signed east – west , although it travels more northwest @-@ southeast throughout its route . It is a two @-@ lane , undivided road through its entire length that intersects with Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) and CR 551 . 
 The road was originally created as Route 18S , running from Penns Grove to Atlantic City , in 1923 , before becoming Route 48 in 1927 . In Penns Grove , the route ended at a ferry which crossed the Delaware River to Wilmington , Delaware , connecting with Delaware Route 48 ( DE 48 ) until the ferry service was terminated in 1951 , when the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened . US 40 was also designated to run along the entire length of the route between Penns Grove and Atlantic City . On two occasions , US 40 has been relocated off portions of Route 48 : once following a realignment to a ferry between New Castle , Delaware and Pennsville and again after the Delaware Memorial Bridge and New Jersey Turnpike opened in 1951 . Route 48 was designated onto its current alignment in 1953 , eliminating the concurrency it shared with US 40 from Carneys Point Township to Atlantic City . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 48 begins at a traffic light with US 130 and CR 675 in Penns Grove , heading to the southeast on Main Street , a two @-@ lane , undivided road . CR 675 continues west on Main Street past US 130 . The road passes through residential areas , intersecting with local roads before entering Carneys Point Township . In Carneys Point Township , Route 48 crosses Dupont Road , becoming Harding Highway , and passes by Penns Grove High School , located on the south side of the road . The road enters a more rural setting and intersects CR 601 at a signalized intersection . Shortly after CR 601 , the road comes to an interchange with I @-@ 295 . Route 48 continues southeast through a mix of woodland and farmland , intersecting CR 551 at a traffic light . Just past the CR 551 intersection , the road intersects CR 628 , passing by <unk> Lake before crossing over the New Jersey Turnpike . Route 48 continues southeast for about another mile , crossing Stumpy Road before ending at an intersection with US 40 . 
 = = History = = 
 The route was designated as Route 18S in 1923 , running from Penns Grove southeast to Atlantic City along what was known as the Harding Highway . US 40 was designated along the length of Route 18S , running east from a ferry dock in Penns Grove where the route crossed the Delaware River to Wilmington , Delaware to continue its journey west . The entire routing of Route 18S was designated Route 48 in the 1927 renumbering of New Jersey state highways , running concurrent with US 40 its entire length . Until the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened in 1951 , a ferry connected Route 48 to DE 48 in Wilmington . US 40 had used this ferry , but was eventually moved to a ferry that ran from New Castle , Delaware to Pennsville , with US 40 being rerouted to follow present @-@ day Route 49 , various local roads , and CR 551 to reach Route 48 and continue east along with that route . Following the completion of both the Delaware Memorial Bridge and the New Jersey Turnpike in 1951 , US 40 was routed off more of Route 48 onto a new alignment , joining the route at its current eastern terminus . In the 1953 renumbering of New Jersey state highways , Route 48 was designated onto its current alignment from US 130 to US 40 , with the rest of the route dropped in favor of the US 40 designation . The old alignment of Route 48 to the ferry terminal is now CR 675 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Salem County . 
 = Allen Craig = 
 Allen Thomas Craig ( born July 18 , 1984 ) is an American professional baseball first baseman and outfielder in the Boston Red Sox organization . He has played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the St. Louis Cardinals and Boston Red Sox . The Cardinals drafted him from the University of California , Berkeley , in 2006 , and he made his Major League debut with the Cardinals in 2010 . Besides the outfield and first base , he has appeared at every position except pitcher , catcher and shortstop . 
 Each season in the minor leagues from 2007 – 09 , Craig finished with a batting average of over .300 with at least 20 home runs . A .306 career hitter in MLB through 2013 , he increased his production with runners in scoring position ( RISP ) . In 2012 , he posted a .400 batting average with RISP . The next season , he raised that figure to .454 , the third @-@ highest average of all time . 
 Craig has appeared in two World Series and in both made history . In the 2011 World Series , he tied a record by collecting three hits that drove in the game @-@ winning run . In 2013 , he became the first player to score a game @-@ winning run on an obstruction call . 
 = = Early life and amateur career = = 
 Allen Craig was born in Mission Viejo , California , to Ron and Kim Craig and raised in Temecula , California . He has one younger sister named Kendal . His parents had moved to the Temecula Valley in the 1970s so that Mr. Craig could secure employment with the Rancho California Water District . In addition to relocating from Mission Viejo in Orange County to Temecula in Riverside County after Craig 's birth , the family shifted residences multiple times before finally settling in Temecula . 
 Craig 's father was an early volunteer to help build the baseball fields that became the Ronald Reagan Sports Complex near Temecula Valley High School in Temecula , California . As soon as he was able to swing a baseball bat , his parents entered him into the national Tee Ball division of Little League Baseball where his father coached and his mother served on the board of directors . While participating on the 14 @-@ and @-@ under USA Baseball team , he played games in Venezuela . 
 At Chaparral High School , Temecula , California , Craig was a two @-@ sport standout <unk> in baseball and basketball . As a senior in 2002 , Craig was recognized in both sports . He earned first team all @-@ league and all @-@ valley honors in basketball while setting a school record with 94 three @-@ pointers . In baseball , he was named All @-@ Valley Baseball Player of the Year . At the Riverside All @-@ Star Game , he earned the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) accolade . His .585 batting average and eight home runs helped energize Chaparral to the Southwest League title . That summer , Craig played for the USA Junior National team , batting .485 with 11 runs scored in their effort to earn a bronze medal at the International Baseball Federation ( IBAF ) World Junior Championship in Sherbrooke , Quebec . 
 After high school , Craig attended the University of California , Berkeley , and was a four @-@ year starter for the California Golden Bears baseball team at all four infield positions . Primarily playing shortstop as a freshman , he posted a .353 batting average with runners in scoring position ( RISP ) . He earned Pac @-@ 10 Player of the Week honors for February 4 – 10 , 2003 , after his 7 @-@ for @-@ 17 ( .412 ) effort with two doubles , a grand slam and five runs batted in ( RBI ) at San Francisco and versus Loyola Marymount . Applying more time at first base in his sophomore season , Craig batted .285 , led the team with 29 bases on balls ( BB ) and aggregated 19 multi @-@ hit games . He was an honorable mention for the Pac @-@ 10 all @-@ academic team . The next year , Craig started primarily in left field , batted .308 overall , and batted .338 with RISP . Against Washington State , March 22 – 24 , 2005 , he put together a 7 – 13 series ( .538 ) . One month later , on April 22 , Craig collected three hits in three at @-@ bats and two days later went 4 – 4 ; both games were against USC . Craig was an honorable mention for the All @-@ Pac Ten baseball team and again for the academic team . His career batting numbers at UC Berkeley included a .308 batting average , 27 home runs and 108 RBI . 
 During his off @-@ season playing time at UC Berkeley , Craig played two campaigns for the Alexandria Beetles ( Minnesota ) of the Northwoods League ( NWL ) , a collegiate summer baseball league . Craig spent most games at shortstop but also contributed in the outfield , at third base , and first base . His first season was in 2003 , after his freshman season at UC . He batted just .229 in 15 games in which his playing time was cut short by injury . He returned in 2005 after his junior season and put together a landmark NWL season that included a 21 @-@ game hitting streak . In 49 games , Craig hit .362 with 12 home runs , 17 doubles and 40 RBI . Craig was named first @-@ team shortstop for Baseball America 's 2005 College Summer All @-@ America team . 
 = = Draft and minor leagues = = 
 The Cardinals drafted Craig as a shortstop in the eighth round of the 2006 draft ( 256th overall ) and signed him for $ 15 @,@ 000 . However , he played just three games at shortstop with the State College Spikes in 2006 before spending the most games playing third base . As a hitter , Craig showed power at all levels of the Cardinal farm system , hitting 76 home runs in a three and one @-@ half season span between 2006 and 2010 that comprised the bulk of his minor league playing time . 
 In the Florida State League in 2006 , he posted an adjusted on @-@ base plus slugging at 26 % above league average . His 21 home runs in an environment of primarily humid air and large ballparks brought notice as one of the top minor league hitters . Baseball America ranked him as the Cardinals ' number @-@ 15 prospect following the season . Each season from 2007 through 2009 , Craig progressed from the high @-@ A level to AAA and participated between 119 and 129 games while hitting at least .304 with 22 home runs and 80 RBI . 
 Although for a time Craig appeared to play adequately at third base , his throwing motion raised questions whether he could play there in the Major Leagues as he was promoted through the minor leagues . With David Freese one step further up the Cardinals depth chart and having the better @-@ regarded glove , Craig was shifted more to the outfield in 2009 . He further increased his versatility by playing first base . Despite the defensive transitions , his hitting remained steady as he posted a .921 on @-@ base plus slugging percentage with the AAA Memphis Redbirds . His consistent hitting and increased positional coverage prompted Craig to be named Cardinals system Player of the Year . The club added him to their 40 @-@ man roster that November . 
 After making his Major League debut in April , 2010 , Craig spent significant time on the Cardinals roster . In addition , he amassed 83 games at Memphis , batting .320 with 14 home runs , 81 RBI and a <unk> slugging percentage . The next two seasons , he made 19 more appearances at Memphis , Springfield and Palm Beach , accumulating 20 hits in 69 at @-@ bats with four home runs and 14 RBI . 
 = = St. Louis Cardinals = = 
 = = = 2010 – 11 = = = 
 Allen Craig made the Cardinals big @-@ league club out of spring training in 2010 and appeared in his first MLB game on April 8 . He started in right field and went 0 – 4 at the plate against the Cincinnati Reds . Craig hit his first home run on July 19 off the Philadelphia Phillies ' Kyle Kendrick . His second home run came on August 22 in the Cardinals ' 9 – 0 drubbing of the San Francisco Giants ' Barry Zito . One month later , he hit his third home run in a 7 – 1 defeat of the Chicago Cubs on September 24 in support of Adam Wainwright 's bid for his first 20 @-@ win season . In 44 total games in 2010 , Craig saw 124 plate appearances ( PA ) , batted .246 , hit seven doubles and four home runs with 18 RBI . 
 By 2011 , it became apparent that Craig was able to hit major league pitching as well he had in the minor leagues . However , the situation was less than ideal for him to realize regular playing time . Lance Berkman , Matt Holliday , and Albert Pujols each already occupied corner positions first base , left field and right field – positions Craig was best suited to play . To get his bat in the lineup more , manager Tony La Russa began playing him at second base near the end of May . 
 In June , after batting .336 with 23 RBI in 107 at @-@ bats , he suffered a small knee cap fracture against the Houston Astros by running into the wall tracking a fly ball in right field . The team placed him on the disabled list ( DL ) with an expected intermission of about six weeks . The healing of the fracture stagnated throughout the season , however , and swelling persisted around the knee , slowing Craig 's rehabilitation . Nevertheless , he regularly strengthened the muscles around his patella and was cleared to play after passing a battery of medical tests . He also spent extra time warming up his knee before each game . After his return , Craig hit .290 in 35 games . He ended the regular season with a .315 batting average , 15 doubles , 11 home runs , 40 RBI , and a .555 slugging percentage in 75 games and 219 PA . 
 The Cardinals made the playoffs that year . Craig struggled in his first ten games covering 21 plate appearances against the Philadelphia Phillies in the National League Division Series ( NLDS ) and the Milwaukee Brewers in the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) , collecting just three hits in 17 at @-@ bats . However , he delivered the go @-@ ahead pinch @-@ hit single in Game 6 to send the Cardinals to the World Series . 
 In the World Series , Craig debuted in Game 1 by hitting a two @-@ out , go @-@ ahead pinch @-@ hit single off Texas Rangers ' pitcher Alexi Ogando 's fastball . The next night , La Russa again summoned Craig to pinch hit against Ogando . This time , he lined a 96 miles per hour ( 154 km / h ) fastball to right field to break a scoreless tie . On that single , he joined Dusty Rhodes , Del Unser and Hal McRae as the only players to collect pinch @-@ hit RBI in three consecutive postseason at bats . He also joined Duke Snider and Amos Otis as the only hitters with the go @-@ ahead hit in the sixth inning or later in consecutive World Series games . Further , Craig became the first player with two go @-@ ahead RBIs as a pinch @-@ hitter in World Series play . After hitting the go @-@ ahead home run in Game 7 , he caught the last out of the Series , helping to secure the Cardinals ' eleventh World Series championship . That home run tied a World Series record Kiki Cuyler and Hank Greenberg shared with three game @-@ winning RBI . For the series , Craig appeared in all seven games , collected five hits in 19 at @-@ bats ( .263 batting average ) , three home runs and five RBI for a <unk> slugging percentage . His totals in the 2011 postseason included <unk> slugging percentage and 1 @.@ 013 on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) . However , with his knee cap still not fully healed , Craig elected to have surgery to repair the fracture the following November . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 Despite his strong 2011 performance and World Series exploits , new manager Mike Matheny assigned Craig the role of utility player in the outset of 2012 , with the likes of veterans Carlos Beltrán , Berkman , and Holliday already stationed at first base and in the outfield corners . Further , Craig spent all of April on the disabled list ( DL ) recovering from knee surgery . However , when he returned to play May 1 , the Cardinals designated outfielder Erik Komatsu for assignment to make room , and Craig found a windfall of playing time with Berkman now on the DL . After hitting five home runs in a seven @-@ game stretch , injury quickly struck again when he pulled a hamstring in a game against the San Francisco Giants on May 18 and landed back on the 15 @-@ day DL . To that point , Craig made a convincing argument for forcing his way into the starting lineup with a combination of top prospect Matt Adams ' slumping and hitting .373 with a .424 on @-@ base percentage and <unk> slugging percentage in thirteen games . 
 Craig was back in action on June 1 , and three days later , his <unk> two @-@ run home run against the Mets allowed the Cardinals to end a five @-@ game losing streak with a 5 – 4 win . In a stretch from June 9 – 21 , he encountered a rare slump as he batted just <unk> with one home run in 11 games . However , Craig discovered that pitchers were throwing him more sliders . Over the next nine games through July 3 , he solved his opponents ' strategy , batting .364 with five HR and 15 RBI . His season total to that date included appearing in just 40 of the Cardinals ' 80 first games , taking 152 at @-@ bats . Nonetheless , he tied Holliday ( 296 at @-@ bats ) , catcher Yadier Molina ( 265 ) , and third baseman David Freese ( 276 ) with 13 HRs . He also carried a .322 batting average with 43 RBI . The RBI total ranked third in the NL since May 1 , even with the second DL stay . 
 Through September 16 , he showed that he was adept at hitting with runners in scoring position with a .355 batting average in his 197 career at @-@ bats . Craig fabricated consistency throughout the season , finishing with a .307 average , 22 HR and 92 RBI in 119 games . He ranked tenth in the NL in batting , seventh in slugging percentage ( <unk> ) and placed 19th in the Most Valuable Player award ( MVP ) balloting . He also led all major leaguers with a .400 batting average with runners in scoring position ( RISP ) . Despite two DL trips , Craig played 30 games in the outfield and led the team in starts at first base with 86 , while Berkman appeared in just 32 total games . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 With Berkman 's departure via free agency , Craig became the Cardinals ' primary first baseman . On March 8 , the club announced they had reached an agreement with him on a five @-@ year contract with a team option for a sixth season . The $ 31 million deal bought out his three future arbitration @-@ eligible years and first year of free agency . Craig would earn $ 13 million in the 2018 season if the Cardinals exercised their option . 
 In July , National League manager Bruce Bochy selected Craig to his first All @-@ Star Game at Citi Field in Queens , New York City , as a reserve first baseman . His first @-@ half performance included batting .333 with 10 home runs and 74 RBI . Both his RBI and hit totals ( 116 ) placed second in the NL . He became the fifth alumnus of the California Golden Bears to be named to an MLB All @-@ Star team . 
 With his team facing a 5 – 4 deficit , Craig belted the game @-@ winning grand slam against the division rival Reds on August 26 . The final outcome was 8 – 6 . It was his first career grand slam , boosting his totals to seven hits in ten bases @-@ loaded at @-@ bats to go with 20 RBI to that point in the season ( 14 for 31 , .452 batting average for his career ) . He was also batting .452 with runners in scoring position – again leading the Major Leagues – and it was the third @-@ highest of all time for a single season , after George Brett ( .469 , 1980 ) and Tony Gwynn ( .459 , 1997 ) . 
 A <unk> injury on September 4 on an infield hit against the Reds prevented him from appearing in a game for the rest of the regular season . At the time , he was third in the NL in RBI with 97 . He eventually finished eighth . Despite being shut down early , he led Cardinals in this category . St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch sportswriter Bernie Miklasz dubbed Craig " The <unk> " , " The RBI Machine " and " an RBI Monster . " He also finished eighth in batting average ( .315 ) . His final batting average with RISP – .454 – remained the Major @-@ League high and third @-@ highest all @-@ time . That figure surpassed Brian Jordan 's average of .422 in 1996 ( 62 of 147 ) as the team record . In spite of his success hitting with RISP , Baseball @-@ Reference.com rated his Wins Above Replacement ( WAR ) at 2 @.@ 2 and Fangraphs at 2 @.@ 6 . 
 Craig 's chances of returning to play before the end of the season depended on how far the Cardinals could extend their season in the playoffs . They qualified for the postseason by finishing with the best regular season record ( 97 – 65 ) in the National League . They kept winning through the playoffs , defeating the Pittsburgh Pirates in the NLDS and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the NLCS . Ready as a hitter in time for the World Series against the Boston Red Sox , Matheny at first excluded him from defense as the injury was not fully healed . Therefore , he served as the designated hitter ( DH ) at Fenway Park in Boston and a pinch hitter at Busch Stadium in St. Louis , a National League park where the DH is not normally played . 
 In Game 3 , Craig was part of an unusual , game @-@ ending , play . With the scored tied 4 – 4 in the bottom of the ninth , Cardinals center fielder Jon Jay hit a ground ball off pitcher Koji Uehara toward second baseman Dustin Pedroia , who threw the ball home to catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia to easily tag Yadier Molina out attempting to score . Saltalamacchia then threw the ball to Will Middlebrooks as Craig rounded third , but it sailed wide into left field for an error , and , at the same time , Middlebrooks tripped while reaching for the ball . Daniel Nava recovered the ball and threw it back to home plate long before Craig would have successfully scored . Due to being tripped , umpire Jim Joyce awarded Craig home plate when he called an obstruction on Middlebrooks , giving the Cardinals a 5 – 4 walk @-@ off victory . This is the first known such walk @-@ off victory in World Series history . However , the Cardinals lost the series to the Red Sox in six games . Craig batted 16 times and collected six hits for a .375 batting average . After the season , he finished 21st in the MVP balloting , but likely would have finished much higher had he not missed nearly a month of the season due to injury . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 With another free agent departure in Beltrán , Craig again shifted positions in 2014 , replacing him in right field . It also cleared the way for Matt Adams to assume first base . Craig started the season slowly , batting just .220 with a <unk> OPS in April . He batted .291 and raised his OPS to <unk> in May . 
 = = Boston Red Sox = = 
 On July 31 , 2014 , Craig was traded along with Joe Kelly to the Red Sox in exchange for John Lackey and prospect Corey Littrell . On May 9 , 2015 , the Red Sox optioned Craig to the Pawtucket Red Sox of the Class AAA International League ; since Craig had yet to accrue five years of service time , the Red Sox could option him to the minor leagues without his consent . On May 18 , they outrighted him to the minors , removing him from the 40 man roster . He was re @-@ added to the major league roster on September 1 . 
 = = Skills profile = = 
 While still in the minor leagues , Craig showed in little time that he could hit at all levels but he had no natural position . In spite of the challenge to categorize his defensive abilities , his versatility and athleticism has allowed him to play at all positions in the major leagues except pitcher , shortstop , and catcher . After an experiment at second base early in his Major League career , first base and the corners in the outfield emerged as the positions for which he was best suited . He played shortstop in amateur ball and third base in the minor leagues , but he was not well @-@ suited to play either position in the major leagues , due to the speed of the game . He posted a fielding percentage of just .927 in 246 minor league games at third base , considered a very low percentage . 
 According to former Cardinals player development executive Jeff <unk> and Memphis Redbirds manager Ron Warner , Craig 's arm , range and footwork proved problematic for third base . He improved his footwork well enough for the Texas League , but they still considered it insufficient for the major leagues because his movement to his left was inhibited , restricting his ability to start double plays . Further , with an inefficient , semi @-@ sidearm throwing motion that he could not resolve , Craig relied on his innate strength to compensate for time lost . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Bold : led National League 
 † : led all Major Leagues 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Allen Craig holds a degree in Social Welfare from the University of California @-@ Berkeley . When growing up , his favorite baseball player was Ken Griffey , Jr . He was also a fan of Cal Ripken , Jr . Craig attended high school with Brandon Snider , the grandson of Duke Snider , with whom he tied the World Series consecutive pinch hit mark . His sister , Kendal Craig , also graduated from Chaparral High School in Temecula and played softball . She attended California State University San Marcos in San Marcos , California . 
 On November 12 , 2011 , Craig married his long @-@ time girlfriend , Marie <unk> , who also is a graduate of Chaparral High School . The couple reside in their mutual hometown of Temecula , along with their daughter Eden and pet tortoise , <unk> . <unk> , whom he has had since a hatchling , gained notoriety and a cult following through a vicarious Twitter account and has since served as an informal mascot for the Cardinals . Craig 's favorite movies are Major League and Major League II . He still enjoys playing basketball and has also played golf since his father introduced him to the sport as a small child . 
 In May , 2014 , Craig partnered with fellow Cardinals outfielder Jon Jay for the Jay @-@ Craig Celebrity Bowl and the Flamingo Bowl in downtown St. Louis . The proceeds benefited Great Circle , a nonprofit organization that provides behavioral health services autism , educational challenges , emotional health , in @-@ home crisis intervention , foster care and adoption , adventure therapy and psychological trauma recovery . 
 = De Stem des Bloeds = 
 De Stem des Bloeds ( The Voice of Blood ) , also known as Njai Siti , is a 1930 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) . It was directed by Ph. Carli and starred Annie Krohn , Sylvain Boekebinder , Vally Lank , and Jan <unk> . The film follows a man and his mistress who reunite after their son and step @-@ daughter unwittingly fall in love . The black @-@ and @-@ white film , which may now be lost , was tinted different colours for certain scenes . It was released in early 1930 to commercial success , although critical opinion was mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Van Kempen is a supervisor at a tea plantation named <unk> in West Java . He keeps a mistress , or njai , named Siti . Together they have two children , Adolf and Annie . One day , van Kempen returns to the Netherlands , leaving Siti and their young mixed @-@ race children behind . In the Netherlands he marries a young widow and takes her daughter , Ervine , as his step @-@ daughter . Siti , meanwhile , lives with her uncle in a hut in the forest and prays fervently for van Kempen 's return , even asking for help from the local shaman ( <unk> ) . 
 Fifteen years later , after his wife dies , van Kempen and Ervine return to the Indies . He has been hired as a supervisor at another plantation , not far from his old place of work . He searches for Siti and the couple 's children , but none of his old coworkers know where they are . Unbeknownst to van Kempen , his children have been raised as natives and wear the traditional clothes , although they have also received a Western education . Adolf has become a hunter , while Annie stays at home with their mother . Frederick , the new manager at <unk> , has meanwhile fallen for Ervine and tries unsuccessfully to woo her . 
 Some time afterwards , as Ervine is wandering through the woods she stumbles upon a deer and , startled , faints . Adolf comes across her and brings her back to the plantation , where van Kempen recognises him and takes him on as a supervisor . Frederick , however , is jealous of Adolf and Ervine 's relationship and entices the workers at van Kempen 's plantation to go on strike until Adolf is fired . Although heartbroken , van Kempen must fire his son . 
 Adolf goes to Lampung , in Sumatra , to hunt elephants . Meanwhile , Frederick has begun wooing Annie , who rejects him as Ervine did before . When Adolf returns and hears of the supervisor 's actions , he fights Frederick and knocks him out . Ervine , meanwhile , has heard that her lover has returned and goes to the hut in the woods , nearly fainting after being caught in a downpour . Adolf sends a letter to van Kempen telling him where to find Ervine . The family are reunited . 
 = = Production = = 
 De Stem des Bloeds was directed by Ph. " Flip " Carli , a man of mixed Indonesian @-@ European descent who had previously made several documentaries . He targeted the film at Dutch audiences , which may account for the focus on native customs and farming ; such coverage was unusual for contemporary works of fiction , although documentaries had handled the subject before . His production house , which handled the film , was the Bandung @-@ based <unk> Carli ; some contemporary reviews erroneously gave the house 's name as Cosmos Film . 
 Production began in late 1929 or early 1930 , with scenes shot in West Java and Sumatra . De Stem Des <unk> starred Annie Krohn , Carli 's mixed @-@ race wife , as Annie as well as Sylvain Boekebinder ( van Kempen ) , Vally Lank , and Jan <unk> . The story was advertised as being adapted from the novel of the same name . 
 Like all contemporary films produced in the Indies , De Stem des Bloeds had low production values . The film was silent and in black @-@ and @-@ white ; the final production consisted of 3 @,@ 652 meters of film . The intertitles were in Dutch , which the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran notes that most viewers – those who were native or ethnic Chinese – were unable to read . In order to provide a semblance of colour , Carli tinted certain scenes entirely in one shade during post @-@ production ; for instance , a scene where farmers were gathering rice was tinted violet . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 De Stem des Bloeds was released in 1930 , seeing its Batavia ( now Jakarta ) premiere on 22 March of that year . By July it was being screened in Surabaya , East Java . It was reported to be a success , with native audiences filling the theatres in Batavia and Surabaya . 
 The film received mixed critical reception . An anonymous review in the Batavia @-@ based Doenia Film praised the film 's picture ( especially its colour ) and both Krohn and Boekebinder 's acting . A review in the Surabaya @-@ based De <unk> Courant likewise praised the film , stating that it " fascinates from beginning to end " and showed that even in the Indies a " grand " film could be made . However , the review criticised the censorship bureau 's failure to catch scenes of Frederick drinking alcohol , which the reviewer found " dangerous to the prestige [ of Dutchmen ] " considering the large native audiences . Kwee Tek Hoay , writing in Panorama , criticised the film extensively , writing that it seemed meant exclusively for Dutch audiences in the Netherlands , as those living in the Indies would be able to see it did not reflect reality and was in places illogical . He found the colouring one extension of this lack of logic , writing that a violet tinge indicated that the farmers were harvesting rice at sunset – something that never happened . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Carli went on to make two more films starring Krohn . The first , <unk> ( 1931 ) , was a romance set on the south coast of Java which had Krohn in the titular role . The second , Karina 's <unk> ( Karina 's Sacrifice ) , followed the following year ; this film saw Krohn play a mixed @-@ raced woman living at the palace in the Sultanate of Yogyakarta . Karina 's <unk> was a commercial failure and Carli left the Indies not long afterwards , moving to the Netherlands . He lived there until his death in 1972 . 
 Writing in 2009 , Biran suggests that De Stem des Bloeds was clearly written from an Indo point of view because of the positive roles of Indo children . He finds the film sympathetic to native culture , including the faithful njai . He notes with interest that , although in real life mixed @-@ race children were faced with a sense of disgust , in De Stem des Bloeds an Indo man is heroic enough to rescue a pure Dutch woman and fight with a Dutchman . 
 The film is likely lost . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = Cyclone Filao = 
 Cyclone Filao was a moderately intense tropical cyclone that caused widespread flooding in Mozambique in 1988 . First classified as a tropical depression north of Madagascar , the system moved southwest , crossing the northern part of the nation before entering the Mozambique Channel on February 27 , where it began to deepen . Later that day , the depression was upgraded into a moderate tropical storm . Two days later , Filao attained severe tropical storm intensity as it began to stall . On March 1 , the storm reached cyclone intensity just before turning west . Later that day , Filao attained peak intensity , with winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 954 mbar ( hPa ) ; 28 @.@ 17 inHg . Within 24 hours , however , the system moved ashore near Quelimane in Central Mozambique , and several hours later , Filao dissipated inland . 
 Cyclone Filao killed 100 people in Mozambique , primarily in rural areas . Damage was heaviest in Quelimane , where wind gusts reached 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) and rainfall totaled 104 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) . There , 57 people were killed and 7 @,@ 375 were left homeless . Elsewhere , the Pungwe River and Limpopo River experienced severe flooding , with the former sustaining its worst flood of the decade . Power and telephone services were also knocked out while a road that connected Mozambique to Zimbabwe was destroyed . In all , 5 @,@ 500 ha ( 14 @,@ 000 acres ) of crops were destroyed . Damage totaled to $ 10 million , including $ 1 @.@ 5 million in property damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On February 23 , Météo @-@ France 's office on the island of Réunion ( MFR ) started monitoring a tropical depression to the northeast of Madagascar . At this time , the depression developed a closed circulation , which received a rating of <unk> on the Dvorak Scale , a tool used to estimate a system 's intensity . Shortly thereafter , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) first classified the system , designating it as 14S . Following a slight increase in organization , the depression moved southwest and quickly crossed the tip of northern Madagascar . After weakening over land , the depression reentered the Mozambique channel near <unk> on February 25 . Based on a 3 @.@ 0 Dvorak classification , MFR upgraded the storm into a moderate tropical storm on February 27 ; the JTWC would follow suit later that day . 
 After reaching the 40th meridian , Filao turned south , which weakened a ridge . The ridge near the system began to re @-@ strengthen , causing Filao to move erratically , first west , and then northwest . The new position of the ridge provided highly favorable conditions aloft , resulting in a period of rapid deepening . By February 29 , MFR upgraded the storm into a severe tropical storm , while the JTWC estimated that Filao attained hurricane @-@ force . Early on March 1 , data from MFR indicated that Filao reached its peak intensity of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) and its minimum pressure of 954 mbar ( hPa ) ; 28 @.@ 17 inHg , in agreement with <unk> and <unk> from the Dvorak Technique . Subsequently , the JTWC reported that Cyclone Filao had attained winds equivalent to Category 2 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , with winds of 155 km / h ( 96 mph ) . Despite a decrease in satellite intensity estimates , Filao held on to this intensity until 1800 UTC , when the storm made landfall near Quelimane in Mozambique . Cyclone Filao quickly weakened over land ; both agencies suggest that the storm dissipated on March 2 over the <unk> Valley and embedded into the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to the weak nature of the storm while crossing Madagascar , damage was minor . After crossing Juan de Nova Island as a tropical depression on February 27 , winds of 54 km / h ( 34 mph ) and gusts of 87 kilometres per hour ( 54 mph ) were reported , along with a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 002 @.@ 3 millibars ( 29 @.@ 60 inHg ) at 0250 UTC . 
 Although the cyclone affected a sparsely populated region of Mozambique , Filao brought heavy rains . Peak storm totals included 103 @.@ 9 mm ( 4 @.@ 09 in ) in Quelimane and 51 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 03 in ) in Beira , both far greater than their March average . Winds of 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) and gusts of 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) were measured . Furthermore , a minimum pressure of 993 @.@ 9 mbar ( 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) was reported in Quelimane at 2300 UTC on March 1 . 
 The Zambezia Province , where Quelimane is located , sustained the worst damage from the cyclone . Throughout Quelimane , 57 fatalities were reported and 800 homes were damaged . Eleven people were wounded , 7 @,@ 375 persons were rendered homeless , 2 @,@ 240 buildings were damaged , of which 359 were completely destroyed . Throughout the city , power was knocked out and telephone service was cut . 
 In the <unk> Province , 400 ha ( 990 acres ) of rice were lost and thousands of coconut trees were downed by the storm . Throughout the district , some schools were damaged while 800 homes were destroyed . Within the province of Sofala , 14 @,@ 395 ha ( 35 @,@ 570 acres ) of harvest were destroyed , 28 @,@ 174 people were rendered homeless , and 1 @,@ 389 buildings were destroyed . Elsewhere , many rivers along the southern and central part of the nation were flooded ; consequently ; 5 @,@ 500 ha ( 14 @,@ 000 acres ) of crops were destroyed . The Pungwe River experienced its worst flood of the 1980s , but the worst flooding took place along the Limpopo River . Near the Pungwe River , a road that connected Mozambique to Zimbabwe was destroyed . Many nearby homes and fields were destroyed , forcing numerous families to seek shelter . Throughout the nation of Mozambique , large portions of the maize , potatoes , tomatoes , cucumber , and pumpkin crops were washed away due to flooding . 
 Overall , the storm brought considerable damage to the nation ; it was also the first storm to affect the nation since Tropical Storm Domoina in 1984 . Damage totaled to $ 10 million ( 1988 USD ) . Property damage alone totaled to $ 1 @.@ 5 million , just under $ 1 million of which came from buildings . Moreover , insured losses from the storm totaled $ 1 million . Even though the death toll was initially believed to be 57 ; by March 14 , this number had increased to the final death toll of 100 after additional information was received from remote areas of the country . About 90 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the system . 
 = Hampden Park = 
 Hampden Park ( often referred to as Hampden ) is a football stadium in the Mount Florida area of Glasgow , Scotland . The 51 @,@ 866 @-@ capacity venue serves as the national stadium of football in Scotland . It is the normal home venue of the Scotland national football team and amateur Scottish league club Queen 's Park F.C. and regularly hosts the latter stages of the Scottish Cup and Scottish League Cup competitions . It is also used for music concerts and other sporting events , such as when it was reconfigured as a athletics stadium for the 2014 Commonwealth Games . 
 There were two 19th century stadia called Hampden Park , built on different sites . A stadium on the present site was first opened on 31 October 1903 . Hampden was the biggest stadium in the world when it was opened , with a capacity in excess of 100 @,@ 000 . This was increased further between 1927 and 1937 , reaching a peak of 150 @,@ 000 . The record attendance of 149 @,@ 415 , for a Scotland v England match in 1937 , is the European record for an international football match . Tighter safety regulations meant that the capacity was reduced to 81 @,@ 000 in 1977 . The stadium has been fully renovated since then , with the most recent work being completed in 1999 . 
 The stadium houses the offices of the Scottish Football Association ( SFA ) and Scottish Professional Football League ( SPFL ) . Hampden has hosted prestigious sporting events , including three Champions League finals , two Cup Winners ' Cup finals and a UEFA Cup final . Hampden is a UEFA category four stadium and it is served by the nearby Mount Florida and King 's Park railway stations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Three Hampdens = = = 
 Queen 's Park , the oldest club in Scottish football , have played at a venue called Hampden Park since October 1873 . The first Hampden Park was overlooked by a nearby terrace named after Englishman John Hampden , who fought for the <unk> in the English Civil War . Queen 's Park played at the first Hampden Park for 10 years beginning with a Scottish Cup tie on 25 October 1873 . The ground hosted the first Scottish Cup Final , in 1874 , and a Scotland v England match in 1878 . 
 The club moved to the second Hampden Park , 150 yards from the original , because the Cathcart District Railway planned a new line through the site of the ground 's western terrace . A lawn bowling club at the junction of Queen 's Drive and Cathcart Road marks the site of the first Hampden . The second Hampden Park opened in October 1884 . It became a regular home to the Scottish Cup Final , but Celtic Park shared some of the big matches including the Scotland v England fixture in 1894 . 
 In the late 1890s , Queen 's Park requested more land for development of the second Hampden Park . This was refused by the landlords , which led to the club seeking a new site . Henry Erskine Gordon agreed to sell 12 acres of land off Somerville Drive to Queen 's Park in November 1899 . James Miller designed twin grandstands along the south side of the ground with a pavilion wedged in between . The natural slopes were shaped to form banks of terracing , designed by Archibald Leitch . Construction of the new ground took over three years to complete ; during construction , a disaster occurred at Ibrox in which part of the wooden terraces collapsed . In response , the terraces at Hampden were firmly set in the earthwork and innovative techniques were used to control spectators . 
 Third Lanark A.C. took over the second Hampden Park in 1903 and renamed it Cathkin Park . The club rebuilt the ground from scratch due to a failure to agree a fee for the whole stadium . Third Lanark went out of business in 1967 and Cathkin Park is now a public park with much of the original terracing still evident . 
 Hampden Park was the biggest stadium in the world from its opening in 1903 until it was surpassed by the Maracanã in 1950 . Along with Celtic Park and Ibrox , the city of Glasgow possessed the three largest football stadia in the world at the time Hampden opened . In the stadium 's first match , on 31 October 1903 , Queen 's Park defeated Celtic 1 – 0 in the Scottish league . The first Scottish Cup Final played at the ground was an Old Firm match in 1904 , attracting a record Scottish crowd of 64 @,@ 672 . The first Scotland v England match at the ground was played in April 1906 with 102 @,@ 741 people in attendance , which established Hampden as the primary home of the Scotland team . 
 = = = Record attendances = = = 
 Attendances continued to increase during the remainder of the 1900s , as 121 @,@ 452 saw the 1908 Scotland v England match . The two Old Firm matches played for the 1909 Scottish Cup Final attracted a total of 131 @,@ 000 . After the second match there was a riot because there was confusion over what would happen next when the second match also ended in a draw . The fans believed that the replay would be played to a conclusion and demanded that a period of extra time be played . The Scottish Cup trophy was withheld as Hampden was not in a fit condition to host a second replay . In response to the riot , the Scottish Football Association decided not to use Hampden as the Scottish Cup Final venue until after the First World War . 
 Queen 's Park conducted extensive ground improvements after the 1909 riot . A new world record of 127 @,@ 307 were in attendance to see Scotland play England in 1912 . A fire in 1914 destroyed the pavilion , which was replaced by a four @-@ storey structure with a press box on the roof . The Scottish Cup Final returned to Hampden in 1920 , when a large crowd of 95 @,@ 000 saw Kilmarnock win the cup against Albion Rovers . Record crowds attended the 1925 Scottish Cup Final , a 5 – 0 win for Celtic against Rangers , and the 1927 Scotland v England match , England 's first win in the stadium . Hampden became the sole venue of the Scottish Cup Final after 1925 except in the 1990s when it was being renovated . Queen 's Park purchased more land in 1923 to bring the total to 33 acres . 25 @,@ 000 places were added to the terraces and rigid crush barriers were installed in 1927 . 
 World record crowds attended Scotland matches against England in 1931 and 1933 . In 1933 , Austria , who had beaten Scotland 5 – 0 in Vienna in 1931 , became the first foreign national side to visit Hampden Park . Further ground improvements increased the official capacity of the ground to 183 @,@ 388 in 1937 , but the SFA were only allowed to issue 150 @,@ 000 tickets for games . The 1937 Scotland v England match had an official attendance of 149 @,@ 415 , but at least 20 @,@ 000 more people entered the ground without tickets . A week later the 1937 Scottish Cup Final between Celtic and Aberdeen drew an official crowd of 147 @,@ 365 , with 20 @,@ 000 more people locked outside . 
 = = = Wartime = = = 
 During the Second World War , matches at heavily @-@ attended grounds were initially prohibited due to the fear of aerial bombing by the Luftwaffe . Scottish national league and cup competitions were suspended for the duration of the war , but regional league and cup competitions were established in their place . Attendance was initially restricted to 50 percent of capacity ; therefore , when 75 @,@ 000 attended a wartime cup final in May 1940 , it was the maximum permitted . The <unk> , a forerunner of the Home Guard , set up a command post at Lesser Hampden in 1940 . A government official presented an order demanding that both the Hampden and Lesser Hampden pitches be ploughed and used to plant vegetables , but the Queen 's Park committee chose to ignore the order and the government did not pursue it . Wartime internationals were played at Hampden , and 91 @,@ 000 saw Scotland beat England 5 – 4 on 18 April 1942 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After the Second World War ended in 1945 , Hampden started to host Scotland matches more frequently . Before then , Hampden had only hosted 15 matches against England and one match each against Austria and Czechoslovakia . During the post @-@ war attendance boom , Hampden was the only stadium big enough to host the crowds who wanted to see the team . Matches that would have ordinarily attracted a crowd of 40 @,@ 000 were being attended by nearly 100 @,@ 000 . The Hampden fixture list was also expanded by the new Scottish League Cup competition . In 1947 , Rangers defeated Aberdeen in the first League Cup Final . 
 A fire on 25 December 1945 destroyed the stadium press box and damaged offices . The press box was replaced with a plainer two @-@ storey structure that overhung the pitch . The capacity of the ground was cut to 135 @,@ 000 following the Burnden Park disaster in Bolton . 
 The re @-@ entry of the Home Nations into FIFA in 1947 was marked by a match between a Great Britain and a Rest of Europe select on 10 May 1947 . Great Britain won 6 – 1 and 130 @,@ 000 people attended . Unusually , a league match between Third Lanark and Hibernian was played immediately afterwards at Hampden because Cathkin Park was undergoing repair work . The first FIFA World Cup qualification match played at Hampden was a 2 – 0 win for Scotland against Wales on 9 November 1949 ; this match was also part of the 1950 British Home Championship . The win appeared to guarantee Scotland qualification for the 1950 FIFA World Cup because the top two finishers in the Championship were offered places in the tournament , but the SFA decreed that they would only send a team if they were British champions . Scotland only needed a draw against England at Hampden to meet that condition but lost 1 – 0 . 
 The Coronation Cup , a competition to mark the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II , was held in Glasgow during May 1953 . Four major clubs from each of Scotland and England were invited , with the Old Firm clubs playing their matches at Hampden . Celtic and Hibernian progressed to the final , and a crowd of 117 @,@ 060 saw Celtic win 2 – 0 . 
 Scotland hosted the Magical Magyars of Hungary in December 1954 in front of 113 @,@ 506 fans . The Scots put up a good fight against one of the most outstanding teams in the world at the time , but eventually lost 4 – 2 . Scotland qualified for the 1958 FIFA World Cup by defeating Spain , including Luis Suarez , <unk> Kubala and Alfredo Di Stéfano , at Hampden . 
 = = = 1960s and 1970s = = = 
 Hampden hosted the 1960 European Cup Final ; Real Madrid defeated 7 – 3 Eintracht Frankfurt with 130 @,@ 000 people in attendance . Floodlights were installed at Hampden in 1961 and were inaugurated with a friendly match between Eintracht Frankfurt and Rangers . The ground then also hosted the 1962 and 1966 finals of the European Cup Winners ' Cup . The attendances for each of these finals was less than 50 @,@ 000 , and the SFA did not offer to host another European final until the 1976 European Cup Final , in which Bayern Munich defeated St Etienne . Until 1987 , Hampden used square goalposts . St Etienne believed that two of their efforts which hit the square crossbar and rebounded into play would have resulted in goals if it had been round . 
 After Celtic won the 1967 European Cup Final , the home leg of their Intercontinental Cup tie against Racing Club was held at Hampden . Celtic won 1 – 0 at Hampden , but lost the tie after a play @-@ off in Montevideo . In 1970 , Celtic played in the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup against English league champions , Leeds United . Celtic chose to move their home leg of the tie from their Celtic Park home to Hampden , which had a far greater capacity . A crowd of 136 @,@ 505 , a record for any match in UEFA competition , saw Celtic win 2 – 1 ( 3 – 1 on aggregate ) to advance to the 1970 European Cup Final . Celtic also played European Cup ties against Ajax and Rosenborg at Hampden during the 1970s . 
 A fire was deliberately started in the south stand in October 1968 , destroying offices , 1 @,@ 400 seats and one of the team dressing rooms . The fire caused the 1968 – 69 Scottish League Cup Final to be postponed until April . By 1970 Hampden was starting to age as a stadium . Wembley had been revamped for the 1966 World Cup , while other major stadia were being constructed for tournaments . Public safety was emphasized after the Ibrox disaster of January 1971 , when 66 spectators were crushed to death . A benefit match was played at Hampden , while the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 compelled stadium authorities to obtain licences from local officials , impose crowd segregation and restrict attendances . Pittodrie and Ibrox were converted into all @-@ seater stadiums , while Hampden 's capacity was reduced to 81 @,@ 000 . 
 Scotland secured qualification for the 1974 FIFA World Cup at Hampden , with a 2 – 1 victory over Czechoslovakia . Kenny Dalglish scored the winning goal against England in 1976 by <unk> Ray Clemence . In 1977 , Scotland again won against Czechoslovakia to move towards qualification for the 1978 FIFA World Cup . Scotland played a friendly match against world champions Argentina in 1979 ; the talented , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Diego Maradona scored a goal in a 3 – 1 win for the visitors . 
 = = = Redevelopment = = = 
 During the late 1970s , it became apparent that the facilities at Hampden were in need of renewal . As an amateur club , Queen 's Park could not possibly fund the works , while Glasgow District Council withdrew funding and the UK Government decided not to fund it either . Queen 's Park considered selling Hampden , but a public appeal and minor repair work kept Hampden open during the 1980s . The riot after the 1980 Scottish Cup Final prompted reforms , as alcohol was banned from football stadia in Scotland . 
 The first phase of the redevelopment involved the demolition of the North Stand , the concreting of all terraces and the building a block of turnstiles around the upper section of the East Terrace . This work , begun in October 1981 and completed in 1986 , reduced the capacity to 74 @,@ 370 and cost £ 3 million . A second phase had been planned to begin in 1988 , but the release of the Taylor Report caused the plans to be redrawn and the proposed costs escalated to £ 25 million . Scotland hosted the 1989 FIFA Under @-@ 16 World Cup , with the Scots contesting the final against Saudi Arabia at Hampden . 
 After the cancellation of the annual Scotland v England fixture in 1989 , questions were raised as to whether Scottish football required a separate national stadium . Rangers proposed Ibrox as an alternative venue , while Murrayfield was about to be redeveloped without public funding . None of these arguments impressed the National Stadium committee , which consisted of the SFA , Scottish Football League and Queen 's Park . The West Terrace was converted to seating in 1991 for only £ 700 @,@ 000 , but this left two terraces and therefore disqualified Hampden from hosting FIFA World Cup qualification matches . 
 The UK Government eventually provided a grant of £ 3 @.@ 5 million in 1992 , which allowed work to begin on a £ 12 million project to convert Hampden into an all @-@ seater stadium . The last match played in front of the sloping terraces was the 1992 Scottish League Cup Final . Within a year , the east and west ends of the ground had been replaced and the partially rebuilt Hampden was re @-@ opened for a friendly match between Scotland and Netherlands on 23 March 1994 . It was then also used for the later stages of the 1993 – 94 Scottish Cup competition . As the capacity of the old South Stand had been limited to 4 @,@ 500 , the total capacity of Hampden had been reduced to approximately 37 @,@ 000 . With Celtic Park also undergoing extensive redevelopment to become all @-@ seater , Celtic spent the 1994 – 95 season groundsharing at Hampden , at a cost of £ 500 @,@ 000 rent . 
 The final stage of the renovation began in November 1997 , costing £ 59 million . There was a cost overrun and a fraud squad investigated alleged financial irregularities . Queen 's Park retained ownership of the ground but the renovation was funded by the National Lottery . The South Stand was replaced and the stadium was re @-@ opened for the 1999 Scottish Cup Final . The ground now has a capacity of 51 @,@ 866 . 
 Real Madrid were again victorious when Hampden Park hosted the 2002 UEFA Champions League Final , defeating Bayer Leverkusen , with Zinedine Zidane scoring the winning goal with a left @-@ foot volley . Hampden has since hosted the 2007 UEFA Cup Final and was one of the venues for football at the 2012 Summer Olympics . One of the 2012 Olympics matches was delayed after the North Korean team protested against the flag of South Korea being used to represent their players . Later in 2012 , a Scotland women 's national football team game was played at Hampden for the first time , when it hosted the first leg of a European Championship qualifying playoff against Spain . 
 Hampden was temporarily converted into an athletics stadium for the 2014 Commonwealth Games . It hosted its last international game before the conversion work on 15 November 2013 and Queen 's Park are playing their home games at the Excelsior Stadium in Airdrie . Due to the works being carried out at the Olympic Stadium , the 2014 London Grand Prix was by hosted by Hampden . The conversion works involved the removal of eight rows of seating , which reduced the capacity to 44 @,@ 000 . Hampden was converted back into a football stadium after the Commonwealth Games . 
 In September 2014 , Hampden was one of 13 venues chosen to host matches in the UEFA Euro 2020 tournament . 
 = = Hampden Roar = = 
 The football match crowd at Hampden were renowned for creating the Hampden Roar and trying to terrify opposing teams . The stadium 's capacity exceeded 100 @,@ 000 from the early 1900s until the 1980s and the Roar could be heard whenever Scotland scored an important goal . After the renovation of the stadium and the reduced capacities , the roar has become more muted . 
 The Hampden Roar was first noticed in a game against England in 1929 . Scotland , who had played the second half with ten players due to an injury to Alex Jackson , equalised in the final minute with a goal from Alec Cheyne direct from a corner kick . The roar that followed the goal was so loud that Jackson , who was a mile away in the Glasgow Victoria Infirmary , could tell that Scotland had scored . 
 The phrase Hampden Roar is also used as rhyming slang . People from Glasgow may ask , " What 's the Hampden ? " , by which they mean " What is the score ? " or " How are you ? " . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 Hampden is an all @-@ seated bowl stadium , although the ground is split into four geographic sections , officially known as the North , East , South and West Stands . Due to the dominance of the Old Firm within Scottish football and their regular qualification for cup matches played at Hampden , the East and West stands are commonly known as the Celtic and Rangers ends . The East Stand has 12 @,@ 800 seats on a single tier of 53 rows . The two end stands are up to 140 metres away from the pitch , due to Hampden retaining its bowl shape after it was redeveloped . This distance is almost as great as if Hampden included an athletics track , although the distance between the pitch and the two side stands is more comparable to a normal football stadium . 
 The South Stand is the main stand of the stadium , as it holds the technical areas , dressing rooms , indoor warm @-@ up area , executive boxes , lounges and media facilities . It has been sponsored by BT Scotland since 1998 . The South Stand is also the only part of the stadium split into two tiers , although there is also a small gallery above the North Stand that has 290 seats and access to lounges . The North Stand accommodates 9 @,@ 100 spectators in 46 rows . The total capacity of the stadium is 51 @,@ 866 . The capacity was temporarily reduced to 44 @,@ 000 for the 2014 Commonwealth Games , as the running track raised the field level by 1 @.@ 9 metres . 
 The redeveloped Hampden has held the top status with the various UEFA stadium categories , holding category four status . The Scottish Football Museum , which opened in 2001 , is located within Hampden . Part of the museum is the Scottish Football Hall of Fame . A distinctive feature of the old Hampden , the press box which sat on the roof of the old South Stand , is also exhibited at the museum . The offices of the Scottish Football Association , Scottish Premier League and Scottish Football League are all located within Hampden . 
 Lesser Hampden is a football stadium located immediately beside the western end of Hampden Park . The ground was constructed in the early 1920s after additional ground was purchased to expand the main stadium . Queen 's Park proposed in 1990 to sell off Lesser Hampden to fund redevelopment works on the main stadium , but this was rejected by planners . It is used by Queen 's Park for training , reserve team matches and youth football . Lesser Hampden was refurbished for use as a warm @-@ up area during the 2014 Commonwealth Games . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 = = = Sports other than football = = = 
 Hampden Park has held four full rugby union international matches . The first was in 1906 , when the Scottish Rugby Union chose to play their match against the touring South Africans at Hampden because no rugby ground could satisfy the demand to see the visitors . A crowd of over 30 @,@ 000 saw Scotland win 6 – 0 . The redeveloped Hampden served as one of the 1999 Rugby World Cup venues , over 90 years later . Scotland played Romania in a friendly match before the tournament and South Africa played Uruguay in a tournament pool match . The only rugby union international played at Hampden since then was in November 2004 , between Scotland and Australia . 
 Hampden hosted the Scottish Amateur Athletics Association championships during the 1920s and 1930s , with the original Meadowbank Stadium used as an alternative venue . Eric Liddell won the 110 , 220 and 440 yard dashes in the 1924 championship . His last competition in Britain was the 1925 championship , when he won the 220 yards race for a record fifth time . Hampden was temporarily converted to stage the athletics events for the 2014 Commonwealth Games . It was also used for the closing ceremony . 
 Suzanne Lenglen , the French professional tennis player , played an exhibition match against Vivian Dewhurst at Hampden in 1927 . A crowd of 10 @,@ 000 saw that match and another between male players Howard Kinsey and Karel <unk> . 
 During the Second World War , American armed forces based in Scotland played games of softball , baseball and American football at Hampden . American football returned to Hampden in 1998 , when the NFL Europe team Scottish Claymores shared home games between Hampden and Murrayfield . World Bowl XI was held at Hampden in 2003 , but after the 2004 season the Claymores folded and were replaced by the Hamburg Sea Devils . 
 Hampden was the home of the Glasgow Tigers speedway team from 1969 until 1972 . Poor crowds , escalating costs and the refusal of the city council to allow music to be played at events contributed to the team moving to Cliftonhill , in Coatbridge . 
 The redeveloped Hampden was the venue for a boxing card headlined by former world champion Mike Tyson in June 2000 . Tyson knocked down Lou <unk> after just 12 seconds of the fight , which the referee stopped after 38 seconds . The fight ended in farce as the referee , who had been attempting to separate the two fighters , was also knocked down by Tyson . The disappointed crowd booed Tyson out of the ring , while former fighters Jim Watt and Barry McGuigan criticised his actions . After the fight , Tyson claimed that he wanted to eat the children of world champion Lennox Lewis , which also drew criticism . 
 = = = Uses other than sport = = = 
 Genesis and Paul Young performed in the first concert at Hampden , in 1987 . The Rolling Stones played there in 1990 , during their Urban Jungle Tour . Since the redevelopment of Hampden was completed in 1999 , many acts have performed there , including The Rolling Stones , Rod Stewart , Tina Turner , Bon Jovi , Eagles , U2 , Oasis , George Michael , the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Neil Diamond , Take That , AC / DC , Bruce Springsteen , Coldplay , Pink and Paul McCartney . The damage caused to the Hampden pitch by a U2 concert in August 2009 forced a Queen 's Park league match to be postponed . Rihanna is set to perform at the stadium as a part of her Anti World Tour on June 27 , 2016 . On July 7 , 2016 Beyoncé will perform at Hampden Park as part of her Formation World Tour . 
 The 50th anniversary Conventicle of the Boys ' Brigade , which had been founded in Glasgow by William Alexander Smith , was staged at Hampden in 1933 . 130 @,@ 000 people were inside the ground , while another 100 @,@ 000 stood outside singing Psalms . 
 American evangelical Christian missionary Billy Graham had an " All Scotland Crusade " during the spring of 1955 . The major outdoor event of the tour was at Hampden , where a crowd of 100 @,@ 000 heard him speak . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded at Hampden for a football match was 149 @,@ 415 , for the 1937 British Home Championship tie between Scotland and England . This is still a European record for an international match . The 1937 Scottish Cup Final between Celtic and Aberdeen drew an official crowd of 147 @,@ 365 , a world record for a club match , with 20 @,@ 000 more people locked outside . Hampden set world attendance records that year that were only surpassed by the Maracanã , and it still holds all the major European records . The European Cup match between Celtic and Leeds United in 1970 was attended by 136 @,@ 505 , which is a UEFA competition record . 
 Since the redevelopment of Hampden was completed in 1999 , the capacity for sporting events is now limited to 52 @,@ 063 . Attendances for concerts can be higher than this as people are allowed onto the pitch area . In 2009 , more people attended concerts at Hampden than football matches . Hampden regularly has crowds of below 1 @,@ 000 for Queen 's Park matches in the lower divisions of the Scottish football league system . Queen 's Park have not played in the top division of Scottish football since 1958 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The nearest railway stations are Mount Florida and King 's Park . Both stations are served by trains from Glasgow Central on the Cathcart Circle Lines . First Glasgow operate several bus routes in the area surrounding Hampden . There is a stadium car park immediately behind the south stand , but for major events this is only available to permit holders . Public car parking is provided by City Parking Glasgow on the Queens Park recreational ground and the <unk> playing fields . 
 = Air raids on Japan = 
 Allied forces conducted many air raids on Japan during World War II , causing extensive destruction to the country 's cities and killing between 241 @,@ 000 and 900 @,@ 000 people . During the first years of the Pacific War , sparked by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , these attacks were limited to the Doolittle Raid in April 1942 and small @-@ scale raids on military positions in the Kuril Islands from mid @-@ 1943 . Strategic bombing raids began in June 1944 and continued until the end of the war in August 1945 . Allied naval and land @-@ based tactical air units also attacked Japan during 1945 . 
 The United States military air campaign waged against Japan began in earnest in mid @-@ 1944 and intensified during the war 's last months . While plans for attacks on Japan had been prepared prior to the Pacific War , these could not begin until the long @-@ range B @-@ 29 Superfortress bomber was ready for combat . From June 1944 until January 1945 , B @-@ 29s stationed in India staged through bases in China to make a series of raids on Japan , but this effort proved unsuccessful . The strategic bombing campaign was greatly expanded from November 1944 when bases in the Mariana Islands became available as a result of the Mariana Islands Campaign . These attacks initially attempted to target industrial facilities , but from March 1945 were generally directed against urban areas as much of the manufacturing process was carried out in small workshops and private homes . Aircraft flying from Allied aircraft carriers and the Ryukyu Islands also frequently struck targets in Japan during 1945 in preparation for the planned invasion of Japan scheduled for October 1945 . During early August 1945 , the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were struck and mostly destroyed by atomic bombs . 
 Japan 's military and civil defenses were unable to stop the Allied attacks . The number of fighter aircraft and anti @-@ aircraft guns assigned to defensive duties in the home islands was inadequate , and most of these aircraft and guns had difficulty reaching the high altitudes at which B @-@ 29s often operated . Fuel shortages , inadequate pilot training , and a lack of coordination between units also constrained the effectiveness of the fighter force . Despite the vulnerability of Japanese cities to firebombing attacks , the firefighting services lacked training and equipment , and few air raid shelters were constructed for civilians . As a result , the B @-@ 29s were able to inflict severe damage on urban areas while suffering few losses . 
 The Allied bombing campaign was one of the main factors which influenced the Japanese government 's decision to surrender in mid @-@ August 1945 . However , there has been a long @-@ running debate over the morality of the attacks on Japanese cities , and the use of atomic weapons is particularly controversial . The most commonly cited estimate of Japanese casualties from the raids is 333 @,@ 000 killed and 473 @,@ 000 wounded . There are a number of other estimates of total fatalities , however , which range from 241 @,@ 000 to 900 @,@ 000 . In addition to the loss of mostly civilian life , the raids caused extensive damage to Japan 's cities and contributed to a large decline in industrial production . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = United States plans = = = 
 The United States Army Air Corps ( which was subsumed by the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) in February 1942 ) began developing contingency plans for an air campaign against Japan during 1940 . During that year the naval attaché to the Embassy of the United States in Tokyo reported that Japan 's civil defenses were weak , and proposals were made for American aircrew to volunteer for service with Chinese forces in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . The first American Volunteer Group ( the " Flying Tigers " ) began operations as part of the Chinese Air Force in late 1941 using P @-@ 40 Warhawk fighter aircraft . A second American Volunteer Group was also formed in late 1941 to attack Japan from bases in China using Hudson and A @-@ 20 Havoc medium bombers . The attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 led to open hostilities between the US and Japan and ended the need for covert operations , however , and this unit did not become active . The small number of Second Air Volunteer Group personnel who were dispatched from the United States in November 1941 were diverted to Australia upon the outbreak of war . 
 Japanese successes during the opening months of the Pacific War nullified pre @-@ war US plans for attacks against the Japanese homeland and a series of attempts to start a small @-@ scale campaign from bases in China were unsuccessful . Before the outbreak of war , the USAAF had planned to bomb Japan from Wake Island , Guam , the Philippines and coastal areas in China . However , these areas were rapidly captured by Japanese forces , and the USAAF heavy bomber force in the Philippines was largely destroyed when Clark Air Base was attacked on 8 December 1941 . The USAAF subsequently attempted to send 13 heavy bombers to China in March and April 1942 to attack the Japanese home islands . These aircraft reached India , but remained there as the Japanese conquest of Burma caused logistics problems and Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai @-@ shek was reluctant to allow them to operate from territory under his control . A further 13 B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers were dispatched from the United States to operate from China in May 1942 as the HALPRO force , but were re @-@ tasked to support Allied operations in the Mediterranean . In July 1942 , the commander of the American Volunteer Group , Colonel Claire Lee Chennault , sought a force of 100 P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt fighters and 30 B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers , which he believed would be sufficient to " destroy " the Japanese aircraft industry . Three months later Chennault told United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt that a force of 105 modern fighters and 40 bombers ( including 12 heavy bombers ) would be able to " accomplish the downfall of Japan " within six to twelve months . The USAAF 's headquarters did not regard these claims as credible , and Chennault 's requests for reinforcements were not granted . 
 = = = Pre @-@ war Japanese defenses = = = 
 The Japanese government 's pre @-@ war plans to protect the country from air attack focused on neutralizing enemy air bases . Before the war it was believed that Soviet aircraft based in the Russian Far East posed the greatest threat . The Japanese military planned to destroy the air bases within range of the home islands if Japan and the Soviet Union ever went to war . When the Pacific War began , the Japanese government believed that the best way to prevent American air raids was to capture and hold the areas in China and the Pacific from which such attacks could be launched . It was expected that the Allies would not be able to re @-@ capture these bases . However , the Japanese anticipated that the Allies might still make small @-@ scale attacks against the home islands using naval aircraft flying from aircraft carriers . The government chose not to develop strong defenses to meet the threat of air attack as the country 's industrial resources were unable to maintain offensive air forces in China and the Pacific as well as a defensive force in the home islands . 
 Few air units or anti @-@ aircraft batteries were stationed in the home islands during the early months of the Pacific War . The General Defense Command ( GDC ) had been formed in July 1941 to oversee the defense of the home islands , but all combat units in this area were assigned to the four regional military districts ( the Northern , Eastern , Central and Western districts ) which reported directly to the Ministry of War . As a result , the GDC 's functions were limited to coordinating communications between the Imperial General Headquarters — Japan 's highest military decision @-@ making body — and the military districts . In early 1942 , forces allocated to the defense of Japan comprised 100 Imperial Japanese Army Air Force ( IJAAF ) and 200 Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) fighter aircraft , many of which were obsolete , as well as 500 Army @-@ manned and 200 IJN anti @-@ aircraft guns . Most of the IJAAF and IJN formations in the home islands were training units which had only a limited ability to counter Allied attacks . The Army also operated a network of military and civilian observation posts to provide warning of air attack and was in the process of building radar stations . Command and control of the air defenses was fragmented , and the IJAAF and IJN did not coordinate their activities or communicate with each other . As a result , the forces were unable to react to a sudden air attack . 
 Japanese cities were highly vulnerable to damage from firebombing due to their design and the weak state of the country 's civil defense organization . Urban areas were typically congested , and most buildings were constructed from highly flammable materials such as paper and wood . In addition , industrial and military facilities in urban areas were normally surrounded by densely populated residential buildings . Despite this vulnerability , few cities had full @-@ time professional firefighters and most relied on volunteers . Such firefighting forces that did exist lacked modern equipment and used outdated tactics . Air raid drills had been held in Tokyo and Osaka since 1928 , however , and from 1937 local governments were required to provide civilians with manuals that explained how to respond to air attacks . Few air @-@ raid shelters and other air defense facilities for civilians and industry were constructed prior to the Pacific War . 
 = = Early raids = = 
 = = = Chinese raid = = = 
 The Republic of China Air Force ( ROCAF ) conducted a single attack on the Japanese home islands during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . On 19 May 1938 two ROCAF aircraft dropped propaganda leaflets on Nagasaki , Fukuoka , <unk> , Saga , and other locations in Kyushu . These leaflets did not have any effect on Japanese civilians , but demonstrated that China could potentially conduct small scale air attacks on the area . The Japanese military later wrongly assessed that the ROCAF had aircraft capable of mounting attacks at a range of 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km ) from their bases , and took precautions against potential raids on western Japan when Chinese forces launched an offensive during 1939 . 
 = = = Doolittle Raid = = = 
 USAAF aircraft bombed Japan for the first time in mid @-@ April 1942 . In an operation conducted primarily to raise morale in the United States and to avenge the attack on Pearl Harbor , 16 B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers were carried from San Francisco to within range of Japan on the aircraft carrier USS Hornet . These aircraft were launched on 18 April , and individually bombed targets in Tokyo , Yokohama , Yokosuka , Nagoya and Kobe . The Japanese air defense units were taken by surprise , and all the B @-@ 25s escaped without serious damage . The aircraft then continued to China and the Soviet Union , though several crashed in Japanese @-@ held territory after running out of fuel . Japanese casualties were 50 killed and over 400 wounded . About 200 houses were also destroyed . 
 Although the Doolittle Raid caused little damage , it had important ramifications . The attack raised morale in the United States and its commander , Lieutenant Colonel James H. Doolittle , was seen as a hero . The weak state of the country 's air defenses greatly embarrassed the Japanese military leadership , and four fighter groups were transferred from the Pacific to defend the home islands . In an attempt to prevent further naval raids , the IJN launched an offensive in the Pacific Ocean which ended in defeat during the Battle of Midway . The Japanese Army also conducted the Zhejiang @-@ Jiangxi Campaign to capture the airfields in central China at which the Doolittle Raiders had intended to land . This offensive achieved its objectives and resulted in the deaths of 250 @,@ 000 Chinese soldiers and civilians ; many of these civilian deaths were due to war crimes . The destruction of the airfields and heavy casualties badly damaged China 's war effort . The IJA also began developing fire balloons capable of carrying incendiary and anti @-@ personnel bombs from Japan to the continental United States . 
 = = = Bombing of the Kuril Islands = = = 
 Following the Doolittle Raid , the next air attacks on Japan were made against the Kuril Islands in mid @-@ 1943 . The liberation of Alaska 's Attu Island in May 1943 during the Aleutian Islands Campaign provided the USAAF with bases within range of the Kurils . As part of the preparations for the liberation of Kiska Island in the Aleutians , the Eleventh Air Force conducted a series of raids against the Kurils to suppress the Japanese air units stationed there . The first of these attacks was made against southern <unk> and northern <unk> by eight B @-@ 25s on 10 July . The Kurils were attacked again on 18 July by six B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers , and the unopposed liberation of Kiska ( Operation Cottage ) took place on 15 August . 
 The Eleventh Air Force and US Navy units continued to make small @-@ scale raids on the Kuril Islands until the closing months of the war . The USAAF attacks were broken off for five months following a raid on 11 September 1943 when nine of the 20 B @-@ 24s and B @-@ 25s dispatched were lost , but raids by US Navy PBY Catalinas continued . In response to the American attacks , the IJN established the North @-@ East Area Fleet in August 1943 , and in November that year Japanese fighter strength in the Kurils and Hokkaidō peaked at 260 aircraft . The Eleventh Air Force resumed its offensive in February 1944 after it had been reinforced with two squadrons of P @-@ 38 Lightning escort fighters , and it continued to attack targets in the Kurils until June 1945 . While these raids caused little damage , they caused the Japanese to divert large numbers of soldiers to defend their northern islands against a potential United States invasion . 
 = = Operation Matterhorn = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 In late 1943 , the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff approved a proposal to begin the strategic air campaign against the Japanese home islands and East Asia by basing B @-@ 29 Superfortress heavy bombers in India and establishing forward airfields in China . This strategy , designated Operation Matterhorn , involved the construction of large airstrips near Chengdu in inland China which would be used to refuel B @-@ 29s traveling from bases in Bengal en route to targets in Japan . Chennault , by now the commander of the Fourteenth Air Force in China , advocated building the B @-@ 29 bases near Kweilin , closer to Japan , but this area was judged too vulnerable to counterattack . However , the decision to build airstrips at Chengdu meant that Kyūshū was the only part of the home island chain within the B @-@ 29 's 1 @,@ 600 @-@ mile ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) combat radius . Construction of the airfields began in January 1944 , and the project involved around 300 @,@ 000 conscripted Chinese labourers and 75 @,@ 000 contracted workers . 
 XX Bomber Command was assigned responsibility for Operation Matterhorn , and its ground crew began to leave the United States for India during December 1943 . The Twentieth Air Force was formed in April 1944 to oversee all B @-@ 29 operations . In an unprecedented move , the commander of the USAAF , General Henry H. Arnold , took personal command of this unit and ran it from the Pentagon in Washington , D.C. The 58th Bombardment Wing was XX Bomber Command 's main combat unit , and its movement from Kansas to India took place between April and mid @-@ May 1944 . 
 The Japanese military began transferring fighter aircraft to the home islands from China and the Pacific in early 1944 in anticipation of B @-@ 29 raids . Japanese intelligence detected the construction of B @-@ 29 bases in India and China , and the military began to develop plans to counter air raids originating from China . The three IJAAF air brigades stationed in Honshū and Kyūshū were expanded to air divisions between March and June ( these were designated the 10th , 11th and 12th Air Divisions ) . By late June the air defense units in the home islands were assigned 260 fighters , and could draw on approximately 500 additional aircraft during emergencies . Additional anti @-@ aircraft gun batteries and searchlight units were also established to protect major cities and military bases . The GDC 's authority was strengthened when the army units in the Eastern , Central and Western military districts were placed under its command in May . The IJN defensive fighter units stationed at Kure , Sasebo and Yokosuka were also assigned to the GDC in July , but cooperation between the GDC 's Army units and the much smaller number of naval units was poor . Despite these improvements , Japan 's air defenses remained inadequate as few aircraft and anti @-@ aircraft guns could effectively engage B @-@ 29s at their cruising altitude of 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) and the number of radar stations capable of providing early warning of raids was insufficient . 
 The Japanese government also sought to improve the country 's civil defenses in response to the Doolittle Raid and the threat of further attacks . The national government placed the burden of constructing civilian air @-@ raid shelters on the prefectural governments . However , few shelters were built due to shortages of concrete and steel . In October 1943 the Home Ministry directed households in the major cities to build their own shelters , though these were normally only trenches . A small number of sophisticated shelters were constructed for air defense headquarters and to protect key telephone facilities . However , less than two percent of civilians had access to bombproof air @-@ raid shelters , though tunnels and natural caves were also used to protect civilians from B @-@ 29 raids . Following the outbreak of war , the Home Ministry expanded the number of firefighters , though these generally remained volunteers who lacked adequate training and equipment . Civilians were also trained to fight fires and encouraged to swear an " air defense oath " to respond to attacks from incendiary or high explosive bombs . 
 From autumn 1943 the Japanese government took further steps to prepare the country 's major cities for air attacks . An air defense general headquarters was established in November and a program of demolishing large numbers of buildings in major cities to create firebreaks began the next month . By the end of the war 614 @,@ 000 housing units had been destroyed to clear firebreaks ; these accounted for a fifth of all housing losses in Japan during the war and displaced 3 @.@ 5 million people . The government also encouraged old people , children and women in cities that were believed likely to be attacked to move to the countryside from December 1943 , and a program of evacuating entire classes of schoolchildren was implemented . By August 1944 , 330 @,@ 000 schoolchildren had been evacuated in school groups and another 459 @,@ 000 had moved to the countryside with their family . Little was done to disperse industrial facilities to make them less vulnerable to attack , however , as this was logistically difficult . 
 = = = Attacks from China = = = 
 XX Bomber Command began flying missions against Japan in mid @-@ June 1944 . The first raid took place on the night of 15 / 16 June when 75 B @-@ 29s were dispatched to attack the Imperial Iron and Steel Works at Yawata in northern Kyūshū . This attack caused little damage and cost seven B @-@ 29s , but received enthusiastic media coverage in the United States and indicated to Japanese civilians that the war was not going well . The Japanese military began expanding the fighter force in the home islands after the attack on Yawata , and by October 375 aircraft were assigned to the three air defense air divisions . These divisions remained at about this strength until March 1945 . Arnold relieved XX Bomber Command 's commander , Brigadier General Kenneth Wolfe , shortly after the raid on Yawata when he was unable to make follow @-@ up attacks on Japan due to insufficient fuel stockpiles at the bases in China . Wolfe 's replacement was Major General Curtis LeMay , a veteran of Eighth Air Force bombing attacks against Germany . 
 Subsequent B @-@ 29 raids staging through China generally did not meet their objectives . The second raid took place on 7 July when 17 B @-@ 29s attacked Sasebo , Ōmura and Tobata , causing little damage , and on the night of 10 / 11 August 24 Superfortresses attacked Nagasaki . Another unsuccessful raid was conducted against Yawata on 20 August in which the B @-@ 29 force was intercepted by over 100 fighters . Twelve of the sixty @-@ one Superfortresses that reached the target area were shot down , including one which was destroyed in a suicide ramming attack . Japanese government propaganda claimed that 100 bombers had been downed during this attack , and one of the crashed B @-@ 29s was placed on display in Tokyo . XX Bomber Command 's performance improved after LeMay instituted a training program and improved the organization of the B @-@ 29 maintenance units during August and September . A raid against Ōmura on 25 October destroyed the city 's small aircraft factory , though a follow @-@ up raid on 11 November ended in failure . The city was attacked again by 61 B @-@ 29s on 21 November and by 17 bombers on 19 December . XX Bomber Command made its ninth and final raid on Japan on 6 January 1945 when 28 B @-@ 29s once again struck Ōmura . During the same period the command conducted a number of attacks on targets in Manchuria , China and Formosa from its bases in China , as well as striking targets in Southeast Asia from India . The command flew its final mission from India , a raid on Singapore , on 29 March ; its constituent units were then transferred to the Mariana Islands . 
 Overall , Operation Matterhorn was not successful . The nine raids conducted against Japan via bases in China succeeded only in destroying Ōmura 's aircraft factory . XX Bomber Command lost 125 B @-@ 29s during all of its operations from bases in India and China , though only 22 or 29 were destroyed by Japanese forces ; the majority of the losses were due to flying accidents . The attacks had a limited impact on Japanese civilian morale but forced the Japanese military to reinforce the home islands ' air defenses at the expense of other areas . These results did not justify the large allocation of Allied resources to the operation , however . Moreover , the diversion of some supply aircraft flown between India and China to support XX Bomber Command 's efforts may have prevented the Fourteenth Air Force from undertaking more effective operations against Japanese positions and shipping . The official history of the USAAF judged that the difficulty of transporting adequate supplies to India and China was the most important factor behind the failure of Operation Matterhorn , though technical problems with the B @-@ 29s and the inexperience of their crews also hindered the campaign . The adverse weather conditions common over Japan also limited the effectiveness of the Superfortresses , as crews that managed to reach their target were often unable to bomb accurately due to high winds or cloud cover . 
 = = Initial attacks from the Mariana Islands = = 
 United States Marine Corps and Army forces captured the Japanese @-@ held islands of Guam , Saipan and Tinian in the Mariana Islands between June and August 1944 . USAAF and US Navy engineers subsequently constructed six airfields on the islands to accommodate hundreds of B @-@ 29s . These bases were more capable of supporting an intensive air campaign against Japan than those in China as they could be easily supplied by sea and were 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) south of Tokyo , which allowed B @-@ 29s to strike most areas in the home islands and return without refueling . Japanese aircraft made several attacks on the airfield at Saipan while it was under construction . 
 The Twentieth Air Force 's XXI Bomber Command began arriving in the Mariana Islands during October 1944 . The Command was led by Brigadier General Haywood S. Hansell , who had also participated in Eighth Air Force operations against Germany . XXI Bomber Command B @-@ 29s flew six practice missions against targets in the Central Pacific during October and November in preparation for their first attack on Japan . On 1 November , an F @-@ 13 photo reconnaissance variant of the B @-@ 29 from the 3d Photographic Reconnaissance Squadron overflew Tokyo ; this was the first American aircraft to fly over the city since the Doolittle Raid . Further F @-@ 13 sorties were conducted during early November to gather intelligence on aircraft factories and port facilities in the Tokyo – Yokosuka area . The F @-@ 13s were generally able to evade the heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire they attracted and the large numbers of Japanese fighters that were scrambled to intercept them as they flew at both high speed and high altitude . 
 XXI Bomber Command 's initial attacks against Japan were focused on the country 's aircraft industry . The first attack , codenamed Operation San Antonio I , was made against the Musashino aircraft plant in the outskirts of Tokyo on 24 November 1944 . Only 24 of the 111 B @-@ 29s dispatched attacked the primary target , and the others bombed port facilities as well as industrial and urban areas . The Americans were intercepted by 125 Japanese fighters but only one B @-@ 29 was shot down . This attack caused some damage to the aircraft plant and further reduced Japanese civilians ' confidence in the country 's air defenses . In response , the IJAAF and IJN stepped up their air attacks on B @-@ 29 bases in the Mariana Islands from 27 November ; these raids continued until January 1945 and resulted in the destruction of 11 Superfortresses and damage to another 43 for the loss of probably 37 Japanese aircraft . The IJA also began launching fire balloons against the United States during November . This campaign caused little damage and was abandoned in March 1945 . By this time 9 @,@ 000 balloons had been dispatched but only 285 were reported to have reached the contiguous United States . 
 The next American raids on Japan were not successful . XXI Bomber Command attacked Tokyo three times between 27 November and 3 December ; two of these raids were made against the Musashino aircraft plant while the other targeted an industrial area using M @-@ 69 incendiary cluster bombs , specifically developed to damage Japanese urban areas . The aircraft plant attacked on 27 November and 3 December was only lightly damaged as high winds and clouds prevented accurate bombing . The incendiary raid conducted on the night of 29 / 30 November by 29 Superfortresses burnt out one tenth of a square mile , and was also judged to be unsuccessful by the Twentieth Air Force 's headquarters . 
 Four of XXI Bomber Command 's next five raids were made against targets in Nagoya . The first two of these attacks on 13 and 18 December used precision bombing tactics , and damaged the city 's aircraft plants . The third raid was a daylight incendiary attack which was conducted after the Twentieth Air Force directed that 100 B @-@ 29s armed with M @-@ 69 bombs be dispatched against Nagoya to test the effectiveness of these weapons on a Japanese city . Hansell protested this order , as he believed that precision attacks were starting to produce results and moving to area bombardment would be counterproductive , but agreed to the operation after he was assured that it did not represent a general shift in tactics . Despite the change in armament , the 22 December raid was planned as a precision attack on an aircraft factory using only 78 bombers , and bad weather meant that little damage was caused . XXI Bomber Command raided the Musashino aircraft plant in Tokyo again on 27 December , but did not damage the facility . On 3 January 1945 , 97 B @-@ 29s were dispatched to conduct an area bombing raid on Nagoya . This attack started several fires , but these were quickly brought under control . 
 Arnold was disappointed with what XXI Bomber Command had achieved , and wanted the Command to produce results quickly . In addition , Hansell 's preference for precision bombing was no longer in accordance with the views of the Twentieth Air Force headquarters , which wanted a greater emphasis on area attacks . In late December 1944 Arnold decided to relieve Hansell of his command . Seeing LeMay 's success in improving XX Bomber Command 's performance , Arnold thought LeMay could solve the problems at XXI Bomber Command , and replaced Hansell with him . Hansell was informed of Arnold 's decision on 6 January , but remained in his position until mid @-@ January . During this period , XXI Bomber Command conducted unsuccessful precision bombing attacks on the Musashino aircraft plant in Tokyo and a Mitsubishi Aircraft Works factory in Nagoya on 9 and 14 January respectively . The last attack planned by Hansell was more successful , however : a force of 77 B @-@ 29s crippled a Kawasaki Aircraft Industries factory near Akashi on 19 January . During XXI Bomber Command 's first three months of operations , it lost an average of 4 @.@ 1 % of aircraft dispatched in each raid . 
 In late January 1945 the Imperial General Headquarters belatedly adopted a civil defense plan to counter the American air raids . This plan assigned responsibility for fighting fires to community councils and neighborhood groups as the professional firefighting units were short @-@ handed . Civilians were to observe a blackout from 10 : 00 pm . Japanese positions in the Bonin Islands were normally able to provide an hour 's warning of American raids and air raid sirens were sounded in cities threatened by attack . 
 The first attacks conducted under LeMay 's leadership achieved mixed results . XXI Bomber Command flew six major missions between 23 January and 19 February with little success , though an incendiary raid against Kobe on 4 February caused significant damage to the city and its main factories . Moreover , while improved maintenance procedures implemented by LeMay reduced the number of B @-@ 29s that had to return to base during raids due to technical problems , the Command suffered a loss rate of 5 @.@ 1 % in these operations . From 19 February to 3 March , XXI Bomber Command conducted a series of precision bombing raids on aircraft factories that sought to tie down Japanese air units so they could not participate in the Battle of Iwo Jima . However , these attacks were frustrated by high winds and cloud cover and little damage was inflicted . A firebombing raid conducted against Tokyo by 172 B @-@ 29s on 25 February was considered successful as it burnt or damaged approximately one square mile of the city 's urban area . This attack was a large @-@ scale test of the effectiveness of firebombing . 
 Several factors explain the poor results of XXI Bomber Command 's precision bombing campaign . The most important of these was the weather ; the American raiders frequently encountered cloudy conditions and high winds over Japan which made accurate bombing extremely difficult . Moreover , the bomber forces often had to pass through severe weather fronts between the Mariana Islands and Japan , which broke up formations and caused navigation problems . XXI Bomber Command 's effectiveness was also limited by poor B @-@ 29 maintenance practices and over @-@ crowding at its airfields – these factors reduced the number of aircraft which were available for operations and complicated the process of launching and recovering the bombers . By March 1945 the USAAF 's commanders were highly concerned about the failure of the campaigns mounted from China and the Mariana Islands , and believed that the results to date made it difficult to justify the high costs of the B @-@ 29 program and also threatened their goal of demonstrating the effectiveness of independent air power . 
 = = <unk> attacks = = 
 = = = LeMay changes tactics = = = 
 USAAF planners began assessing the feasibility of a firebombing campaign against Japanese cities in 1943 . Japan 's main industrial facilities were vulnerable to such attacks as they were concentrated in several large cities and a high proportion of production took place in homes and small factories in urban areas . The planners estimated that incendiary bomb attacks on Japan 's six largest cities could cause physical damage to almost 40 percent of industrial facilities and result in the loss of 7 @.@ 6 million man @-@ months of labor . It was also estimated that these attacks would kill over 500 @,@ 000 people , render about 7 @.@ 75 million homeless and force almost 3 @.@ 5 million to be evacuated . The USAAF tested the effectiveness of incendiary bombs on Japanese @-@ style buildings at Eglin Field and the " Japanese village " at Dugway Proving Ground . The American military also attempted to develop " bat bombs " , using incendiary bombs attached to bats dropped by aircraft to attack Japanese cities , but this project was abandoned in 1944 . 
 In light of the poor results of the precision bombing campaign and the success of the 25 February raid on Tokyo , LeMay decided to begin firebombing attacks on Japan 's main cities during early March . This was in line with Arnold 's targeting directive for XXI Bomber Command , which specified that urban areas were to be accorded the second @-@ highest priority for attacks after aircraft factories . The directive also stated that firebombing raids should be conducted once M @-@ 69 bombs had been tested in combat and the number of B @-@ 29s available was sufficient to launch an intensive campaign . LeMay did not seek Arnold 's specific approval before launching his firebombing campaign , however , to protect the USAAF commander from criticism if the attacks were unsuccessful . The Twentieth Air Force 's Chief of Staff , Brigadier General Lauris Norstad , was aware of the change in tactics though and provided support . The decision to use firebombing tactics represented a move away from the USAAF 's previous focus on precision bombing , and was believed by senior officials in the military and US Government to be justified by the need to rapidly bring the war to an end . 
 To maximize the effectiveness of the firebombing attacks , LeMay ordered the B @-@ 29s to fly at the low altitude of 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) and bomb by night ; this represented a significant change from the Command 's standard tactics , which focused on high @-@ altitude daylight bombing . As Japan 's night fighter force was weak and the anti @-@ aircraft batteries were less effective at night , LeMay also had most of the B @-@ 29s ' defensive guns removed ; by reducing the weight of the aircraft in this way they were able to carry more bombs . These changes were not popular with XXI Bomber Command 's aircrew , as they believed that it was safer to fly heavily armed aircraft at high altitude . 
 = = = March firebombing campaign = = = 
 The first firebombing attack in this campaign — codenamed Operation Meetinghouse — was carried out against Tokyo on the night of 9 / 10 March , and proved to be the single most destructive air raid of the war . XXI Bomber Command mounted a maximum effort , and on the afternoon of 9 March 346 B @-@ 29s left the Marianas bound for Tokyo . They began to arrive over the city at 2 : 00 am Guam time on 10 March , and 279 bombers dropped 1 @,@ 665 tons of bombs . The raid caused a massive conflagration that overwhelmed Tokyo 's civil defenses and destroyed 16 square miles ( 41 km2 ) of buildings , representing seven percent of the city 's urban area . The Tokyo police force and fire department estimated that 83 @,@ 793 people were killed during the air raid , another 40 @,@ 918 were injured and just over a million lost their homes ; postwar estimates of deaths in this attack have ranged from 80 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 . Damage to Tokyo 's war production was also substantial . Japanese opposition to this attack was relatively weak ; 14 B @-@ 29s were destroyed as a result of combat or mechanical faults and a further 42 damaged by anti @-@ aircraft fire . Following the attack on Tokyo , the Japanese government ordered the evacuation of all schoolchildren in the third to sixth grades from the main cities , and 87 percent of them had departed to the countryside by early April . 
 XXI Bomber Command followed up the firebombing of Tokyo with similar raids against other major cities . On 11 March , 310 B @-@ 29s were dispatched against Nagoya . The bombing was spread over a greater area than had been the case at Tokyo , and the attack caused less damage . Nevertheless , 2 @.@ 05 square miles ( 5 @.@ 3 km2 ) of buildings were burnt out and no B @-@ 29s were lost to the Japanese defenses . On the night of 13 / 14 March , 274 Superfortresses attacked Osaka and destroyed 8 @.@ 1 square miles ( 21 km2 ) of the city for the loss of two aircraft . Kobe was the next target in the firebombing campaign , and was attacked by 331 B @-@ 29s on the night of 16 / 17 March . The resulting firestorm destroyed 7 square miles ( 18 km2 ) of the city ( equivalent to half its area ) , killed 8 @,@ 000 people and rendered 650 @,@ 000 homeless . Three B @-@ 29s were lost . Nagoya was attacked again on the night of 18 / 19 March , and the B @-@ 29s destroyed 2 @.@ 95 square miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km2 ) of buildings . Only one Superfortress was shot down during this attack , and all members of its crew were rescued after the aircraft ditched into the sea . This raid marked the end of the first firebombing campaign as XXI Bomber Command had exhausted its supplies of incendiary bombs . The Command 's next major operation was an unsuccessful night precision attack on the Mitsubishi aircraft engine factory conducted on the night of 23 / 24 March ; during this operation five of the 251 aircraft dispatched were shot down . B @-@ 29s also began to drop propaganda leaflets over Japan during March . These leaflets called on Japanese civilians to overthrow their government or face destruction . 
 The USAAF assessed that the firebombing campaign had been highly successful , and noted that American losses during these attacks were much lower than those incurred during day precision raids . Accordingly , the Joint Target Group ( JTG ) , which was the Washington , D.C.-based organisation responsible for developing strategies for the air campaign against Japan , developed plans for a two @-@ stage campaign against 22 Japanese cities . The JTG also recommended that precision bombing attacks on particularly important industrial facilities continue in parallel to the area raids , however . While this campaign was intended to form part of preparations for the Allied invasion of Japan , LeMay and some members of Arnold 's staff believed that it alone would be sufficient to force the country 's surrender . 
 The Japanese government was concerned about the results of the March firebombing attacks as the raids had demonstrated that the Japanese military was unable to protect the nation 's airspace . As well as the extensive physical damage in the targeted cities , the attacks also caused increased absenteeism as civilians were afraid to leave their homes to work in factories which might be bombed . Japanese air defenses were reinforced in response to the firebombing raids , but remained inadequate ; 450 fighters were assigned to defensive duties in April . 
 = = = Destruction of Japan 's main cities = = = 
 The start of the major firebombing campaign was delayed as XXI Bomber Command was used to attack airfields in southern Japan from late March to mid @-@ May in support of the invasion of Okinawa , an island just south of the home islands . Prior to the landings on 1 April , the Command bombed airfields in Kyushu at Ōita and <unk> as well as an aircraft plant at Ōmura on 27 March , and struck Ōita and <unk> again on the 31st of the month . No B @-@ 29s were lost in these raids . From 6 April the Japanese conducted large @-@ scale kamikaze air raids on the Allied invasion fleet , during which suicide aircraft damaged or sank many warships and transports . As part of the Allied response to these attacks , XXI Bomber Command conducted major raids on airfields in Kyushu on 8 and 16 April , though the first of these attacks was diverted to strike residential areas in Kagoshima after the airfields were found to be covered by clouds . From 17 April until 11 May , when the B @-@ 29s were released for other duties , about three quarters of XXI Bomber Command 's effort was devoted to attacking airfields and other targets in direct support of the Battle of Okinawa ; this included 2 @,@ 104 sorties flown against 17 airfields . These raids cost the Command 24 B @-@ 29s destroyed and 233 damaged and failed to completely suppress kamikaze attacks from the targeted airfields . 
 A few attacks on Japanese cities were conducted during the Battle of Okinawa . On 1 April , a night precision bombing raid was flown against the Nakajima engine factory in Tokyo by 121 B @-@ 29s and three similar attacks were conducted against engine factories in Shizuoka , Koizumi and Tachikawa on the night of 3 April . These raids were unsuccessful as XXI Bomber Command lacked the specialized equipment needed to strike targets accurately at night , and LeMay decided not to conduct similar operations . Small forces of B @-@ 29s also struck Tokyo and nearby Kawasaki on 4 April . Two successful large @-@ scale precision bombing raids were flown against aircraft factories in Tokyo and Nagoya on 7 April ; the raid on Tokyo was the first to be escorted by Iwo Jima @-@ based P @-@ 51 Mustang very @-@ long @-@ range fighters from the VII Fighter Command , and the Americans claimed to have shot down 101 Japanese aircraft for the loss of two P @-@ 51s and seven B @-@ 29s . Over 250 B @-@ 29s struck three different aircraft factories on 12 April ; during this operation the 73rd Bombardment Wing inflicted heavy damage on the Musashino aircraft plant and fought off 185 Japanese fighters without loss . LeMay resumed night firebombing raids on 13 April when 327 B @-@ 29s attacked the arsenal district of Tokyo and destroyed 11 @.@ 4 square miles ( 30 km2 ) of the city , including several armaments factories . On 15 April , 303 Superfortresses attacked the Tokyo region and destroyed 6 square miles ( 16 km2 ) of Tokyo , 3 @.@ 6 square miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km2 ) of Kawasaki and 1 @.@ 5 square miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km2 ) of Yokohama for the loss of 12 bombers . On 24 April the Tachikawa aircraft engine factory at Yamato near Tokyo was destroyed by 131 B @-@ 29s . An attack on the aircraft arsenal at Tachikawa six days later was aborted due to cloud cover ; some of the heavy bombers attacked the city of Hamamatsu instead . Another precision raid was made against the Hiro Naval Aircraft Factory at Kure on 5 May when 148 B @-@ 29s inflicted heavy damage on the facility . Five days later B @-@ 29s successfully attacked oil storage facilities at Iwakuni , Ōshima and Toyama . On 11 May a small force of B @-@ 29s destroyed an airframe factory at Konan . XXI Bomber Command reached its full strength in April when the 58th and 315th Bombardment Wings arrived in the Marianas ; at this time the command comprised five wings equipped with a total of 1 @,@ 002 B @-@ 29s and was the most powerful air unit in the world . 
 After being released from supporting the Okinawa campaign , XXI Bomber Command conducted an intensive firebombing campaign against Japan 's main cities from mid @-@ May . A force of 472 B @-@ 29s struck Nagoya by day on 13 May and destroyed 3 @.@ 15 square miles ( 8 @.@ 2 km2 ) of the city . The Japanese mounted a strong defense that downed two Superfortresses and damaged another 64 ; another eight B @-@ 29s were lost to other causes . The Americans claimed 18 Japanese fighter " kills " as well as another 30 " probables " and 16 damaged . Nagoya was attacked again by 457 B @-@ 29s on the night of 16 May , and the resulting fires destroyed 3 @.@ 82 square miles ( 9 @.@ 9 km2 ) of the city . Japanese defenses were much weaker by night , and the three bombers lost in this attack crashed due to mechanical problems . The two raids on Nagoya killed 3 @,@ 866 Japanese and rendered another 472 @,@ 701 homeless . On 19 May , 318 B @-@ 29s conducted an unsuccessful precision bombing raid on the Tachikawa Aircraft Company . XXI Bomber Command made further large @-@ scale firebombing attacks against Tokyo on the nights of 23 and 25 May . In the first of these raids 520 B @-@ 29s destroyed 5 @.@ 3 square miles ( 14 km2 ) of southern Tokyo with 17 aircraft lost and 69 damaged . The second attack involved 502 B @-@ 29s and destroyed 16 @.@ 8 square miles ( 44 km2 ) of the city 's central area , including the headquarters of several key government ministries and much of the Tokyo Imperial Palace ; the bomber crews had been briefed to not target the palace as the US Government did not want to risk killing Emperor Hirohito . The Japanese defenses were relatively successful on this occasion , and 26 Superfortresses were shot down and another 100 damaged . By the end of these raids just over half ( 50 @.@ 8 percent ) of Tokyo had been destroyed and the city was removed from XXI Bomber Command 's target list . The Command 's last major raid of May was a daylight incendiary attack on Yokohama on 29 May conducted by 517 B @-@ 29s escorted by 101 P @-@ 51s . This force was intercepted by 150 A6M Zero fighters , sparking an intense air battle in which five B @-@ 29s were shot down and another 175 damaged . In return , the P @-@ 51 pilots claimed 26 " kills " and 23 " probables " for the loss of three fighters . The 454 B @-@ 29s that reached Yokohama struck the city 's main business district and destroyed 6 @.@ 9 square miles ( 18 km2 ) of buildings ; over 1000 Japanese were killed . Overall , the attacks in May destroyed 94 square miles ( 240 km2 ) of buildings , which was equivalent to one seventh of Japan 's total urban area . The Minister of Home Affairs , Iwao Yamazaki , concluded after these raids that Japan 's civil defense arrangements were " considered to be futile " . 
 The firebombing campaign against major cities ended in June . On the first day of the month 521 B @-@ 29s escorted by 148 P @-@ 51s were dispatched in a daylight raid against Osaka . While en route to the city the Mustangs flew through thick clouds , and 27 of the fighters were destroyed in collisions . Nevertheless , 458 heavy bombers and 27 P @-@ 51s reached the city and the bombardment killed 3 @,@ 960 Japanese and destroyed 3 @.@ 15 square miles ( 8 @.@ 2 km2 ) of buildings . On 5 June , 473 B @-@ 29s struck Kobe by day and destroyed 4 @.@ 35 square miles ( 11 @.@ 3 km2 ) of buildings for the loss of 11 bombers . A force of 409 B @-@ 29s attacked Osaka again on 7 June ; during this attack 2 @.@ 21 square miles ( 5 @.@ 7 km2 ) of buildings were burnt out and the Americans did not suffer any losses . Osaka was bombed for the fourth time in the month on 15 June when 444 B @-@ 29s destroyed 1 @.@ 9 square miles ( 4 @.@ 9 km2 ) of the city and another 0 @.@ 59 square miles ( 1 @.@ 5 km2 ) of nearby <unk> ; 300 @,@ 000 houses were destroyed in Osaka . This attack marked the end of the first phase of XXI Bomber Command 's attack on Japan 's cities . During May and June the bombers had destroyed much of the country 's six largest cities , killing between 112 @,@ 000 and 126 @,@ 762 people and rendering millions homeless . The widespread destruction and high number of casualties from these raids caused many Japanese to realize that their country 's military was no longer able to defend the home islands . American losses were low compared to Japanese casualties ; 136 B @-@ 29s were downed during the campaign . In Tokyo , Osaka , Nagoya , Yokohama , Kobe , and Kawasaki , " over 126 @,@ 762 people were killed ... and a million and a half dwellings and over 105 square miles ( 270 km2 ) of urban space were destroyed . " In Tokyo , Osaka and Nagoya , " the areas leveled ( almost 100 square miles ( 260 km2 ) ) exceeded the areas destroyed in all German cities by both the American and English air forces ( approximately 79 square miles ( 200 km2 ) ) . " 
 = = Attacks on small cities = = 
 In mid @-@ June Arnold visited LeMay 's headquarters at Saipan . During this visit he approved a proposal for XXI Bomber Command to attack 25 relatively small cities with populations ranging from 62 @,@ 280 to 323 @,@ 000 while also continuing precision raids on major targets . This decision was made despite a recommendation from the United States Strategic Bombing Survey ( USSBS ) team , which was assessing the effectiveness of air attacks on Germany , that operations against Japan should focus on the country 's transportation network and other targets with the goal of crippling the movement of goods and destroying food supplies . LeMay 's plan called for precision attacks on important industrial targets on days when the weather over Japan was clear and incendiary attacks guided by radar on overcast days . As both the cities and industrial facilities targeted were relatively small , the B @-@ 29 force would be sent against multiple locations on days in which attacks were conducted . This targeting policy , which was labeled the " Empire Plan " , remained in force until the last days of the war . 
 Five major precision bombing attacks were conducted as part of the Empire Plan . On 9 June , two groups of B @-@ 29s bombed an aircraft factory at <unk> and another two groups raided a factory in <unk> ; both facilities were badly damaged . A single group of Superfortresses also attempted to bomb a Kawasaki Aircraft Industries factory at Akashi but accidentally struck a nearby village instead . The next day , XXI Bomber Command bombers escorted by 107 P @-@ 51s successfully attacked six different factories in the Tokyo Bay region . Precision bombing raids were also conducted on 22 June , when 382 B @-@ 29s attacked six targets at Kure , <unk> , Himeji , Mizushima and Akashi in southern Honshu . Most of the factories targeted were badly damaged . Four days later , 510 B @-@ 29s escorted by 148 P @-@ 51s were sent against nine factories in southern Honshu and Shikoku . Heavy clouds over the region meant that many bombers attacked targets of opportunity individually or in small groups , and little damage was done to the raid 's intended targets . Cloudy weather prevented any further large @-@ scale precision attacks until 24 July , when 625 B @-@ 29s were dispatched against seven targets near Nagoya and Osaka . Four of the factories attacked suffered heavy damage . Renewed cloudy weather prevented any further Empire Plan precision attacks in the last weeks of the war . 
 XXI Bomber Command began incendiary raids against small cities from 17 June . On that night , Hamamatsu , Kagoshima , Ōmuta , Yokkaichi were each attacked by a wing of B @-@ 29s using similar tactics to those employed in the firebombing raids against the major cities . Of the 477 B @-@ 29s dispatched , 456 struck their targets and Hamamatsu , Kagoshima , Yokkaichi suffered extensive damage ; overall 6 @.@ 073 square miles ( 15 @.@ 73 km2 ) of buildings were destroyed . The cities were almost undefended and no B @-@ 29s were lost to Japanese actions . This operation was judged a success , and set the pattern for XXI Bomber Command 's firebombing attacks until the end of the war . As the campaign continued and the most important cities were destroyed , the bombers were sent against smaller and less significant cities . On most nights that raids were conducted , four cities were attacked , each by a wing of bombers . Two @-@ wing operations were conducted against Fukuoka on 19 June and Ōmuta on 26 July , however . Sixteen multi @-@ city incendiary attacks had been conducted by the end of the war ( an average of two per week ) , and these targeted 58 cities . The incendiary raids were coordinated with precision bombing attacks during the last weeks of the war in an attempt to force the Japanese government to surrender . As the small cities were not defended by anti @-@ aircraft guns and Japan 's night @-@ fighter force was ineffective , only a single B @-@ 29 was shot down during this campaign ; a further 66 were damaged and 18 crashed as a result of accidents . 
 The firebombing campaign against small cities continued through June and July . On the night of 19 June B @-@ 29s struck Fukuoka , Shizuoka and Toyohashi . On 28 June Moji , Nobeoka , Okayama and Sasebo were attacked . Kumamoto , Kure , Shimonoseki and Ube were bombed on 1 July . Two nights later , Himeji , Kōchi , Takamatsu and Tokushima were attacked . On 6 July , attacks were conducted against Akashi , Chiba , Kōfu and Shimizu . Gifu , Sakai , Sendai and Wakayama were struck on 9 July . Three nights later , the B @-@ 29s targeted <unk> , Tsuruga , Utsunomiya and Uwajima . On 16 July , Hiratsuka , <unk> , <unk> and Ōita were attacked . Chōshi , Fukui , Hitachi , Okazaki were bombed on 19 July . After a break of almost a week , Matsuyama , <unk> and Tokuyama were firebombed on 26 July . 
 XXI Bomber Command also conducted an intensive propaganda campaign alongside its firebombing raids . It has been estimated that B @-@ 29s dropped 10 million propaganda leaflets in May , 20 million in June and 30 million in July . The Japanese government implemented harsh penalties against civilians who kept copies of these leaflets . On the night of 27 / 28 July , six B @-@ 29s dropped leaflets over 11 Japanese cities warning that they would be attacked in the future ; this was intended to lower the morale of Japanese civilians and convince them that the United States was seeking to minimize civilian casualties . Six of these cities ( Aomori , <unk> , Tsu , Uji @-@ Yamada <unk> and Uwajima ) were attacked on 28 July . No B @-@ 29s were lost in the raids on these cities , though six were damaged by attacks from between 40 and 50 fighters and another five were hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire . 
 August 1945 began with further large @-@ scale raids against Japanese cities . On the 1st of the month , 836 B @-@ 29s staged the largest single raid of World War II , dropping 6 @,@ 145 tons of bombs and mines . The cities of <unk> , Mito , Nagaoka and Toyama were the main targets of this operation ; all four suffered extensive damage and 99 @.@ 5 percent of buildings in Toyama were destroyed . The cities of Imabari , Maebashi , Nishinomiya and Saga were attacked on 5 August . These raids had also been preceded by propaganda leaflets and radio broadcasts from Saipan warning that the cities would be attacked . 
 From late June the 315th Bombardment Wing conducted a series of night precision bombing attacks against the Japanese oil industry , independently of the precision day and night incendiary raids . The wing 's B @-@ 29s were fitted with the advanced AN / APQ @-@ 7 radar that allowed targets to be accurately located at night . Arriving in the Marianas in April 1945 , the 315th underwent a period of operational training before flying its first attack against the <unk> Oil Refinery at Yokkaichi on the night of 26 June . The 30 bombers ( out of 38 dispatched ) that struck the refinery destroyed or damaged 30 percent of the facility . The unit 's next attack was against a refinery at <unk> three nights later , and on the night of 2 July it struck another refinery at <unk> . On the night of 6 / 7 July the 315th Bombardment Wing destroyed the <unk> oil refinery near Osaka , and three nights later it completed the destruction of the <unk> refinery . The wing had conducted 15 operations against Japanese oil facilities by the end of the war . During these attacks it destroyed six of the nine targets attacked for the loss of four B @-@ 29s . However , as Japan had almost no crude oil to refine due to the Allied naval blockade of the home islands these raids had little impact on the country 's war effort . 
 During mid @-@ July the USAAF strategic bomber forces in the Pacific were reorganized . On 16 July , XXI Bomber Command was re @-@ designated the Twentieth Air Force and LeMay appointed its commander . Two days later the United States Strategic Air Forces in the Pacific ( USASTAF ) was established at Guam under the command of General Carl Spaatz . USASTAF 's role was to command the Twentieth Air Force as well as the Eighth Air Force , which at the time was moving from Europe to Okinawa . The Eighth Air Force was led by James Doolittle ( who had been promoted to general ) and was being reequipped with B @-@ 29s . The Commonwealth Tiger Force , which was to include Australian , British , Canadian and New Zealand heavy bomber squadrons and attack Japan from Okinawa , was also to come under the command of USASTAF when it arrived in the region during late 1945 . 
 = = Aerial mine laying = = 
 From mid @-@ 1944 , the US Navy pressed for B @-@ 29s to be used to lay naval mines in Japan 's home waters to strengthen the blockade of the country . Arnold and his staff were unenthusiastic about these proposals , however , as they believed that such missions would divert too many Superfortresses away from precision bombing attacks . In response to repeated requests from the Navy , Arnold decided in November 1944 to begin mine @-@ laying operations once sufficient aircraft were available . In January 1945 , LeMay selected the 313th Bombardment Wing to be the Twentieth Air Force 's specialist mine @-@ laying unit , and the Navy provided assistance with its training and logistics . LeMay designated the aerial mining campaign Operation Starvation . As the United States had only occasionally used mines up to this time , the Japanese military had placed relatively little emphasis on keeping its minesweeping force up to date . As a result , the IJN was unprepared for the large @-@ scale USAAF offensive . 
 The 313th Bombardment Wing conducted its first mine @-@ laying operation on the night of 27 / 28 March when it mined the Shimonoseki Strait to prevent Japanese warships from using this route to attack the US landing force off Okinawa . Mine @-@ laying operations were disrupted in April as the wing was assigned to support operations in Okinawa and participate in conventional bombing raids . Its rate of effort increased in May , when it conducted missions against harbors and other choke points around Honshu and Kyushu . The air @-@ dropped minefields greatly disrupted Japanese coastal shipping . 
 LeMay increased the number of mine @-@ laying sorties in June , and the 505th Bombardment Group joined the 313th Bombardment Wing on occasion . In response to this offensive , the Japanese greatly expanded their mine @-@ sweeping force by 349 ships and 20 @,@ 000 men and deployed additional anti @-@ aircraft guns around the Shimonoseki Strait . They had little success in permanently clearing minefields or downing the B @-@ 29s , however . Many of Japan 's major harbors , including those of Tokyo , Yokohama and Nagoya , became permanently closed to shipping . During the last weeks of the war , B @-@ 29s continued to drop large numbers of mines off Japan and the campaign was expanded into Korean waters . The 313th Bombardment Wing lost only 16 B @-@ 29s during mine @-@ laying operations . Overall , mines dropped by Superfortresses off the home islands sank 293 ships , which represented 9 @.@ 3 percent of all Japanese merchant shipping destroyed during the Pacific War and 60 percent of losses between April and August 1945 . Following the war , the USSBS assessed that the Twentieth Air Force should have placed a greater emphasis on attacking Japanese shipping given the effectiveness of these attacks . 
 = = Naval air attacks = = 
 The US Navy conducted its first attacks against the Japanese home islands in mid @-@ February 1945 . This operation was undertaken primarily to destroy Japanese aircraft that could attack the US Navy and Marine Corps forces involved with the landing on Iwo Jima on 19 February , and was conducted by Task Force 58 ( TF 58 ) . This task force was the US Navy 's main striking force in the Pacific , and comprised 11 fleet carriers , five light aircraft carriers and a powerful force of escorts . TF 58 approached Japan undetected , and attacked airfields and aircraft factories in the Tokyo region on 16 and 17 February . The American naval aviators claimed 341 " kills " against Japanese aircraft and the destruction of a further 160 on the ground for the loss of 60 aircraft in combat and 28 in accidents . Several ships were also attacked and sunk in Tokyo Bay . The actual Japanese aircraft losses in this operation are uncertain , however ; the Imperial General Headquarters admitted losing 78 aircraft in dogfights and did not provide a figure for those destroyed on the ground . TF 58 's ships were not attacked during this period in Japanese waters , and on 18 February sailed south to provide direct support to the landings on Iwo Jima . The Task Force attempted a second raid against the Tokyo area on 25 February , but this operation was frustrated by bad weather . The American ships sailed south , and attacked Okinawa from 1 March . 
 TF 58 renewed its attacks on Japan in mid @-@ March when it made a series of raids that sought to destroy Japanese aircraft within range of Okinawa prior to the landing there . On 18 March , carrier aircraft struck Japanese airfields and other military facilities on Kyushu . The next day they attacked Japanese warships at Kure and Kobe , damaging the battleship Yamato and aircraft carrier Amagi . The Japanese fought back against these raids with kamikaze and conventional attacks , and inflicted light damage on three carriers on 18 March and severely damaged USS Franklin the next day . On 20 March , TF 58 sailed south but continued fighter sweeps over Kyushu to suppress Japanese aircraft . During the attacks on 18 and 19 March , the American naval aviators claimed to have destroyed 223 Japanese aircraft in the air and 250 on the ground , while the Japanese placed their losses as 161 of the 191 aircraft they committed in the air and an unspecified number on the ground . From 23 March , TF 58 conducted strikes against Okinawa , though its aircraft made further sweeps of Kyushu on 28 and 29 March . Following the landing on 1 April , TF 58 provided air defense for the naval force off Okinawa and regularly conducted patrols over Kyushu . In an attempt to stem the large @-@ scale Japanese air attacks against the Allied ships , part of TF 58 struck at kamikaze aircraft bases on Kyushu and Shikoku on 12 and 13 May . On 27 May , Admiral William Halsey assumed command of the Fifth Fleet ( redesignated the Third Fleet ) from Admiral Raymond A. Spruance . TF 58 , renumbered TF 38 , continued operations off Okinawa in late May and June , and on 2 and 3 June one of its task groups attacked airfields on Kyushu . Another attack was made against these airfields on 8 June ; two days later , TF 38 left Japanese waters for a period of recuperation at Leyte in the Philippines . 
 On 1 July , TF 38 sailed from Leyte to strike at the Japanese home islands . At this time the Task Force comprised nine fleet carriers , six light carriers and their escorts . Halsey sought to coordinate his fleet 's attacks during the last months of the war with those of the USAAF 's land @-@ based aircraft , but the two forces often operated separately . On 10 July TF 38 's aircraft conducted raids on airfields in the Tokyo region , destroying several aircraft on the ground . No Japanese fighters were encountered in the air , however , as they were being kept in reserve for a planned large @-@ scale suicide attack on the Allied fleet . Following this raid TF 38 steamed north , and began a major attack on Hokkaido and northern Honshu on 14 July . These strikes continued the next day , and sank eight of the 12 railway car ferries which carried coal from Hokkaido to Honshu and damaged the remaining four . Many other ships were also destroyed in this area , including 70 out of the 272 small sailing ships which carried coal between the islands . Once again no Japanese aircraft opposed this attack , though 25 were destroyed on the ground . The loss of the railway car ferries reduced the amount of coal shipped from Hokkaido to Honshu by 80 percent , which greatly hindered production in Honshu 's factories . This operation has been described as the single most effective strategic air attack of the Pacific War . TF 38 's battleships and cruisers also began a series of bombardments of industrial targets on 14 July which continued until almost the end of the war . 
 Following the attacks on Hokkaido and northern Honshu TF 38 sailed south and was reinforced by the main body of the British Pacific Fleet , which was designated Task Force 37 and included another four fleet carriers . Strikes on the Tokyo area on 17 July were disrupted by bad weather , but the next day aircraft from the fleet attacked Yokosuka naval base where they damaged the battleship Nagato and sank four other warships . On 24 , 25 and 28 July the Allied fleet attacked Kure and the Inland Sea and sank an aircraft carrier and three battleships , as well as two heavy cruisers , a light cruiser and several other warships . A force of 79 USAAF Liberators flying from Okinawa participated in this attack on 28 July . Allied casualties in this operation were heavy , however , as 126 aircraft were shot down . On 29 and 30 July the carrier aircraft struck at Maizuru , sinking three small warships and 12 merchant vessels , before the fleet sailed east to avoid a typhoon and replenish its supplies . Its next attacks against Japan took place on 9 and 10 August , and were directed at a buildup of Japanese aircraft in northern Honshu which Allied intelligence believed were to be used to conduct a commando raid against the B @-@ 29 bases in the Marianas . The naval aviators claimed to have destroyed 251 aircraft in their attacks on 9 August and damaged a further 141 . On 13 August , TF 38 's aircraft attacked the Tokyo region again and claimed to have destroyed 254 Japanese aircraft on the ground and 18 in the air . Another raid was launched against Tokyo on the morning of 15 August , and the 103 aircraft of its first wave attacked their targets . The second wave aborted its attack when word was received that Japan had agreed to surrender . Several Japanese aircraft were shot down while attempting to attack TF 38 later that day , however . 
 = = Raids from Iwo Jima and Okinawa = = 
 USAAF P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters of the VII Fighter Command stationed at Iwo Jima from March 1945 were initially used mainly to escort B @-@ 29s . They also conducted a series of independent ground attack missions against targets in the home islands . The first of these operations took place on 16 April , when 57 P @-@ 51s strafed Kanoya Air Field in Kyushu . In operations conducted between 26 April and 22 June the American fighter pilots claimed the destruction of 64 Japanese aircraft and damage to another 180 on the ground , as well as a further ten shot down in flight ; these claims were lower than the American planners had expected , however , and the raids were considered unsuccessful . USAAF losses were 11 P @-@ 51s to enemy action and seven to other causes . 
 Due to the lack of Japanese air opposition to the American bomber raids , VII Fighter Command was solely tasked with ground attack missions from July . These raids were frequently made against airfields to destroy aircraft being held in reserve to attack the expected Allied invasion fleet . While the P @-@ 51 pilots only occasionally encountered Japanese fighters in the air , the airfields were protected by anti @-@ aircraft batteries and barrage balloons . By the end of the war , VII Fighter Command had conducted 51 ground attack raids , of which 41 were considered successful . The fighter pilots claimed to have destroyed or damaged 1 @,@ 062 aircraft and 254 ships along with large numbers of buildings and railway rolling stock . American losses were 91 pilots killed and 157 Mustangs destroyed . 
 From May 1945 aircraft of the USAAF 's Fifth Air Force and Seventh Air Force , which were grouped under the Far East Air Force ( FEAF ) , also attacked targets in Kyushu and western Honshu from bases in Okinawa and other locations in the Ryukyu Islands . These raids formed part of the preparation for the invasion of Japan . From 17 May , P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt fighters flying from the Ryukyus made frequent day and night patrols over Kyushu to disrupt the Japanese air units there . On 21 June an additional fighter group joined this effort , and the campaign was reinforced by bombers and another fighter group from 1 July . While these American operations were initially fiercely contested , from early July onwards they encountered little opposition as the Japanese aircraft were withdrawn so that they could be preserved for later operations . Between 1 and 13 July , the Americans flew 286 medium and heavy bomber sorties over Kyushu without loss . As the fighters met few Japanese aircraft , they were mainly used to attack transportation infrastructure and targets of opportunity ; these included at least two strafing attacks on groups of civilians . 
 Attacks on airfields and transportation infrastructure in southern Japan continued until the end of the war . By this time the Fifth Air Force 's bombers had flown 138 sorties against airfields in Kyushu and the Seventh Air Force had conducted a further 784 . Road and railway bridges were attacked by both fighters and bombers , and the city of Kagoshima was frequently bombed . Seventh Air Force B @-@ 24 Liberators also bombed the railway terminals in the port of Nagasaki on 31 July and 1 August . While these raids were focused on tactical targets , the Okinawa @-@ based aircraft made several strategic attacks against industrial facilities ; these included an unsuccessful raid on a coal liquefaction plant at Ōmuta on 7 August . Bombers of the Fifth and Seventh Air Forces also made firebombing attacks against <unk> on 5 August , Kumamoto on 10 August and <unk> the next day . The FEAF staged its last attacks against Japan on 12 August ; aircraft were dispatched on 14 August but recalled while en route to their targets . Overall , the two air forces flew 6 @,@ 435 sorties against targets in Kyushu during July and August for the loss of 43 aircraft to Japanese anti @-@ aircraft guns and fighters . 
 = = Japanese military response = = 
 = = = Air defenses = = = 
 Japan 's air defenses were unable to stop the Allied air attacks . Owing to the short range of the country 's land @-@ based radar , and Allied attacks on IJN picket ships , the defenders typically had only about an hour to respond to incoming B @-@ 29s once they had been detected . Japanese signals intelligence units could provide longer warning times of incoming raids by eavesdropping on the bombers ' radio communications , but were unable to predict the target of the attack . As a result , fighter units did not have enough time to scramble and reach the bombers ' cruising altitude before they arrived over their target , and most raids were intercepted by only small numbers of aircraft . Moreover , the American bombers were capable of flying faster at high altitude than many Japanese fighters . Even when the fighters managed to close within gun range , the well @-@ built B @-@ 29s were often able to sustain large amounts of damage . Due to the difficulty of intercepting and downing B @-@ 29s , the Japanese fighter pilots increasingly perceived their efforts as being futile . From August 1944 Japanese aircraft occasionally conducted suicide ramming attacks on B @-@ 29s , and several specialized kamikaze fighter units were established in October ; by the end of the war , ramming tactics had destroyed nine B @-@ 29s and damaged another 13 for the loss of 21 fighters . 
 Air combat was most intense in late 1944 and early 1945 . Following the first B @-@ 29 raids on Tokyo , the number of IJN aircraft assigned to air defense duties was greatly increased and all 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were allocated to protect the capital . Fighters stationed to defend Japan 's main industrial areas frequently intercepted American air raids between 24 November 1944 and 25 February 1945 , and inflicted significant losses for a period . The number of fighters available declined from late January , however . Poor coordination between the IJAAF and IJN also continued to hamper Japan 's defensive efforts throughout this period . The Americans suffered few losses from Japanese fighters during the night raids which were conducted from March 1945 until the end of the war . 
 Resistance to the air raids decreased sharply from April 1945 . On 15 April the IJAAF and IJN air defense units were belatedly placed under a single command when the Air General Army was formed under the command of General Masakazu Kawabe , but by this time the fighter force 's effectiveness had been greatly reduced due to high rates of casualties in training accidents and combat . Due to the poor standard of the remaining pilots and the deployment of P @-@ 51 Mustangs to escort B @-@ 29s , the Japanese leadership decided in April to withdraw their remaining fighters from combat . These aircraft were placed in reserve to counterattack the Allied invasion . As a result , few of the subsequent Allied raids were intercepted . The effectiveness of Japanese anti @-@ aircraft batteries also decreased during 1945 as the collapse of the national economy led to severe shortages of ammunition . Moreover , as the anti @-@ aircraft guns were mainly stationed near major industrial areas , many of the raids on small cities were almost unopposed . Imperial General Headquarters decided to resume attacks on Allied bombers from late June , but by this time there were too few fighters available for this change of tactics to have any effect . The number of fighters assigned to the Air General Army peaked at just over 500 during June and July , but most frontline units had relatively few serviceable aircraft . During the last weeks of the war Superfortresses were able to operate with near impunity owing to the weakness of the Japanese air defenses ; LeMay later claimed that during this period " it was safer to fly a combat mission over Japan than it was to fly a B @-@ 29 training mission back in the United States " . 
 Overall , Japanese fighters shot down 74 B @-@ 29s , anti @-@ aircraft guns accounted for a further 54 , and 19 were downed by a combination of anti @-@ aircraft guns and fighters . IJAAF and IJN losses during the defense of Japan were 1 @,@ 450 aircraft in combat and another 2 @,@ 750 to other causes . 
 = = = Treatment of prisoners of war = = = 
 Many of the Allied airmen who were captured after being shot down over Japan were mistreated . On 8 September 1944 , the Cabinet of Japan directed that indiscriminate bombing constituted a war crime despite the fact there was no international treaty or instrument protecting a civilian population specifically from attack by aircraft at the time . As a result , captured Allied airmen were subject to trial and possible execution although the rules of war stipulates that only soldiers who engaged in combat or carry out acts of sabotage or espionage wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes behind enemy lines can be punished . The frequency of such executions differed between military districts , however . While no airmen were executed in the <unk> district ( eastern Musashi ) , which included Tokyo , those captured in the Tōkai , Chūbu and Seibu ( western Musashi ) districts were sometimes killed after a brief trial or summarily executed by the Kempeitai ( " Military Police Corps " ) . For instance , 33 American airmen were killed by IJA personnel at Fukuoka , including 15 who were beheaded shortly after the Japanese Government 's intention to surrender was announced on 15 August . Mobs of civilians also killed several Allied airmen before the Japanese military arrived to take the men into custody . In addition to these killings , most captured B @-@ 29 crewmen were brutally interrogated by the Kempeitai . 
 Of the approximately 545 Allied airmen who were captured in the Japanese home islands ( excluding the Kuril and Bonin Islands ) , 132 were executed and 29 were killed by civilians . Another 94 airmen died from other causes while in Japanese custody , including 52 who were killed when they were deliberately left in a prison in Tokyo during the 25 / 26 May raid on the city . Between six and eight US airmen shot down on 5 May were subjected to vivisection at the Kyushu Imperial University ; Professor <unk> Ishiyama and other doctors conducted four such sessions throughout May and early June . The Western Military Command assisted in arranging these operations . Many of the Japanese personnel responsible for the deaths of Allied airmen were prosecuted in the Yokohama War Crimes Trials following the war . Several of those found guilty were executed and the remainder were imprisoned . 
 = = Atomic bombings and final attacks = = 
 Beginning in 1942 the United States , with assistance from Britain and other Allied countries , devoted considerable resources to developing nuclear weapons through the Manhattan Project . In December 1944 the USAAF 's 509th Composite Group was formed under the command of Colonel Paul Tibbets to deliver these weapons once they were complete ; it deployed to Tinian during May and June 1945 . The " Trinity " test of the first nuclear bomb was successfully conducted on 16 July . Four days later the 509th Composite Group 's modified " Silverplate " B @-@ 29s began flying practice raids against Japanese cities , each armed with a single high @-@ explosive " pumpkin " bomb ; further practice missions took place on 24 , 26 and 29 July . Japanese fighters did not attempt to intercept these aircraft , and their bombing altitude of 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) was beyond the range of most anti @-@ aircraft guns . Meanwhile , on 24 July President Harry S. Truman approved the use of atomic bombs against Japan , and the next day Spaatz received written orders to this effect . These orders specified that the first attack should be made after 3 August , and named Hiroshima , Kokura , Niigata and Nagasaki as targets . Kyoto , Japan 's former imperial capital , had been included in an earlier version of the target list but Nagasaki was substituted on the direction of US Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson owing to Kyoto 's cultural value ; the city had also been excluded from the urban firebombing raids on the same grounds . On 26 July the United States , Britain and China issued the Potsdam Declaration , which demanded Japan 's surrender after warning that the country would be devastated if the war continued . The Japanese government rejected the Allied demands on 28 July . 
 Hiroshima was attacked on 6 August . At 8 : 15 am local time the B @-@ 29 Enola Gay , piloted by Tibbets , dropped the " Little Boy " atomic bomb over the center of the city . The resulting explosion killed tens of thousands of people and destroyed about 4 @.@ 7 square miles ( 12 km2 ) of buildings . The six American aircraft involved in this attack returned safely to the Marianas . Postwar estimates of casualties from the attack on Hiroshima range from 66 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 fatalities and 69 @,@ 000 to 151 @,@ 000 injured . Tens of thousands more subsequently died as a result of radiation and other injuries from the attack ; it has been estimated that 140 @,@ 000 people had died as a result of the atomic bomb by the end of 1945 . Estimates of the total number of fatalities range as high as 230 @,@ 000 . Of the survivors of the bombing , 171 @,@ 000 were rendered homeless . 
 Following the attack , a statement from President Truman was broadcast to announce that the United States had used an atomic bomb against Hiroshima and that further air attacks would be conducted on Japan 's industrial facilities and transportation network . The statement included a threat that if Japan did not surrender under the terms specified in the Potsdam Declaration it would be subjected to " a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on earth " . Two days later , daylight incendiary raids were conducted against the cities of Yawata and Fukuyama ; these attacks destroyed 21 percent of Yawata 's urban area and over 73 percent of Fukuyama . Japanese aircraft intercepted the force dispatched against Yawata and shot down a B @-@ 29 and five of the escorting P @-@ 47s for the loss of approximately 12 fighters . 
 The second atomic bomb attack was made on 9 August . On this day , the B @-@ 29 Bockscar was dispatched to attack Kokura with the " Fat Man " bomb . The city was found to be covered in smoke and haze , however ; as a result , the plane 's pilot , Major Charles Sweeney , decided to attack the secondary target of Nagasaki instead . The bomb was dropped at 10 : 58 am local time , and the resulting 20 kiloton explosion destroyed 1 @.@ 45 square miles ( 3 @.@ 8 km2 ) of buildings in the Urakami district . Official Japanese figures issued in the late 1990s state the total number of people killed as a result of this attack exceeded 100 @,@ 000 . The attack also crippled the city 's industrial production ; steel production was set back by one year , electrical power was severely reduced for two months and arms production was greatly reduced . All the American aircraft involved in the operation returned safely . The Soviet invasion of Manchuria also began on 9 August , and the Red Army advanced rapidly . On this day , B @-@ 29s dropped three million leaflets on Japanese cities warning that atomic bombs would be used to destroy all the country 's military resources unless the Emperor ended the war . At this time a third atomic bomb was expected to be ready by the end of August . Eight bombs were scheduled to have been completed by November , and General George Marshall , the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , was advocating that they be reserved for use against tactical targets in support of the planned invasion rather than be dropped on cities . 
 The Japanese government began negotiations with the Allies about the terms of surrender on 10 August . During this period B @-@ 29 attacks on Japan were limited to a raid by the 315th Bombardment Wing against an oil target on the night of 9 / 10 August and a daytime precision bombing attack on a factory in Tokyo on 10 August . The next day , President Truman ordered a halt to the bombing due to the possibility that it would be interpreted as a sign that the peace negotiations had failed . On 11 August , Spaatz issued a new targeting directive for any renewed attacks that reduced the emphasis on bombing cities in favor of intensified attacks on transport infrastructure . On 13 August , B @-@ 29s dropped copies of the Japanese government 's conditional offer to surrender over Japanese cities . Negotiations appeared to be stalled , and on 14 August Spaatz received orders to resume the bombing campaign . Arnold requested the largest attack possible , and hoped that USASTAF could dispatch 1 @,@ 000 aircraft against the Tokyo region and other locations in Japan . In fact , 828 B @-@ 29s escorted by 186 fighters ( for a total of 1 @,@ 014 aircraft ) were dispatched ; during the day precision raids were made against targets at Iwakuni , Osaka and <unk> and at night the cities of Kumagaya and <unk> were firebombed . While the Eighth Air Force units at Okinawa had not yet conducted any missions against Japan , General Doolittle decided not to contribute aircraft to this operation as he did not want to risk the lives of the men under his command when the war was effectively over . These were the last attacks conducted against Japan by heavy bombers , as at noon on 15 August Hirohito made a radio broadcast announcing his country 's intention to surrender . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Limited air operations continued over Japan in the weeks following the Japanese government 's decision to surrender . On 17 and 18 August , B @-@ 32 Dominators flying reconnaissance missions from Okinawa were attacked by IJN fighters near Tokyo . From 17 August the Twentieth Air Force was made responsible for supplying Allied prisoner of war camps in Japan , Korea and China until the prisoners were evacuated . Supply drops began 10 days later , and continued until 20 September . During this period the B @-@ 29s flew almost 1 @,@ 000 sorties and delivered close to 4 @,@ 500 tons of supplies . Eight aircraft crashed during these missions and another was damaged by a Soviet fighter over Korea . The 3d Photographic Reconnaissance Squadron , which had operated over Japan throughout the bombing campaign , also continued its photo reconnaissance and mapping flights over the home islands during this period . While Spaatz ordered that B @-@ 29s and fighters fly continuous show of force patrols of the Tokyo area from 19 August until the formal surrender ceremony took place , these operations were initially frustrated by bad weather and logistics problems . The first patrols were not flown until 30 August , when they were made in conjunction with the landing of General Douglas MacArthur and the US Army 's 11th Airborne Division at Atsugi airfield . A similar operation was conducted the next day , and on 2 September 462 B @-@ 29s and many naval aircraft overflew the Allied fleet in Tokyo Bay following the surrender ceremony on board USS Missouri . 
 Allied air units participated in the occupation of Japan after the war . Advance parties of the FEAF began to arrive at Atsugi airfield on 30 August , and units of the Fifth Air Force were established across the home islands during September and October . Besides transporting occupation troops , the Fifth Air Force conducted armed patrols over Japan and Korea as well and also made many photo reconnaissance and mapping sorties . Royal Australian Air Force , British Royal Air Force , Indian Air Force , Royal New Zealand Air Force , US Navy and United States Marine Corps air units were also deployed to Japan for occupation duties . There was no Japanese resistance to the Allied occupation , and the number of air units stationed in the country was gradually reduced from late 1945 . 
 Japan 's bomb @-@ damaged cities were rebuilt after the war . War damage and the need to rehouse soldiers and civilians returning from overseas resulted in a shortage of 4 @.@ 2 million units of housing which , combined with food shortages , led to many civilians being forced to live in harsh conditions . In September 1945 the Japanese government offered to provide material for 300 @,@ 000 small temporary houses to evacuees , but the emphasis of its policies in this year and 1946 was to stop people returning to the damaged cities . The reconstruction of 115 cities began in 1946 , and this work was conducted in line with guidelines developed by the Japanese government . The Allied occupation authorities were not involved in the urban rebuilding effort , but allowed this work to go ahead despite criticizing it as inappropriate to Japan 's status as a defeated country . <unk> of land and buildings for use by the occupation force and a requirement that the Japanese government prioritize the construction of housing for the Allied troops interfered with reconstruction , however . In many cities rebuilding was accompanied by a process of land readjustment which sought to improve the urban layout , though the success of both such readjustment and rebuilding programs varied between locations . Overall , most of the new buildings constructed were of poor quality , and it was not until well after the war that major urban improvement projects were undertaken . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Results = = = 
 The air attacks on Japan caused hundreds of thousands of casualties , though estimates of the number who were killed and wounded vary considerably . The strategic attacks by the Twentieth Air Force caused most of the casualties and damage . The figures most frequently cited in the literature on the campaign are sourced from the USSBS report The Effects of Bombing on Health and Medical Services in Japan which estimated that 333 @,@ 000 Japanese were killed and 473 @,@ 000 wounded . Included in this figure were an estimated 120 @,@ 000 dead and 160 @,@ 000 injured in the two atomic bomb attacks . Another USSBS report , The Effects of Strategic Bombing on Japanese Morale , included a much higher estimate of 900 @,@ 000 killed and 1 @.@ 3 million injured which was reached by a Japanese research team using a statistical sampling methodology . While this figure is also occasionally cited , the USSBS ' investigators regarded the work of their statistical teams as unsatisfactory , and the researchers were unable to calculate the error rate of this estimate . The postwar Japanese government calculated in 1949 that 323 @,@ 495 people had been killed by air attacks in the home islands . The destruction of buildings housing government records during air raids contributed to the uncertainty about the number of casualties . The Twentieth Air Force lost 414 B @-@ 29s during attacks on Japan . Over 2 @,@ 600 American bomber crew members were killed , including POWs who died in captivity , and a further 433 were wounded . 
 The following table provides examples of the estimated number of Japanese casualties from air attack in different sources : 
 Much of Japan 's industrial capacity was also destroyed by Allied bombing . Over 600 major industrial facilities were destroyed or badly damaged , contributing to a large decline in production . <unk> caused by the air attacks further reduced output . It is not possible to determine the exact damage bombing caused to Japan 's economy , however , as the Allied naval blockade also contributed to general breakdown which occurred from late 1944 . Statistics compiled by the USSBS show a correlation between the number of B @-@ 29 sorties directed at different industries and the amount by which their production declined , but air attacks were not the only reason for these differences . In addition to the heavy bomber attacks , the operations by Allied aircraft carriers tightened the blockade by disrupting Japanese coastal shipping ; the naval aircraft were unable to carry enough bombs to seriously damage Japanese industrial plants , however . Compounding the effects of the air attacks , Japan 's rice crop of 1945 failed . The resulting shortage of rice caused widespread malnutrition , and mass starvation would have occurred had the war continued . In financial terms , the Allied air campaign and attacks on merchant ships destroyed between one third and a quarter of Japan 's wealth . 
 The attacks also caused extensive damage to Japan 's urban areas . Approximately 40 percent of the urban area of the 66 cities subjected to area attacks were destroyed . This included the loss of about 2 @.@ 5 million housing units , which rendered 8 @.@ 5 million people homeless . The urban area attacks reduced the morale of the Japanese population , and postwar surveys conducted by the USSBS found that air attacks were the most important factor in convincing the Japanese that the war had been lost . During the final months of the war the raids also contributed to the deterioration of the Japanese social fabric . However , civilian morale did not collapse due to the bombing , and post @-@ war investigations found that most Japanese had remained willing to continue the war if necessary . 
 Allied air raids significantly influenced the Japanese government 's decision to surrender . While the USSBS did not state that any single factor caused the surrender , during interrogations most Japanese wartime leaders nominated the prolonged air attacks on the home islands as the single most important factor which influenced their decision to end the war . In particular , Prime Minister Kantarō Suzuki stated that the combination of the conventional B @-@ 29 raids , Potsdam Declaration and atomic bombings gave the Government the opportunity to begin negotiations with the Allies . Emperor Hirohito cited damage from the attacks , inadequate preparations to resist invasion and the Soviet offensive as his justifications for authorizing the surrender . To achieve this , the American Twentieth Strategic Air Force , in concert with its Allies , dropped 160 @,@ 800 tons of bombs on the Japanese home islands . Of this total , 147 @,@ 000 tons of bombs were dropped by the B @-@ 29 bomber force . Around 90 percent of the American tonnage fell in the last five months of the war . The financial cost of the campaign to the United States was $ 4 billion ; this expenditure was much lower than the $ 30 billion spent on bomber operations in Europe , and a small proportion of the $ 330 billion the US Government spent on the war . 
 = = = Morality = = = 
 There has been debate over the morality of the air campaign against Japan since World War II . During the war the American public approved of the bombing of Germany and Japan , and the few people who criticized the raids were seen as unrealistic or even traitors . Some United States government and military personnel believed that the bombing campaign was morally ambiguous , however , but rarely voiced their views publicly . 
 The moral concerns over the attacks have focused on the large number of civilian casualties and property damage they caused . For this and other reasons , British philosopher A. C. Grayling has concluded that the Allied area bombing campaigns against both Japan and Germany constituted moral crimes . Mark Selden described the summer 1945 peak of the bombing campaign as " still perhaps unrivaled in the magnitude of human slaughter " and stated that the factors contributing to its intensity were a combination of " technological breakthroughs , American nationalism , and the erosion of moral and political scruples about killing of civilians , perhaps intensified by the racism that crystallized in the Pacific theater " . Edwin P. Hoyt wrote in 1987 that Japanese people commonly regard the Allied bombing of civilians as the worst atrocity of the war . It has also been suggested that anti @-@ Japanese sentiment was a factor motivating the USAAF 's emphasis on firebombing during the campaign against Japan while most of its raids on Germany used precision bombing tactics . However , historian Richard B. Frank argues that this difference was attributable to the evolution in views towards bombing over the course of the war , the limited intelligence on the structure of the Japanese economy available to the Allies and the much greater vulnerability of Japanese cities to incendiary bombs . 
 The moral defense of the attacks on Japanese cities rests on an argument that they saved lives by shortening the war . The USSBS concluded that the effects of strategic bombing and blockade would have forced Japan to surrender by the end of 1945 even if atomic bombs had not been used and the Soviet Union had remained neutral . Historian E. Bartlett Kerr supported this assessment , and argued that the firebombing of Japan 's major cities was the key factor motivating Hirohito 's decision to end the war . American historian Barrett Tillman has also written that area attacks were unavoidable because , owing to the limitations of their bombsight and the high winds common over Japan , the B @-@ 29s were incapable of bombing individual targets without also causing widespread damage to surrounding areas . 
 The atomic bomb attacks have been the subject of long @-@ running controversy . Shortly after the attacks an opinion poll found that about 85 percent of Americans supported the use of atomic weapons , and the wartime generation believed that they had saved millions of lives . Criticisms over the decision to use the bombs have increased over time , however . Arguments made against the attacks include that Japan would have eventually surrendered and that the attacks were made to either intimidate the Soviet Union or justify the Manhattan Project . In 1994 , an opinion poll found that 55 percent of Americans supported the decision to bomb Hiroshima and Nagasaki . When registering the only dissenting opinion of the judges involved in the International Military Tribunal for the Far East in 1947 , Justice <unk> Pal argued that Japan 's leadership had not conspired to commit atrocities and stated that the decision to conduct the atomic bomb attacks was the clearest example of a direct order to conduct " indiscriminate murder " during the Pacific War . Since then , Japanese academics , such as Yuki Tanaka and Tsuyoshi Hasegawa , have argued that use of the bombs was immoral and constituted a war crime . In contrast , President Truman and , more recently , historians such as Paul Fussell have argued that the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were justified as they induced the Japanese surrender . 
 On two occasions Japanese citizens have sued their government for damages from the bombings , arguing that the government is culpable for having waged a " reckless war " that provoked the bombings and for requiring civilians to remain in the targeted areas . In December 2009 the Tokyo District Court dismissed one of the suits , stating that it was not possible to identify individuals who deserve compensation as almost all Japanese suffered as a result of the war . The court also ruled that any compensation should be allocated through the legislative , rather than judicial , process . In December 2011 , the Osaka District Court handed down a similar ruling , adding that the government did not violate its constitution in its treatment of bombing victims . This judgement stated that there had not been " unreasonable disparity " in how civilians , soldiers , and atomic bomb survivors were treated , and that the government had showed " no gross deviation from its discretionary right in not legislating for redress measures " . 
 = No Line on the Horizon = 
 No Line on the Horizon is the twelfth studio album by Irish rock band U2 . It was produced by Brian Eno , Daniel Lanois , and Steve Lillywhite , and was released on 27 February 2009 . It was the band 's first record since How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb ( 2004 ) , marking the longest gap between studio albums of their career to that point . The band originally intended to release the songs as two EPs , but later combined the material into a single record . Photographer Anton Corbijn shot a companion film , Linear , which was released alongside the album and included with several special editions . 
 U2 began work on the album in 2006 with record producer Rick Rubin but shelved most of the material from those sessions . In May 2007 , the group began new sessions with Eno and Lanois in Fez , Morocco . Intending to write " future hymns " — songs that would be played forever — the group spent two weeks recording in a riad and involved the producers in the songwriting process . Having grown tired of writing in the first @-@ person , lead singer Bono wrote his lyrics from the perspective of different characters . Recording continued at several studios in the United States , United Kingdom , and Ireland through December 2008 . The group had intended to release No Line on the Horizon in November , but after composing 50 to 60 songs , they delayed the release to continue writing . 
 Prior to the album 's release , U2 indicated that Eno 's and Lanois ' involvement , as well as the band 's time in Fez , had resulted in a more experimental record than their previous two albums . The band compared the shift in style to that seen between The Joshua Tree ( 1987 ) and Achtung Baby ( 1991 ) . Upon its release , No Line on the Horizon received generally favourable reviews , although many critics noted that it was not as experimental as previously suggested . The album debuted at number one in 30 countries but did not sell as well as anticipated ; the band expressed disappointment over the relatively low sales , compared to previous albums , of five million copies . By contrast , the supporting U2 360 ° Tour from 2009 to 2011 , was the highest @-@ grossing concert tour in history , with ticket sales over $ 736 million . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 = = = Aborted sessions with Rick Rubin = = = 
 In 2006 , U2 started work on the follow @-@ up to How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb ( 2004 ) , collaborating with producer Rick Rubin in southern France and at Abbey Road Studios in London . Later that year , the band released two songs from these sessions on the compilation album U218 Singles : a cover of the Skids ' " The Saints Are Coming " with Green Day , and " Window in the Skies " . In January 2007 , lead singer Bono said U2 intended to take their next album in a different musical direction from their previous few releases . He said , " We 're gonna continue to be a band , but maybe the rock will have to go ; maybe the rock has to get a lot harder . But whatever it is , it 's not gonna stay where it is . " 
 Rubin encouraged a " back to basics " approach and wanted the group to bring finished songs to the studio . This approach conflicted with U2 's " free @-@ form " recording style , by which they improvised material in the studio . They ultimately decided to end recording with Rubin ; though the material from these sessions was shelved , the band expressed interest in revisiting it in the future . They subsequently employed Brian Eno and Daniel Lanois as principal producers and co @-@ writers . Steve Lillywhite was also brought in to produce a few tracks . 
 = = = Sessions with Brian Eno and Daniel Lanois = = = 
 U2 began work with Eno and Lanois in May 2007 . Bono had accepted an invitation to the World Sacred Music Festival in Fez , Morocco , and he invited his bandmates , as well as Eno and Lanois , to attend . They rented the riad of the hotel Riad El <unk> and turned it into a makeshift recording studio , intending to create " future hymns " — songs that would be played forever . 
 The group spent two weeks in Fez , occasionally recording with an oud player and local percussionists . Recording during the festival exposed the group to Hindu and Jewish music , Sufi singing and <unk> drums . The exotic influences inspired them to pursue a more experimental sound . Bassist Adam Clayton said the music they heard in Fez " had a primitivism ... but there was an other @-@ worldly feel , there was that connection with that Arabic scale . " Eno insisted that drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. use an electronic drum kit . The band described many of the tracks conceived in these sessions as unsuitable for radio airplay or for playing live . The open @-@ air riad allowed the group to hear birdsong , as captured in the introduction to " Unknown Caller " . The songs " Moment of Surrender " , " White as Snow " , " No Line on the Horizon " and " Unknown Caller " were written at this time ; each track was recorded in one take . In total , the band recorded approximately 10 songs during the two weeks . After leaving Fez , the band recorded in Hanover Quay Studios in Dublin , Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City , and Olympic Studios in London . 
 In pre @-@ release interviews , U2 compared the extent of their expected shift in musical style to that of Achtung Baby . The band scaled back these experimental pursuits , however ; Mullen , Jr. noted , " at a certain stage , reality hits , and you go , ' What are we gonna do with this stuff ? ' Are we going to release this sort of meandering experimentation , or are we gonna knock some songs out of this ? " Bono shared this opinion , stating , " We went so far out on the Sufi singing and the sort of ecstatic @-@ music front , that we had to ground it and find a counterpoint . " Eno commented that many of " the more contemplative and sonically adventurous songs " had been dropped , attributing the lack of African @-@ inspired music to its sounding " synthetic " and unconvincing when paired with other songs . 
 Clayton filmed the band 's progress during the album 's production ; these videos were added to the subscribers ' section of U2.com. On 16 August 2008 , an eavesdropping fan recorded several songs playing from Bono 's beach house in Èze , France . These " beach clips " were uploaded to YouTube , but removed at Universal Music 's request . In November 2008 , U2 guitarist The Edge confirmed the album 's working title as No Line on the Horizon and noted that the band had to move quickly to complete mixing to meet the new February release date . In an interview with Q , the group revealed that rapper will.i.am had worked with them on the track " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " . 
 In December 2008 , U2 recorded at Olympic Studios in London , putting the finishing touches to the album and making several changes to its content . The group had planned to release the material as two extended plays , titled Daylight and Darkness , but during these sessions decided to compile the best songs onto one album . The band struggled to complete " Stand Up Comedy " , a song they had been working on since the Fez sessions 16 months previously . The song had been through multiple iterations and titles , including " For Your Love " and " Stand Up " . U2 cut " Winter " , a song Eno had urged them to complete , and " Every Breaking Wave " , which they cut to reduce the album 's running time . " Winter " appears in the accompanying Anton Corbijn film Linear and the 2009 war film Brothers . Both songs had been mentioned in pre @-@ release album reviews . 
 The band changed many of the tracks ' names during recording , retitling " French Disco " to " Magnificent " and " Crazy Tonight " to " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " . " Chromium Chords " became " Tripoli " , and finally " Fez – Being Born " . The band considered " Fez – Being Born " and " Get on your Boots " as album openers , but ultimately decided on " No Line on the Horizon " . At the end of the sessions , the band chose to include " White as Snow " , a quiet song about a dying soldier in Afghanistan , to balance out the earlier , rockier tunes . With the exception of this track , U2 had tried to keep the theme of war out of the album . In early December 2008 , Clayton stated , " this is definitely the last week of recording . But then again , last week was definitely the last week of recording , and the week before that . " The final sessions ended later that month . No Line on the Horizon is dedicated to Rob Partridge , who signed the band 's first record deal in 1979 and died of cancer in late 2008 . 
 = = = Linear = = = 
 Linear , a film directed by Anton Corbijn , is included with the digipak , magazine , box , and deluxe iTunes editions of the album . The idea for the film originated from a U2 video shoot in June 2007 , during which Corbijn asked the band to remain still while he filmed them to create a " photograph on film " ; the band did not move but the objects around them did . Impressed , the band believed that the online album listening experience could be enhanced with moving imagery . In May 2008 , they commissioned Corbijn to create the film . Corbijn has claimed that Linear is not a music video but " a new way to listen to a record " and " a new way to use film to connect to music " . 
 The film is based on a story by Corbijn and Bono , and includes several of the characters Bono created for the album . The plot focuses on a Parisian motorcycle officer , played by Saïd Taghmaoui ; the character has become disillusioned with his life and the conflict between immigrants and the police in the city , causing him to leave to see his girlfriend in Tripoli . The song order in the film is representative of No Line on the Horizon 's as it was in May 2008 . 
 = = = Follow @-@ up album = = = 
 In February 2009 , Bono stated that by the end of the year , U2 would release an album consisting of unused material from the No Line on the Horizon sessions . Bono labelled it " a more meditative album on the theme of pilgrimage " . Provisionally titled Songs of Ascent , it would be a sister release to No Line on the Horizon , similar to Zooropa 's relationship to Achtung Baby . In June 2009 , Bono said that although nine tracks had been completed , the album would only be released if its quality surpassed that of No Line on the Horizon . A December 2009 report stated that U2 had been working in the studio with the goal of a mid @-@ 2010 release . The band revealed that the first single was intended to be " Every Breaking Wave " . 
 Over time , the album continued to be delayed . In April 2010 , U2 's manager Paul McGuinness confirmed that the album would not be finished by June , but indicated that a release " before the end of the year [ was ] increasingly likely . " In October 2010 , Bono stated that their new album would be produced by Danger Mouse , and that 12 songs had been completed . He also noted that U2 were working on a potential album of club music in the spirit of " U2 's remixes in the 1990s " . Around the same time , McGuinness said the album was slated for an early 2011 release . In February 2011 , he said that the album was almost complete and had a tentative release date of May 2011 , although he noted that Songs of Ascent was no longer the likely title . After numerous delays , U2 digitally released their thirteenth album , Songs of Innocence , on 9 September 2014 in a surprise release . The band appeared the same day at an Apple Inc. product launch event to announce the album and reveal it was being released to all iTunes customers at no cost . 
 In October 2014 , Bono said that Songs of Ascent " will come " and that the group views it as the third release in a possible trilogy of albums . 
 = = Composition = = 
 During the Hanover Quay sessions in 2008 , Bono indicated that he had become " tired of [ writing in ] the first @-@ person " , leading him to write songs from the perspective of different characters . He invented " a traffic cop , a junkie [ and ] a soldier serving in Afghanistan . " Although each character tells a personal story , the underlying theme of the album is peripheral vision , events taking place in the wider world , " just at the edges " . Bono described it as " central to the understanding of this album " . Nevertheless , as the characters narrate there is an intentional " shutting out " of the wider world , so that the focus remains on their " personal epiphanies " . The narrative the group originally planned for the album was broken up in the sessions ' final weeks with their changes to the track listing . Bono revealed that numbers were significant in many of the songs , and that the album was split into thirds ; he described the first section as " a whole world unto itself , and you get to a very ecstatic place " , and the second as " a load of singles " . The final third is composed of songs that are " unusual territory " for the band . 
 " No Line on the Horizon " stemmed from Mullen 's experiments with different drum beats ; Eno sampled and manipulated the patterns , and the rest of the band began to play over the beats . The lyrical idea of a place " where the sea meets the sky and you can 't tell the difference between the two " and the vocal delivery were both present from the start . Bono noted that the theme behind the song was infinity , and that the track was inherently optimistic . " Magnificent " is an up @-@ tempo song that begins with a synthesizer line by Eno . The band wanted a track that felt euphoric , and the melody , created from a series of chord changes during a jam , was worked on continuously by Bono . The setting in the lyrics was described by Lanois as " New York in the 50s " , written from the perspective of " a Charlie Parker kind of figure " . The song has been described as " echo [ ing ] The Unforgettable Fire 's opening track ' A Sort of Homecoming ' in its atmospheric sweep " . 
 The drug addict character appears in the songs " Moment of Surrender " and " Unknown Caller " . " Moment of Surrender " , improvised and recorded by U2 , Eno , and Lanois in a single take , demonstrates gospel influences . Eno and Lanois said the song is the closest to the group 's original concept for an album of future hymns . Eno noted , " Apart from some editing and the addition of the short cello piece that introduces it , the song appears on the album exactly as it was the first and only time we played it . " In the song , the addict is having a crisis of faith . In " Unknown Caller " , the character is suicidal and , while using his phone to buy drugs , begins receiving cryptic text messages with technology @-@ inspired directions . The track was developed early in the Fez sessions . The guitar solo at the song 's conclusion was taken from the backing track . 
 Eno developed " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " during the Fez sessions , under the working title " Diorama " . U2 reworked it with Steve Lillywhite during a break from recording with Eno and Lanois . Some of the lyrics were influenced by Barack Obama 's presidential campaign , while others referenced Bono . Album reviews described the song as a joyous pop rock composition . " Get on Your Boots " stemmed from a guitar riff The Edge created and recorded at his home . At 150 beats per minute , the song is one of the fastest the band have recorded . Rolling Stone called it a " blazing , fuzzed @-@ out rocker that picks up where ' Vertigo ' left off . " Thematically , the song is about Bono taking his family on vacation to France and witnessing warplanes flying overhead at the start of the Iraq War . The chant " let me in the sound " was developed late in the recording sessions and became a motif throughout parts of the album . 
 " Stand Up Comedy " went through numerous iterations ; at one point , Lanois noted , " that song was about six different songs " . In its original concept , the track featured mandolins playing in a Middle Eastern beat . The riff was altered and a chorus of " for your love " was introduced . This version was discarded as the band came up with a new riff and lyrics , only retaining the " for your love " vocal . U2 liked the result at the end of the sessions , but felt that the song would appear too " crafted " ; they instead chose an older mix for inclusion on the album . Several of the song 's lyrics , including the line , " Be careful of small men with big ideas " , relate to Bono 's self @-@ mockery . The guitar sound from the experimental " Fez " portion of " Fez – Being Born " was developed while the band recorded " The Saints Are Coming " during the Rick Rubin sessions . Lanois edited the part , adding a beat developed by Eno , before playing it for the group . The sounds of a Moroccan marketplace were also added . The faster section of the song , " Being Born " , was altered into the same key as " Fez " and Lanois placed the two sections together , creating the one song . The " let me in the sound " chant from " Get on Your Boots " is included at the beginning of the track . 
 " White as Snow " focuses on the soldier character 's last thoughts as he dies from the wounds suffered from an improvised explosive device . The song is based on the traditional hymn " Veni , <unk> , Emmanuel " ; the idea to base the song on a public domain melody was suggested to Lanois by Newfoundland musician Lori Anna Reid . " Breathe " is set on 16 June , an intentional reference to James Joyce 's novel Ulysses . U2 worked on an earlier version of the song for a long time before they scrapped it and re @-@ recorded it with Lillywhite . Two sets of lyrics were also present ; one about Nelson Mandela , and the other " more surreal and personal " . The band decided to use the latter . " Cedars of Lebanon " , written from the perspective of a journalist covering a war overseas , was created in a similar manner to " Fez – Being Born " . The song 's melody was based on a sample of " Against the Sky " , a track Eno and Lanois had collaborated on with Harold Budd for the 1984 album The Pearl ; the group noted that the ambience of the song was " like a direct throwback to the early 80s " . The final verse is a condemnation of the Iraq War . 
 = = Release = = 
 At the music industry trade fair <unk> in 2008 , Paul McGuinness said No Line on the Horizon would be ready for release in October 2008 . Lanois corroborated that in June 2008 , stating the album should be ready in 3 – 4 weeks . He said , " We 're just finishing the vocals . Bono 's in great form , singing fantastic . " On 3 September 2008 , U2.com posted an article in which Bono revealed that the new album would be out " in early 2009 " , also noting that " around 50 – 60 songs " had been recorded in the sessions . It was later confirmed the album would be released on 27 February 2009 in Ireland , 2 March in the UK , and 3 March in North America . The gap between How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb and No Line on the Horizon 's release was the longest of the band 's career to that point . 
 Universal Music Group took extreme measures to prevent the album from leaking , offering pre @-@ release listening sessions for critics instead of sending out review copies . However , Universal Music Australia 's online music store , <unk> , accidentally released the album for digital sale on 18 February 2009 , almost two weeks before the scheduled release date . The complete album appeared on the website for a short time before it was removed , and the accidental sale led to the album 's being leaked and shared across the Internet . U2 reacted to the leak with some positivity . The Edge stated , " The one good thing about that is a lot of our fans have already given us their thumbs up . Even though it was fans getting it for free . " 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 The cover art for No Line on the Horizon is a photograph of Lake Constance , taken by Japanese photographer Hiroshi Sugimoto ; titled Boden Sea , it is one of 200 pictures in his <unk> collection . The image was the inspiration for Bono 's lyrics on the track " No Line on the Horizon " . Sugimoto and U2 struck a deal in which the band could use the photograph as the cover art and Sugimoto could use " No Line on the Horizon " in his future projects ; Sugimoto 's only stipulation was that no text could be placed on top of the image . Original releases had an equals sign superimposed in the middle of the album cover , but later releases featured only the image . AMP Visual , who designed the equals sign , stated that it represents " a form of title for the album , from the universal language of mathematics , " taking inspiration from the album 's theme of " universal balance and contrast , of night and day . " Continuing the mathematical theme that the equals sign established , the packaging of the digipak special edition features a " little hidden code " in the form of a piece of the Fibonacci sequence . 
 Boden Sea had previously been used by Richard Chartier and Taylor <unk> for their 2006 album <unk> The album covers are similar , though No Line on the Horizon has a white border around the image , and <unk> has a box at the top of the cover with the names of the artists and the album . <unk> called U2 's cover " nearly an exact rip @-@ off " and stated that for the band to obtain the rights to the image it was " simply a phone call and a check . " Sugimoto refuted both of these claims , calling the use of the same photograph a coincidence and stating that no money was involved in the deal with U2 . 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 No Line on the Horizon was released in five physical formats , three of which — the digipak , magazine , and box formats — were limited editions . The standard jewel case release contained a 24 @-@ page booklet . The LP vinyl release was pressed on two black discs and contained a 16 @-@ page booklet . The digipak release had a 36 @-@ page booklet and a poster , which was also included in the box release . A 60 @-@ page magazine was included in the magazine release . Linear was a downloadable feature in the digipak and magazine formats , and was a bonus DVD in the box release , which also contained a 64 @-@ page hardcover book . 
 The album was made available for pre @-@ order on the iTunes Store on 19 January 2009 , the day " Get on Your Boots " premiered on <unk> iTunes album pre @-@ orders contained bonus tracks unavailable with any other version . Digital versions were available from Amazon.com in MP3 format , and from U2.com in MP3 and FLAC formats . 
 = = Promotion and singles = = 
 To promote No Line on the Horizon , U2 performed " Get on Your Boots " at the 51st Grammy Awards , the 2009 BRIT Awards , and the 2009 Echo Awards , although the album was not eligible for awards at any of the ceremonies . The band later appeared on French television and radio on 23 February 2009 , and on 26 February they taped a segment for Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , which was aired the next day . On 27 February , U2 made an appearance on a Live Lounge session for BBC Radio 1 , followed by a mini @-@ concert on the roof of Broadcasting House . On the week of 2 March 2009 , U2 appeared on CBS @-@ TV 's Late Show with David Letterman for five consecutive nights , the first time a musical guest had performed for an entire week on the show . The group performed " Breathe " , " Magnificent " , " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " , " Beautiful Day " , and " Get on Your Boots " . On 3 March , Michael Bloomberg , Mayor of New York City , added a street sign reading " U2 Way " at 53rd Street in Manhattan , for the week that U2 performed on the Late Show . U2 also performed at Fordham University on 6 March 2009 for an appearance on ABC @-@ TV 's Good Morning America . From 9 to 11 March , the band participated in " U2 3 Nights Live " , a series of radio interviews and performances that were broadcast across North America and streamed live on U2.com. 
 From 11 to 17 February 2009 , U2.com hosted a promotion where 4 @,@ 000 fans could win a 7 @-@ inch single collector 's edition box set that contained all four of the singles released from No Line on the Horizon . An alternate version of the title track , " No Line on the Horizon 2 " , debuted on RTÉ <unk> on 12 February 2009 ; it was later used as the B @-@ side for the first single , " Get on Your Boots " . The full album began streaming on the group 's MySpace page on 20 February 2009 , and on U2.com a few days later . 
 Four singles were planned from the album , although only three were released . The first single , " Get on Your Boots " , was released as a digital download on 19 January 2009 , and in a physical format on 16 February 2009 . The iTunes store held the exclusive digital download rights to the single for the first 24 hours . The second single , " Magnificent " , was released on 4 May 2009 . The third single , " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " , was released on 7 September 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 No Line on the Horizon received generally favourable reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 30 reviews . David Fricke of Rolling Stone gave it a five @-@ star score and called it " [ U2 's ] best , in its textural exploration and tenacious melodic grip , since 1991 's Achtung Baby . " In his review for Blender , Rob Sheffield stated " The days are gone when U2 were trying to keep it simple — at this point , the lads have realized that over @-@ the @-@ top romantic grandiosity is the style that suits them , so they come on like the cosmic guitar supplicants they were born to be . " Uncut magazine 's Andrew Mueller commented , " It 's U2 's least immediate album — but there 's something about it that suggests it may be one of their most enduring . " Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly graded it an " A − " and called the album " an eclectic and electrifying winner , one that speaks to the zeitgeist the way only U2 can and dare to do . " BBC Music reviewer Chris Jones said , " There 's plenty to rejoice about here " while noting that the " symbiotic relationship with Brian Eno ( and Daniel Lanois ) seems to have reached the point of <unk> . " NME contributor Ben Patashnik called the album " a grand , sweeping , brave record that , while not quite the reinvention they pegged it as , suggests they 've got the chops to retain their relevance well into their fourth decade as a band . " 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Time Out Sydney felt that the album is unfortunately Brian Eno 's new album rather than U2 's : " for all that 's new , there 's no way that you 'll mistake it for another band . " Pitchfork Media reviewer Ryan Dombal gave a score of 4 @.@ 2 out of 10 , stating , " the album 's <unk> experimentation is either terribly misguided or hidden underneath a wash of shameless U2 @-@ isms . " Kaj Roth of Melodic magazine described it as " more electronic and less rock " and stating that part of the album " reminds just too much of their early 90 's records " . Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun gave a rating of three and a half stars , comparing it to the 1990s albums Zooropa , Pop , and Original Soundtracks 1 while stating " This is no blockbuster ... It 's the least immediate U2 album in years , but one that diehard fans will enjoy living with " . Madeleine Chong of MTV Asia wrote that , " Although U2 should be lauded for their efforts at constant reinvention and pushing the envelope in the rock genre , [ No Line on the Horizon ] possesses neither the iconic qualities of The Joshua Tree or the radical yet relevant magnetism of Achtung Baby . " Toronto Star music critic Ben Rayner called the songs boring , adding that the ambience introduced by Eno and Lanois was " often all these vague , hook @-@ deficient songs have going for them . " Rob Harvilla of The Village Voice gave the album a mixed review and wrote that its songs " will remind you of other , much better songs , but in a way that only makes you want to go and listen to those other songs instead . " Time magazine also gave it an unfavourable review , calling the effort " unsatisfied " and " mostly restless , tentative and confused . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 No Line on the Horizon opened with strong sales , debuting at number one in thirty countries , including Australia , Belgium , Canada , France , Ireland , Japan , the Netherlands , Portugal , the United Kingdom , and the United States . Within one week of release , the album was certified platinum in Brazil , a record for the country . In the United States , it was U2 's seventh number @-@ one album ; first @-@ week sales exceeded 484 @,@ 000 , the band 's second @-@ highest figures after How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb . In the United Kingdom , the album became U2 's tenth number @-@ one album , making them the fifth @-@ most @-@ successful act on the UK Albums Chart . By June 2009 , over five million copies had been sold worldwide . Globally it was the seventh @-@ highest @-@ selling album of 2009 . 
 Sales of the album stalled midway through 2009 . By October , just over one million copies had been sold in the US , the group 's lowest in more than a decade . Through March 2014 , the album 's lifetime sales in the country totaled 1 @.@ 1 million copies . In the UK , the record sold less than a third of How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb 's figures , and a quarter of All That You Can 't Leave Behind 's . Global sales of No Line on the Horizon remained at five million copies through September 2010 . The album did not generate a hit single ; ABC noted that sales of How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb had been propelled by the track " Vertigo " which , although not a chart success , had become well @-@ known to the public from its use in iPod commercials . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 No Line on the Horizon was nominated in the Best Rock Album category at the 52nd Grammy Awards in 2010 . The song " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " was nominated for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group With Vocals and Best Rock Song . The cut song " Winter " was nominated for Best Original Song at the 67th Golden Globe Awards for its role in the film Brothers . Rolling Stone ranked No Line on the Horizon the best album of the year and the 36th @-@ best album of the decade , and " Moment of Surrender " as the best song of the year and the 36th @-@ best song of the decade . The Irish Independent placed it fourth on their list of the year 's top Irish albums , while Time listed the song " No Line on the Horizon " as the third @-@ best of 2009 . 
 = = U2 360 ° Tour = = 
 Following the release of No Line on the Horizon , U2 staged a worldwide stadium tour , titled the U2 360 ° Tour . Beginning on 30 June 2009 in Barcelona , the tour visited Europe , North America , Oceania , Africa and South America from 2009 to 2011 and comprised 110 shows . The concerts featured a 360 @-@ degree stage that the audience surrounded . To accommodate this , a large four @-@ legged structure nicknamed " The Claw " was built above the stage . At 50 meters ( 165 feet ) tall , it was the largest stage ever constructed and twice the size of the previous largest set , which was used on The Rolling Stones ' A Bigger Bang Tour . The idea for the stage had been proposed to the group by the set designer Willie Williams at the end of the Vertigo Tour in 2006 . The design was intended to overcome the staid traditional appearance of outdoor concerts where the stage was dominated by speaker stacks on either side . Despite grossing over US $ 311 million from 44 shows over its first two legs , the tour was barely breaking even , with production costs of approximately US $ 750 @,@ 000 per day . In 2010 , U2 's scheduled headline appearance at the Glastonbury Festival 2010 and their North American leg were postponed until the following year after Bono suffered a serious back injury . By its conclusion in July 2011 , U2 360 ° had set records for the highest @-@ grossing concert tour with $ 736 million in ticket sales , and for the highest @-@ attended tour with over 7 @.@ 2 million tickets sold . 
 During the first leg of the tour in Europe , the band typically played songs from No Line on the Horizon early in the set . " Breathe " , " No Line on the Horizon " , " Get on Your Boots " and " Magnificent " were played as the opening quartet , while " Unknown Caller " and a remixed arrangement of " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " appeared close to the halfway point . " Moment of Surrender " closed every show . U2 made minor changes to the setlists for the second leg of the tour . " No Line on the Horizon " was performed later in the concerts , while " Unknown Caller " was dropped for several weeks before being revived towards the end of the leg . The band did not play " Stand Up Comedy " , " Fez – Being Born " , " White as Snow " , or " Cedars of Lebanon " at any point in 2009 . The 25 October 2009 concert at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , California , U2 's penultimate concert of 2009 , was filmed and streamed live over YouTube . The shoot used 27 high definition cameras ; the concert was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray as U2 360 ° at the Rose Bowl on 3 June 2010 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Eight months after No Line on the Horizon 's release , Bono said he was disappointed with the album 's sales . Regarding the lack of commercial appeal , Bono said , " We weren 't really in that mindset . We felt that the ' album ' is almost an extinct species , and we [ tried to ] create a mood and feeling , and a beginning , middle and an end . And I suppose we 've made a work that is a bit challenging for people who have grown up on a diet of pop stars . " Clayton agreed that the album 's commercial reception must be " challenged " but said , " the more interesting challenge is , ' What is rock ' n ' roll in this changing world ? ' Because , to some extent , the concept of the music fan — the concept of the person who buys music and listens to music for the pleasure of music itself — is an outdated idea . " The Edge predicted that , despite its lack of a big hit , No Line on the Horizon would grow on listeners over time . He noted that the reaction to the songs in the live setting made U2 believe that the material was connecting with the fans , adding , " There 's a lot of records that make great first impressions . There might be one song that gets to be big on the radio , but they 're not albums that people ... play a lot . This is one that I gather from talking to people . ... Four months later , they 're saying , ' I 'm really getting into the album now . ' " McGuinness believed that the conditions of the music market were more responsible for the low sales than any decline in U2 's popularity . 
 Lillywhite believed that the African influences had not translated well onto the album , remarking : " It 's a pity because the whole idea of Morocco as a big idea was great . When the big idea for U2 is good , that is when they succeed the most , but I don 't think the spirit of what they set out to achieve was translated . Something happened that meant it did not come across on the record . " The Edge concurred , admitting that the group erred by " starting out experimental and then trying to bring it into something that was more accessible " . He added , " I think probably we should have said , ' It 's an experimental work . That 's what it is . ' " Mullen refers to the album as " No <unk> on the Horizon " and said , " It was pretty fucking miserable . It turns out that we 're not as good as we thought we were and things got in the way . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 • ( add . ) Additional production 
 Notes 
 " Cedars of Lebanon " features a sample from " Against The Sky " by Harold Budd and Brian Eno from the album The Pearl ( 1984 ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = USS Kentucky ( BB @-@ 66 ) = 
 USS Kentucky ( BB @-@ 66 ) was an uncompleted battleship originally intended to be the sixth and final member of the Iowa class constructed for the United States Navy . At the time of her construction she was the second ship of the United States Navy to be named in honor of the U.S. state of Kentucky . Hull BB @-@ 66 was originally to be the second ship of the Montana class . However , the U.S. Navy 's experiences in World War II led it to conclude that it required more fast battleships to escort the new Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers that were being built . As a result , Kentucky was reordered as an Iowa @-@ class battleship midway through the war . Like her sister ship Illinois , Kentucky was still under construction at the end of hostilities and was caught up in the post @-@ war draw @-@ down of the armed services . Her construction was suspended twice , during which times she served as a spare parts cache of sorts . In the 1950s , there were several proposals to complete the ship as a guided missile battleship . These were abandoned primarily due to cost concerns , and Kentucky ultimately was sold for scrap in 1958 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kentucky was conceived in 1935 , when the United States Navy initiated design studies for the creation of an extended South Dakota class that was not restricted by the Second London Naval Treaty . This resulting in one of the " fast battleship " designs planned in 1938 by the Preliminary Design Branch at the Bureau of Construction and Repair . 
 The passage of the Second Vinson Act in 1938 had cleared the way for construction of the four South Dakota @-@ class battleships and the first two Iowa @-@ class fast battleships ( those with the hull numbers BB @-@ 61 and BB @-@ 62 ) . The latter four battleships of the class , those designated with the hull numbers BB @-@ 63 , BB @-@ 64 , BB @-@ 65 , and BB @-@ 66 ( Missouri , Wisconsin , Illinois , and Kentucky , respectively ) were not cleared for construction until 12 July 1940 , . While BB @-@ 63 and BB @-@ 64 were originally planned as the final ships in the Iowa @-@ class to serve as fast escorts for the Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers , BB @-@ 65 and BB @-@ 66 were intended to be the first ships of the Montana class which was larger and slower while mounting twelve 16 in ( 410 mm ) Mark 7 guns . However , the passage of an emergency war building program on 19 July 1940 resulting in Illinois and Kentucky being re @-@ ordered as the fifth and sixth ships , respectively , of the Iowa class in order to save time on construction , so the first ship of the Montana @-@ class would be reassigned as BB @-@ 67 . The orders for BB @-@ 65 and BB @-@ 66 were placed on 9 September 1940 , and the ships were laid down on 6 December 1942 , and 7 March 1942 , respectively . 
 By 1942 the United States Navy shifted its building focus from battleships to aircraft carriers after the successes of carrier combat in both the Battle of the Coral Sea , and to a greater extent , the Battle of Midway . As a result , the construction of the US fleet of Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers had been given the highest priority for completion in the US shipyards by the US Navy . The Essex @-@ class carriers were proving vital to the war effort by enabling the Allies to gain and maintain air supremacy in the Pacific War , and were rapidly becoming the principal striking arm of the United States Navy in the ongoing effort to defeat the Empire of Japan . Accordingly , the United States accepted shortcomings in the armor their Iowa @-@ class battleships in favor of additional speed , which could steam at a comparable speed with the Essex @-@ class and provide the carriers with the maximum amount of anti @-@ aircraft protection . As a result , construction of the Montana @-@ class was canceled before their keels could be laid . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Kentucky 's main battery would have consisted of nine 16 in ( 406 mm ) / 50 cal Mark 7 guns , which could hurl 2 @,@ 700 lb ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) armor @-@ piercing shells some 20 mi ( 32 km ) . Her secondary battery would have consisted of 20 5 in ( 127 mm ) / 38 cal guns arranged in 10 gun turrets , which could fire at targets up to 10 mi ( 16 km ) away . With the advent of air power and the mandate to gain and maintain air superiority came a need to protect the growing fleet of Allied aircraft carriers . To this end , Kentucky was to be fitted with an array of Oerlikon 20 mm and Bofors 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns to defend allied carriers from enemy airstrikes . 
 Because the Iowa @-@ class torpedo defense was virtually the same as the preceding South Dakota @-@ class battleships it was proposed that Kentucky 's hull be redesigned to provide a greater degree of torpedo protection for the battleship . Under the original construction schematics for the class each side of the ship was protected below the waterline by two tanks mounted outside the belt armor , and separated by a bulkhead . These tanks were initially planned to be empty , but in practice were filled with water or fuel oil . The armored belt tapered to a thickness of 4 inches ( 100 mm ) below the waterline . Behind the armored belt there was a void , and then another bulkhead . The outer hull was intended to detonate a torpedo , with the outer two compartments absorbing the shock and with any splinters or debris being stopped by the armored belt and the empty compartment behind it . In 1939 the Navy discovered that this system was considerably less effective than earlier torpedo defense systems , and as such the intended construction format for Kentucky would have addressed this problem by providing a 20 % improvement to the torpedo defense of the battleship while simultaneously reducing flooding in the event of a torpedo strike . Despite providing additional torpedo defense for Kentucky the records are unclear on the matter of whether or not the idea was actually adopted . 
 Kentucky 's construction was plagued by suspensions . Her keel was laid down at the Norfolk Navy Yard , Portsmouth , Virginia , on 7 March 1942 . However , work on the ship was suspended in June that year , and Kentucky 's bottom structure was launched to make room for LST construction on 10 June . While her construction was suspended , the Bureau of Ships considered an aircraft carrier conversion proposal for Kentucky and Illinois in the aftermath of the Battles of Coral Sea and Midway . As proposed , the converted Kentucky would have had an 864 @-@ foot ( 263 m ) long by 108 @-@ foot ( 33 m ) wide flight deck , with armament identical to the carriers of the Essex class : four twin 5 @-@ inch gun mounts and four more 5 @-@ inch guns in single mounts , along with six 40 mm quadruple mounts . The idea was abandoned after the Bureau of Ships decided that the converted ships would carry fewer aircraft than the Essex class , that more Essex @-@ class carriers could be built in the same amount of time , and that the conversion project would be significantly more expensive than new Essexes . Instead , Kentucky and Illinois were to be completed as battleships , but their construction was given very low priority . Work on the ship resumed on 6 December 1944 , when the keel structure was returned to the slipway . Work on the battleship proceeded at a slow pace , and her completion was projected for the third quarter of 1946 . In December 1945 it was recommended that Kentucky be completed as an anti @-@ aircraft battleship , and work on the ship was suspended in August 1946 while this was considered . Construction resumed again on 17 August 1948 without any decision having been made on her final design . Work on Kentucky continued until 20 January 1950 , when it was decided to halt work on the ship . Following this , she was floated out of her drydock to clear a space for repairs to sister ship Missouri , which had run aground en route from Hampton Roads . 
 = = Guided missile battleship = = 
 As early as 1946 , missile conversion projects for Kentucky and the incomplete large cruiser USS Hawaii were discussed . In the early 1950s , the advances in guided missile technology led to a proposal to create a large warship armed with both guns and missiles . To this end , the incomplete Kentucky was chosen for conversion from an all gun ship into a " guided missile battleship " . This proposal would have been relatively conservative , and would have involved the installation of a pair of twin arm launchers for the RIM @-@ 2 Terrier surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) on the aft deckhouse , with a pair of antennas for the associated AN / APG @-@ 55 pulse doppler interception radar installed forward of these , and the AN / SPS @-@ 2B air search radar on a short mast . Since the battleship was already approximately 73 % complete ( construction had been halted at the main deck ) , installation of the missile system and associated electronics would have involved only adding the necessary equipment without any need to rebuild the ship to accommodate the system . Some guided missile concepts included one or two launchers for eight Regulus II or SSM @-@ N @-@ 2 Triton nuclear cruise missiles . The guided missile battleship project was authorized in 1954 , and Kentucky was renumbered from BB @-@ 66 to BBG @-@ 1 , with the conversion due to be complete in 1956 . However , the project was soon cancelled , with the conversion ideas transferred to a smaller platform that led to the Boston @-@ class guided missile cruiser . 
 Another conversion project in early 1956 called for the installation of two Polaris ballistic missile launchers with a capacity for sixteen weapons . She would also be equipped with four RIM @-@ 8 Talos SAM launchers with eighty missiles per launcher and twelve RIM @-@ 24 Tartar SAM launchers with 504 missiles . A July 1956 estimate projected completing the ship by July 1961 , but the cost of the conversion ultimately forced the Navy to abandon the project . 
 = = Fate = = 
 Kentucky was never completed , instead serving as a parts hulk while in the mothball fleet at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard from about 1950 to 1958 . Hurricane Hazel hit the area on 15 October 1954 ; the storm caused Kentucky to break free from her moorings and run aground in the Delaware River . In 1956 , Kentucky 's bow was removed and used in the repair of Wisconsin , which had been damaged in a collision with the destroyer USS Eaton on 6 May 1956 . Congressman William Huston <unk> attempted to block the sale of the ship by objecting to the bill in August 1957 . Nevertheless , Kentucky was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 9 June 1958 and her incomplete hulk was sold for scrapping to Boston Metals Company of Baltimore , Maryland , on 31 October . Boston Metals Company paid $ 1 @,@ 176 @,@ 666 for the vessel , and towed her to their shipyard in Baltimore in February 1959 . 
 When the first two of the Sacramento @-@ class fast combat support ships , Sacramento and Camden , were laid down in 1961 and 1964 , the builders used Kentucky 's four turbine sets to power the ships . This would later prove to be a beneficial decision : when the Navy switched from 600 psi ( 4 @.@ 1 MPa ) boilers to 1 @,@ 200 psi ( 8 @.@ 3 MPa ) boilers , sailors who had served aboard Sacramento and Camden were posted to operate the older boilers aboard New Jersey during her combat tour in the Vietnam War and aboard all four of the Iowas when they were recalled and modernized in the 1980s as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy plan . A pair of 150 @-@ pound ( 68 kg ) mahogany doors were donated by the state of Kentucky while the ship was still under construction ; they were used in an officer 's club in New York City before eventually being returned to the Kentucky Historical Society in early January 1994 . 
 = Tuck School of Business = 
 The Amos Tuck School of Business Administration is the graduate business school of Dartmouth College in Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . Founded in 1900 , Tuck is the oldest graduate school of business in the world , and was the first institution to offer master 's degrees in business administration . It is one of six Ivy League business schools . 
 Tuck grants only one degree , the Master of Business Administration , alongside shorter programs for executives and recent college graduates , as well as opportunities for dual degrees with other institutions . 
 = = History = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , Dartmouth College president William Jewett Tucker decided to explore the possibility of establishing a school of business to educate the growing number of Dartmouth alumni entering the commercial world . Turning to his former roommate from his undergraduate years at Dartmouth , Tucker enlisted the support of Edward Tuck , who had since become a wealthy banker and philanthropist . Tuck donated $ 300 @,@ 000 in the form of preferred stock shares in a Minnesota railroad company as the capital to found the school . It was named the Amos Tuck School of Administration and Finance , after Edward Tuck 's father and Dartmouth alumnus Amos Tuck . 
 The new school 's tuition fee cost $ 100 for the few students who enrolled in the first year ; graduates of the two @-@ year program received a Master of Commercial Science degree ( MCS ) . The curriculum involved both traditional liberal arts fields as well as economic and finance education . Undergraduate professors taught most of the first @-@ year courses , while outside guest instructors and businesspeople educated students in their second years . As the nation 's first graduate school of business , the Tuck School 's emphasis on a broad education in general management was adopted by many other emerging business schools , and was dubbed the " Tuck Pattern " . 
 In the late 1920s , Dartmouth president Ernest Martin Hopkins sought to unify the Tuck School by establishing a central campus , uniting the school 's academic and residential facilities . Edward Tuck , then an aged man living in France , donated an additional $ 570 @,@ 000 for the effort . Using primarily his funds , four new buildings were constructed in 1929 on the west side of campus . 
 In 1942 , the school 's name changed to the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration , and in 1953 , the degree program changed to the modern Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) . Until the late 1950s and early 1960s , the Tuck School catered primarily to Dartmouth students , accepting undergraduates during their third year . Under Dean Karl Hill , Tuck shifted its focus to soliciting a national student body . The resulting expansion in the late 1960s saw additional growth of the campus with the construction of a new dormitory and the Murdough Center , which contains the Feldberg Business and Engineering Library . Under Deans Richard West ( 1976 – 1983 ) and Colin Blaydon ( 1983 – 1990 ) , the school 's curriculum and faculty expanded extensively , and applications increased by one @-@ third . Since the late 1980s , Tuck has continued to expand in student body and faculty size , and has seen the establishment of two new campus buildings as well as several research centers and <unk> business programs . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Tuck School is located on the campus of Dartmouth College , which is situated in the rural , Upper Valley New England town of Hanover , New Hampshire . The campus of the Tuck School sits in a complex on the west side of Dartmouth 's campus , near the Connecticut River . Shortly after being founded in 1900 , Tuck was housed in a single building across from the Green at the center of the campus ; in 1930 , the institution moved into Stell , Chase , Tuck , and Woodbury Halls in its present location along the Tuck Mall . Today , these original structures serve as four of Tuck 's six academic and administrative buildings . 
 Tuck emphasizes its residential character , describing residential life as " a foundation of the Tuck culture " and crediting it as " a reason that Tuck alumni are among the most loyal of all the business school [ sic ] in the world . " Tuck 's isolated location has been described as an " image problem " for attracting successful applicants and faculty to its rural campus , although some students cite the insular location as a positive trait for fostering intimacy and friendship . 
 Currently , Tuck has five residential facilities : Buchanan Hall ( constructed 1968 ) and Whittemore Hall ( constructed 2000 ) Pineau @-@ <unk> Hall , <unk> Hall and <unk> Hall ( 2008 ) . Further , a new complex called the Tuck Living and Learning Complex that will house 85 additional students as well as classrooms and study space is currently under construction . At a total cost of $ 27 @.@ 2 million , the Tuck LLC is expected to be ready for occupancy in December 2008 . The Tuck School shares the Murdough Center ( containing the Feldberg Business and Engineering Library ) the with the adjacent Thayer School of Engineering . The Tuck campus is serviced by Byrne Hall , a dining facility operated by Dartmouth Dining Services . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The Tuck School offers only a single degree : the two @-@ year , full @-@ time Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) . Students may specialize within the MBA in fields such as finance or marketing , but a specialization is not required for graduation . First @-@ year MBA students at Tuck undertake a 32 @-@ week core curriculum in general management and a specialized First Year Project . During their second year , students take 12 elective courses and design their own focused field of study . 
 The school stresses a collaborative and teamwork @-@ based approach to learning , which it touts as one of its assets for " building the interpersonal skills required for business leadership . " However , this emphasis on cooperative group learning has been criticized as too " touchy @-@ feely " for students entering the competitive business world , and the emphasis on consensus @-@ building as detrimental to students ' ability to make quick , independent decisions . The school 's academic programs have also been criticized for not offering their students a broader international perspective , though the school has sought to remedy this by offering globally @-@ oriented courses , programs , and research . 
 Students seeking other degrees can engage in one of seven dual @-@ degree or joint @-@ degree programs offered in conjunction with other academic institutions . Dual degrees include an MBA / Master of Arts in Law and Diplomacy from The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University , an MBA / Master of Public Affairs from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University , an MBA / Master of Studies in Environmental Law from the Vermont Law School , and an MBA / Master of Arts from the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University . Joint degrees include a Doctor of Medicine / MBA from the Dartmouth Medical School , a Master of Public Health / MBA from the Dartmouth 's Center for the <unk> Clinical Sciences , and a Master of Engineering Management / MBA from Dartmouth 's Thayer School of Engineering . The school also offers a variety of second @-@ year exchange programs at other institutions such as the <unk> Leipzig in Germany , the HEC School of Management in Paris , <unk> Business School in Barcelona , and the London Business School . 
 In addition to the MBA program , the school also offers an array of executive education and other non @-@ degree programs , such as the Tuck Business Bridge Program for current and recent university undergraduates , and the Leadership Education and Development ( <unk> ) program for high school students . 
 = = = Organization and research = = = 
 Like the undergraduate portion of Dartmouth College , the Tuck School operates on a quarter system . As part of the larger institution , the Tuck School is ultimately administered by Dartmouth 's President and Board of Trustees . The school is directly managed by a Dean ( currently Paul <unk> ) who is advised by a Board of Overseers that was established in 1951 . 
 Since the Tuck School offers only one degree , it does not contain formal academic departments as do other institutions . Instead , faculty are generally grouped in one or more of seven " academic areas " : accounting , finance and economics , marketing , operations management and management science , strategy and management , international business , and management communication . Tuck is also home to five research centers which organize research in different fields of business administration . The centers are meant to promote faculty research , establish liaisons between the Tuck School and the corporate world , and sponsor programs for Tuck as a whole ; MBA students are occasionally invited to participate as fellows and research associates . The five research centers are the William F. <unk> Center for Global Leadership , the Center for Corporate Governance , the Center for International Business , the Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship , and the <unk> / McNamee Center for Digital Strategies . 
 = = = Admissions and rankings = = = 
 In 2007 , the Tuck School was ranked first among MBA programs nationally by The Wall Street Journal and Forbes , fourth internationally by The Economist Intelligence Unit , seventh by U.S. News & World Report , ninth by the Financial Times , and eleventh ( in 2006 ) by BusinessWeek . Tuck claims that it places first when these six rankings are averaged . 
 Applicants to the Tuck School are evaluated based on undergraduate academic performance , Graduate Management Admission Test ( GMAT ) standardized test scores , essays , recommendations , written applications , and interviews , if applicable . 2 @,@ 276 applicants applied for approximately 240 slots in the class of 2009 , for an acceptance rate of 20 % . The average GMAT score of applicants was 710 , and the average undergraduate grade point average ( GPA ) of American applicants was 3 @.@ 4 . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Student profile = = = 
 Tuck students , known as " <unk> " , typically number about 480 students , with international students making up about 30 % of the student body . The school has relatively low percentages of women ( 32 % ) and minorities ( 15 % ) , which has been criticized as a weakness by students who desire more diversity in the school . Tuck has tried to address these shortcomings by offering additional scholarships to minority applicants and by promoting such programs as the annual Tuck Diversity Conference and participation in the Forté Foundation for women in business . 
 Like many other business schools , Tuck encourages its students to have post @-@ undergraduate work experience before applying to the MBA program . The average incoming student has five years of full @-@ time work experience , and the average student age is 28 , ranging from 25 to 32 years . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
