 Tuck claims the highest percentage of alumni donors of any business school in the world . It is the only business school in BusinessWeek 's study of American business schools to have at least 50 % of its alumni contribute to their alma mater 's annual funds , with 66 % making donations . The most popular career industries for graduates are management consulting ( 40 % ) and finance / accounting ( 37 % ) , with graduates ' annual base salaries averaging $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Alumni of Tuck 's MBA program who are prominent in business include entrepreneur Jim Butterworth , former Bristol @-@ Myers Squibb CEO Peter R. Dolan ' 80 , Digital Angel CEO Kevin McGrath ' 77 , and current Mattel CEO Christopher A. Sinclair ' 73 . In education , David T. McLaughlin ' 55 served as the president of Dartmouth College , and Robert Witt ' 65 as the president of the University of Alabama . Alumni in other fields include screenwriter and director Kamran Pasha ' 00 , U.S. Representative Herman T. <unk> ' 31 , and former XFL football player Kyle Schroeder ' 07 . Alumni of Tuck 's Executive Training program include The New York Times Company president and CEO Janet L. Robinson ' 96 and graphic designer David R. Brown . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 As of the 2007 @-@ 2008 school year , the Tuck School employs 46 full @-@ time faculty members and currently maintains a student @-@ faculty ration of 9 : 1 . Among Tuck 's notable professors and instructors are Professor of Economics Andrew Bernard , Professor of Marketing Kevin Lane Keller , Professor of Finance Kenneth French , Professor of International Economics Matthew J. Slaughter , Professor of International Business Vijay <unk> , Professor of Strategic Management Richard D <unk> , and Professor of Operations Management M. Eric Johnson . Former faculty include industrial efficiency pioneer Frederick Winslow Taylor , marketing professor Brian <unk> , and Michael Jensen , who taught as a visiting scholar . 
 = Black Stone = 
 The Black Stone ( or <unk> Aswad , Arabic : <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Aswad ) is the eastern cornerstone of the Kaaba , the ancient stone building located in the center of the Grand Mosque in Mecca , Saudi Arabia . It is revered by Muslims as an Islamic relic which , according to Muslim tradition , dates back to the time of Adam and Eve . 
 The stone was venerated at the Kaaba in pre @-@ Islamic pagan times . According to Islamic tradition , it was set intact into the Kaaba 's wall by the Islamic prophet Muhammad in the year 605 A.D. , five years before his first revelation . Since then it has been broken into a number of fragments and is now cemented into a silver frame in the side of the Kaaba . Its physical appearance is that of a fragmented dark rock , polished smooth by the hands of pilgrims . Islamic tradition holds that it fell from the heaven as a guide for Adam and Eve to build an altar , although it has often been described as a meteorite , a hypothesis which is now uncertain . 
 Muslim pilgrims circle the Kaaba as a part of the tawaf ritual during the hajj and many try to stop and kiss the Black Stone , emulating the kiss that Islamic tradition records that it received from Muhammad . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The Black Stone consists of a number of fragments held together by a silver frame , which is fastened by silver nails to the Kaaba . The smaller fragments have been cemented together to form the seven or eight fragments visible today . The Stone 's exposed face measures about 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) by 16 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) . Its original size is unclear and the recorded dimensions have changed considerably over time , as the stone has been remodelled on several occasions . 
 In the 10th century , an observer described it as being one cubit ( 46 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 ft ) long ) . By the early 17th century , it was recorded as measuring 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 1 @.@ 5 yd ) by 1 @.@ 22 metres ( 1 @.@ 33 yd ) . According to Ali Bey in the 18th century , it was described as 110 centimetres ( 43 in ) high , and Muhammad Ali Pasha reported it as being 76 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 49 ft ) long by 46 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 51 ft ) wide . 
 The Black Stone was first mentioned in Western literature in the 19th and early 20th centuries by European travellers to Arabia , who visited the Kaaba disguised as pilgrims . Swiss traveler Johann Ludwig Burckhardt visited Mecca in 1814 , and provided a detailed description in his 1829 book Travels in Arabia : 
 It is an irregular oval , about seven inches in diameter , with an undulated surface , composed of about a dozen smaller stones of different sizes and shapes , well joined together with a small quantity of cement , and perfectly well smoothed ; it looks as if the whole had been broken into as many pieces by a violent blow , and then united again . It is very difficult to determine accurately the quality of this stone which has been worn to its present surface by the millions of touches and kisses it has received . It appeared to me like a lava , containing several small extraneous particles of a whitish and of a yellow substance . Its colour is now a deep reddish brown approaching to black . It is surrounded on all sides by a border composed of a substance which I took to be a close cement of pitch and gravel of a similar , but not quite the same , brownish colour . This border serves to support its detached pieces ; it is two or three inches in breadth , and rises a little above the surface of the stone . Both the border and the stone itself are encircled by a silver band , broader below than above , and on the two sides , with a considerable swelling below , as if a part of the stone were hidden under it . The lower part of the border is studded with silver nails . 
 Visiting the Kaaba in 1853 , Richard Francis Burton also noted that : 
 The colour appeared to me black and metallic , and the centre of the stone was sunk about two inches below the metallic circle . Round the sides was a reddish brown cement , almost level with the metal , and sloping down to the middle of the stone . The band is now a massive arch of gold or silver gilt . I found the aperture in which the stone is , one span and three fingers broad . 
 Ritter von Laurin , the Austrian consul @-@ general in Egypt , was able to inspect a fragment of the Stone removed by Muhammad Ali in 1817 and reported that it had a pitch @-@ black exterior and a silver @-@ grey , fine @-@ grained interior in which tiny cubes of a bottle @-@ green material were embedded . There are reportedly a few white or yellow spots on the face of the Stone , and it is officially described as being white with the exception of the face . 
 The frame around the Black Stone and the black <unk> or cloth enveloping the Kaaba were for centuries maintained by the Ottoman Sultans in their role as Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques . The frames wore out over time due to the constant handling by pilgrims and were periodically replaced . Worn @-@ out frames were brought back to Istanbul , where they are still kept as part of the sacred relics in the Topkapı Palace . 
 = = History and tradition = = 
 The Black Stone was held in reverence well before the preaching of Islam by Muhammad . By the time of Muhammad , it was already associated with the Kaaba , a pre @-@ Islamic shrine , that was a sacred sanctuary and a site of pilgrimage of Nabateans who visited the shrine once a year to perform their pilgrimage . The Kaaba held 360 idols of the Meccan gods . The Semitic cultures of the Middle East had a tradition of using unusual stones to mark places of worship , a phenomenon which is reflected in the Hebrew Bible as well as the Qur 'an , although bowing to or kissing such sacred objects is repeatedly described in the Tanakh as idolatrous and was the subject of prophetic rebuke . Some writers remark on the apparent similarity of the Black Stone and its frame to the external female genitalia , and ascribe this to its earlier association with fertility rites of Arabia . 
 A " red stone " was associated with the deity of the south Arabian city of <unk> , and there was a " white stone " in the Kaaba of al @-@ <unk> ( near the city of <unk> , south of Mecca ) . Worship at that time period was often associated with stone reverence , mountains , special rock formations , or distinctive trees . The Kaaba marked the location where the sacred world intersected with the profane , and the embedded Black Stone was a further symbol of this as an object as a link between heaven and earth . 
 = = = Muhammad = = = 
 According to Islamic belief Muhammad is credited with setting the Black Stone in the current place in the wall of the Kaaba . A story found in Ibn Ishaq 's Sirah Rasul Allah tells how the clans of Mecca renovated the Kaaba following a major fire which had partly destroyed the structure . The Black Stone had been temporarily removed to facilitate the rebuilding work . The clans could not agree on which one of them should have the honour of setting the Black Stone back in its place . 
 They decided to wait for the next man to come through the gate and ask him to make the decision . That individual happened to be the 35 @-@ year @-@ old Muhammad , five years before his prophethood . He asked the elders of the clans to bring him a cloth and put the Black Stone in its centre . Each of the clan leaders held the corners of the cloth and carried the Black Stone to the right spot . Then , Muhammad himself set the stone in place , satisfying the honour of all of the clans . 
 The Stone has suffered <unk> and significant damage over the course of time . It is said to have been struck and smashed to pieces by a stone fired from a catapult during the Umayyad siege of Mecca in 683 . The fragments were rejoined by Abd Allah ibn Zubayr using a silver ligament . In January 930 , it was stolen by the Qarmatians , who carried the Black Stone away to their base in Hajar ( modern Bahrain ) . According to Ottoman historian Qutb al @-@ Din , writing in 1857 , Qarmatian leader Abu Tahir al @-@ <unk> set the Black Stone up in his own mosque , the Masjid al @-@ <unk> , with the intention of redirecting the hajj away from Mecca . However , this failed , and pilgrims continued to venerate the spot where the Black Stone had been . 
 According to historian Al @-@ <unk> , the Stone was returned twenty @-@ three years later , in 952 . The Qarmatians held the Black Stone for ransom , and forced the Abbasids to pay a huge sum for its return . It was wrapped in a sack and thrown into the Friday Mosque of Kufa , accompanied by a note saying " By command we took it , and by command we have brought it back . " Its abduction and removal caused further damage , breaking the stone into seven pieces . Its abductor , Abu Tahir , is said to have met a terrible fate ; according to Qutb al @-@ Din , " the filthy Abu Tahir was afflicted with a gangrenous sore , his flesh was eaten away by worms , and he died a most terrible death . " 
 In the 11th century , a man allegedly sent by the Fatimid Caliph Al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah attempted to smash the Black Stone , but was killed on the spot , having caused only slight damage . In 1674 , according to Johann Ludwig Burckhardt , someone smeared the Black Stone with excrement so that " every one who kissed it retired with a sullied beard " . The Shi 'ite Persians were suspected of being responsible and were the target of curses from other Muslims for centuries afterwards , though explorer Sir Richard Francis Burton doubted that they were the culprits ; he attributed the act to " some Jew or Greek , who risked his life to gratify a furious bigotry . " 
 = = Ritual role = = 
 The Black Stone plays an important role in the central ritual of the hajj , when pilgrims must walk seven times around the Kaaba in a counterclockwise direction . They attempt to kiss the Black Stone seven times , once for each circumambulation of the Kaaba , emulating the actions of Muhammad . In modern times , large crowds make it practically impossible for everyone to kiss the stone , so it is currently acceptable to point in the direction of the Stone on each of their seven circuits around the structure . 
 Some even say that the Stone is best considered simply as a marker , useful in keeping count of the ritual <unk> ( tawaf ) that one has performed . Its black colour is deemed to symbolize the essential spiritual virtue of detachment and poverty for God ( <unk> ) and the extinction of ego required to progress towards God ( <unk> ) . 
 Writing in Dawn in Madinah : A Pilgrim 's Progress , Muzaffar Iqbal described his experience of venerating the Black Stone during a pilgrimage to Mecca : 
 At the end of the second [ <unk> of the Kaaba ] , I was granted one of those extraordinary moments which sometimes occur around the Black Stone . As I approached the Corner the large crowd was suddenly pushed back by a strong man who had just kissed the Black Stone . This push generated a backward current , creating a momentary opening around the Black Stone as I came to it ; I swiftly accepted the opportunity reciting , <unk> Allahu <unk> wa <unk> @-@ <unk> [ " In the name of God , God is great , all praise to God " ] , put my hands on the Black Stone and kissed it . Thousands of silver lines sparkled , the Stone <unk> , and something stirred deep inside me . A few seconds passed . Then I was pushed away by the guard . 
 = = Meaning and symbolism = = 
 Islamic tradition holds that the Black Stone fell from Jannah to show Adam and Eve where to build an altar , which became the first temple on Earth . Muslims believe that the stone was originally pure and dazzling white , but has since turned black because of the sins of the people who touch it . According to a prophetic tradition , " Touching them both ( the Black Stone and al @-@ Rukn al @-@ Yamani ) is an expiation for sins . " Adam 's altar and the stone were said to have been lost during Noah 's Flood and forgotten . Ibrahim was said to have later found the Black Stone at the original site of Adam 's altar when the angel Jibrail revealed it to him . Ibrahim ordered his son Ismael — who in Muslim belief is an ancestor of Muhammad — to build a new temple , the Kaaba , into which the Stone was to be embedded . 
 A hadith records that , when the second Caliph Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab ( 580 – 644 ) came to kiss the Stone , he said in front of all assembled : " No doubt , I know that you are a stone and can neither harm anyone nor benefit anyone . Had I not seen Allah 's Messenger [ Muhammad ] kissing you , I would not have kissed you . " However , in the hadith collection Kanz al @-@ <unk> , it is recorded that Ali responded to Umar , saying , " This stone ( Hajar Aswad ) can indeed benefit and harm .... Allah ( <unk> ) says in Quran that he created human beings from the progeny of Adam ( as ) and made them witness over themselves and asked them , ' Am I not your creator ? ' Upon this , all of them confirmed it . Thus Allah wrote this confirmation . And this stone has a pair of eyes , ears and a tongue and it opened its mouth upon the order of Allah ( <unk> ) , who put that confirmation in it and ordered to witness it to all those worshippers who come for Hajj . " 
 Muhammad <unk> al @-@ <unk> , writing in 1911 , commented on the practice that the pre @-@ Islamic practice of venerating stones ( including the Black Stone ) arose not because such stones are " sacred for their own sake , but because of their relation to something holy and respected . " The Indian Islamic scholar Muhammad Hamidullah summed up the meaning of the Black Stone : 
 [ T ] he Prophet has named the ( Black Stone ) the ' right hand of God ' ( <unk> @-@ Allah ) , and for purpose . In fact one poses there one 's hand to conclude the pact , and God obtains there our pact of allegiance and submission . In the qur 'anic terminology , God is the king , and … in ( his ) realm there is a metropolis ( Umm al @-@ Qurra ) and in the metropolis naturally a palace ( Bait @-@ Allah , home of God ) . If a subject wants to testify to his loyalty , he has to go to the royal palace and conclude personally the pact of allegiance . The right hand of the invisible God must be visible symbolically . And that is the al @-@ Hajar al @-@ Aswad , the Black Stone in the Ka 'bah . 
 In recent years , however , several literalist views of the Black Stone have emerged . A small minority accepts as literally true an allegorical hadith which asserts that " the Stone will appear on the Day of Judgement ( <unk> ) with eyes to see and a tongue to speak , and give evidence in favor of all who kissed it in true devotion , but speak out against whoever indulged in gossip or profane conversations during his circumambulation of the Kaaba " . 
 Carl Jung notes in Memories , Dreams , Reflections that biblical symbol of stones are numerous , as in this sense the stone symbolizes what is perhaps the deepest experience - the experience of something that is eternal that man can have in those moments when he feels immortal and unalterable . He adds holiest sanctuary of the Islamic world is the Ka 'aba , the black stone of Mecca to which all pious Moslems hope to make their pilgrimage at least once in their life . 
 = = Scientific origins = = 
 The nature of the Black Stone has been much debated . It has been described variously as basalt stone , an agate , a piece of natural glass or — most popularly — a stony meteorite . Paul <unk> , the curator of the Austro @-@ Hungarian imperial collection of minerals , published the first comprehensive history of the Black Stone in 1857 in which he favoured a meteoritic origin for the Stone . Robert Dietz and John <unk> proposed in 1974 that the Black Stone was actually an agate , judging from its physical attributes and a report by an Arab geologist that the Stone contained clearly discernible diffusion banding characteristic of agates . 
 A significant clue to its nature is provided by an account of the Stone 's recovery in 951 AD after it had been stolen 21 years earlier ; according to a chronicler , the Stone was identified by its ability to float in water . If this account is accurate , it would rule out the Black Stone being an agate , a basalt lava or a stony meteorite , though it would be compatible with it being glass or pumice . 
 <unk> Thomsen of the University of Copenhagen proposed a different hypothesis in 1980 . She suggested that the Black Stone may be a glass fragment or <unk> from the impact of a fragmented meteorite that fell some 6 @,@ 000 years ago at Wabar , a site in the Rub ' al Khali desert 1 @,@ 100 km east of Mecca . The craters at Wabar are notable for the presence of blocks of silica glass , fused by the heat of the impact and impregnated with beads of a nickel @-@ iron alloy from the meteorite ( most of which was destroyed in the impact ) . Some of the glass blocks are made of shiny black glass , with a white or yellow interior and gas @-@ filled hollows , which allow them to float on water . Although scientists did not become aware of the Wabar craters until 1932 , they were located near a caravan route from Oman and were very likely known to the inhabitants of the desert . The wider area was certainly well @-@ known ; in ancient Arabic poetry , Wabar or <unk> ( also known as " Iram of the Pillars " ) was the site of a fabulous city that was destroyed by fire from the heavens because of the wickedness of its king . If the estimated age of the crater is accurate , it would have been well within the period of human habitation in Arabia and the impact itself may have been witnessed . A recent ( 2004 ) scientific analysis of the Wabar site suggests that the impact event happened much more recently than first thought and might have occurred only within the last 200 – 300 years . 
 The meteoritic hypothesis is now viewed by geologists as doubtful . The British Natural History Museum suggests that it may be a <unk> , in other words a terrestrial rock mistakenly attributed to a meteoritic origin . 
 = One Thing ( One Direction song ) = 
 " One Thing " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction from their debut studio album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) . It was released in various countries by Syco Music on 6 January 2012 , as their second single , and as their third single in the UK on 13 February 2012 . Additionally , Columbia Records sent it to contemporary hit radio playlists on 22 May 2012 as their second single in the United States . Written by Savan Kotecha and its producers , Carl Falk and Rami Yacoub , initially , the upbeat pop rock number was written as two different songs . As both tracks had elusive attributes , the trio decided to merge the two into one song . The lyrical content regards the protagonist 's infatuation with a significant other . 
 " One Thing " garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics , who generally commended the track 's catchiness . The single reached the top ten in Australia , Ireland and the United Kingdom , while attaining top @-@ forty positions in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Canada , New Zealand , and the United States . The number has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of one million copies . Directed by Declan Whitebloom , the accompanying music video depicts One Direction performing in and around London . The group performed " One Thing " on televised programmes and four major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) , Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) , Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) and On the Road Again Tour ( 2015 ) . This song is the eleventh track on Now 43 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After being formed and finishing third in the seventh series of The X Factor in 2010 , One Direction were signed to Syco Music . Recording for their debut studio album , Up All Night , began in January 2011 . In February 2011 , the boy band and other contestants from the series participated in the X Factor Live Tour . After the tour concluded in April 2011 , the group continued working on their debut album . Carl Falk and Rami Yacoub produced three songs on the album : " What Makes You Beautiful , " " One Thing " and " I Wish , " all of which were co @-@ written by Falk , Yacoub and Savan Kotecha . Initially , " One Thing " was written as two different songs : " One had a really , really good verse " and the other track " had a really , really good chorus " , as noted by Falk in a 2012 interview with <unk> Falk quipped that when they merged the two songs , " everything fell into place " . Additionally , Falk deemed it the perfect accompaniment to " What Makes You Beautiful " and selected it as his favourite " out of the three tracks [ that I have on the Up All Night album ] " . 
 It premiered on BBC Radio 1 on 21 November 2011 . One Direction confirmed that " One Thing " would be released as the third single from their debut studio album , Up All Night , on 22 November 2011 . Syco Music described the song as an " epic pop smash @-@ in @-@ waiting , featuring soaring vocal harmonies , powerhouse guitar riffs and an anthemic chorus that refuses to leave your head . " The track was released digitally in various European countries on 6 January 2012 . " I Should Have Kissed You " , the B @-@ side to " One Thing " , was confirmed on 25 January 2012 . CD singles , containing " One Thing " and " I Should Have Kissed You " , were released on 13 February 2012 in the United Kingdom . In addition , " One Thing " was released as second US single from Up All Night ; Columbia Records sent it to contemporary hit radio ( CHR ) playlists on 22 May 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " One Thing " is an upbeat , uptempo pop rock number which runs for three minutes and ten seconds . Its instrumentation includes piano lines , vocals , and guitar strings . The lyrical content regards the protagonist 's infatuation with a significant other , while the lead vocals are predominantly sung by members Harry Styles and Liam Payne . According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , One Direction 's vocal range in the span from the note of B3 to D5 . Written in the key of D major , the song set in the time signature of common time at a fast @-@ paced tempo of 128 beats per minute . The track incorporates rock music influences and a simplistic guitar riff . The chorus of the song is predominantly featured alongside the bridge and is backed by wordless chants . The song has been noted as musically similar to the Backstreet Boys song " I Want It That Way " and to the group 's debut single , " What Makes You Beautiful " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Due to its resemblance to the aforementioned Backstreet Boys number , PopMatters 's Zachary Houle suggested that there could occur " a pretty compelling case to launch a plagiarism lawsuit " , concluding : " Homage or theft ? You decide " . Brian Mansfield from USA Today felt the song 's Backstreet Boys @-@ references " may or may not be intentional , " but noted that the attribute " is the same . " Lewis Corner from Digital Spy awarded the song four out five stars , complimented the song 's guitar riff , its " forceful " chorus , and the melody as memorable , and summarised it as an " arena @-@ ready hit " . A Newsround reviewer gave the song four and half stars out five stars , praising the group 's vocal performance and its sonic palette . Billboard correspondent Jason Lipshutz hailed " One Thing " as " perfectly executed pop rock " and opined that it " could own radio for months " . Cosmopolitan 's Sophie Goddard lauded " One Thing " as an " upbeat , catchy , hit @-@ in @-@ waiting , " and Entertainment Weekly writer Adam Markovitz commended it as " irresistibly bouncy " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " One Thing " peaked at number six on the Irish Singles Chart in the week ending 16 February 2012 , becoming the band 's third top ten appearance in Ireland . The single bowed at number 28 on the UK Singles Chart dated 22 January 2012 . Buoyed by weekly sales of 31 @,@ 602 copies in the week of 19 February 2012 , it peaked at number nine in the United Kingdom and marked the group 's third consecutive top ten hit . " One Thing " was One Direction 's second best @-@ selling song in the UK by August 2012 , denoting sales of 154 @,@ 000 copies . Due to strong digital downloads from its parent album , " One Thing " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 90 on 21 March 2012 , and had sold 300 @,@ 000 copies in the US by 21 May 2012 . After being serviced to radio formats on 22 May 2012 , " One Thing " peaked at number 39 for the week ending 20 June 2012 . On 21 September 2012 , " One Thing " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and as of November 2013 , the song had sold 1 @,@ 486 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 It peaked at number 17 on the Canadian Hot 100 and was certified platinum by Music Canada on 10 July 2012 , denoting sales of 80 @,@ 000 copies . The song debuted at number 34 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on 23 January 2012 . After fifteen weeks of fluctuation around the top forty , " One Thing " rose from number 28 to 16 , signifying its peak position . " One Thing " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . The single bowed at number 32 on the Australian Singles Chart of 12 February 2012 . " One Thing " peaked at number three in its tenth charting week , becoming One Direction 's highest peaking single in the country at the time and their second top ten hit . One Direction became the second act of 2012 to have two singles simultaneously occupying the chart 's top ten when " One Thing " was at number six and " What Makes You Beautiful " at number ten for the chart week ending 22 April 2012 . The single has been certified quadruple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , indicating shipments of 280 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Declan Whitebloom in London on 28 November 2011 . Whitebloom approached shooting the clip with a " what you get , is what you get " sentiment , which , as he noted , " can create some real magic . " In regard to its concept , <unk> characterised the clip as " kind of Monkees or Beatles @-@ esque " , elaborating that it revolves around " five lads go [ ing ] crazy in London , it 's like a big day out in London . " In a December interview with Capital FM , member Harry Styles reflected that the shoot was a fun , careless romp . Premiering on YouTube on 13 January 2012 , the music video depicts the band performing in and around London . As of April 2016 , the music video has garnered more than 460 million YouTube views . One Direction surged 35 @-@ 10 from the previous week on Billboard 's Social 50 chart . Alex Hughes of The Huffington Post commented that the music video has an effortless element of happiness , proclaiming : " if you fail to crack a smile , there is a 100 percent chance that you are the devil . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One Direction performed " One Thing " live for the first time at Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball on 4 December 2011 , at the The O2 Arena . The group performed " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " on Dancing on Ice on 5 February 2012 . In the United States , One Direction performed the song along with " More than This " and " What Makes You Beautiful " for the first time on The Today Show at the Rockefeller Center on 12 March 2012 . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 fans descended on the plaza . On 7 April 2012 , One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " and appeared in a comedy sketch with Sofia Vergara on comedy television show Saturday Night Live . The group played " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " and presented an award for " Most Popular New Female Talent " at the 54th Logie Awards on 15 April 2012 . On 6 September 2012 , One Direction performed " One Thing " at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards . It was included on the set list of the group 's headlining sold @-@ out show at Madison Square Garden on 3 December 2012 . Additionally , One Direction performed the song on two of their major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) and Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK CD single 
 " One Thing " – 3 : 19 
 " I Should Have Kissed You " – 3 : 34 
 Digital download 
 " One Thing " – 3 : 19 
 " I Should Have Kissed You " – 3 : 34 
 " One Thing " ( acoustic ) – 3 : 04 
 " One Thing " ( acoustic ; music video ) – 3 : 08 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = You 're Not the One = 
 " You 're Not the One " is a song by American recording artist Sky Ferreira from her debut studio album Night Time , My Time ( 2013 ) . Released on September 24 , 2013 by Capitol Records , it served as the album 's lead single . The song was written and produced by Ariel Rechtshaid and Justin Raisen , with additional songwriting provided by Ferreira and Daniel Nigro . It is styled in indie rock and electropop , while its lyrics portray a relationship in which there is not enough mutual interest . 
 Contemporary music critics provided positive reviews for " You 're Not the One " , selecting it as a standout from its parent album and highlighting its overall sound . Grant Singer directed a music video for the track , which was released in September 2013 . It follows the relationship between Ferreira and a possible love interest , interspersed with shots of her dancing in front of lasers . The song has been performed by Ferreira on several live events , some of which were television shows . 
 = = Background = = 
 " You 're Not the One " was written in 2012 , at a time when — according to Ferreira — she " was in a different headspace " . " I had been dating someone for three years , since I was 17 , and that person guarded me from everything " , she said . Ferreira explained that her life was essentially limited to modelling , crafting songs and " watch [ ing ] TV " , which resulted in her not having a " chance to discover [ her ] self . " 
 The track was recorded in 2013 by Ariel Rechtshaid , at the Heavy Duty Studios in Los Angeles . Rechtshaid and Justin Raisen produced the track , contributed towards its instrumentation and provided background vocals for the song . The two played the keyboard while they were accompanied by Daniel Nigro when playing the electric guitar ; Rechtshaid played the bass and Garrett Ray helmed the drums . During post @-@ production , David Schiffman mixed the song and Emily Lazar mastered it . 
 During a July 2013 interview with Glamour , Ferreira announced that the track would serve as the lead single from an upcoming extended play — which ultimately became her debut album Night Time , My Time . The single cover for " You 're Not the One " was revealed on September 9 , 2013 , and the song itself was released 15 days later , on September 24 . An official remix of the track by producer Cid Rim was released online in March 2014 ; a commercial release of that remix , packaged with three others in a digital EP format , followed in June . The Blood Diamonds Remix version of the song was featured in Jimmy Choo 's commercial for Illicit fragrance . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You 're Not the One " displays a fusion of pop and indie rock styles while incorporating electropop as well . Ferreira stated that she conceptualized the track as a " super @-@ poppy version " of David Bowie 's eleventh studio album Low ( 1977 ) ; she was told that the song itself resembles the works of singer @-@ songwriter Siouxsie Sioux . Its instrumentation is marked by the mixture of pounding , " crude " percussion and electric guitar riffs , accompanied with " tinny six @-@ stringer scrapes " . Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club described its sonority as having " gothic overtones " and being a " homage " to the " late @-@ 80s " works of band The Cure . 
 The songs ' lyrics were written by Ferreira , Rechtshaid , Raisen and Nigro ; they depict a relationship in which two love partners do not express sufficient mutual interest , due to the fact that they do not pursue each other . The Washington Post 's Lavanya Ramanathan dubbed the song a " breakup tune " and wrote that in it , Ferreira embodies a teenager with " guy problems " . For CMJ , Brooke Segarra billed the track as a " sexually assertive " number and interpreted the song 's lyrical theme as listing the " mistakes and shortcomings " that come " with sex " . Elias Leight of the PopMatters website wrote that a recurring theme in the album — also represented in " You 're Not the One " — is Ferreira 's " rejection of the opposite sex " . 
 The song 's official remix , produced by Cid Rim , removes the " pop rock " edge of the song in favor of an electronica and hip hop @-@ influenced sound . In this version , the verses display handclaps underneath Ferreira 's vocals , which are more pitched than in the original and " cut up " as well . Carl Williott of Idolator billed it as " an intriguing listen " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " You 're Not the One " received positive feedback from contemporary music critics . Heather Phares of AllMusic selected the song as one of Night Time , My Time 's stronger tracks , as did Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner ; the latter elaborated that it " continues the premise that [ Ferreira ] has finally emerged as an artist who knows what she wants " . Bryant Kitching from Consequence of Sound deemed it a musical highlight from the album . Comparing the song 's guitar @-@ led opening to " Johnny Marr on a sugar rush " , he also called it the album 's " most rewarding moment " . Writing for magazine Spin , Marc Hogan echoed praise for the song — he described it as " impressively catchy and emotionally communicative " and also said it was " the type of track that might inspire a label to green @-@ light — finally — her debut album " . musicOMH 's Nina Bertok highlighted the song 's mixture of genres and catchiness , and also praised the " killer " chorus . The staff of The Guardian listed " You 're Not the One " as the eighteenth best track of 2013 , whereas Melissa Locker of Time , who made a similar list , included the song as the nineteenth best of that year . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The official music video for " You 're Not the One " was directed by Grant Singer , and written and co @-@ produced by V magazine senior editor Patrik Sandberg . Ferreira announced plans to shoot a visual for the track in July 2013 , and stated that Singer would direct it . According to Singer , the video took nine months to craft ; it was originally supposed to be filmed in Berlin so it had a " Christiane F. vibe " , however this did not occur due to unknown reasons . Sandberg suggested the twist ending and the use of an ice pick , which he thought should be used as a " narrative tool " instead of just a prop . Singer described the overall video as " sinister and pop " . The video was filmed at The Lash , a nightclub in Los Angeles , where Ferreira is seen dancing in front of multicolored lasers . 
 The video begins with Ferreira walking towards a blue projector screen , wearing black sunglasses , a black jacket and a transparent , fishnet @-@ pattern top . Ferreira stops and removes the jacket slowly as a group of voyeurs observes her . During her act , she continuously looks towards a man with shades and long hair , who sips a drink while watching Ferreira . Outside the nightclub , she is seen again with that man — her apparent love interest — as they kiss each other and involve themselves physically . They <unk> in a black room where Ferreira sticks an ice pick on his face ; in response , he slaps her , to which she smiles and they start kissing again . After they reenter the nightclub , another man kisses her , while her love interest looks surprised . The latter walks away and finds a woman with whom he starts dancing and kissing , much to Ferreira 's sadness . The next morning , she wakes up in a grass field with red marks on her face while holding the ice pick , which is now covered in blood . In a different setting , the man , who is lying on a bed , sees his stomach cut with the word " not " , dripping blood as well . Spin 's Marc Hogan found the video too " focused on Ferreira 's model " abilities to " complement the song effectively " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Ferreira had already been performing " You 're Not the One " before its formal release — at her concert on the last day of the 2013 Pitchfork Music Festival , she sung it as the ninth track of her setlist . After the song 's digital release , she promoted it on television shows and radio lounges . On November 26 , 2013 she sung the track during an appearance on The Late Show with David Letterman , where she wore " opaque black sunglasses " and a black blazer over a " sheer top " . Ferreira , who opened the American leg of Miley Cyrus ' Bangerz Tour , included the song in her setlist for those concerts . On February 27 , 2014 — as she was on an interruption from the tour — Ferreira performed the song on Jimmy Kimmel Live . Dressed in a leather jacket , shades and with her hair wet , she was praised by Ben Kaye from Consequence of Sound for her " dazzling rendition " of the song . " You 're Not the One " was later performed on March 12 of that year on a BBC Radio 1 session . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " You 're Not the One " — 3 : 55 
 Remixes EP 
 " You 're Not the One " ( Little Daylight Remix ) — 3 : 38 
 " You 're Not the One " ( Cid Rim Remix ) — 4 : 06 
 " You 're Not the One " ( Blood Diamonds Remix ) — 3 : 29 
 " You 're Not the One " ( Benny Cassette Mix ) — 3 : 23 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Night Time , My Time . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Heavy Duty Studios ( Los Angeles ) 
 Personnel 
 Daniel Nigro – songwriting , additional vocals , guitar 
 Justin Raisen – songwriting , additional vocals , keyboard , guitar 
 Ariel Rechtshaid – songwriting , additional vocals , keyboard , guitar , bass 
 Garrett Ray – drums 
 Nick Rowe – editing 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Diamond Trust of London = 
 Diamond Trust of London is a turn @-@ based strategy video game by Jason Rohrer , with music by Tom Bailey . Following a crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter the game was published by <unk> and released for the Nintendo DS on August 28 , 2012 . The game has been placed in the public domain and is hosted on SourceForge . 
 Inspired by German @-@ style board games , Diamond Trust of London is played between two players , each controlling a diamond trading company . The game is set in 2000 , before the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme to curb the blood diamond trade , and the player 's aim is to extract diamonds from Angola over the nine turns which comprise a game . To extract the most diamonds and win , players resort to a combination of bribery and deception . 
 First pitched in 2009 , Diamond Trust of London went through a protracted development process , going through two publishers and taking over three years to reach the market . To raise capital for the game 's manufacture , Rohrer launched a Kickstarter campaign , where it became the first successfully crowdfunded Nintendo DS game . Critics had reservations about the amount of content on offer and the game 's user interface , but were appreciative of the psychological gameplay and the themes explored . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players control one of two diamond trading companies : the eponymous Diamond Trust of London or an unnamed Antwerp @-@ based competitor . The game is set in 2000 and the aim is to extract diamonds from Angola before the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is put in place . The winner is the one who finishes the game with the most diamonds after nine turns . Each turn , players decide where to send their three agents . They can be sent to six different Angolan regions to extract diamonds , or recalled to the player 's headquarters to deposit extracted diamonds . Players make decisions in secret , and both sets of decisions are resolved on the game board simultaneously . 
 The competitors must decide how much to pay each agent , and how much to pay the local guide in that region . If there are competing offers for the same guide in a particular region , the highest offer receives all of that region 's diamonds in an all @-@ pay auction . Competing agents can be bribed to reveal inside information regarding the competitor 's decisions . Complicating matters further is the UN inspector , who moves at random between regions on each turn . The inspector blocks all diamond extraction from the region in which he is present , and can confiscate diamonds from agents within that region . Like other agents though , the inspector can be bribed and directed to regions of a player 's choice . 
 In single @-@ player mode , the player competes against an AI opponent available at various difficulty levels . Multiplayer gameplay includes support for DS Download Play , allowing an entire group of players to play from only one game card . 
 = = Development = = 
 Jason Rohrer was inspired by German @-@ style board games to build a turn @-@ based strategy game . He wanted to harness the unique qualities that a video game could bring to a board game , and so focused on their ability to deliver different views of the board to each player . He wanted to create a game which explored " knowledge chains " , where the player must not only be aware of his knowledge and movements on the board , but also how much of that has been exposed to the opponent . In March 2009 , he was invited by publisher Majesco to pitch an idea for a Nintendo DS game , and keeping these mechanics in mind , he pitched a game called Deception . In Deception , two players would play one half of a married couple , with the aim to gather as much damaging evidence regarding their spouse 's infidelities as ammunition for a forthcoming divorce case . Majesco rejected this concept as being " too sensitive a subject for the DS market " . 
 Rohrer later transferred the themes of Deception onto a framework around corporate espionage and the blood diamond trade . Though not particularly concerned about blood diamonds , and wary of the game being perceived as a finger @-@ wagging exercise , he felt that the setting would give an " extra oomph to the game 's seedy mechanics " . Instead of being an overt protest against the blood diamond trade , the game would explore the psychology of the industry through its game mechanics , causing players to reflect after a game on their decisions made within it . Majesco greenlit this , and in July 2009 , a publishing contract was signed . Rohrer began work on Diamond Trust of London as a pen and paper prototype to iron out the design before committing to code . By December , the game was in a fully playable state , lacking only the soundtrack and tutorial . Majesco , however , decided to back away from a physical cartridge release , and pushed instead for a DSiWare download version . Rohrer disagreed , believing that the smaller DSiWare market would limit the game 's audience ; Majesco , on the other hand , was not willing to invest in the manufacturing of cartridges without strong pre @-@ order numbers . The company made the game available to GameStop to gauge pre @-@ order interest , stating that 3 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders would be necessary for a cartridge release . Diamond Trust generated only 23 pre @-@ orders , and in 2010 , the Majesco agreement was terminated . 
 Lacking a publisher for Diamond Trust of London , Rohrer moved onto other projects such as Inside a Star @-@ Filled Sky and Sleep is Death . He also took on work at Gun , a video games consultancy firm , and there he made contact with Mark <unk> , CEO of Zoo Publishing . Zoo was interested in pursuing Diamond Trust of London as a limited physical release on their <unk> label , and so work on the game resumed . To provide the game 's soundtrack , Rohrer approached his friend and former band @-@ mate , Tom Bailey . This was the first time that Rohrer had collaborated with others on his games . He cited this collaboration as helping to " restore [ his ] creative momentum " for the project . To avoid hearing exactly the same music every time the game is played , Rohrer developed a music generation engine which would arrange Bailey @-@ composed loops procedurally depending on the game 's state . If the lid of the Nintendo DS is closed with headphones plugged in while the game is still running , it will act as a random music generator . Rohrer 's previous project , Inside a Star Filled Sky , had used entirely computer generated music , but he felt that the thematic demands of Diamond Trust of London required Bailey 's handcrafted compositions and musicianship . 
 By July 2011 , Rohrer had submitted a beta version of the game for Nintendo approval . This was followed up with the master version in October . An issue raised during the approval process was Rohrer 's desire to credit Bailey on the game 's cover , which Nintendo rejected . He got around this by officially naming the game Jason Rohrer with Music by Tom Bailey : Diamond Trust of London . In May 2012 , the game was ready for manufacturing . However , due to changing market conditions , Zoo Publishing was no longer able to afford the manufacturing of cartridges given the large minimum order of 6 @,@ 000 units that Nintendo required , and so , Rohrer turned to the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter . 
 Rohrer launched the Kickstarter campaign on May 9 , 2012 , looking to raise $ 78 @,@ 715 ; the campaign closed on May 26 , 2012 , after raising $ 90 @,@ 118 from 1 @,@ 305 backers . This allowed manufacturing to proceed , and Diamond Trust of London became the first successfully crowdfunded Nintendo DS game . By mid @-@ July , the 6 @,@ 000 cartridges had been manufactured by Nintendo in Japan , and in August , they arrived at Rohrer 's home in California . As he was packaging the cartridges personally , it allowed him to release a special signed and numbered limited edition of 1000 copies , bundled with mystery bonuses . The game was released on August 28 , 2012 , and as customers received their copies , they revealed the contents of the limited edition . Jason Cipriano at MTV Multiplayer received , alongside his limited edition , postage stamps and a coin from countries featured in the game , and four actual diamonds . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Diamond Trust of London received few reviews , and they were generally mixed . Critics enjoyed the gameplay , but found that the game required a human opponent for it to shine , with the single @-@ player element acting merely as a practice mode . Nintendo Gamer found the game " mind @-@ bending " , likening its cycle of bluffs and double @-@ bluffs to the Ouroboros . GamesTM enjoyed the experience of " trying to outwit and deceive a friend " , but found achieving victory over @-@ reliant on control of the UN inspector . Paste praised the support for DS Download Play functionality as generous , and described games of Diamond Trust of London as " fabulous palate cleansers " in between board game sessions . They also observed that during these games , much of a player 's personality would be expressed through the moves they made . 
 Commenting on a preview build , Nintendo World Report highlighted the game 's music , describing it as a " wonderfully eclectic mix " , and " a constantly evolving ambient soundscape " . MTV Multiplayer , while finding the music " a little out of place " , still found it " really good " , and believed that players would find themselves " zoning out , enjoying the music without even realizing it " as they waited for their next turn . 
 GamesTM felt that the game did not have sufficient content to justify a full @-@ price retail release , being more suited instead to a budget @-@ priced app . The publication described Diamond Trust of London as " a fantastic iOS strategy game . On the DS . " Similarly , Nintendo Gamer called it a " worthwhile , if insubstantial game " . The user interface was described as confusing by Nintendo Gamer , and while Edge felt that the interface was " simple to the point of crudity " , it could also be " opaque and cluttered , making a reasonably complex game seem even more so " . Edge concluded that if the player can get through these issues , there is " an acute psychological game to be played " . 
 <unk> named Diamond Trust of London as one of their top games of 2012 , describing it as Rohrer 's " most elegantly designed game to date " . They highlighted how it critiques the blood diamond trade by using game mechanics that present " the world from the cynical , detached perspective of the Homo economicus " , rather than by lecturing the player . Paste echoed these thoughts , stating that the game offered " no overt judgments " on the diamond trade , but had mechanics that paint it as " one that encourages and maybe even requires misdeeds " . Reflecting on the game 's unlikely journey in becoming a physical product , Paste declared Diamond Trust of London to be " not just a success in design , but also one of creation " . 
 = Xá Lợi Pagoda raids = 
 The Xá Lợi Pagoda raids were a series of synchronized attacks on various Buddhist pagodas in the major cities of South Vietnam shortly after midnight on 21 August 1963 . The raids were executed by the Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces under Colonel Lê Quang Tung , and combat police , both of which took their orders directly from Ngô Đình Nhu , younger brother of the Roman Catholic President Ngô Đình Diệm . Xá Lợi Pagoda , the largest pagoda in the South Vietnamese capital , Saigon , was the most prominent of the raided temples . Over 1 @,@ 400 Buddhists were arrested , and estimates of the death toll and missing ranged up to the hundreds . In response to the Huế Vesak shootings and a ban on the Buddhist flag in early May , South Vietnam 's Buddhist majority rose in widespread civil disobedience and protest against the religious bias and discrimination of the Catholic @-@ dominated Diệm government . Buddhist temples in major cities , most prominently the Xá Lợi pagoda , became focal points for protesters and assembly points for Buddhist monks from rural areas . 
 In August , several Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) generals proposed the imposition of martial law , ostensibly to break up the demonstrations , but in reality to prepare for a military coup . However , Nhu , already looking to arrest Buddhist leaders and crush the protest movement , used the opportunity to preempt the generals and embarrass them . He disguised Tung 's Special Forces in army uniforms and used them to attack the Buddhists , thereby causing the general public and South Vietnam 's U.S. allies to blame the army , diminishing the generals ' reputations and ability to act as future national leaders . 
 Soon after midnight on 21 August , Nhu 's men attacked the pagodas using automatic firearms , grenades , battering rams and explosives , causing widespread damage . Some religious objects were destroyed , including a statue of Gautama Buddha in the Từ Đàm Pagoda in Huế , which was partially leveled by explosives . Temples were looted and vandalized , with the remains of venerated monks confiscated . In Huế , violent street battles erupted between government forces and rioting pro @-@ Buddhist , anti @-@ government civilians . 
 Initially , the Ngô family claimed that the army had carried out the raids , something their U.S. allies initially believed . However , this was later debunked , and the incident prompted the United States to turn against the regime and begin exploring alternative leadership options , eventually leading to Diệm 's overthrow in a coup . In South Vietnam itself , the raids stoked widespread anger . Several high @-@ ranking public servants resigned , and university and high school students boycotted classes and staged riotous demonstrations , resulting in further mass incarcerations . As most of the students were from middle @-@ class public service and military families , the arrests caused further upset among the Ngô family 's power base . 
 = = Background = = 
 In South Vietnam , where the Buddhist majority was estimated to comprise between 70 and 90 percent of the population in 1963 , President Ngô Đình Diệm 's pro @-@ Catholic policies antagonized many Buddhists . A member of the Catholic minority , his government was biased towards Catholics in public service and military promotions , as well as in the allocation of land , business favors and tax concessions . Diệm once told a high @-@ ranking officer , forgetting the man was from a Buddhist background , " Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places . They can be trusted . " Many officers in the ARVN had converted to Catholicism in the belief that their career prospects depended on it , and many were refused promotion if they did not do so . Additionally , the distribution of firearms to village self @-@ defense militias intended to repel Việt Cộng guerrillas was done so that weapons were only given to Catholics . Some Catholic priests ran private armies , and in some areas forced conversions ; looting , shelling and demolition of pagodas occurred . Some Buddhist villages converted en masse to receive aid or avoid being forcibly resettled by Diem 's regime . 
 A rarely enforced 1958 law — known as Decree Number 10 — was invoked in May 1963 to prohibit the display of religious flags . This disallowed the flying of the Buddhist flag on Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . The application of the law caused indignation among Buddhists on the eve of the most important religious festival of the year , as a week earlier Catholics had been encouraged to display Vatican flags at a government @-@ sponsored celebration for Diem 's brother , Archbishop Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục , the most senior Catholic cleric in the country . On 8 May in Huế , a crowd of Buddhists protested against the ban on the Buddhist flag . The police and army broke up the demonstration by firing guns at and throwing grenades into the gathering , leaving nine people dead . 
 Diệm 's denial of governmental responsibility for the incident — he instead blamed the Việt Cộng — added to the anger and discontent of the Buddhist majority . The incident spurred a protest movement against the religious discrimination of the Roman Catholic – dominated Diệm regime , resulting in widespread large @-@ scale civil disobedience among the South Vietnamese public , persisting throughout May and June . This period of political instability was known as the " Buddhist crisis " . The objectives of the protests was to have Decree Number 10 repealed and to force to implement religious equality . 
 On 11 June , a Buddhist monk , Thích Quảng Đức , self @-@ immolated in downtown Saigon . Images were shown by news outlets across the world , embarrassing Diệm 's government and bringing negative global attention . A few days later , under mounting American pressure , Diệm signed the Joint Communique with senior Buddhist leaders , making various concessions to the Buddhists , who in turn agreed to stop the civil unrest and return to normal life . 
 Neither the Ngô family nor the Buddhists were happy with the agreement , however , and it failed to solve the dispute . Both sides accused the other of failing to uphold their obligations ; the government accused the Buddhists of continuing to vilify them in demonstrations , while the Buddhists accused Diệm of stalling and not acting on his commitments to religious reform , and continuing to detain arrested Buddhist dissidents . The demonstrations and tension continued throughout July and August , with more self @-@ immolations and an altercation ( known as the Double Seven Day scuffle ) between secret police and American journalists reporting on a Buddhist protest . 
 = = Xá Lợi = = 
 The hub of Buddhist activism in Saigon was the Xá Lợi Pagoda . Built in the late 1950s , it was the largest Buddhist temple in the capital and was located in the city center . Many monks from outside Saigon — including prominent Buddhist leaders — had congregated at Xá Lợi since the dispute began and it was used as a venue for press conferences , media interviews , publication of pamphlets and to plan and organize mass demonstrations . 
 At the time , Ngô Đình Nhu was known to favor an even harder line against the Buddhists . Nhu was the younger brother of President Diệm and his main confidant , and was regarded as the real power behind the Ngô family 's rule . Nhu had made statements calling for the suppression of the protests through his English @-@ language newspaper , the Times of Vietnam . There were persistent reports that Nhu was seeking to usurp power from his elder brother and to attack the Buddhists . Nick Turner of Reuters approached Nhu and interviewed him about these rumors . Nhu said that if the Buddhist crisis were not resolved , he would stage a coup , demolish Xá Lợi in two hours , and head a new anti @-@ Buddhist government . The news was promptly published , which the American embassy largely disregarded , purportedly unconvinced as to Nhu 's seriousness . 
 In the meantime , Nhu prepared the Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces commanded by Colonel Lê Quang Tung — who took his orders directly from Nhu and not the senior generals — for the raids . An American @-@ trained outfit created to fight the Việt Cộng , the Special Forces were better @-@ equipped , better @-@ trained and better @-@ paid than the regular army , but were used by the Ngô family as a private army for repressing dissidents and protecting their rule , rather than fighting for the national interest . As such , they spent the majority of their time in Saigon warding off coup attempts . Tung brought more Special Forces into Saigon , bringing the total from two to four battalions in the capital . 
 On Sunday , 18 August , the Buddhists staged a mass protest at Xá Lợi , attracting around 15 @,@ 000 people , undeterred by rain . The attendance was approximately three times higher than that at the previous Sunday 's rally . The event lasted for several hours , as speeches by the monks interspersed religious ceremonies . A Vietnamese journalist said that it was the only emotional public gathering in South Vietnam since Diệm 's rise to power almost a decade earlier . David Halberstam of The New York Times speculated that by not exploiting the large crowd by staging a protest march towards Gia Long Palace or other government buildings , the Buddhists were saving their biggest demonstration for the scheduled arrival of new U.S. ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr. the following week . As a government attack on Xá Lợi was anticipated , Halberstam concluded that the Buddhists were playing " a fast and dangerous game " . He wrote that " the Buddhists themselves appeared to be at least as much aware of all the developments , and their protest seemed to have a mounting intensity " . 
 = = Planning = = 
 On the evening of 18 August , ten senior ARVN generals met to discuss the situation regarding the Buddhist unrest and decided martial law was needed . They wanted to disperse the monks who had gathered in Saigon and other regional cities and return them to their original pagodas in the rural areas . 
 Nhu summoned 7 of the 10 generals to Gia Long Palace on August 20 for consultations . They presented their request for martial law and discussed how to disband the groups of monks and their supporters from the temples in Saigon . Nhu sent the generals to see Diem . The president listened to the group of seven , led by General Trần Văn Đôn . The group also included Army Chief General Trần Thiện Khiêm and General Nguyễn Khánh , commander of the II Corps in the Central Highlands . Khiêm and Khánh were two of the officers who were responsible for helping to put down the attempted coup against Diệm in 1960 . Also present was Đôn 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , General Đỗ Cao Trí , commander of I Corps , which oversaw the northernmost region around Huế , and General Lê Văn Kim , head of the military academy . Trí and Kim were favorites of the Diệm regime . General Tôn Thất Đính , a brash paratrooper , who was also South Vietnam 's youngest @-@ ever general , commanded the III Corps surrounding Saigon . General Huỳnh Văn Cao was the commander of the IV Corps in the Mekong Delta and the only one of the septet who would prove not to have been involved in the later plotting against Diệm . Đính and Cao controlled the two corps regions closest to Saigon and therefore the two areas most crucial in the success or failure of a coup . Cao had used the Seventh Division of his IV Corps to storm the capital in 1960 to save Diệm . 
 Trần Văn Đôn claimed communists had infiltrated the monks at Xá Lợi and warned that ARVN morale was deteriorating because of the civil unrest and consequent disruption of the war effort . He claimed it was possible that the Buddhists could assemble a crowd to march on Gia Long Palace . Hearing this , Diệm agreed to declare martial law effective on the next day , without consulting his cabinet , and troops were ordered into Saigon to occupy strategic points . Don was appointed as the acting Chief of the Armed Forces in place of General Lê Văn Tỵ , who was terminally ill with cancer and receiving medical treatment abroad . Đôn claimed Diệm was concerned for the welfare of the monks , allegedly telling the generals that he did not want any of them hurt . The martial law orders were then signed and authorized by Đôn . 
 The real purpose of Đôn asking for martial law was to maneuver troops in readiness for a coup , and he had no concrete plans to send the regular army into the pagodas . Nhu sidestepped him and took the opportunity to discredit the army by using Tung 's Special Forces and the combat police to attack the pagodas . Đính , the officer most trusted by the Ngô family , was the only general who was given advance notice of the raids . 
 With the approval of Diệm , Nhu used the declaration of martial law to order armed men into the Buddhist pagodas . Nhu chose a time when he knew the American Embassy was leaderless . Frederick Nolting had returned to the United States and his successor Lodge was yet to arrive . As the high command of the ARVN worked closely with American military advisers deployed in the country , Nhu used the combat police and Tung 's Special Forces , who took their orders directly from him . The men were dressed in standard army uniforms , such as paratroop attire , to frame the regulars for the raids . Nhu 's motive was to avoid responsibility for a violent operation — which would anger the Vietnamese public and the American leadership . In falsely implicating the army in the attacks , Nhu intended to dent the confidence of the Vietnamese populace and the Americans in the senior officers who were plotting against him . Nhu evidently hoped the Buddhist majority and the Americans would blame the army for the raids and become less inclined to support a coup by the generals . In the past , Nhu 's tactics in playing the generals against one another had kept conspirators off @-@ balance and thwarted coup attempts . The raids were not unexpected , as the Buddhists had prepared themselves for the attacks , as had journalists , who were watching military installations for signs of movement . 
 = = Raids = = 
 = = = Saigon = = = 
 The Buddhists in Saigon were aware that a raid on the pagodas was imminent . Buddhist relatives of Special Forces and combat police personnel had tipped off the monks , and Buddhists who lived near pagodas had observed them move into the region in the lead @-@ up . American journalists were tipped off and traveled through Saigon to visit the pagodas ahead of the raids . The pagodas had been locked by the monks in preparation for the attacks and the doors were barricaded with furniture and reinforced by nailing wooden planks across them . The monks told members of the U.S. press corps in Saigon that the raids were coming , allowing them to be more prepared for the event than the U.S. embassy . 
 In the afternoon before the raids , trucks filled with soldiers headed past the offices of media outlets — from where the journalists saw them — destined for the <unk> Quang Pagoda . More troops were seen congregating at police headquarters , ready to board trucks moving towards Xá Lợi . The American @-@ made trucks had been provided as part of the U.S. military aid program for South Vietnam . Late at night , the convoys arrived and surrounded Xá Lợi from several sides , causing a traffic jam in the city center . Several thousand personnel were estimated to have been present . Journalists were informed as soon as the attacks began , even as Nhu 's men cut communications lines , and rushed to Xá Lợi . 
 Squads of Special Forces and combat police flattened the gates and smashed their way into the pagoda at around 00 : 20 on 21 August as Xá Lợi 's brass gong was struck to signal the attack . Nhu 's men were armed with pistols , submachine guns , carbines , shotguns , grenades and tear gas . The red @-@ <unk> Special Forces were joined by truckloads of steel @-@ helmeted combat police in army camouflage uniforms . Two of Nhu 's senior aides were seen outside Xá Lợi directing the operation , while Nhu and his wife , Madame Nhu , watched the action from a nearby tank . Monks and nuns who barricaded themselves behind wooden shields were attacked with rifle butts and bayonets . The sound of the pagoda 's gong was largely masked by that of automatic weapons fire , exploding grenades , battering rams , shattering glass and human screaming . The military personnel shouted as they attacked , as did the occupants , in fear . 
 Tung 's men charged forward in a V @-@ shaped riot formation . According to Halberstam , " they pranced into the pagoda , looking something like a smart football team coming up to the line of scrimmage " . In the end , it took around two hours to complete the raids because many of the occupants had entrenched themselves inside the various rooms in anticipation of the attacks and doors had to be unhinged to reach them . According to journalist Neil Sheehan , who was at the scene , " The raid on Xá Lợi , like those on the pagodas elsewhere in South Vietnam , was flawlessly executed . It reminded me of a scene from a movie of the French Resistance — the scene when the Gestapo arrive at the Resistance hideout in Paris . " William <unk> said that " Using the elite guard against the Buddhists was analogous to using Green Berets to put down Negro protests at home . It was outrageous . " 
 One monk was thrown from a balcony down to the courtyard six meters below . Nhu 's men vandalized the main altar and confiscated the intact charred heart of Thích Quảng Đức , which had failed to burn during his re @-@ cremation . However , some of the Buddhists were able to flee the pagoda with a receptacle containing his ashes . Two monks jumped the back wall of Xá Lợi to enter the grounds of the adjoining United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) mission , where they were given asylum , despite the presence of troops behind the pagoda walls who opened fire with automatic weapons on any monks who tried to flee by jumping the fence . 
 Thích Tịnh <unk> , the 80 @-@ year @-@ old Buddhist patriarch , was seized and taken to a military hospital on the outskirts of Saigon . As commander of the III Corps , General Đính soon announced military control over Saigon , canceling all commercial flights into the city and instituting press censorship . Later , Thích Quảng <unk> , one of the leading arrested monks , who later would become a leader of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam , explained the protest strategy . After being released following the deposal of Diệm , he was asked why the Buddhist leaders had not fled to avoid arrest . He said that " We had done nothing wrong ; therefore we could not flee . If we had , it would have been an admission that we were guilty . " 
 = = = Huế = = = 
 The violence was worse in Huế , where the approach of government forces was met by the beating of Buddhist drums and cymbals to alert the populace . The townsfolk left their homes in the middle of the night in an attempt to defend the city 's pagodas . At Từ Đàm , the temple of Buddhist protest leader Thích Trí Quang , monks attempted to burn the coffin of a monk who had self @-@ immolated recently . Government soldiers , firing M1 rifles , overran the pagoda and confiscated the coffin . They demolished a statue of Gautama Buddha and looted and vandalized the pagoda . They then set off an explosion , leveling much of the pagoda . Many Buddhists were shot , beheaded , confiscated , and clubbed to death . 
 The most determined resistance to the Diệm regime occurred outside the <unk> Đế Pagoda . As troops attempted to stretch a barbed wire barricade across a bridge leading to the pagoda , the crowd tore it down with their bare hands . The protesters fought the heavily armed military personnel with rocks , sticks and their bare fists , throwing back the tear gas grenades that were fired at them . After a five @-@ hour battle , the military finally won control of the bridge by driving armored cars through the angry crowd at sunrise . The defense of the bridge and <unk> Đế left an estimated 30 dead and 200 wounded . 
 Ten truckloads of bridge defenders were taken to jail and an estimated 500 people were arrested in the city . Seventeen of the 47 professors at Huế University , who had resigned earlier in the week in protest against the dismissal of the rector Cao Văn Luân , a Catholic priest and opponent of Archbishop Thục ( elder brother of Diệm and Nhu ) were also arrested . The raids were repeated in cities and towns across the country . The total number of dead and disappeared was never confirmed , but estimates range up to several hundred . At least 1 @,@ 400 were arrested . 
 = = U.S. reaction and sanctuary for monks = = 
 The United States became immediately embroiled in the attacks following the escape of the two monks over the back wall of the Xá Lợi pagoda into the adjacent USAID compound . Saigon 's police chief , disguised as a member of Nhu 's Republican Youth , cordoned off the building . He ordered all Vietnamese inside to leave the area and threatened to storm the building when the Americans denied him entry . Foreign Minister Vũ Văn Mẫu rushed to the scene to stop any physical confrontation , but demanded the Americans turn over the monks . William Trueheart , the deputy of the recently relieved U.S. Ambassador Nolting , arrived at the building . As the leading American diplomat in Vietnam in the transition period between ambassadors , Trueheart refused to take action until he received instructions from Washington , but warned Mẫu against violating the diplomatic immunity of the USAID offices . Trueheart knew that handing over the monks would imply American approval of the regime 's action . The confrontation soon died down , and the U.S. State Department ordered Trueheart not to release the two monks and to regard the USAID building as being equivalent to the embassy . More monks went on to find sanctuary in the U.S. embassy , which became known as the " Buddhist Hilton " . 
 Lodge was in Honolulu for last minute briefings with Nolting when news filtered through of the pagoda raids . He was given directions to proceed directly to Saigon , and arrived after sunset on 22 August . In the meantime , the State Department denounced the raids as a " direct violation by the Vietnamese government of assurances that it was pursuing a policy of reconciliation with the Buddhists " . On 23 August , Lodge 's first full day in Saigon , he visited the two monks who had taken refuge in the USAID building , and ordered that vegetarian food be made available for them . The meeting was a means of showing where American government policy stood on the attacks against the Buddhists . 
 = = Diệm reaction = = 
 At 06 : 00 on 21 August 1963 , President Diệm broadcast a statement on Radio Saigon in which he said : " under Article 44 of the constitution , I declare a state of siege throughout the national territory . I confer upon the Army of the Republic of Vietnam the responsibility to restore security and public order so that the state may be protected , Communism defeated , freedom secured , and democracy achieved . " Under martial law , the army was given blanket search @-@ and @-@ arrest powers and was empowered to ban all public gatherings , enforce a curfew , restrict press freedom and stop the circulation of all " printed material and other documents harmful to public order and security " . The military were given orders to shoot anybody who violated the curfew on sight , and the secret police used the increased powers to raid and vandalize the premises of anyone thought to be unfriendly to the regime . 
 Government sources claimed that in Xá Lợi , <unk> Quang , and various Theravada pagodas , soldiers had found machine guns , ammunition , plastic explosives , homemade mines , daggers , and Việt Cộng documents . It was later discovered that they had been planted there by Nhu 's men . A few days later , Madame Nhu , a Catholic convert from Buddhism , said in an interview that the raids were " the happiest day in my life since we crushed the Binh Xuyên in 1955 " , and assailed the Buddhists as " communists " . On 29 August , General Đính held a press conference in which he accused the Americans of trying to launch a coup in South Vietnam and took credit for the raids , despite Tung having been the chief military officer in charge . 
 = = Confusion over culpability and army denials = = 
 The driving force behind the government assault on the Buddhists appeared to have come from senior military commanders acting without consulting the civilian government . Immediately after the attacks , posters were erected across Saigon under the aegis of ARVN , but the language was recognized as that of Nhu . 
 The Secretary of State Nguyễn Đính Thuan and Interior Minister Bùi Văn Lương were caught off guard by the attacks . The initial perception was that the military establishment had suddenly cracked down on the Buddhists because they were deemed to be a threat to the war effort . The government propagated a theory which held that the military felt compelled to take action after pro @-@ Buddhist student unrest on 17 – 18 August . In Huế , student protestors had turned on an ARVN officer after he fired in their direction . The attacks were preceded by a large rally at Xá Lợi during which some monks had called for the overthrow of the Diệm regime and denounced the anti @-@ Buddhist statements of the de facto first lady Madame Nhu . However , observers dismissed government claims that the raids were spontaneous . 
 Diệm had long distrusted his generals and frequently played them against each other in a divide and conquer strategy to weaken any chance of a coup attempt . The army also contained substantial numbers of soldiers of Buddhist backgrounds , thus heightening skepticism that they would have attacked the pagodas and monks in such a violent manner . The synchronized military operations throughout the country , the speed at which banners were erected declaring the ARVN resolve to defeat communism , and doctored propaganda photos purporting to show Việt Cộng infiltration of the Buddhists suggested that the actions were long premeditated . In an attempt to maintain secrecy , special printing presses had produced propaganda materials only hours before the raids . 
 The initial government line was that the regular army had taken the actions . ARVN radio broadcasts bore the influence of Nhu 's abrasive tone in directing the Republican Youth to cooperate with the government . Nhu accused the Buddhists of turning their pagodas into headquarters for plotting anti @-@ government insurrections . He claimed the Buddhist Intersect Committee operated under the control of " political speculators who exploited religion and terrorism " . Lodge believed Diệm remained in control but that Nhu 's influence had risen to unprecedented levels . He thought that Nhu 's divide and conquer tactics had split the military into three factions , respectively led by Generals Đôn and Đính , and Colonel Tung . Đôn was believed not to have the allegiance of Đính and Tung , who took their orders directly from Gia Long Palace . The two loyalists had support from various pro @-@ Diệm elements . Lodge predicted that if the army deposed Diệm , fighting could break out within the ARVN . 
 Initially , the American embassy believed the Ngô family 's claims that the regular army was responsible for the raids . The Voice of America , which was widely listened to in South Vietnam as the only non @-@ Diệmist news source , initially aired Nhu 's version of events , much to the dismay of the generals . The American media thought otherwise and began to debunk this theory , pointing out that the Ngô family constantly sought to undermine the army , and that Madame Nhu 's joy over the events suggested the family had neither ceded power nor had their hands forced by the military . Furthermore , they identified Nhu 's aides at the site , his idiosyncratic style in the announcements supposedly made by the ARVN , and the fact that the army had little motive to attack the Buddhists . 
 The New York Times printed two versions of the raids on its front page , one by David Halberstam implicating Nhu for the attacks , and another with the official government version . Sheehan of United Press International also claimed Nhu was responsible for the attacks , and foreign journalists had to smuggle their stories out by asking people leaving the country at the airport to carry documents for them . At the time , Sheehan and Halberstam were on a Ngô family hit list along with political dissidents because of their exposes of the regime 's human rights abuses , and following the raids , they slept at the home of John Mecklin , a U.S. official . They also received information that the Ngos were going to plant bombs in their offices and blame the deaths on the communists . 
 The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) went on to report that ARVN officers resolutely denied any involvement in the pagoda raids . They held that Tung 's Special Forces had disguised themselves in ARVN uniforms before attacking the pagodas . Further unsubstantiated rumors had spread within the army that the Americans , who trained the Special Forces , had helped to plan the attack . The ARVN leaders were unsure of how to proceed and Don called a staff meeting on the morning of 23 August to discuss impending demonstrations against the raids by university students and the anger of junior ARVN officers about the pagoda attacks . General Dương Văn Minh noted that the ongoing presence of armed military personnel had alienated society by creating an " aura of suppression " . 
 Later in the day , Đôn privately met with CIA agent Lucien Conein and reiterated that the Americans were mistaken in believing that the ARVN was responsible . Đôn insisted that Diem remained in control although Nhu had to approve all of the generals ' meetings with Diệm . Đôn insisted Nhu had orchestrated the raids , fearing that the generals had too much power . He asserted that Nhu used the cover of martial law to discredit the generals by dressing the Special Forces in ARVN uniforms . Đôn insisted that he was unaware of the plans and was at Joint General Staff headquarters with Khiêm when he received a radio message informing him of the assaults . Police Commissioner Trần Văn Tu , supported by Tung 's men , were in charge of the operation at ground level , and by the time Don arrived , the mission had been completed . 
 Khiêm had his own meeting with Rufus Phillips at the U.S. Embassy . He bitterly confided that Nhu had tricked the army into imposing martial law and becoming his " puppet " . Khiêm asserted that Đính , Đôn and the other generals were not aware of the raids in advance and revealed that the arms and explosives that Nhu claimed were found in the pagodas had been planted . As a result , the Vietnamese people expressed anger at the army and their U.S. backers , strengthening Nhu 's position . 
 = = Martial law and riots = = 
 Following the raids , tensions were high in the streets of the cities . Police were ordered to shoot those who defied the 21 : 00 to 05 : 00 curfew , and troops in full camouflage battle dress guarded every major intersection and bridge with automatic weapons bearing fixed bayonets . The empty pagodas were ringed by troops and armored cars . All outgoing news was censored , forcing reporters to smuggle their copy out with travelers flying to foreign countries . The telephone lines in the homes and offices of all U.S. military and embassy staff were disconnected . The head of the USAID mission , Joe Brant , was stopped and searched while commuting to work , and other American officials had their meetings with Vietnamese officials and applications for permits to travel after the curfew hours delayed . The 14 @,@ 000 U.S. military advisers in the country were given orders to stay in their homes , and all leave was canceled . 
 The pagoda raids provoked widespread disquiet among the <unk> . At midnight on 22 August , Generals Đôn , Đính and Khiêm informed Nhu that student demonstrations were planned for three consecutive days . They recommended that schools be closed , but when Nhu took them to see Diệm , the president refused to close the educational institutions . Diệm decided the students , not usually known for political activism , should be allowed to voice their opinions . Students at Saigon University boycotted classes and rioted , which was met with arrests , imprisonment , and the closure of the campus . These events were repeated at Huế University , which was likewise shut down . 
 When high school students followed the lead of their elders and demonstrated , Diệm had them arrested as well . Two of the detained students were paraded at a press conference in which they falsely admitted to being communists who had brainwashed their entire school , having been tortured to force their confession . At Trung Vuong , an elite girls ' high school , the students hung up banners attacking Diệm and the Nhus , while students from the corresponding boys ' schools became violent , smashing school windows and erecting banners that insulted Madame Nhu in explicit language . More than 1000 students from Saigon 's leading high school , most of them children of public servants and military officers , were sent to re @-@ education camps . The result was that many army officers and senior civil servants had to lobby to have their children or younger siblings released from jail , causing a further drop in morale among government and military officials . In more extreme cases , brawls broke out between police officers arresting students , and the students ' parents , many of whom were military officers and / or public servants . 
 Foreign Minister Vũ Văn Mẫu resigned , shaving his head like a Buddhist monk in protest . Mẫu had decided to leave the country for a religious pilgrimage to India and the diplomatic and press corps assembled at the airport to see him off . He never arrived , as the Ngô family had him arrested . General Đính softened the punishment at the behest of a fellow officer , and put the former diplomat under house arrest instead of placing him in jail . 
 Trần Văn Chương , the ambassador to the United States and father of the de facto first lady Madame Nhu , resigned in protest , along with all but one of the staff members at the embassy . Chương charged Diệm with having " copied the tactics of totalitarian regimes " , and said that as long as Diệm and the Nhus were in power , there was " not once chance in a hundred for victory " against the communists . Madame Chương — who was South Vietnam 's observer at the United Nations — resigned and spoke of mass executions and a reign of terror under Diệm and Nhu . She predicted that if Diệm and the Nhus did not leave Vietnam then they would be killed in some sort of uprising . 
 Voice of America announced that Chương had resigned in protest against the Ngô family 's policies , but this was denied by the Saigon government , which asserted the <unk> had been sacked . Diệm bureaucrats claimed Chương 's last telegram had been so critical of the regime that it was determined to be " inadmissible in form and substance " and that after years of privately complaining about his ambassador , Diệm dismissed him . In the meantime , the brothers made selective payments to some generals , hoping to cause resentment and division within the army . Vietnamese civil servants also became more reluctant to do their jobs , especially in conjunction with American advisers . They reasoned that as the Americans were funding Tung 's men , they must have been involved in the attacks . 
 = = Change in U.S. policy = = 
 Once the U.S. government realized the truth about who was behind the raids , they reacted with disapproval towards the Diệm regime . The Americans had pursued a policy of quietly and privately advising the Ngôs to reconcile with the Buddhists while publicly supporting the partnership , but following the attacks , this route was regarded as untenable . Furthermore , the attacks were carried out by American @-@ trained Special Forces personnel funded by the CIA , and presented Lodge with a fait accompli . One Western ambassador thought that the raids signaled " the end of the gallant American effort here " . The U.S. State Department issued a statement declaring that the raids were a " direct violation " of the promise to pursue " a policy of reconciliation " . 
 On 24 August , the Kennedy administration sent Cable 243 to Lodge at the embassy in Saigon , marking a change in American policy . The message advised Lodge to seek the removal of the Nhus from power , and to look for alternative leadership options if Diệm refused to heed American pressure for reform . As the probability of Diệm sidelining the Nhus was seen as virtually nil , the message effectively meant the fomenting of a coup . The Voice of America broadcast a statement blaming Nhu for the raids and absolving the army of responsibility . Aware that the Americans would neither oppose a coup nor respond with aid cuts or sanctions , the generals deposed the Ngô brothers , who were arrested and assassinated the next day , 2 November 1963 . 
 = Charles Villiers Stanford = 
 Sir Charles Villiers Stanford ( 30 September 1852 – 29 March 1924 ) was an Irish composer , music teacher , and conductor . Born to a well @-@ off and highly musical family in Dublin , Stanford was educated at the University of Cambridge before studying music in Leipzig and Berlin . He was instrumental in raising the status of the Cambridge University Musical Society , attracting international stars to perform with it . 
 While still an undergraduate , Stanford was appointed organist of Trinity College , Cambridge . In 1882 , aged 29 , he was one of the founding professors of the Royal College of Music , where he taught composition for the rest of his life . From 1887 he was also Professor of Music at Cambridge . As a teacher , Stanford was sceptical about modernism , and based his instruction chiefly on classical principles as exemplified in the music of Brahms . Among his pupils were rising composers whose fame went on to surpass his own , such as Gustav Holst and Ralph Vaughan Williams . As a conductor , Stanford held posts with the Bach Choir and the Leeds triennial music festival . 
 Stanford composed a substantial number of concert works , including seven symphonies , but his best @-@ remembered pieces are his choral works for church performance , chiefly composed in the Anglican tradition . He was a dedicated composer of opera , but none of his nine completed operas has endured in the general repertory . Some critics regarded Stanford , together with Hubert Parry and Alexander Mackenzie , as responsible for a renaissance in music from the British Isles . However , after his conspicuous success as a composer in the last two decades of the 19th century , his music was eclipsed in the 20th century by that of Edward Elgar as well as former pupils . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Stanford was born in Dublin , the only son of John James Stanford and his second wife , Mary , née Henn . John Stanford was a prominent Dublin lawyer , Examiner to the Court of Chancery in Ireland and Clerk of the Crown for County Meath . His wife was the third daughter of William Henn , Master of the High Court of Chancery in Ireland . Both parents were accomplished amateur musicians ; John Stanford was a cellist and a noted bass singer who was chosen to perform the title role in Mendelssohn 's Elijah at the Irish premiere in 1847 . Mary Stanford was an amateur pianist , capable of playing the solo parts in concertos at Dublin concerts . 
 The young Stanford was given a conventional education at a private day school in Dublin run by Henry Tilney Bassett , who concentrated on the classics to the exclusion of other subjects . Stanford 's parents encouraged the boy 's precocious musical talent , employing a succession of teachers in violin , piano , organ and composition . Three of his teachers were former pupils of Ignaz Moscheles , including his godmother Elizabeth <unk> , of whom Stanford recalled , " She taught me , before I was twelve years old , to read at sight . ... She made me play every day at the end of my lesson a Mazurka of Chopin : never letting me stop for a mistake . ... By the time I had played through the whole fifty @-@ two <unk> , I could read most music of the calibre my fingers could tackle with comparative ease . " One of the young Stanford 's earliest compositions , a march in D ♭ major , written when he was eight years old , was performed in the pantomime at the Theatre Royal , Dublin three years later . At the age of seven , Stanford gave a piano recital for an invited audience , playing works by Beethoven , Handel , Mendelssohn , Moscheles , Mozart and Bach . One of his songs was taken up by the University of Dublin Choral Society and was well received . 
 In the 1860s Dublin received occasional visits from international stars , and Stanford was able to hear famous performers such as Joseph Joachim , Henri Vieuxtemps and Adelina Patti . The annual visit of the Italian Opera Company from London , led by Giulia Grisi , Giovanni Matteo Mario and later Thérèse <unk> , gave Stanford a taste for opera that remained with him all his life . When he was ten , his parents took him to London for the summer , where he stayed with his mother 's uncle in Mayfair . While there he took composition lessons from the composer and teacher Arthur O 'Leary , and piano lessons from Ernst <unk> , professor of piano at the Royal Academy of Music ( RAM ) . On his return to Dublin , his godmother having left Ireland , he took lessons from Henrietta Flynn , another former Leipzig Conservatory pupil of Moscheles , and later from Robert Stewart , organist of St Patrick 's Cathedral , as well as from a third Moscheles pupil , Michael Quarry . During his second spell in London two years later , he met the composer Arthur Sullivan and the musical administrator and writer George Grove , who later played important parts in his career . 
 John Stanford hoped that his son would follow him into the legal profession but accepted his decision to pursue music as a career . However , he stipulated that Stanford should have a conventional university education before going on to musical studies abroad . Stanford tried unsuccessfully for a classics scholarship at Trinity Hall , Cambridge , but gained an organ scholarship , and later a classics scholarship , at Queens ' College . By the time he went up to Cambridge in 1870 he had written a substantial number of compositions , including vocal music , both sacred and secular , and orchestral works ( a rondo for cello and orchestra and a concert overture ) . 
 = = = Cambridge = = = 
 Stanford immersed himself in the musical life of the university to the detriment of his Latin and Greek studies . He composed religious and secular vocal works , a piano concerto , and incidental music for Longfellow 's play A Spanish Student . In November 1870 he appeared as piano soloist with the Cambridge University Musical Society ( CUMS ) , and quickly became its assistant conductor and a committee member . The society had declined in excellence since its foundation in 1843 . Its choir consisted solely of men and boys ; the lack of women singers severely limited the works that the society could present . Stanford was unable to persuade the members to admit women , and so he staged what The Musical Times called " a bloodless revolution . " In February 1872 he co @-@ founded a mixed choir , the Amateur Vocal Guild , whose performances immediately put those of the CUMS singers in the shade . The members of CUMS rapidly changed their minds , and agreed to a merger of the two choirs , with women given associate membership of the society . 
 The conductor of the combined choir was John Larkin Hopkins , who was also organist of Trinity College . He became ill , and handed over the conductorship to Stanford in 1873 . Stanford was also appointed Hopkins 's deputy organist at Trinity , and moved from Queens ' to Trinity in April 1873 . In the summer of that year Stanford made his first trip to continental Europe . He went to Bonn for the Schumann Festival held there , where he met Joachim and Brahms . His growing love of the music of Schumann and Brahms marked him as a classicist at a time when many music @-@ lovers were divided into the classical or the modernist camps , the latter represented by the music of Liszt and Wagner . Stanford was not constrained by the fashion for belonging to one camp or the other ; he immensely admired Die Meistersinger though he was unenthusiastic about some of Wagner 's other works . After leaving Bonn he returned home by way of Switzerland and then Paris , where he saw Meyerbeer 's Le prophète . 
 Hopkins 's illness proved fatal , and after his death the Trinity authorities invited Stanford to take over as organist of the college . He accepted with the proviso that he was to be released each year for a spell of musical study in Germany . The fellows of the college resolved on 21 February 1874 : 
 Charles Villiers Stanford ( undergraduate of the College ) be appointed organist at a salary of £ 100 p. a. for the next two years in addition to rooms and Commons when in residence . The organist to be allowed to be abroad during the two years mentioned for one term and the vacations for the purpose of studying music in Germany , the college undertaking to find a substitute in his absence . 
 Two days after his appointment , Stanford took the final examinations for his classics degree . He ranked 65th of 66 , and was awarded a third @-@ class degree . 
 = = = Leipzig = = = 
 On the recommendation of Sir William Sterndale Bennett , former professor of music at Cambridge and now director of the Royal Academy of Music , Stanford went to Leipzig in the summer of 1874 for lessons with Carl Reinecke , professor of composition and piano at the Leipzig Conservatory . The composer Thomas Dunhill commented that by 1874 it was " the tail @-@ end of the Leipzig ascendancy , when the great traditions of Mendelssohn had already begun to fade . " Nevertheless , Stanford did not seriously consider studying anywhere else . Neither Dublin nor London offered any comparable musical training ; the most prestigious British music school , the Royal Academy of Music ( RAM ) , was at that time hidebound and reactionary . He was dismayed to find in Leipzig that Bennett had recommended him to a German pedant no more progressive than the teachers at the RAM . Stanford said of Reinecke , " Of all the dry musicians I have ever known he was the most desiccated . He had not a good word for any contemporary composer ... He loathed Wagner ... sneered at Brahms and had no enthusiasm of any sort . " Stanford 's biographer Paul Rodmell suggests that Reinecke 's ultra @-@ conservatism may have been unexpectedly good for his pupil " as it may have encouraged Stanford to kick against the traces . " During his time in Leipzig Stanford took piano lessons from Robert <unk> ( 1826 – 1903 ) , organist of the city 's Nikolaikirche , whom he found more helpful . 
 Among Stanford 's compositions in 1874 was a setting of part one of Longfellow 's poem The Golden Legend . He intended to set the entire poem , but gave up , defeated by Longfellow 's " numerous but unconnected characters . " Stanford ignored this and other early works when assigning opus numbers in his mature years . The earliest compositions in his official list of works are a four @-@ movement Suite for piano and a Toccata for piano , which both date from 1875 . 
 After a second spell in Leipzig with Reinecke in 1875 , which was no more productive than the first , Stanford was recommended by Joachim to study in Berlin the following year with Friedrich Kiel , whom Stanford found " a master at once sympathetic and able ... I learnt more from him in three months , than from all the others in three years . " 
 = = = Rising composer = = = 
 Returning to Cambridge in the intervals of his studies in Germany , Stanford had resumed his work as conductor of CUMS . He found the society in good shape under his deputy , Eaton <unk> , and able to tackle demanding new works . In 1876 the society presented one of the first performances in Britain of the Brahms Requiem . In 1877 CUMS came to national attention when it presented the first British performance of Brahms 's First Symphony . 
 During the same period , Stanford was becoming known as a composer . He was composing prolifically , though he later withdrew some of his works from these years , including a violin concerto which , according to Rodmell , suffered from " undistinguished thematic material . " In 1875 his First Symphony won the second prize in a competition held at the Alexandra Palace for symphonies by British composers , although he had to wait a further two years to hear the work performed . In the same year Stanford directed the first performance of his oratorio The Resurrection , given by CUMS . At the request of Alfred Tennyson , he wrote incidental music for Tennyson 's drama Queen Mary , performed at the Lyceum Theatre , London in April 1876 . 
 In April 1878 , despite the disapproval of his father , Stanford married Jane Anna Maria Wetton , known as Jennie , a singer whom he had met when she was studying in Leipzig . She was the daughter of Henry Champion Wetton of <unk> in Surrey , who had died in 1870 . They had a daughter , Geraldine Mary , born in 1883 and a son , Guy Desmond , born in 1885 . 
 In 1878 and 1879 Stanford worked on his first opera , The Veiled Prophet , to a libretto by his friend William Barclay Squire . It was based on a poem by Thomas Moore with characters including a virgin priestess and a mystic prophet , and a plot that culminates in poisoning and stabbing . Stanford offered the work to the opera impresario Carl Rosa , who refused it and suggested that the composer should try to have it staged in Germany : " Its success will ( unfortunately ) have much greater chances here if accepted abroad . " Referring to the enormous popularity of Sullivan 's comic operas , Rosa added , " If the work was of the Pinafore style it would be quite another matter . " Stanford had greatly enjoyed Sullivan 's Cox and Box , but The Veiled Prophet was intended to be a serious work of high drama and romance . Stanford had made many useful contacts during his months in Germany , and his friend the conductor Ernst Frank got the piece staged at the <unk> <unk> in Hanover in 1881 . Reviewing the premiere for The Musical Times , Stanford 's friend J A Fuller Maitland wrote , " Mr. Stanford 's style of instrumentation ... is built more or less on that of Schumann ; while his style of dramatic treatment bears more resemblance to Meyerbeer than to that of any other master . " Other reviews were mixed , and the opera had to wait until 1893 for its English premiere . Stanford nevertheless continued to seek operatic success throughout his career . In his lifelong enthusiasm for opera he differed strikingly from his contemporary Hubert Parry , who made one attempt at composing opera and then renounced the genre . 
 By the early 1880s , Stanford was becoming a major figure in the British musical scene . His only major rivals were seen as Sullivan , Frederic Hymen Cowen , Parry , Alexander Mackenzie and Arthur Goring Thomas . Sullivan was by this time viewed with suspicion in high @-@ minded musical circles for composing comic rather than grand operas ; Cowen was regarded more as a conductor than as a composer ; and the other three , though seen as promising , had not so far made a clear mark as Stanford had done . Stanford helped Parry in particular to gain recognition , commissioning incidental music from him for a Cambridge production of Aristophanes ' The Birds and a symphony ( the " Cambridge " ) for the musical society . At Cambridge Stanford continued to raise the profile of CUMS , as well as his own , by securing appearances by leading international musicians including Joachim , Hans Richter , Alfredo Piatti and Edward Dannreuther . The society attracted further attention by premiering works by Cowen , Parry , Mackenzie , Goring Thomas and others . Stanford was also making an impression in his capacity as organist of Trinity , raising musical standards and composing what his biographer Jeremy Dibble calls " some highly distinctive church music " including a Service in B ♭ ( 1879 ) , the anthem " The Lord is my shepherd " ( 1886 ) and the motet <unk> <unk> ( 1888 ) . 
 In the first half of the 1880s , Stanford collaborated with the author Gilbert à Beckett on two operas , Savonarola , and The Canterbury Pilgrims . The former was well received at its premiere in Hamburg in April 1884 , but received a critical savaging when staged at Covent Garden in July of the same year . Parry commented privately , " It seems very badly constructed for the stage , poorly conceived and the music , though clean and well @-@ managed , is not striking or dramatic . " The most severe public criticism was in The Theatre , whose reviewer wrote , " The book of Savonarola is dull , stilted , and , from a dramatic point of view , weak . It is not , however , so crushingly tiresome as the music fitted to it . Savonarola has gone far to convince me that opera is quite out of [ Stanford 's ] line and that the sooner he abandons the stage for the cathedral , the better for his musical reputation . " The Canterbury Pilgrims had been premiered in London in April 1884 , three months before Savonarola was presented at Covent Garden . It had a better reception than the latter , though reviews pointed out Stanford 's debt to Die Meistersinger , and complained of a lack of emotion in the love music . George Grove agreed with the critics , writing to Parry , " Charlie 's music contains everything but sentiment . Love not at all – that I heard not a grain of . ... And I do think that there might be more tune . Melody is not a thing to be avoided surely . " In 1896 a critic wrote that the opera had " just such a ' book ' as would have suited the late Alfred Cellier . He would probably have made of it a charming light English opera . But Dr. Stanford has chosen to use it for the exemplification of those advanced theories which we know him to hold , and he has given us music which would incline us to think that Die Meistersinger had been his model . The effect of the combination is not happy . " 
 = = = Professor = = = 
 In 1883 , the Royal College of Music was set up to replace the short @-@ lived and unsuccessful National Training School for Music ( <unk> ) . Neither the <unk> nor the longer @-@ established Royal Academy of Music had provided adequate musical training for professional orchestral players , and the founder @-@ director of the college , George Grove , was determined that the new institution should succeed in doing so . His two principal allies in this undertaking were the violinist Henry Holmes and Stanford . In a study of the founding of the college , David Wright notes that Stanford had two main reasons for supporting Grove 's aim . The first was his belief that a capable college orchestra was essential to give students of composition the chance to experience the sound of their music . His second reason was the severe contrast between the competence of German orchestras and the performance of their British counterparts . He accepted Grove 's offer of the posts of professor of composition and ( with Holmes ) conductor of the college orchestra . He held the professorship for the rest of his life ; among the best known of his many pupils were Samuel Coleridge @-@ Taylor , Gustav Holst , Ralph Vaughan Williams , John Ireland , Frank Bridge and Arthur Bliss . 
 Stanford was never an easy @-@ going teacher . He insisted on one @-@ to @-@ one tutorials , and worked his pupils hard . One of them , Herbert Howells , recalled , " Corner any Stanford pupil you like , and ask him to confess the sins he most hated being discovered in by his master . He will tell you ' <unk> ' and ' vulgarity . ' When these went into the teacher 's room they came out , badly damaged . Against compromise with dubious material or workmanship Stanford stubbornly set his face . " Another pupil , Edgar Bainton , recalled : 
 Stanford 's teaching seemed to be without method or plan . His criticism consisted for the most part of " I like it , my boy , " or " It 's damned ugly , my boy " ( the latter in most cases ) . In this , perhaps , lay its value . For in spite of his conservatism , and he was intensely and passionately conservative in music as in politics , his amazingly comprehensive knowledge of musical literature of all nations and ages made one feel that his opinions , however irritating , had weight . 
 To Stanford 's regret , many of his pupils who achieved eminence as composers broke away from his classical , Brahmsian precepts , as he had himself rebelled against Reinecke 's conservatism . The composer George Dyson wrote , " In a certain sense the very rebellion he fought was the most obvious fruit of his methods . And in view of what some of these rebels have since achieved , one is tempted to wonder whether there is really anything better a teacher can do for his pupils than drive them into various forms of revolution . " The works of some of Stanford 's pupils , including Holst and Vaughan Williams , entered the general repertory in Britain , and to some extent elsewhere , as Stanford 's never did . For many years after his death it seemed that Stanford 's greatest fame would be as a teacher . Among his achievements at the RCM was the establishment of an opera class , with at least one operatic production every year . From 1885 to 1915 there were 32 productions , all of them conducted by Stanford . 
 In 1887 Stanford was appointed professor of music at Cambridge in succession to Sir George Macfarren who died in October of that year . Up to this time , the university had awarded music degrees to candidates who had not been undergraduates at Cambridge ; all that was required was to pass the university 's music examinations . Stanford was determined to end the practice , and after six years he persuaded the university authorities to agree . Three years ' study at the university became a prerequisite for sitting the bachelor of music examinations . 
 = = = Conductor and composer = = = 
 During the last decades of the 19th century , Stanford 's academic duties did not prevent him from composing or performing . He was appointed conductor of the Bach Choir , London , in 1885 , succeeding its founding conductor Otto Goldschmidt . He held the post until 1902 . Hans von Bülow conducted the German premiere of Stanford 's Irish Symphony in Hamburg in January 1888 , and was sufficiently impressed by the work to programme it in Berlin shortly afterwards . Richter conducted it in Vienna , and Mahler later conducted it in New York . For the Theatre Royal , Cambridge , Stanford composed incidental music for productions of Aeschylus 's The Eumenides ( 1885 ) , and Sophocles ' Oedipus <unk> ( 1887 ) . The Times said of the former , " Mr. Stanford 's music is dramatically significant , as well as beautiful in itself . It has , moreover , that quality so rare among modern composers – style . " In both sets of music Stanford made extensive use of leitmotifs , in the manner of Wagner ; the critic of The Times noted the Wagnerian character of the prelude to Oedipus . 
 In the 1890s , Bernard Shaw writing as " Corno di Bassetto " , music critic of The World , voiced mixed feelings about Stanford . In Shaw 's view , the best of Stanford 's works displayed an uninhibited , Irish , character . The critic was dismissive of the composer 's solemn Victorian choral music . In July 1891 , Shaw 's column was full of praise for Stanford 's capacity for spirited tunes , declaring that Richard D 'Oyly Carte should engage him to succeed Sullivan as the composer of Savoy operas . In October of the same year , Shaw attacked Stanford 's oratorio Eden , bracketing the composer with Parry and Mackenzie as a mutual admiration society , purveying " sham classics " : 
 [ W ] ho am I that I should be believed , to the disparagement of eminent musicians ? If you doubt that Eden is a masterpiece , ask Dr Parry and Dr Mackenzie , and they will applaud it to the skies . Surely Dr Mackenzie 's opinion is conclusive ; for is he not the composer of Veni Creator , guaranteed as excellent music by Professor Stanford and Dr Parry ? You want to know who Parry is ? Why , the composer of Blest Pair of Sirens , as to the merits of which you only have to consult Dr Mackenzie and Professor Stanford . 
 To Fuller Maitland , the trio of composers lampooned by Shaw were the leaders of an English musical renaissance ( although neither Stanford nor Mackenzie was English ) . This view persisted in some academic circles for many years . 
 Stanford returned to opera in 1893 , with an extensively revised and shortened version of The Veiled Prophet . It had its British premiere at Covent Garden in July . His friend Fuller Maitland was by this time the chief music critic of The Times , and the paper 's review of the opera was laudatory . According to Fuller Maitland The Veiled Prophet was the best novelty of an opera season that had also included Leoncavallo 's Pagliacci , Bizet 's Djamileh and Mascagni 's I Rantzau . Stanford 's next opera was Shamus O 'Brien ( 1896 ) , a comic opera to a libretto by George H. Jessop . The conductor was the young Henry Wood , who recalled in his memoirs that the producer , Sir Augustus Harris , managed to quell the dictatorial composer and prevent him from interfering with the staging . Stanford attempted to give Wood lessons in conducting , but the young man was unimpressed . The opera was successful , running for 82 consecutive performances . The work was given in German translation in Breslau in 1907 ; Thomas Beecham thought it " a colourful , racy work " , and revived it in his 1910 opéra comique season at His Majesty 's Theatre , London . 
 At the end of 1894 , Grove retired from the Royal College of Music . Parry was chosen to succeed him , and although Stanford wholeheartedly congratulated his friend on his appointment , their relations soon deteriorated . Stanford was known as a hot @-@ tempered and quarrelsome man . Grove had written of a board meeting at the Royal College " where somehow the spirit of the <unk> himself had been working in Stanford all the time – as it sometimes does , making him so nasty and quarrelsome and <unk> as no one but he can be ! He is a most remarkably clever and able fellow , full of resource and power – no doubt of that – but one has to purchase it often at a very dear price . " Parry suffered worse at Stanford 's hands with frequent rows , deeply upsetting to the highly strung Parry . Some of their rows were caused by Stanford 's reluctance to accept the authority of his old friend and protégé , but on other occasions Parry seriously provoked Stanford , notably in 1895 when he reduced the funding for Stanford 's orchestral classes . 
 In 1898 , Sullivan , ageing and unwell , resigned as conductor of the Leeds triennial music festival , a post which he had held since 1880 . He believed that Stanford 's motive for accepting the conductorship of the Leeds Philharmonic Society the previous year was to position himself to take over the festival . Stanford later felt obliged to write to The Times , denying that he had been party to a conspiracy to oust Sullivan . Sullivan was by then thought to be a dull conductor of other composers ' music , and although Stanford 's work as a conductor was not without its critics , he was appointed in Sullivan 's place . He remained in charge until 1910 . His compositions for the festival included Songs of the Sea ( 1904 ) , Stabat Mater ( 1907 ) and Songs of the Fleet ( 1910 ) . New works by other composers presented at Leeds during Stanford 's years in charge included pieces by Parry , Mackenzie , and seven of Stanford 's former pupils . The best @-@ known new work from Stanford 's time is probably Vaughan Williams 's A Sea Symphony , premiered in 1910 . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1901 Stanford returned once again to opera , with a version of Much Ado About Nothing , to a libretto by Julian Sturgis that was exceptionally faithful to Shakespeare 's original . The Manchester Guardian commented , " Not even in the Falstaff of Arrigo Boito and Giuseppe Verdi have the characteristic charm , the ripe and pungent individuality of the original comedy been more <unk> preserved . " 
 Despite good notices for the opera , Stanford 's star was waning . In the first decade of the century , his music became eclipsed by that of a younger composer , Edward Elgar . In the words of the music scholar Robert Anderson , Stanford " had his innings with continental reputation in the latter decades of the nineteenth century , but then Elgar bowled him out . " When Elgar was struggling for recognition in the 1890s , Stanford had been supportive of his younger colleague , conducting his music , putting him forward for a Cambridge doctorate , and proposing him for membership of the exclusive London club , the Athenaeum . He was , however , put out when Elgar 's success at home and abroad eclipsed his own , with Richard Strauss ( whom Stanford detested ) praising Elgar as the first progressive English composer . When Elgar was appointed professor of music at Birmingham University in 1904 , Stanford wrote him a letter that the recipient found " odious " . Elgar retaliated in his inaugural lecture with remarks about composers of rhapsodies , widely seen as denigrating Stanford . Stanford later counter @-@ attacked in his book A History of Music , writing of Elgar , " Cut off from his contemporaries by his religion and his want of regular academic training , he was lucky enough to enter the field and find the preliminary ploughing done . " 
 Though bitter about being sidelined , Stanford continued to compose . Between the turn of the century and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 his new works included a violin concerto ( 1901 ) , a clarinet concerto ( 1902 ) , a sixth and a seventh ( and last ) symphony ( 1906 and 1911 ) , and his second piano concerto ( 1911 ) . In 1916 he wrote his penultimate opera , The Critic . It was a setting of Sheridan 's comedy of the same name , with the original text left mostly intact by the librettist , Lewis Cairns James . The work was well received at the premiere at the Shaftesbury Theatre , London , and was taken up later in the year by Beecham , who staged it in Manchester and London . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 The First World War had a severe effect on Stanford . He was frightened by air @-@ raids , and had to move from London to Windsor to avoid them . Many of his former pupils were casualties of the fighting , including Arthur Bliss , injured , Ivor Gurney , gassed , and George Butterworth , killed . The annual RCM operatic production , which Stanford had supervised and conducted every year since 1885 , had to be cancelled . His income declined , as the fall in student numbers at the college reduced the demand for his services . After a serious disagreement at the end of 1916 , his relationship with Parry deteriorated to the point of hostility . Stanford 's magnanimity , however , came to the fore when Parry died two years later and Stanford successfully lobbied for him to be buried in St Paul 's Cathedral . 
 After the war , Stanford handed over much of the direction of the RCM 's orchestra to Adrian Boult , but continued to teach at the college . He gave occasional public lectures , including one on " Some Recent Tendencies in Composition " , in January 1921 which was belligerently hostile to most of the music of the generation after his own . His last public appearance was on 5 March 1921 conducting Frederick <unk> and the Royal Choral Society in his new cantata , At the Abbey Gate . Reviews were polite but unenthusiastic . The Times said , " we could not feel that the music had enough emotion behind it " , The Observer thought it " quite appealing even though one feels it to be more facile than powerful . " 
 In September 1922 , Stanford completed the sixth Irish Rhapsody , his final work . Two weeks later he celebrated his 70th birthday ; thereafter his health declined . On 17 March 1924 he suffered a stroke and on 29 March he died at his home in London , survived by his wife and children . He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 2 April and his ashes were buried in Westminster Abbey the following day . The orchestra of the Royal College of Music , conducted by Boult , played music by Stanford , ending the service with a funeral march that he had written for Tennyson 's Becket in 1893 . The grave is in the north choir aisle of the Abbey , near the graves of Henry Purcell , John Blow and William Sterndale Bennett . The Times said , " the conjunction of the music of Stanford with that of his great predecessors showed how thoroughly as composer he belonged to their line . " 
 Stanford 's last opera , The Travelling Companion , composed during the war , was premiered by amateur performers at the David Lewis Theatre , Liverpool in 1925 with a reduced orchestra . The work was given complete at Bristol in 1928 and at Sadler 's Wells Theatre , London , in 1935 . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Stanford received many honours , including honorary doctorates from Oxford ( 1883 ) , Cambridge ( 1888 ) , Durham ( 1894 ) , Leeds ( 1904 ) , and Trinity College , Dublin ( 1921 ) . He was knighted in 1902 and in 1904 was elected a member of the Royal Academy of Arts , Berlin . 
 = = Works = = 
 Stanford composed about 200 works , including seven symphonies , about 40 choral works , nine operas , 11 concertos and 28 chamber works , as well as songs , piano pieces , incidental music , and organ works . He suppressed most of his earliest compositions ; the earliest of works that he chose to include in his catalogue date from 1875 . 
 Throughout his career as a composer , Stanford 's technical mastery was rarely in doubt . The composer Edgar Bainton said of him , " Whatever opinions may be held upon Stanford 's music , and they are many and various , it is , I think , always recognised that he was a master of means . Everything he turned his hand to always ' comes off . ' " On the day of Stanford 's death , one former pupil , Gustav Holst , said to another , Herbert Howells , " The one man who could get any one of us out of a technical mess is now gone from us . " 
 After Stanford 's death most of his music was quickly forgotten , with the exception of his works for church performance . His Stabat Mater and Requiem held their place in the choral repertoire , the latter championed by Sir Thomas Beecham . Stanford 's two sets of sea songs and the song " The Blue Bird " were still performed from time to time , but even his most popular opera , Shamus O 'Brien came to seem old fashioned with its " stage @-@ Irish " vocabulary . However , in his 2002 study of Stanford , Dibble writes that the music , increasingly available on disc if not in live performance , still has the power to surprise . In Dibble 's view , the frequent charge that Stanford is " Brahms and water " was disproved once the symphonies , concertos , much of the chamber music and many of the songs became available for reappraisal when recorded for compact disc . In 2002 , Rodmell 's study of Stanford included a discography running to 16 pages . 
 The criticism most often made of Stanford 's music by writers from Shaw onwards is that his music lacks passion . Shaw praised " Stanford the Celt " and <unk> " Stanford the Professor " , who reined in the emotions of the Celt . In Stanford 's church music , the critic Nicholas Temperley finds " a thoroughly satisfying artistic experience , but one that is perhaps lacking in deeply felt religious impulse . " In his operas and elsewhere , Grove , Parry and later commentators found music that ought to convey love and romance failing to do so . Like Parry , Stanford strove for seriousness , and his competitive streak led him to emulate Sullivan not in comic opera , for which Stanford had a real gift , but in oratorio in what Rodmell calls grand statements that " only occasionally matched worthiness with power or profundity . " 
 = = = Orchestral = = = 
 The commentator Richard Whitehouse writes that Stanford 's seven symphonies embody both the strengths and limitations of his music , displaying " a compositional rigour and expertise matched only by his older contemporary ... Parry , while seeming content to remain well within the stylistic ambit of Mendelssohn , Schumann and Brahms . " Whitehouse comments that although Stanford 's symphonic construction is conventional , " an often subtle approach to movement forms and resourceful orchestration make his symphonies worth exploring . " 
 Stanford 's first two symphonies ( 1876 and 1879 ) were not published and were excluded from his catalogue of works . The Third Symphony in F minor , known as the Irish , was first performed in 1887 . It was the most popular of Stanford 's symphonies during his lifetime . In his study of Stanford 's works , John Porte refers to it as " full of the spirit and tunes of his country ... with its contrasting expressions of jollity and sad beauty . " In this , as in many of his works , Stanford incorporated genuine Irish folk tunes . Like Parry and Mackenzie , but unlike Sullivan and Elgar , Stanford liked and respected folk songs . He generally avoided programmatic music , but his Sixth Symphony , composed in memoriam G F Watts , was , Stanford acknowledged , inspired by Watts 's sculptures and paintings . 
 Of Stanford 's other orchestral works , his six Irish Rhapsodies all date from the 20th century , the first from 1901 and the last from the year before his death . Two of the set feature solo instruments along with the orchestra : the third ( cello ) and the sixth ( violin ) . In Dibble 's view some of the concertante works such as the First Piano Concerto ( 1894 ) and the Violin Concerto ( 1899 ) are in their orchestration and their lyricism as much in the tradition of Mendelssohn as of Brahms , with whom Stanford 's music is often compared . 
 = = = Chamber works = = = 
 Stanford 's chamber music , which as Dibble notes even Shaw praised , has not entered the general repertoire , but is well crafted . Dibble singles out the Three <unk> for clarinet and piano ( 1879 ) , the Serenade nonet ( 1905 ) , and the Clarinet Sonata ( 1911 ) with its touching lament . Writing of the First String Quintet , Porte calls it a sonorous and warm @-@ hearted sort of work , constructed on fairly classical lines , and notes that the character and construction are typical of the composer . Porte comments similarly on other chamber works , including the Second Piano Trio : " This is a typical <unk> work . It is <unk> scored , classical in outlook , and contains many passages of an expressive and somewhat poetical freshness . There are no very special features to note , but the work is one that makes a useful and interesting item . " 
 = = = Church music = = = 
 The general neglect of Stanford 's music in the years after his death did not extend to his ecclesiastical works . In Music in Britain , one of the few books to deal with Stanford 's music in detail , Nicholas Temperley writes that it is due to Stanford that settings of the Anglican church services regained their " full place beside the anthem as a worthy object of artistic invention . " Vaughan Williams ranked the Stabat Mater as one of Stanford 's works of " imperishable beauty " . In Temperley 's view , Stanford 's services in A ( 1880 ) , F ( 1889 ) and C ( 1909 ) are the most important and enduring additions from those years to the cathedral repertory . As with his concert works , Stanford 's music is dominated by melody . The bass line , in Rodmell 's view , is always important yet secondary and anything in between was regarded as " filling . " 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 In a 1981 survey of Stanford 's operas , the critic Nigel Burton writes that Shamus O 'Brien lacks good tunes , and that the only memorable melody in it is not by Stanford but is an English folk song , " The Glory of the West . " Burton is more dismissive of The Critic , which he describes as " a poor man 's Ariadne auf Naxos . " Dibble rates The Critic much higher , considering it to be one of Stanford 's two best operas . In 1921 , Porte wrote that it contains music that is " remarkably fresh , melodious and thoroughly individual in character and outlook . The vocal and instrumental writing is done with consummate skill . " Burton praises Much Ado About Nothing , judging it to contain some of Stanford 's best operatic music . He rates the last of the composer 's operas , The Travelling Companion as his finest operatic achievement , though Burton credits much of its power to the brilliant story adapted by Henry Newbolt from Hans Andersen . Porte writes that the music is often solemn and romantic , and curiously impressive . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Although much of Stanford 's music is neglected in the concert hall , a considerable amount has been recorded . Complete cycles of the symphonies have been recorded for the Chandos and Naxos labels , under the conductors Vernon Handley and David Lloyd @-@ Jones . Other orchestral works recorded for CD include the six Irish Rhapsodies , the Clarinet Concerto , the Second Piano Concerto and the Second Violin Concerto . 
 Stanford 's church music is well represented on disc . In his 2002 discography , Rodmell lists 14 versions of the Service in B ♭ , alongside multiple recordings of the Services in A , F and C , the three motets Op. 38 and the composer 's setting of " The Lord is my Shepherd . " Secular songs recorded by several artists include " La Belle Dame Sans Merci " , performed by Janet Baker among others , " An Irish Idyll " , whose interpreters have included Kathleen Ferrier , and Songs of the Sea in recordings by such singers as Thomas Allen . Among the chamber works that have received several recordings are the Three <unk> for Clarinet and Piano and the Clarinet Sonata . Rodmell 's discography lists none of Stanford 's operas . 
 = New York State Route 28N = 
 New York State Route 28N ( NY 28N ) is an east – west state highway in the North Country of New York in the United States . It extends for 50 @.@ 95 miles ( 82 @.@ 00 km ) through the Adirondack Mountains from Blue Mountain Lake to North Creek . The route is a northerly alternate route to NY 28 between both locations ; as such , it passes through several communities that NY 28 bypasses to the south . The westernmost 10 miles ( 16 km ) of NY 28N overlap with NY 30 through the town of Long Lake . NY 28N and NY 30 split in the hamlet of Long Lake , from where NY 30 heads to the north and NY 28N proceeds eastward through mountainous regions of Adirondack Park . 
 The 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) section of NY 28N not concurrent with NY 30 is designated as the Roosevelt – Marcy Trail , a scenic byway named for Theodore Roosevelt , who was then the Vice President of the United States . The byway marks the path Roosevelt took in 1901 to reach North Creek from Mount Marcy after learning that President William McKinley had been assassinated . The route has a rather scant history before its designations . The road originated as an old highway stretching from Warren County to Long Lake . It was used for transportation in the iron ore industry in Newcomb , and for the lumber industry in Minerva . New York State gained control of the road in 1909 . The NY 28N designation was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , incorporating part of pre @-@ 1930 NY 10 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 28N begins at the intersection with NY 28 and NY 30 near the hamlet of Blue Mountain Lake within the town of Indian Lake . The highway , concurrent with Route 30 , heads north through the hamlet nestled at the base of Blue Mountain , one of the highest peaks in Adirondack Park standing , 3 @,@ 795 feet ( 1 @,@ 157 m ) above sea level . Routes 28N and 30 track north , gaining elevation after leaving Blue Mountain Lake . Nestled between Blue Mountain and <unk> Mountain , Routes 28N and 30 turn northeast . After intersecting Salmon Pond Road , the highways wind through the mountains and hills of the Adirondacks . Mud Pond and South Pond are on the west , and East Inlet Mountain is on the east . After paralleling Long Lake and the base of East Inlet Mountain , the highways enter the hamlet of Long Lake , where they split . Route 30 heads northwest , while NY 28N turns eastward towards Newcomb . 
 Beyond Long Lake , NY 28N partially remains in a mountainous region ; Pinnacle Mountain , a 2 @,@ 159 @-@ foot ( 658 m ) peak , rises to the north , while lowlands lie to the south . The highway progresses eastward , passing Windfall Mountain and proceeding through the center of the park . NY 28N crosses into Essex County , where it becomes the Roosevelt – Marcy Trail , one of 13 scenic byways in the Adirondack Park . The highway , first turning southeast for a short distance , turns east again , passing south of Rich Lake . The two @-@ lane highway passes Baldwin Mountain to the north , and subsequently enters Newcomb , an isolated town between Long Lake and North Creek . The highway exits Newcomb as it approaches the shores of Harris Lake . After crossing one of those creeks , the highway turns to the southeast and into <unk> Hills . 
 NY 28N passes through <unk> Hills , and intersects with its first signed roads since Long Lake , County Route 75 ( CR 75 , named Eaton Lane ) and CR 84 ( Blue Ridge Road ) . The latter is a former alignment of NY 73 . Nearby is Vanderwhacker Mountain , a 3 @,@ 386 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 032 m ) high peak and part of the Vanderwhacker Mountain Wild Forest , which the highway passes through . CR 84 eventually parallels the highway to the north of NY 28N , but this slowly begins to change as the main highway begins to progress southward . NY 28N heads south into the hamlet of Aiden Lair and continues south towards Warren County . The highway crosses Boreas Creek , which flows southwest in the park , and eventually passes a series of lakes . NY 28N enters Minerva , where it intersects several county routes , including County Route 29 , which heads towards the Warren County border and Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) . 
 The road , after leaving Minerva , passes Moxham Mountain , a 2 @,@ 200 @-@ foot ( 670 m ) peak , and eventually crosses the Hudson River . The route ends just after entering North Creek in Warren County , at the intersection with NY 28 , its parent route . 
 NY 28N is classified as a rural major collector road , with the exception of the section that is overlapped with Route 30 , which is classified as a rural minor arterial road . As of 2006 , the Route 30 overlap had an annual average daily traffic of 1 @,@ 781 vehicles . Traffic volumes are reduced to 1 @,@ 231 vehicles per day from the end of the Route 30 overlap to the intersection with Blue Ridge Road ( CR 84 ) . South of this intersection , traffic is reduced further to 350 until the hamlet of Minerva , rising to 751 south of Minerva until near the Warren county line . Traffic increases back up to 1 @,@ 248 vehicles per day from there to Route 28 in North Creek . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history : Newcomb and Minerva = = = 
 Many of the earliest roads in the area crossed through Minerva . The first known road that reached the settlement was established in 1804 , when land along a highway from St. Lawrence County to the town of Chester in Warren County was populated by the West family . Minerva was mainly limited to the vicinity of the old highway , but as more people settled along the road , the town began to grow . For a time , the town boasted several water @-@ powered sawmills , and the highway was used to transport lumber . However , the lumber industry began to fail , and by 1840 , the logging and lumber system had been replaced by crops . The town initiated river drives , which continued until 1950 . 
 On March 15 , 1828 , part of Minerva and nearby Moriah was split into the town of Newcomb . Settlers began to arrive in this area in 1816 . Settlement began along the shores of Lake Harris and Newcomb Lake , mainly along the old highway from Warren County to nearby Long Lake . Eventually , highways helped the town grow , and it reached a population of 300 by the 1880 census . The iron ore industry contributed to population growth via 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) to 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) roads to Lake Champlain that were meant for hauling ore . The highway from Warren County to Long Lake became part of the state system as early as 1909 . After 1845 , Newcomb 's iron ore industry began to decline and the town evolved into somewhat of a sportsmen 's resort . As a result , a road was built connecting Newcomb with nearby Minerva and Long Lake . 
 The 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) section of 28N between Long Lake and North Creek is a scenic byway named the Roosevelt – Marcy Trail . This was the route traveled on September 10 , 1901 by Theodore Roosevelt , then Vice President of the United States . The vice president had hiked to the summit of nearby Mount Marcy earlier , while there , learned that President William McKinley , having been shot four days earlier by anarchist Leon Czolgosz in Buffalo , was near death . Roosevelt took an overnight wagon ride to North Creek . From the train station there , he traveled to Buffalo , where , after McKinley died , he was sworn in as president on September 14 . 
 = = = Designation and bridge rehabilitation = = = 
 The routing of NY 28N was originally designated , but not signed , as part of legislative Route 25 in 1908 . In 1924 , the portion of Route 25 from Long Lake to North Creek was designated as part of the signed NY 10 . The segment of former Route 25 between Blue Mountain Lake and Long Lake became part of NY 10A in the late 1920s . In the 1930 renumbering , the NY 10A designation was eliminated , and NY 10 was rerouted south of Long Lake to follow the modern routing of NY 30 south to Speculator . The former routing of NY 10 between Long Lake and North Creek was then administratively redesignated as NY 28N , which continued southward from Long Lake to Blue Mountain Lake by way of an overlap with NY 10 . 
 The New York State Department of Transportation has scheduled for NY 28N to undergo construction in spring 2013 , to rehabilitate the bridge over the Upper Hudson River Railroad . The $ 5 @.@ 9 million project is projected to be complete in fall of 2015 , and is to be supported by state and federal funds . New York State Department of Transportation has also planned for NY 28N 's bridge over Stillwater Brook in Minerva to be replaced with a stronger structure . The development of the project is expected to take place 2014 , with bids and construction starting in 2016 . The project has been set to end in 2017 , and is predicted to cost $ 1 @.@ 1 million of federal and state funds . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tropical Storm Julio ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Julio in 2002 was a weak and short @-@ lived tropical storm that made landfall along the southern Mexican coast . An area of convection organized into a tropical depression on September 25 . Initially forecast to stay offshore , the depression headed northward and strengthened into a tropical storm that same day . Julio turned to the northwest and peaked as a minimal tropical storm just before landfall near Lázaro Cárdenas , on September 26 . The storm soon weakened into a tropical depression and later on September 26 , it rapidly dissipated over Mexico . 
 Prior to making landfall , tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued for a portion of the Pacific coast of Mexico . After making landfall , three fatalities and 18 injuries were reported from Julio when a bus flipped over . Around 100 houses in Acapulco and Zihuatanejo were damaged or washed away by flash flooding . In the latter city , many trees were brought down and numerous streets were flooded . The highest rainfall reported was 16 @.@ 10 in ( 409 mm ) at Zihuatanejo and La Unión , resulting in devastation . In all , about 2 @,@ 000 homes were flooded while 100 families were evacuated . About a month after Julio , Hurricane Kenna affected some of the same locations as Julio . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Julio were from a persistent monsoon @-@ like area of convection ( possibly related to Hurricane Isidore ) that was situated off the west coast of Central America on September 21 . Convective activity generally increased over the next two days , and it is estimated that a poorly defined surface circulation developed late on September 23 . The low gradually became better organized and at 0000 UTC on September 25 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) reported that the disturbance had developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E about 100 mi ( 160 km ) southwest of Acapulco . 
 Initially , the storm was expected to pass very close to the Mexican coast and attain a peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , the NHC upgraded the depression into Tropical Storm Julio based on intensity estimates from the Dvorak technique . By this time , Julio was now expected to move onshore the Mexican coast and meander . At 0000 UTC on September 26 , Tropical Storm Julio attained its peak intensity of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) while also reaching its minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mb ( 30 inHg ) . At peak , the storm was centered just west @-@ northwest of Lázaro Cárdenas . After turning northwest , Julio made landfall along the coast of Southwestern Mexico . After landfall , Julio rapidly deteriorated over the mountainous terrain . At 1200 UTC September 26 , the storm was downgraded into a tropical depression . Even though the storm was initially expected to enter the extreme southern Gulf of California and regain tropical storm strength , Julio dissipated near Manzanillo later that day instead . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued for portions of the Pacific coast of Mexico ; a tropical storm warning was issued from Zihuatanejo to Punta San Telma while a tropical storm watch was in effect from Punta San Telma to Manzanillo . On September 26 , once the storm had weakened into a depression over land , all the watches and warnings were dropped . While making landfall , Zihuatanejo reported 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) winds , with gusts up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) at <unk> UTC September 25 . In addition , a peak pressure of 1 @,@ 002 @.@ 3 mb ( 29 @.@ 60 inHg ) was reported . The highest rainfall reported was 16 @.@ 10 inches ( 409 mm ) at Zihuatanejo and La Unión , Guerrero . Record rainfall was reported in Guerrero . 
 Tropical Storm Julio was responsible for heavy rains to Zihuatanejo , where 100 homes were damaged or destroyed . Across the city , numerous roofs were damaged and many trees fell . Many houses and streets were flooded as well . Meanwhile , in Acapulco , heavy rains triggered flash flooding that damaged another 100 houses . Throughout Colima , many rivers overflowed its banks . Furthermore , 2 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Roughly 100 families were evacuated to shelters in Michoacán . 
 In addition , many small shacks lost their roof due to the storm 's high winds . On the outskirts of the <unk> , situated 95 mi ( 155 km ) inland , a school bus carrying 40 kids flipped over , killing three and injuring 18 others . An estimated 2700 acres ( 700 ha ) of crops were lost because of the storm . Parts of Guerrero were later declared a disaster area . However , the city of <unk> was quickly cleaned up proceeding the storm . About a month after Julio , Hurricane Kenna affected some of the same locations that Julio impacted . 
 = Daughters ( Nas song ) = 
 " Daughters " is a song by American rapper Nas , released on July 17 , 2012 , by Def Jam Recordings as the third single from his 2012 album Life Is Good . He wrote it as a reflection on the growth of his daughter Destiny Jones . It was produced by No I.D. and was one of the first songs recorded for the album . 
 " Daughters " features lyrics about raising a daughter and vignettes about fatherhood . Nas ' lyrics address his daughter 's behavioral problems and are self @-@ critical of his parenting skills . No I.D. ' s soul @-@ influenced production incorporates samples of Cloud One 's 1979 song " Dust to Dust " and Wayne McGhie and the Sounds of Joy 's 1970 song " Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye " . 
 " Daughters " was released to positive reviews from music critics while charting at number 78 on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . It also earned Nas two Grammy Award nominations , one for Best Rap Performance and another for Best Rap Song . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 With " Daughters " , Nas wanted to write a song that expressed him observing the growth of his daughter Destiny Jones , who was 17 years old at the time . Nas said in an interview with XXL : 
 " She 's so important to me and she always has been . They grow so fast and time flies man . Before you know it , you ’ re looking at a little lady . She 's my first kid , my first time watching a child become a teen and a little adult before my eyes . That 's one of the most important things in my life . She is . I can ’ t get away from talking about it . " 
 " Daughters " was one of the first tracks Nas recorded for his 2012 album Life Is Good . Recording sessions for the song took place at 4220 Studios , Conway Recording Studios , and EastWest Studio in Hollywood , and at Record One in Sherman Oaks , California . It was produced by No I.D. , who incorporated live instrumentation , including guitar by Steve Wyreman and keyboards by James Poyser and Kevin Randolph . Kaye Fox sung additional vocals on the song . 
 Destiny Jones was in the studio when they were recording " Daughters " . " We were in a big studio so Destiny was doing other things " , Nas later told Vibe . " She walked into the room where I was recording it and heard a few words and said , ‘ What ’ s going on ? ’ The whole room just started laughing and she kind of smiled and walked backwards out of the room . She didn ’ t know what it was about and she didn ’ t want to listen to it , but later on she heard the song . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Daughters " uses samples of Wayne McGhie and the Sounds of Joy 's 1970 song " Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye " and Cloud One 's 1979 song " Dust to Dust " . According to Artistdirect critic Rick Florino , the song draws on " shimmering " soul music and personal vignettes about fatherhood by Nas , who dedicates the song to " my brothers with daughters . " 
 According to Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe , " Daughters " is " an emotionally complex paean to raising a girl " by a father who " struggles to let her find her way " . Pitchfork Media 's Jayson Greene said the song " finds him examining the responsibilities of fatherhood with fond bewilderment . " New York Times critic Jon Caramanica remarked that Nas sounded conflicted " between forgiving his daughter her occasional transgressions and indicting himself for not being a stern enough parent " . In the opinion of Billboard 's Erika Ramirez , he drew on an allegory of fatherhood that seemed universal . 
 Nas made reference to finding his daughter 's letter to a man in jail and the controversy that ensued when she posted a photo of a box of condoms on Instagram . According to Kyle Ellison from Drowned in Sound , Nas also commented on gender expectations in his rap , citing the line " when he date , he straight , chip off his old papa / when she date , we wait behind the door with a sawed off / ' cause we think no one is good enough for our daughters . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Daughters " was premiered on DJ <unk> 's radio show on Power 105 @.@ 1 on April 26 , 2012 . Chris Robinson directed a music video for the song , which premiered on May 27 and was " visualized through the eyes of [ Destiny Jones ] — from her third birthday party to her high school years to getting into trouble with boys " , Rap @-@ Up reported . On July 17 , Def Jam Recordings released " <unk> " as a single , the third from Life Is Good . It was performed by Nas on the Late Show with David Letterman that same day . Nas also wanted to record a remix of the song with Eminem , who turned the offer down , explaining that he had spoken enough on the subject of fatherhood in his own music . He also reached out to Jay @-@ Z , but their busy schedules did not permit them to record together . 
 " Daughters " peaked at number 78 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , on which it charted for nine weeks . It was received positively by critics , including AllMusic editor David Jeffries , who found it " well written " , and Robert Christgau , who named it a highlight on Life Is Good . Greene deemed it a " sweetly reflective response " by Nas to his daughter 's behavior , while Amidon found his level of honesty on the song " intense " and " probably the most honest we ’ re ever going to hear Nas " . Alex Macpherson of Fact called it " a song that 's as likely to make fathers everywhere misty @-@ eyed as it is to make teenage girls cringe in horror " . Respect. magazine deemed it a worthy example of when hip hop transcends its entertainment value in " an effort to celebrate and share the complexities of raising a daughter in the hip @-@ hop community " . " Daughters " was nominated for two Grammy Awards , one in the category of Best Rap Performance and another for Best Rap Song . Complex ranked it number 39 on its list of 2012 's 50 best songs . 
 Carmen Bryan , Nas ' ex @-@ wife , was critical of the song , calling it a " disappointment " while claiming via Twitter , " He had nothing positive to say about our daughter and his depiction of her is false ! " In response , American rapper Common defended Nas for his personal songwriting and likened " Daughters " to his own 1997 song " Retrospect for Life " , which he wrote about his girlfriend 's abortion . " I 've had people come to me because of those type of songs and say it changed their life " , Common told XXL . " Or somebody be like , ' Man , that song made me decide to have my child instead of having an abortion . ' Something that Nas said in that song may inspire somebody to be a better father so I think it ’ s worth it . " In an interview for Vibe , Nas said of his daughter 's reaction to the song : 
 " I think she understands where I was coming from . She can hear me saying that I wasn ’ t always around and I wasn ’ t always the best dad , but I care . And there are a lot of fathers like me . To me , ‘ Daughters ’ lets all those fathers out there know , ‘ Hey , don ’ t end up like me in terms of not being there all the time . ’ You should really pay attention to the most precious thing in the world . Destiny and I hang out all the time . She never <unk> with me about it . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital single 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes for Life Is Good . 
 Kaye Fox – additional vocals 
 Rob Kinelski – mixing , recording engineer 
 Nas – composer , performer 
 No I.D. – composer , producer 
 James Poyser – keyboards 
 Kevin Randolph – keyboards 
 Brian Sumner – recording engineer 
 Anna Ugarte – assistant engineer , mixing assistant 
 Steve Wyreman – guitar 
 = Clara Ng = 
 Clara Ng ( born 28 July 1973 ; née Clara Regina Juana , last name pronounced [ ŋ ̍ ] ) is an Indonesian writer who is known for both adult fiction and children 's literature . 
 During her childhood in Jakarta , Ng enjoyed reading and read at an advanced rate . After finishing her primary and secondary education in Indonesia , during which time she took up writing , Ng went to the United States to study at Ohio State University . After her graduation in 1997 , she worked in the US for a year before returning to Indonesia to work at a shipping company . After three years working there , in which time she married and had two miscarriages , Ng quit to become a professional writer . Her first novel , Tujuh Musim Setahun ( Seven Seasons in a Year ; 2002 ) , sold poorly , but her subsequent trilogy Indiana Chronicle was better received . Since then , she has released several novels , as well as numerous short stories ( including one anthology ) and twenty @-@ one children 's books , and some collections of fairytales . 
 Ng , who is a stay at home mother , writes in her spare time at home . Her topics are different depending on the genre she is writing in ; her adult @-@ oriented works often deal with minority groups , while her children 's books are meant to teach empathy . Her children 's works have won three Adhikarya Awards from the Indonesian Publishers Association , and LGBT groups have praised her novel Gerhana Kembar ( Twin Eclipse ; 2007 ) for avoiding stereotyping the group . However , some educators have protested the lack of an explicit moral message in her children 's books . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Ng was born in Jakarta on 28 July 1973 with the name Clara Regina Juana and raised in the Kemayoran sub @-@ district . She took up reading at a young age , reportedly capable of reading translations of The Adventures of Tintin by kindergarten . She also enjoyed Hans Christian Andersen 's fairytale The Snow Queen , which influenced her writing . By age 11 she was reading adult @-@ oriented works by Mira W. Ng attended Budi Mulia Elementary School from 1979 until 1986 , then attended Van Lith Middle School until 1989 ; it was while in middle school that she taught herself creative writing and began creating works . She completed her high school education at Bunda Hati Kudus , graduating in 1992 . While in high school , she became interested in social issues , including discrimination faced by ethnic Chinese , LGBT , and women . 
 After high school , Ng went to the United States and began studying at Ohio Dominican University in Columbus , Ohio , but later transferred to Ohio State University ; she graduated with a bachelour 's degree in interpersonal communications in 1997 . While in the US , she read numerous children 's books ; these later influenced her own writings . After graduating , she spent a year working in the US before returning to Indonesia in 1998 . Upon her return to Indonesia , she spent three years working in the human resources department of Hanjin Shipping but left after she had two miscarriages , the first when she was seven months pregnant and the second at seven weeks . While staying at home , she took up writing . 
 = = = Writing career = = = 
 Ng made her debut as a novelist with Tujuh Musim Setahun ( Seven Seasons A Year ) in 2002 , which sold poorly . She gained recognition with her Indiana Chronicle trilogy , which consists of Blues ( 2004 ) , Lipstick ( 2005 ) and Bridesmaid ( 2005 ) . These works were classified as pop literature , but readers identified with the main characters — urban working women . Tempo magazine notes that the trilogy pioneered the <unk> genre in Indonesia . Between <unk> and Bridesmaid , another novel , The ( Un ) Reality Show , was released in 2005 . 
 In 2006 , Ng 's short story " Rahasia Bulan " ( " The Moon 's Secret " ) was included in a lesbian and gay themed short story collection of the same name . The work also included stories by Alberthiene Endah , Djenar Maesa Ayu , and Indra Herlambang . That year , she published two novels : <unk> Terakhir ( The Last Dim Sum ) and Utukki : <unk> Para Dewa ( Utukki : Wings of the Gods ) . The following year Ng published another two novels , Tiga Venus ( Three Venuses ) and Gerhana Kembar ( Twin Eclipse ) . The latter , which was initially run as a serial in the newspaper Kompas and later picked up by Gramedia , was about lesbianism . The title was a result of Ng combining the Sun ( commonly representative of men ) and the Moon ( commonly representative of women ) to create a united symbol to represent homosexuality . Ng launched a short story collection , <unk> Jatuh ( Fallen Angel ) in 2008 . The collection dealt mainly with death . The collection was followed in 2009 by the novel Tea For Two , which was first published as a serial in Kompas . 
 Ng 's short story " Barbie " was adapted as a film by actor @-@ cum @-@ presenter Raffi Ahmad in 2010 , with Yuni Shara in the titular role . Barbie followed the story of a night @-@ club singer and her lover , a security guard at the club . The film premiered at the LA Lights Indie movie festival . That same year she released two other books , Dongeng Tujuh Menit ( The Seven @-@ Minute Fairytale ) and <unk> @-@ <unk> Varaiya ( Varaiya 's Incantations ) . Another one of her short stories , " Mata Indah " , was included in the lesbian @-@ themed anthology Un Soir du Paris ( An Evening in Paris ) ; other writers in the anthology included Seno Gumira Ajidarma , Ucu Agustin , and Noor . 
 In 2010 , Ng , Agus Noor , and Eka Kurniawan established the Fiksimini community on Facebook as a way to critique each other 's work , later branching out to Twitter . As of 2011 the community , with approximately 70 @,@ 000 followers , allows writers , both professional and aspiring , to tweet an idea within the 140 @-@ character technical limitations of the software which could make the reader think . On 1 July 2011 , Ng published <unk> Drama Cinta ( Love Potion Drama ) , and in November she released Dongeng Sekolah <unk> ( Fairytales from the School on the Cliff ) , a collection of 53 stories about children who attend a school on a cliff . 
 Aside from writing novels and short stories , she also writes children 's books , a genre which she entered due to a lack of Indonesian @-@ language works . As of 2008 , Ng has written 21 such books in three series : Berbagi Cerita Berbagi Cinta ( Sharing Stories , Sharing Love ; started in 2006 and numbering seven books ) , Sejuta Warna Pelangi ( A Million Colours of the Rainbow ; started in 2007 and numbering nine books ) , and Bagai Bumi <unk> <unk> ( As If the Earth Stopped Rotating ; started in 2008 and numbering five books ) . 
 = = Style = = 
 Ng 's main characters are generally female . These characters generally do not hold the same employment ; some occupations held by her characters include office worker , animal nursery employee , and automotive repair shop owner . Her children 's stories are written simply , illustrated , and deal with children 's feelings ; they are intended to give children more empathy . The characters ' names are chosen to be easy to remember . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ng has received several awards . Her 2006 children 's story <unk> Pascal ( Pascal 's Hair , from the Berbagi Cerita series ) won an Adhikarya Award for Best Children 's Book from the Indonesian Publishers Association ( <unk> Penerbit Indonesia , or <unk> ) . The following year she won the same award for Sejuta Warna Pelangi . Another followed suit in 2008 for Jangan Bilang Siapa @-@ Siapa ( Don 't Tell Anybody ) . 
 A. Junaidi , writing for The Jakarta Post , notes that Gerhana Kembar was well received by Indonesia 's LGBT community as it did not link homosexuality to negative issues like drug use . 
 Ng notes that her children 's stories have been generally well received . However , some educators disagree with the lack of an explicit moral message ; Ng argues that her books have multiple interpretations : those by children and those by adults . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As of 2010 , Ng is married to Nicholas Ng , a Malaysian citizen whom she met while working at Hanjin Shipping ; the couple married in 2000 . Together they have two children . She lives in Tanjung Duren , West Jakarta . According to an interview with Kompas , Ng is a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother and writes in an office in her house . She writes in her spare time , usually in the morning , as in the afternoon she must pick up her children . 
 = Burning of Norfolk = 
 The Burning of Norfolk was an incident that occurred on January 1 , 1776 , during the American Revolutionary War . British Royal Navy ships in the harbor of Norfolk , Virginia began shelling the town , and landing parties came ashore to burn specific properties . The town , whose significantly Tory ( Loyalist ) population had fled , was occupied by Whig ( Revolutionary ) forces from Virginia and North Carolina . Although these forces worked to drive off the landing parties , they did nothing to impede the progress of the flames , and began burning and looting Tory properties . 
 After three days , most of the town had been destroyed , principally by the action of the Whig forces . The destruction was completed by Whig forces in early February to deny use of even the remnants to the British . Norfolk was the last significant foothold of British authority in Virginia ; after raiding Virginia 's coastal areas for a time , its last Royal Governor , Lord Dunmore , left for good in August 1776 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Tensions in the British Colony of Virginia were raised in April 1775 at roughly the same time that the hostilities of the American Revolutionary War broke out in the Province of Massachusetts Bay with the Battles of Lexington and Concord . Rebellious Whigs ( also known as Patriots ) in control of the provincial assembly had begun recruiting troops in March 1775 , leading to a struggle for control of the colony 's military supplies . Under orders from John Murray , 4th Earl of Dunmore , the royal Governor of Virginia , British marines removed gunpowder from the colonial storehouse in Williamsburg to a Royal Navy ship , alarming members of the colonial legislature and prompting a militia uprising . Although the incident was resolved without violence , Dunmore , fearing for his personal safety , left Williamsburg in June 1775 and placed his family on board a Royal Navy ship . A small British fleet then took shape at Norfolk , a port town whose merchants had significant Loyalist ( Tory ) tendencies . Although the town did have some Whig support , the threat posed by the British fleet may have played a role in minimizing their activity in the town . 
 Confrontations and minor skirmishes continued in Virginia between Whigs on one side and Tories on the other until October , when Dunmore had acquired enough military support to begin organized operations against the rebellious Whigs . General Thomas Gage , the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief for North America , had ordered a small detachment of the 14th Regiment of Foot to Virginia in response to pleas by Dunmore for military help . These troops began raiding surrounding counties for rebel military supplies on October 12 . This activity continued through the end of October , when a small British ship ran aground and was captured by Whigs during a skirmish near Hampton . Navy boats sent to punish the townspeople were repulsed by Continental Army troops and militia in a brief gunfight that resulted in the killing and capture of several sailors . Dunmore reacted to this event by issuing a proclamation on November 7 in which he declared martial law , and offered to emancipate Whig @-@ held slaves in Virginia willing to serve in the British Army . The proclamation alarmed Tory and Whig slaveholders alike , concerned by the idea of armed former slaves and the potential loss of their property . Nevertheless , Dunmore was able to recruit enough slaves to form the Ethiopian Regiment , as well as raising a company of Tories he called the Queen 's Own Loyal Virginia Regiment . These local forces supplemented the two companies of the 14th Foot that were the sole British military presence in the colony . This successful recruiting drive prompted Dunmore to write on November 30 , 1775 that he would soon be able to " reduce this colony to a proper sense of their duty . " 
 Virginia 's assembly had sent companies of militia to Hampton under the command of William Woodford , the colonel of the 2nd Virginia Regiment in October , and further militia continued to arrive at Williamsburg . Woodford , his force swollen to 700 men , advanced toward Great Bridge in early December . Some of Dunmore 's troops had fortified the north side of the bridge , so Woodford began entrenching the position on his side of the bridge , while more and more militia companies arrived from the surrounding counties and North Carolina . On December 9 , British troops attempted to disperse Woodford 's force , and were decisively repulsed . Following the battle , the British retreated back into Norfolk , and shortly after , Dunmore and his entire force withdrew to Royal Navy ships anchored in Norfolk 's harbor , along with most of the remaining Tory population of the town . Woodford 's force continued to grow with the arrival of Colonel Robert Howe and North Carolina regulars the day after the battle . 
 = = Continental Army occupation of Norfolk = = 
 On December 14 , with the Whig forces having grown by further militia arrivals to about 1 @,@ 200 , Howe and Woodford moved into Norfolk . Since Colonel Howe held a senior Continental Army commission , he outranked Woodford , and assumed command of the occupying forces . He adopted a hard line in dealings with Dunmore and the Royal Navy captains , denying the delivery of supplies to the overcrowded ships , and insisting on parity in the exchange of prisoners . 
 Howe and Woodford were also concerned about the possibility of a British attack , and at first appealed for additional troops . However , on further consideration they realized that the British fleet could easily maneuver around the town and isolate the garrison . They consequently recommended to the Virginia assembly that the town be abandoned and rendered useless to their enemy . 
 On December 21 the Liverpool arrived , accompanied by a store ship loaded with supplies and munitions . Dunmore positioned four ships , the Dunmore , the Liverpool , the Otter , and the Kingfisher in a threatening line along the town 's waterfront , setting off an exodus of people and possessions from the town . On Christmas Eve , Liverpool 's captain , Henry Bellew , sent what amounted to an ultimatum into the town , stating that he preferred to purchase provisions instead of taking them by force . Howe rejected the ultimatum , and prepared for a bombardment . On December 30 , Bellew demanded that the Whig forces cease parading and changing the guard on the waterfront because he found it offensive , and suggested that it would " not be imprudent " for women and children to leave the town . Howe refused to withdraw his men , telling Bellew " I am too much an Officer [ ... ] to recede from any point which I conceive to be my duty . " 
 = = Burning and looting = = 
 On New Year 's Day 1776 , Howe 's guards paraded as they had before . Between 3 : 00 and 4 : 00 pm , the four ships of the British fleet opened fire on the town . Mounting more than 100 guns , they cannonaded the town well into the evening hours . Landing parties were sent ashore , some to retrieve provisions , others to set fire to buildings that Whig snipers had been using as posts from which to fire on the fleet . Although the British movements were not particularly well coordinated , they succeeded in setting most of the waterfront ablaze . 
 The Whig militia resisted the landing parties , but did little to stop the flames , which were spread by advantageous winds . Some Loyalist properties were targeted for burning and looting by the Whigs shortly after the bombardment began , including a local distillery . Although the British ended their operations that day , the fires continued to rage ; the next morning Colonel Howe reported that " the whole town will I doubt not be <unk> 'd in a day or two . " The burning and looting by the occupying Whigs continued for three days . By the time order was restored , much of the town had been destroyed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Damage to the town by the Whig forces significantly exceeded that done by the British , destroying 863 buildings valued at £ 120 @,@ 000 ( an estimated £ 14 @.@ 6 million in modern pound sterling ) . In comparison , the British bombardment destroyed only 19 properties worth £ 3 @,@ 000 ( £ 360 @,@ 000 ) ; this was in addition to £ 2 @,@ 000 ( £ 240 @,@ 000 ) in damages done by Lord Dunmore during the British occupation of Norfolk . 
 Colonel Howe 's report to the Virginia Convention omitted the role of the Whig forces in the burning , and repeated the recommendation that the town be destroyed . A newspaper account published by Lord Rawdon prompted some questions in Whig circles about the event , but many assumed that British forces were responsible for most of the damage , and no inquiries were made in the immediate aftermath . The convention approved Howe 's plan , and by February 6 the remaining 416 structures had been destroyed . It was not until 1777 that the full extent of Whig participation in the burning was acknowledged . 
 Whig forces withdrew from the ruins of the town after completing its destruction , and took up posts in other nearby towns . They were further organized in March , when General Charles Lee arrived to take command of the Continental Army 's Southern Department . He mobilized the militia to evict Dunmore from a camp he had established near Portsmouth ; Dunmore finally abandoned Virginia for good in August 1776 . 
 While the lands at an already established Fort Nelson and what would later become Fort Norfolk had been fortified , these defensive positions were too weak to prevent the British Royal Navy from bombarding Norfolk . As a result , following the war , the U.S. Federal Government bought the fortified land in Norfolk and established Fort Norfolk . Both fortifications were reinforced and used to prevent any further naval assaults on the cities which lie on the Elizabeth River . 
 There is a marker at St. Paul 's Boulevard and City Hall Avenue in Norfolk commemorating the action . 
 = Music of Chrono Trigger = 
 The Chrono series is a video game franchise developed and published by Square Enix ( formerly Square ) . It began in 1995 with the time travel role @-@ playing video game Chrono Trigger , which spawned two continuations , Radical Dreamers and Chrono Cross . The music of Chrono Trigger was mainly composed by Yasunori Mitsuda , with a few tracks composed by regular Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu . The Chrono Trigger soundtrack has inspired four official album releases by Square Enix : a soundtrack album in released by NTT Publishing in 1995 and re @-@ released in 2004 , a greatest hits album published by DigiCube in 1999 , published in abbreviated form by Tokyopop in 2001 , and republished by Square Enix in 2005 , an acid jazz arrangement album published and republished by NTT Publishing in 1995 and 2004 , and a 2008 orchestral arranged album by Square Enix . Corresponding with the Nintendo DS release of the game , a reissued soundtrack was released in 2009 . An arranged album for Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross , entitled To Far Away Times , was released in 2015 to commemorate the 20 year anniversary of Chrono Trigger . 
 The original soundtrack has been hailed as one of the best video game soundtracks ever made , and the Original Sound Version album met with similar applause . The reception for the other albums has been mixed , with the releases finding both fans and detractors among reviewers . Songs from the soundtrack have been played at various orchestral concerts , such as the personal arrangements by Mitsuda for the Play ! A Video Game Symphony concert series . Chrono Cross music has also been extensively remixed by fans , and such remixes have been included in both official and unofficial albums . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Chrono Trigger was scored primarily by Yasunori Mitsuda , with assistance by veteran Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu . A sound programmer at the time , Mitsuda was unhappy with his pay and threatened to leave Square if he could not compose music . Final Fantasy developer Hironobu Sakaguchi , one of the three designers for the upcoming Chrono Trigger , suggested he score the game , remarking , " maybe your salary will go up . " Mitsuda reflected , " I wanted to create music that wouldn 't fit into any established genre ... music of an imaginary world . The game 's director , Masato Kato , was my close friend , and so I 'd always talk with him about the setting and the scene before going into writing . " Mitsuda has said that he was unsure of how to start , saying that he " must 've tried to start writing the music 4 times " and that it took " a month and a half " before he knew how to compose the music for Chrono Trigger . 
 Mitsuda slept in his studio several nights , and attributed certain songs , such as " To Far Away Times " , to inspiring dreams . He later attributed this song to an idea he was developing before Chrono Trigger , reflecting that the song was made in dedication to " a certain person with whom I wanted to share a generation . " Mitsuda tried to use leitmotifs of the Chrono Trigger main theme to create a sense of consistency in the soundtrack . He also suffered a hard drive crash that lost around forty in @-@ progress tracks . After Mitsuda contracted stomach ulcers , regular Final Fantasy series composer Nobuo Uematsu joined the project to compose ten songs and finish the score . Mitsuda returned to watch the ending with the staff before the game 's release , crying upon seeing the finished scene . Mitsuda considers Chrono Trigger a landmark title which helped mature his talent . While Mitsuda later held that the title piece was " rough around the edges , " he maintains that it had " significant influence on my life as a composer . " At the time of the game 's release , the number of tracks and sound effects was unprecedented , causing the soundtrack to span three discs in its 1995 commercial pressing . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Chrono Trigger Original Sound Version = = = 
 Chrono Trigger Original Sound Version is a soundtrack of the music from Chrono Trigger , produced by Yasunori Mitsuda and <unk> Nakamura . The soundtrack spans three discs and 64 tracks , covering a duration of 2 : 39 : 52 . It was published by NTT Publishing on March 25 , 1995 and re @-@ published on October 1 , 2004 . 
 The majority of the tracks were composed by Yasunori Mitsuda , while ten tracks were contributed by Nobuo Uematsu after Mitsuda contracted stomach ulcers . Noriko Matsueda composed one track , " Boss Battle 1 " , which was arranged by Uematsu . The soundtrack tunes have been described as covering a wide variety of moods , from " simple , light @-@ hearted tunes " like " <unk> " to " sad themes " like " At The Bottom of Night " and " darker themes " like " Ocean Palace " . 
 The album was well received by reviewers such as Liz Maas of RPGFan , who termed it " well worth its price " and noted that the tracks were very memorable and " always fit the mood in the game " . IGN termed it " one of the best videogame soundtracks ever produced " and said that the music was a large part of the game 's ability to " capture the emotions of the player " . It furthermore called the soundtrack " some of the most memorable tunes in RPG history " . The game itself won the " Best Music in a Cartridge @-@ Based Game " award in Electronic Gaming Monthly 's 1995 video game awards . 
 The original CDs for both releases were only published in Japan and include only Japanese track names . The official English track names were later released on <unk> <unk> Official Soundtrack : Music from FINAL FANTASY <unk> and Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack [ DS Version ] . 
 Track listing 
 All music composed by Yasunori Mitsuda , except where noted . 
 = = = Chrono Trigger Arranged Version : The Brink of Time = = = 
 The Chrono Trigger Arranged Version : The Brink of Time is an album of acid jazz rearrangements of the music from Chrono Trigger , arranged and performed by <unk> ( Hiroshi Hata and Hidenobu Ootsuki ) . The soundtrack spans one disc and 10 tracks , covering a duration of 52 : 47 . It was published by NTT Publishing on June 25 , 1995 , and reprinted on October 1 , 2004 . 
 The Brink of Time came about because Mitsuda wanted to do something that no one else was doing , and he noted that acid jazz and its related genres were uncommon in the Japanese market . It was the first album for which Mitsuda had to work with live recordings . The cover art of the album depicts a plate of fried eggs between a fork , knife and glass , while the inside booklet depicts a rooster which was specifically brought into the studio for the photo shooting . Several eggs had to be fried before the designers could settle on the correct shape . Mitsuda has stated that Ootsuki 's arrangement technique left a strong impact on him and notably influenced his next score , the soundtrack to Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard . 
 The album received mixed reviews from critics . Freddie W. of RPGFan , while calling the album " pretty good " overall , said that several of the tracks including " Zeal Palace " and " Warlock Battle " were " absolutely horrible " due to the " disgustingly bad " distorted guitars . He cited the overuse of guitars as the worst part of the album . Simon of Square Enix Music Online had a different reaction ; he enjoyed the guitars in the songs and said that the album had " skill , class , and a feel that 's relatively original " . He concluded , however , that he could not seem to " connect " with the album , and that the CD was " very much down to personal taste — a love or hate arrangement " . 
 = = = Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack , also referred to as " Chrono Trigger ' 99 " or " Chrono Trigger PSX OST " , is a greatest hits album featuring 21 tracks from Chrono Trigger Original Sound Version and nine arranged tracks from the release of Chrono Trigger for the PlayStation . The arranged tracks come from the cutscenes added to the game , while Tsuyoshi Sekito composed four new pieces for the game 's bonus features which weren 't included on the soundtrack . The album was released by DigiCube on December 18 , 1999 to coincide with the PlayStation release and re @-@ released by Square Enix on February 23 , 2005 . The album is 1 : 14 : 12 long and spans 30 tracks . 
 A version of the album was re @-@ published by Tokyopop in North America as Chrono Trigger Official Soundtrack : Music From Final Fantasy Chronicles on August 21 , 2001 , to coincide with the release of the Final Fantasy Chronicles collection of Final Fantasy IV and Chrono Trigger . The first 21 tracks of the album out of 25 were identical to Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack , while the next three tracks corresponded to tracks 22 , 23 , and 29 of the Original Soundtrack and the final track was the same as the first track of Brink of Time . This version of the album is 1 : 13 : 03 long . 
 Original Soundtrack received mixed reviews by critics . Ryan Mattich of RPGFan termed it " an excellent selection of music " , primarily due to the arranged tracks , saying that the Original Sound Version album 's tracks were better than this version 's as they were looped and thus played longer . Patrick Gann was disparaging of the North American version of the CD , however , saying that its shortened tracklist destroyed the main reason to buy the album . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online was dismissive of the Original Soundtrack album , saying that while the Original Sound Version tracks truly represented the " best of " the game 's soundtrack , the arranged tracks were " either too short , too much like the original , or lifeless compared to the original " , giving no incentive to purchase the album over the Original Sound Version . 
 = = = Chrono Trigger Orchestra Extra Soundtrack = = = 
 Chrono Trigger Orchestra Extra Soundtrack is an album of orchestral arrangements of Chrono Trigger songs , arranged by Natsumi Kameoka . Published by Square Enix on November 20 , 2008 exclusively as a pre @-@ order bonus of the Nintendo DS port of Chrono Trigger , this soundtrack consists of two tracks , " Chrono Trigger ~ Orchestra Version ~ " and " Chrono Trigger Medley ~ Orchestra Version ~ " , the latter spanning the songs " A Premonition " , " Guardia 's Millennial Fair " , " <unk> of the Wind " , " Frog 's Theme " , " Battle with Magus " , " Epilogue ~ To Good Friends ~ " , and " To Far Away Times " . Mitsuda expressed difficulty in selecting the songs for the orchestral medley , eventually picking a song from each era and certain character themes . While both tracks involve a full orchestra , " Chrono Trigger " is more heavily horn @-@ based , while " Medley " relies more on stringed instruments . The CD itself came in a single sleeve with a short note from primary composer Yasunori Mitsuda . The album as a whole has a length of 6 : 18 , with " Chrono Trigger " lasting 2 : 07 and " Medley " having a length of 4 : 11 . 
 The album has been described as showing that Mitsuda was " well ahead of the curve " when he composed the Chrono Trigger soundtrack . IGN described " Chrono Trigger ~ Orchestra Version ~ " as having a heavy 1970 's influence and as being " a testament to Mitsuda 's compositional skills " , while calling " Chrono Trigger Medley ~ Orchestra Version ~ " " playfully romantic " with " a fairy tale element " in the beginning of the song that later transforms into " an entirely more grandiose arena " . Patrick Gann described the soundtrack as " awesome " and said that " Kameoka is really good at orchestral arrangement " . His primary complaint was the length of the album , as he wished it had been a full album instead of a " mini @-@ album " of only two tracks . 
 = = = Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack ( 2009 release ) = = = 
 Chrono Trigger Original Soundtrack is a Square @-@ Enix re @-@ release of the Chrono Trigger Original Sound Version soundtrack that was made available for purchase on July 29 , 2009 . This was reprinted for the Nintendo DS version of the game ( that came out in 2008 ) , however the music and synth is almost identical to the original Super NES version . This 3 disc soundtrack contains additional tracks that were not included on the original release , as well as a bonus DVD . 
 The track lengths for a number of tracks on all three discs are different than the Original Sound Version release . On the first disc , tracks 24 @-@ 27 are new arranged version tracks that were included as the music from those tracks corresponded to the video animated sequences that were added originally on the PlayStation version . The same applied to tracks 25 @-@ 27 on the second disc and tracks 18 @-@ 24 on the third disc . 
 The Bonus DVD included a special Mitsuda interview and two music videos for the tracks that were on the Orchestra Extra album : " Chrono Trigger ~ Orchestra Version ~ " and " Chrono Trigger Medley ~ Orchestra Version ~ " . 
 The asterisk indicates the additional tracks that were not in the original Original Sound Version . 
 Track listing 
 All music composed by Yasunori Mitsuda , except where noted . 
 = = = To Far Away Times : Chrono Trigger & Chrono Cross Arrangement Album = = = 
 On a live performance at the Tokyo Dome in July 2015 commemorating the 20 year anniversary of Chrono Trigger , Mitsuda announced that the long requested Chrono series arrangement album , entitled To Far Away Times : Chrono Trigger & Chrono Cross Arrangement Album would be released . This was eventually released by Square Enix Music on October 14 , 2015 . 
 = = Covers and adaptations = = 
 Music from Chrono Trigger Original Sound Version has been arranged for the piano and published as sheet music by DOREMI Music Publishing . Chrono Trigger 's soundtrack has been heavily remixed by fans , sparking several albums . These include the officially licensed Time & Space - A Tribute to Yasunori Mitsuda , released by OneUp Studios on October 7 , 2001 and containing 18 remixes over a span of 1 : 00 : 58 , with a second version of the album released on June 17 , 2003 . In 2009 , another album , " <unk> " , was released by the same band under the name " Bad Dudes " . Another album release was Chrono Symphonic , an unofficial download @-@ only album release by the remix website OverClocked ReMix on January 3 , 2006 containing 25 remixes over 2 " discs " . Selections of remixes also appear on Japanese remix albums , called Dōjin , and on English remixing websites such as OverClocked Remix . In 2013 , Video game composer Blake Robinson officially licensed the compositions and released his new arrangements as " The Chrono Trigger Symphony " . Volume 1 , 2 and 3 are available for paid download from iTunes and <unk> . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The main theme of Chrono Trigger was played at the fifth of the Orchestral Game Music Concerts in 1996 , and released on an accompanying album . Mitsuda has arranged versions of music from Chrono Trigger for Play ! A Video Game Symphony video game music concerts in 2006 , presenting the main theme , Frog 's Theme , and To Far Away Times . Music from the game has also been performed in other video game concert tours such as the Video Games Live concert series and in concerts by the Eminence Orchestra . Music from Chrono Trigger and Cross made up one fourth of the music in the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in Cologne in September 2009 which were produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series and conducted by Arnie Roth . The concerts featured a suite of music from both games interspersed together with the songs from Trigger comprising " A Premonition " , " Battle with Magus " , " Chrono Trigger " , " Peaceful Days " , " Outskirts of Time " , " Frog 's Theme " , and " To Far Away Times " , as well as a boss battle suite that featured " Lavos ’ Theme " . " Crono 's Theme " was performed at the Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2007 concerts in Yokohama and Osaka , Japan , and a suite comprising music from Chrono Trigger and Cross was performed at the Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2008 concerts the following year in Tokyo and Shanghai . An arrangement of " Light of Silence " was performed on July 9 , 2011 at the Symphonic Odysseys concert , which commemorated the music of Uematsu . 
 For the 20th anniversary in 2015 , Mitsuda , along with his performing group Millennial Fair , performed songs from the game at the Tokyo Globe in Tokyo , Japan on July 25 and 26 . The event , titled " The Brink of Time " , included Mitsuda performing on the piano , guitar , and Irish bouzouki . 
 = Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument = 
 The Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument ( originally named the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Marine National Monument ) is a World Heritage listed , U.S. National Monument encompassing 140 @,@ 000 square miles ( 360 @,@ 000 km2 ) ( an area larger than the nation of Germany ) of ocean waters , including ten islands and atolls of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , internationally recognized for both its cultural and natural values as follows : 
 " The area has deep cosmological and traditional significance for living Native Hawaiian culture , as an ancestral environment , as an embodiment of the Hawaiian concept of kinship between people and the natural world , and as the place where it is believed that life originates and to where the spirits return after death . On two of the islands , Nihoa and <unk> , there are archaeological remains relating to pre @-@ European settlement and use . Much of the monument is made up of pelagic and deepwater habitats , with notable features such as seamounts and submerged banks , extensive coral reefs and lagoons . It is one of the largest marine protected areas ( MPAs ) in the world . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The area was proclaimed the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Marine National Monument by U.S. President George W. Bush on June 15 , 2006 ; it was renamed Papahānaumokuākea in 2007 , and inscribed on the World Heritage list as Papahānaumokuākea on 30 July 2010 , at the 34th Session of the World Heritage Committee , Brasilia . 
 The area is managed in partnership with the Department of Commerce , the Department of the Interior , and the State of Hawaii . The name for the area was inspired by the names of the Hawaiian creator goddess <unk> and her husband <unk> . 
 Although it is not a sanctuary , the ocean area is part of a system of 13 National Marine Sanctuaries administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . The Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge , with an area of 254 @,@ 418 @.@ 1 acres ( 397 @.@ 53 sq mi ; 1 @,@ 029 @.@ 6 km2 ) in the monument , is administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) . 
 The monument supports 7 @,@ 000 species , one quarter of which are endemic . Prominent species include the threatened green sea turtle and the endangered Hawaiian monk seal , the Laysan and Nihoa finches , the Nihoa <unk> , Laysan duck , seabirds such as the Laysan albatross , numerous species of plants including Pritchardia palms , and many species of arthropods . According to the Pew Charitable Trusts , populations of lobster have not recovered from extensive harvesting in the 1980s and 1990s , which is now banned ; the remaining fisheries are overfished . 
 The National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) reports that many species populations have not yet fully recovered from a large @-@ scale shift in the oceanographic ecosystem regime that affected the North Pacific during the late 1980s and early 1990s . This shift reduced populations of some important species such as spiny lobster , seabirds and Hawaiian monk seals ; the proclamation calls for a commercial fishing phase @-@ out by 2011 . The monument will receive strict conservation protection , with exceptions for traditional Native Hawaiian uses and limited tourism . 
 = = Area and administration = = 
 As the 96th National Monument of the United States , it preserves much of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands ( NWHI ) under the Department of the Interior 's Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) , the Department of Commerce 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . 
 The monument covers roughly 140 @,@ 000 square miles ( 363 @,@ 000 km2 ) of reefs , atolls and shallow and deep sea ( out to 50 miles ( 80 km ) offshore ) in the Pacific Ocean – larger than all of America 's National Parks combined . It contains approximately 10 percent of the tropical shallow water coral reef habitat ( i.e. , 0 to 100 fathoms ) in U.S. territory . It is slightly larger than Australia 's Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , approximately the size of the country of Germany , and just slightly smaller than Montana . 
 About 132 @,@ 000 square miles ( 340 @,@ 000 km2 ) of the monument were already part of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve , which was designated in 2000 . The monument also includes the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge ( 590 @,@ 991 @.@ 50 acres ( 2 @,@ 391 @.@ 7 km2 ) ) and Battle of Midway National Memorial , the Hawaii State Seabird Sanctuary at Kure Atoll , the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands State Marine Refuge , and the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge . NOAA is responsible for most oceanic areas of the new monument ; the FWS continues to manage the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge . An emergency landing strip on Midway Atoll for trans @-@ Pacific flights remains open . 
 The islands included in the monument are all part of the State of Hawaii , except Midway Atoll , which is part of The United States Minor Outlying Islands insular area . 
 = = History and establishment = = 
 The genesis of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands ( NWHI ) as a protected area began on February 3 , 1909 , when U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt created the Hawaiian Islands Bird Reservation through Executive Order 1019 , as a response to the over @-@ harvesting of seabirds , and in recognition of the importance of the NWHI as seabird nesting sites . Its status was later upgraded to the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge in 1940 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt . A series of incremental protections for the NWHI followed , leading to the establishment of Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge in 1988 , Kure Atoll State Wildlife Sanctuary in 1993 , and the NWHI Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve in 2000 . 
 President Bill Clinton established the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve on December 4 , 2000 , with Executive Order <unk> . Clinton 's executive order initiated a process to designate the waters of the NWHI as a National Marine Sanctuary . A public comment period began in 2002 . In 2005 , Governor of Hawaii Linda Lingle declared parts of the monument a state marine refuge . 
 In April 2006 , President Bush and his wife viewed a screening of the documentary film Voyage to Kure at the White House along with its director , Jean @-@ Michel Cousteau ( son of documentary film maker Jacques @-@ Yves Cousteau ) . Compelled by the film 's portrayal of the flora and fauna of the region , Bush moved quickly to protect the area . 
 On June 15 , 2006 , President George W. Bush signed Proclamation 8031 , designating the waters of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands a national monument under the 1906 Antiquities Act . Using the Antiquities Act bypassed the normal year of consultations and halted the public input process on the eve of the dissemination of the draft environmental impact statement for the proposed Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Marine Sanctuary . This was the second use by Bush of the Antiquities Act , following the declaration of the African Burial Ground National Monument on Manhattan in February 2006 . The legislated process for stakeholder involvement in the planning and management of a marine protected area had already taken five years of effort , but the abrupt establishment of the NWHI as a National Monument , rather than a Sanctuary , provided immediate and more resilient protection , revocable only by an act of the United States Congress . 
 After the signing of the proclamation , Joshua Reichert explained the importance of the timely designation in an interview on the News Hour with Jim Lehrer : 
 Monument status is quicker ; it 's more comprehensive ; and it 's more permanent . Only an act of Congress can undo a monument designation . The sanctuary process , it takes longer ; it involves more congressional input , more public debate , more hearings and meetings . And he [ George W. Bush ] obviously made a decision today to , actually , take a bold step and create something which is going to be immediate , that the law applies immediately to this place now . 
 The NWHI accounted for approximately half of the locally landed bottomfish in Hawaii , and these fish are highly valued by local chefs and consumers . The NWHI bottomfish fishery is a limited entry fishery , with eight active vessels , which are restricted to 60 feet ( 18 m ) in length . Frank McCoy , chair of the Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council , said : 
 We are pleased the President recognizes the near pristine condition of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands waters . We believe the abundance and biodiversity of the area attests to the successful management of the NWHI fisheries by the Council the past 30 years and indicates that properly regulated fisheries can operate in the NWHI without impacting the ecosystem . The small NWHI bottomfish fishery has not and would not jeopardize the protection of the NWHI that President Bush is pursuing by designating the area a national monument . 
 The National Marine Fisheries Service has published reports attesting to the health of the NWHI bottomfish stocks . Commercial bottomfish and pelagic fishing as well as recreational catch @-@ and @-@ keep and catch @-@ and @-@ release fishing were also deemed compatible to the goals and objectives of the proposed NWHI National Marine Sanctuary . 
 On February 27 , 2007 , President Bush amended Proclamation 8031 , giving the monument the Native Hawaiian name , " Papahānaumokuākea " . On March 1 , first lady Laura Bush visited Midway Atoll , and on March 2 , a renaming ceremony was held at Washington Place in Honolulu , Hawaii . At the ceremony , Laura Bush and Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne announced the new Hawaiian name and helped raise public awareness about the monument . On May 15 , 2007 , President Bush announced his intention to submit the monument for Particularly Sensitive Sea Area ( PSSA ) status , which would " alert mariners to exercise caution in the ecologically important , sensitive , and hazardous area they are entering . " In October 2007 , the Marine Environmental Protection Committee of the International Maritime Organization adopted the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument as a PSSA . 
 The designation of the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument as a particularly sensitive sea area ( PSSA ) received committed support from the US delegation to the International <unk> Organization . Particular note is made of the contribution of Ms. Lindy S Johnson , author of " Coastal State Regulation of International Shipping . ” Ms. Johnson worked passionately for the PSSA designation for the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument as well as for other land- and sea @-@ based sources of marine pollution , environment and navigation , marine protected areas , ship strikes of right whales , noise and marine mammals as well as protecting coral . 
 = = World Heritage Site status = = 
 On January 30 , 2008 , the U.S. Department of Interior added Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument to a tentative list of 14 proposed sites for consideration on the UNESCO World Heritage List . The Federal Interagency Panel for World Heritage officially accepted the recommendation in November 2008 . As a mixed site with natural and cultural resources , the International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) commented on the natural features of the monument , and the International Council on Monuments and Sites ( ICOMOS ) assessed its cultural aspects . 
 The national monument was inscribed on the World Heritage List in July 2010 as simply " Papahānaumokuākea " . 
 = = Mokupāpapa Discovery Center - A Window into the Monument = = 
 In May 2003 , the Mokupāpapa Discovery Center originally opened in the restored S. Hata building . [ 20 ] In 2013 , The Discovery Center moved down the street a few blocks into the legendary and historical <unk> Building , reopening in March 2014 . It displays both static and interactive educational exhibits all focused on the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , which are protected along with their surrounding waters , as the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument . [ 21 ] The name comes from Mokupāpapa in the Hawaiian language which means " flat / low reef island " . This name was used in chants of Ancient Hawaii , perhaps referring to the area now known as French Frigate Shoals , or the northwestern islands in general . [ 22 ] The Northwestern islands stretch for hundreds of miles northwest of the main Hawaiian islands ; the discovery center is on the southeastern @-@ most island in the chain , Hawai 'i Island , which is the youngest and farthest away from the much older <unk> islands in the Monument . [ 22 ] A 3 @,@ 500 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 13 @,@ 000 l ) salt @-@ water aquarium displays some of the fish found on Hawaiian reefs . One entire wall is covered by a large mural painted by local artist Layne Luna depicting the coral reef ecosystems found in the leeward islands . Layne Luna also created several life @-@ sized models of life sized sharks , fish and manta ray that hang from the ceiling . Another exhibit plays a recording of the creation chant of Hawaiian mythology known as <unk> . Signs are in the Hawaiian language and English . Admission to the new center is still FREE although donations are accepted to support all of the National Marine Sanctuaries . It is open Tuesday through Saturday 9AM to <unk> , closed on Federal holidays . [ 20 ] 
 = = Ongoing research = = 
 Federal researchers continue to study the monument 's marine resources . A 2010 expedition reached the Kure atoll and its divers reached 250 feet ( 76 m ) revealing new species of coral and other animals . The Waikiki aquarium is attempting to culture the new corals and present them in an 2011 exhibit dedicated to the monument . 
 On 3 August 2015 divers found the wreck of the USNS Mission San Miguel ( T @-@ AO @-@ 129 ) within the Monument . She had sunk there on October 8 , 1957 when she ran aground on Maro Reef while running at full speed and in ballast . Researchers will map and study the wreck in situ . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument on Wikimedia Commons . 
 = The Survivor ( Star Trek : The Animated Series ) = 
 " The Survivor " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American animated science fiction television series Star Trek : The Animated Series . It first aired on NBC on October 13 , 1973 , and was written by James Schmerer and was directed by Hal Sutherland . Schmerer pitched an idea for an episode to producer D.C. Fontana called " The Chameleon " , and together with the series creator Gene Roddenberry , it was developed into the final script . 
 Set in the 23rd century , the series follows the adventures of Captain James T. Kirk ( voiced by William Shatner ) and the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise . In this episode , the crew rescue a shapeshifting alien called the Vendorian from a damaged spacecraft who has disguised himself as a missing philanthropist . Once on board the vessel , he transforms himself into Captain Kirk and tries to take the ship into a Romulan trap . But after falling in love with Lieutenant Anne Nored ( voiced by Nichelle Nichols ) , the Vendorian saves the Enterprise and Kirk agrees to take his actions into account . 
 Schmerer and Roddenberry disagreed over some of the changes to the script , as the writer wanted to avoid repeating things that had previously been seen in Star Trek : The Original Series . Critics felt that the episode was similar to those of The Original Series , and was considered one of the best episodes seen in The Animated Series by Chris Cummins of the website Topless Robot . " The Survivor " was adapted into a novelization by Alan Dean Foster and was released on several different home media formats . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On stardate <unk> @.@ 3 , while patrolling near the Romulan Neutral Zone , the Federation starship Enterprise finds a small private ship manned by a Vendorian , an alien species that can transform its shape at will . The alien dupes the crew on board the Enterprise into thinking that it is actually Carter Winston ( voiced by Ted Knight ) , a Federation citizen and philanthropist who has been missing for five years . 
 Once aboard , the Vendorian renders Captain James T. Kirk ( voiced by William Shatner ) unconscious , takes his form and orders the helmsman , Lt. Hikaru Sulu ( voiced by George Takei ) to steer the Enterprise into the Neutral Zone , where Romulan warbirds lie in wait . When the real Kirk eventually regains consciousness , he orders the Enterprise to get out of the Neutral Zone at Warp 8 . The Vendorian who has been shapeshifting himself into other members of the Enterprise 's crew eventually reveals itself to Lieutenant Anne Nored ( voiced by Nichelle Nichols ) , Carter Winston 's fiancee who serves as a security officer aboard the Enterprise ; the alien further states that the real Winston is dead but , because it has absorbed Carter 's feelings for her , it can love her . 
 Around this time , the Romulans attack the Enterprise , and the Vendorian — realizing that his actions have placed the ship in danger — decides to betray his Romulan masters for love . He takes the form of the Enterprise 's main deflector shield and the Romulans retreat . The Vendorian is arrested and would face trial but Kirk informs him that his actions to protect the Enterprise would be taken into consideration . Nored informs the Vendorian that it is very similar to Winston in personality and she offers to return to Earth with the alien . When Chief Medical Officer Leonard McCoy ( voiced by DeForest Kelley ) jokes that if the Vendorian had turned himself into a second Spock " it would have been too much to take " , Spock ( voiced by Leonard Nimoy ) quickly replies that " two Dr. McCoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship to acceptable levels . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Survivor " is writer James Schmerer 's only credit in the Star Trek franchise , whose other genre work consisted of two episodes of the television series Wonder Woman as well as a single episode of Buck Rodgers . He was better known for his work on soap operas such as General Hospital and Another World . He pitched stories for Star Trek : The Animated Series on the basis that the show targeted an adult audience similar to Star Trek : The Original Series and not children . He knew it was going to be broadcast on Saturday mornings , but would be unhampered by restrictions on live @-@ action television . He later said " that was one of the reasons why I took it , because I 'm not an animated writer ... I had written a couple of animated shows through the years , and it was like pulling teeth . " He explained that he wrote the script for " The Survivor " as if it was a live @-@ action story ; it was originally known as " The Chameleon " . The title was eventually changed in order to preserve the plot point as a surprise for the viewer . 
 He had known producer D.C. Fontana for several years , and pitched his story directly to her . In turn , she relayed it to the franchise creator Gene Roddenberry , who called Schmerer back for a meeting . Together they re @-@ wrote the story during the meeting to make it fit within the 30 minute long animated episode . Schmerer explained that Roddenberry appreciated the idea of an alien pretending to be other characters , and that the animated series could easily show the shapeshifter undergo the various changes in the episode . The design of the Vendorian had been described by Schmerer in the script , but was changed to the squid @-@ like design by the animators , a change that Schmerer described as " neat " and " clever " . In the original outline , the Vendorian didn 't assume the role of Kirk . Added by Roddenberry , Schmerer did not agree with the change . Roddenberry and <unk> argued about the point , with Roddenberry saying that Kirk was the star of the series while Schmerer wanted it to be different as he was concerned that its plot would appear too similar to the events of " Whom Gods Destroy " where Garth of Izar changes his appearance to become Kirk . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Survivor " was first broadcast on NBC on October 13 , 1973 . Edward Gross , the senior editor of Cinescape Magazine , rates " The Survivor " as " an above @-@ average episode " that " definitely has the feeling of a live @-@ action [ Star Trek ] show . " Marc Altman compared it to other similarly @-@ themed episodes such as " The Man Trap " , which featured a shape @-@ changing alien and a lost love , and said " the shape @-@ changing alien is a familiar genre ( and <unk> trope ) , the romantic twist in which the Vendorian spy betrays his Romulan masters for love is a nice surprise . " 
 Michelle Erica Green , in her review for TrekNation , found that the voice work was distracting due to the similarity between William Shatner 's and Ted Knight 's voices ; as well as having Nichelle Nichols voice a different character . She also thought that the alien looked silly , and felt that the plot had been reused from " The Man Trap " . In 2012 , Chris Cummins listed the eight best episodes of The Animated Series for website Topless Robot . He praised the writing of Schmerer , saying that the episode felt like an episode of The Original Series , and placed it as the third best episode of the series . The episode was given four out of five stars in Star Trek : The Complete Manual by SciFiNow magazine . 
 Alan Dean Foster expanded the episode into a novelization , adding such scenes as a Christmas party . It was released as part of Star Trek Log Two , published in September 1974 . The other episodes adapted in the same work were " The Lorelei Signal " and " The Infinite Vulcan " . " The Survivor " was released on LaserDisc as part of the series set . The first release of Star Trek : The Animated Series on DVD was through fan @-@ made productions . The official DVD release was on November 21 , 2006 in the United States , a single release containing all episodes from both seasons of the television show . 
 = Mary 's Club = 
 Mary 's Club is the oldest strip club in Portland , Oregon , in the United States . In 1954 , Roy Keller bought the business from Mary <unk> Hemming , who owned and operated Mary 's as a piano bar beginning in the 1930s . Keller initially hired go @-@ go dancers as entertainment during the piano player 's breaks , then quickly hired them full @-@ time due to their popularity . Topless dancers wearing pasties were introduced in 1955 . The club also featured comics , musicians , singers and other acts . All @-@ nude dancing began immediately following a judge 's 1985 ruling against City of Portland ordinances that forbid it in places that served alcohol . 
 Former strippers include Courtney Love and Christine Jorgensen , though the club is known for featuring long @-@ term dancers who are loyal to the family business . Since Keller 's death in 2006 , Mary 's Club is owned and operated by his daughter Vicki . Mary 's has become a Portland institution , having been included in several " best of " lists for strip clubs , and its neon sign is considered a landmark . The club has appeared in several films , including Bongwater ( 1997 ) and <unk> ... A Love Story ( 1993 ) , and has been included in walking tours of the city . 
 = = History = = 
 Mary 's Club , known as " Portland 's first topless " , is the oldest strip club in Portland , Oregon . Roy Keller , who had been a foreman at a Portland shipyard , bought the club in 1954 for around $ 25 @,@ 000 . The former owner was Mary <unk> Hemming , who won the piano bar in a divorce settlement and operated the business " for more than 20 years " beginning in the 1930s . The bar had been popular with sailors . According to The Seattle Times , Keller initially hired go @-@ go dancers to keep the crowd entertained during the piano player 's breaks . Due to their popularity , Keller laid off the musician and employed the dancers full @-@ time . He introduced " pasties @-@ clad topless dancers " in 1955 . In that same year , two city council members advised Keller against installing pinball machines at the club . Portland then had an anti @-@ pinball ordinance that was being contested in court . A Mary 's Club team played in the Multnomah League of the Portland Basketball Association during the 1955 – 56 season . Teams included Interstate Hauling , Kent 's Keg , Il Trovatore , Frolic Inn , Portland Air Base , and several others . 
 Singers , comics , and piano players performed at the club . A newspaper advertisement in 1958 announced the opening act of Tiny Watson , " 200 pounds of mirth and merriment " , comparing her to Sophie Tucker . Closing at the club was George James , " king of the keyboards " . In 1965 , an Oregonian article focused partly on a topless dancer , Bambi Darling , performing at Mary 's Club . She was said to excel in discothèque , " shaking and undulating " to the Mashed Potato , the Monkey , the Shotgun , and other dances popular at the time . Keller , said to resemble " a church deacon " , praised his dancers and described his customer base as " more refined " than in the club 's pre @-@ 1954 era . By March 1966 , Darling 's " 16 torrid acts " shared the billing with reptile wrestler Bobby Vale and with Gigi La France , promoted as the club 's answer to James Bond . Tom Waits reputedly sang about the club in the song " Pasties and a G @-@ String " , from his album Small Change ( 1976 ) . In 2012 , one author wrote that the club featured " tattooed contortionist entertainers " . 
 All @-@ nude dancing at the club began in 1985 after a judge ruled against City of Portland ordinances forbidding it in places that served alcohol . A lawsuit over pasties and G @-@ strings arose after Portland annexed land formerly regulated by Multnomah County , which allowed tavern dancers to perform without clothing . A tavern forced by annexation to eliminate its nude dancing sued the City and won . " As soon as we got the word [ about the ruling ] , we went nude , " said a Mary 's Club employee quoted in a news story in The Oregonian . 
 Courtney Love , whose signed picture hangs on the wall of the club , was among past strippers at the venue , according to Willamette Week . Love wrote on the photograph that she " bought my very first guitar here showing my teeny little <unk> " . Christine Jorgensen was also once featured at the club . However , dancers at the club have tended to be long @-@ term employees , loyal to the family @-@ run business . Keller died in 2006 , aged 90 ; the club is now run by his daughter , Vicki Keller , who has recalled that she first worked for the business at age seven , serving as a waitress . Vicki had managed the business for the twenty @-@ five years prior to her father 's death ; her daughters also worked at the club during that period . 
 According to a 2013 profile by Portland Monthly , the club includes a full cocktail bar , more than two dozen varieties of beer and wine , and a menu with mostly Mexican cuisine . Mary 's has a one @-@ drink minimum and a $ 2 cover charge on Friday and Saturday evenings . 
 = = Murals and marquee = = 
 Between 1956 and 1958 , Keller hired La Monte <unk> to paint murals throughout the club 's interior . The fluorescent murals depict scenes that Roy thought patrons would appreciate . Several of them feature women in exotic locales , such as the Orient and the Pyramids . One depicts an " island beauty " watching sailors load bananas into a ship , and another shows merchant seaman working in front of a ship docked in a " Portland @-@ like " harbor . The mural with pyramids depicts a lounging Cleopatra @-@ esque woman , while another features an " exotic priestess " performing a sacrifice and a volcano . According to Mary 's , the murals receive " almost as much attention as the girls do ! " Mary 's " retro " neon marquee has been called a " landmark for locals and tourists alike " . In 2014 , one Willamette Week contributor said of the signage : " The marquee , blue and star @-@ spangled and coyly advertising an evening of ' Dine and Dance , ' is as iconic as the neon on the ' Made in Oregon ' sign and the line outside Voodoo " . Its cocktail waitress logo is featured on clothing . The marquee also includes an epitaph to Keller . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mary 's Club has been called a " downtown institution " and a " Portland nightlife landmark " . In 2001 , The Portland Mercury said Mary 's was " a must @-@ visit for any true strip club connoisseur " for offering both " friendliness and sexiness " . One reporter found the interior to be " cozy " , with conversational dancers who seemingly enjoyed interacting with guests . Following Keller 's death , Willamette Week said the club " has cemented its place in history far beyond the city limits " , both for once featuring Love and Jorgensen , and for offering nudity to a loyal customer base . The newspaper 's Mary Christmas wrote that Keller had achieved status of " regional celebrity " and could be credited for starting a local industry . In 2011 , one contributor to Portland State University 's student newspaper , the Daily Vanguard , included Mary 's in his list of the city 's top five strip clubs , writing : " if you visit only one dance club in this town it should probably be Mary ’ s . The inside is stuffy and sleazy , but embodies that red @-@ light district feel that fits right in with rowdy environment . " In the same year , Willamette Week described the club as " the undisputed grande dame of West Coast strips " and " a stubbornly degenerate landmark " . The publication 's Matthew <unk> quipped that entertainment came in the form of " Girls / ladies , friendly also brassy , oddly classy , with sterling taste on the juke , who let you see all of their piercings and tattoos . Also , video poker . " In 2013 , Portland Monthly named the club an " editor 's pick " for its dancers and all @-@ female staff , and for having a " welcoming and relaxed " environment . <unk> included Mary 's in its " definitive guide " to Portland 's best strip clubs . The website complimented its " glorious flashing sign that welcomes you to Downtown " and called the club " a part of Portland 's past we should all cherish " . Men 's Fitness included Mary 's in its list of the " Top 10 Best Strip Clubs in America " , calling it a " neon landmark " with <unk> murals and a " relaxed , hole @-@ in @-@ the @-@ wall vibe " . 
 Thomas Lauderdale , known for his work with the Portland @-@ based band Pink Martini , has shared his affinity for the club and considers it one of his favorite places in the city . Portland Monthly published a video of Lauderdale giving a tour of the club . Lauderdale interviews Vicki Keller and shows the interior murals . He wears a Pink Martini bomber @-@ style jacket inspired by one sold by the business in the 1950s . Films that include scenes shot at Mary 's include Bongwater ( 1997 ) , <unk> ... A Love Story ( 1993 ) and Dangerous Pursuit ( 1990 ) . Mary 's has also been included in walking tours of Portland , including one by Lonely Planet called " Underground Portland " . In 2013 , the club was the last stop on the " Seedy , <unk> and Sinful Portland " history tour , which takes adult visitors to sites in Old Town to examine the city 's " darker elements " . Led by a historian , the tour otherwise includes saloons , opium dens , gambling halls , and bordellos that operated in Portland in the past . This was repeated in the same historian 's 2014 tour called " <unk> , Saloons and <unk> : A Walking Tour of Portland ’ s Sinful Past " . 
 = Thallium = 
 Thallium is a chemical element with symbol Tl and atomic number 81 . This soft gray post @-@ transition metal is not found free in nature . When isolated , it resembles tin , but discolors when exposed to air . Chemists William Crookes and Claude @-@ Auguste Lamy discovered thallium independently in 1861 , in residues of sulfuric acid production . Both used the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy , in which thallium produces a notable green spectral line . Thallium , from Greek <unk> , <unk> , meaning " a green shoot or twig , " was named by Crookes . It was isolated by both Lamy and Crookes in 1862 ; Lamy by electrolysis and Crookes by precipitation and melting of the resultant powder . Crookes exhibited it as a powder precipitated by Zinc at the International exhibition which opened on the first of May , that year . 
 Thallium tends to oxidize to the + 3 and + 1 oxidation states as ionic salts . The + 3 state resembles that of the other elements in group 13 ( boron , aluminum , gallium , indium ) . However , the + 1 state , which is far more prominent in thallium than the elements above it , recalls the chemistry of alkali metals , and thallium ( I ) ions are found geologically mostly in potassium @-@ based ores , and ( when ingested ) are handled in many ways like potassium ions ( K + ) by ion pumps in living cells . 
 Commercially , however , thallium is produced not from potassium ores , but as a byproduct from refining of heavy metal sulfide ores . Approximately 60 – 70 % of thallium production is used in the electronics industry , and the remainder is used in the pharmaceutical industry and in glass manufacturing . It is also used in infrared detectors . The radioisotope thallium @-@ 201 ( as the soluble chloride TlCl ) is used in small , nontoxic amounts as an agent in a nuclear medicine scan , during one type of nuclear cardiac stress test . 
 Soluble thallium salts ( many of which are nearly tasteless ) are highly toxic in quantity , and were historically used in rat poisons and insecticides . Use of these compounds has been restricted or banned in many countries , because of their nonselective toxicity . Notably , thallium poisoning results in hair loss . Because of its historic popularity as a murder weapon , thallium has gained notoriety as " the poisoner 's poison " and " inheritance powder " ( alongside arsenic ) . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 A thallium atom has 81 electrons , arranged in the electron configuration [ Xe ] <unk> ; of these , the three outermost electrons in the sixth shell are valence electrons . However , due to the inert pair effect , the 6s electron pair is relativistically stabilised and it is more difficult to get them involved in chemical bonding than for the heavier elements . Thus , very few electrons are available for metallic bonding , similar to the neighboring elements mercury and lead , and hence thallium , like its congeners , is a soft , highly electrically conducting metal with a low melting point of 304 ° C. 
 A number of standard electrode potentials , depending on the reaction under study , are reported for thallium , reflecting the greatly decreased stability of the + 3 oxidation state : 
 Indeed , thallium is the first element in group 13 where the reduction of the + 3 oxidation state to the + 1 oxidation state is spontaneous . Since bond energies decrease down the group , by thallium , the energy released in forming two additional bonds and attaining the + 3 state is not always enough to outweigh the energy needed to involve the 6s @-@ electrons . Accordingly , thallium ( I ) oxide and hydroxide are more basic and thallium ( III ) oxide and hydroxide are more acidic , showing that thallium conforms to the general rule of elements being more electropositive in their lower oxidation states . 
 Thallium is malleable and sectile enough to be cut with a knife at room temperature . It has a metallic luster that , when exposed to air , quickly tarnishes to a bluish @-@ gray tinge , resembling lead . It may be preserved by immersion in oil . A heavy layer of oxide builds up on thallium if left in air . In the presence of water , thallium hydroxide is formed . Sulfuric and nitric acid dissolve thallium rapidly to make the sulfate and nitrate salts , while hydrochloric acid forms an insoluble thallium ( I ) chloride layer . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Thallium has 25 isotopes which have atomic masses that range from 184 to 210 . <unk> and <unk> are the only stable isotopes and make up nearly all of natural thallium . <unk> is the most stable radioisotope , with a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 78 years . It is made by the neutron activation of stable thallium in a nuclear reactor . The most useful radioisotope , <unk> ( half @-@ life 73 hours ) , decays by electron capture , emitting Hg X @-@ rays ( ~ 70 – 80 keV ) , and photons of 135 and 167 keV in 10 % total abundance ; therefore it has good imaging characteristics without excessive patient radiation dose . It is the most popular isotope used for thallium nuclear cardiac stress tests . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = Thallium ( III ) = = = 
 Thallium ( III ) compounds resemble the corresponding aluminium ( III ) compounds . They are moderately strong oxidizing agents and are usually unstable , as illustrated by the positive reduction potential for the <unk> + / Tl couple . Some mixed @-@ valence compounds are also known , such as <unk> and <unk> , which contain both thallium ( I ) and thallium ( III ) . Thallium ( III ) oxide , <unk> , is a black solid which decomposes above 800 ° C , forming the thallium ( I ) oxide and oxygen . 
 The simplest possible thallium compound , <unk> ( <unk> ) , is too unstable to exist in bulk , both due to the instability of the + 3 oxidation state as well as poor overlap of the valence orbitals of thallium with the 1s orbital of hydrogen . The trihalides are more stable , although they are chemically distinct from those of the lighter group 13 elements and are still the least stable in the whole group . For instance , thallium ( III ) fluoride , <unk> , has the β @-@ <unk> structure rather than that of the lighter group 13 trifluorides , and does not form the <unk> − 
 4 complex anion in aqueous solution . The trichloride and tribromide disproportionate just above room temperature to give the <unk> , and thallium triiodide contains the linear triiodide anion ( I − 
 3 ) and is actually a thallium ( I ) compound . Thallium ( III ) <unk> do not exist . 
 = = = Thallium ( I ) = = = 
 The thallium ( I ) halides are stable . In keeping with the large size of the Tl + cation , the chloride and bromide have the caesium chloride structure , while the fluoride and iodide have distorted sodium chloride structures . Like the analogous silver compounds , TlCl , <unk> , and <unk> are photosensitive . The stability of thallium ( I ) compounds demonstrates its differences from the rest of the group : a stable oxide , hydroxide , and carbonate are known , as are many chalcogenides . 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 <unk> compounds tend to be thermally unstable , in concordance with the trend of decreasing thermal stability down group 13 . The chemical reactivity of the Tl – C bond is also the lowest in the group , especially for ionic compounds of the type <unk> . Thallium forms the stable [ Tl ( CH3 ) 2 ] + ion in aqueous solution : like the isoelectronic Hg ( CH3 ) 2 and [ Pb ( CH3 ) 2 ] 2 + , it is linear . <unk> and <unk> are , like the corresponding gallium and indium compounds , flammable liquids with low melting points . Like indium , thallium cyclopentadienyl compounds contain thallium ( I ) , in contrast to gallium ( III ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Thallium ( Greek <unk> , <unk> , meaning " a green shoot or twig " ) was discovered by flame spectroscopy in 1861 . The name comes from thallium 's bright green spectral emission lines . 
 After the publication of the improved method of flame spectroscopy by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff and the discovery of caesium and rubidium in the years 1859 to 1860 , flame spectroscopy became an approved method to determine the composition of minerals and chemical products . William Crookes and Claude @-@ Auguste Lamy both started to use the new method . William Crookes used it to make spectroscopic determinations for tellurium on selenium compounds deposited in the lead chamber of a sulfuric acid production plant near <unk> in the Harz mountains . He had obtained the samples for his research on selenium cyanide from August Hofmann years earlier . By 1862 , Crookes was able to isolate small quantities of the new element and determine the properties of a few compounds . Claude @-@ Auguste Lamy used a spectrometer that was similar to Crookes ' to determine the composition of a selenium @-@ containing substance which was deposited during the production of sulfuric acid from pyrite . He also noticed the new green line in the spectra and concluded that a new element was present . Lamy had received this material from the sulfuric acid plant of his friend <unk> Kuhlmann and this by @-@ product was available in large quantities . Lamy started to isolate the new element from that source . The fact that Lamy was able to work ample quantities of thallium enabled him to determine the properties of several compounds and in addition he prepared a small ingot of metallic thallium which he prepared by remelting thallium he had obtained by electrolysis of thallium salts . 
 As both scientists discovered thallium independently and a large part of the work , especially the isolation of the metallic thallium was done by Lamy , Crookes tried to secure his priority on the work . Lamy was awarded a medal at the International Exhibition in London 1862 : For the discovery of a new and abundant source of thallium and after heavy protest Crookes also received a medal : thallium , for the discovery of the new element . The controversy between both scientists continued through 1862 and 1863 . Most of the discussion ended after Crookes was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1863 . 
 The dominant use of thallium was the use as poison for rodents . After several accidents the use as poison was banned in the United States by the Presidential Executive Order <unk> in February 1972 . In the subsequent years several other countries also banned the use . 
 = = Occurrence and production = = 
 Although thallium is a modestly abundant element in the Earth 's crust , with a concentration estimated to be about 0 @.@ 7 mg / kg , mostly in association with potassium @-@ based minerals in clays , soils , and granites , thallium is not generally economically recoverable from these sources . The major source of thallium for practical purposes is the trace amount that is found in copper , lead , zinc , and other heavy @-@ metal @-@ sulfide ores . 
 Thallium is found in the minerals <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . Thallium also occurs as a trace element in iron pyrite , and thallium is extracted as a by @-@ product of roasting this mineral for the production of sulfuric acid . 
 Thallium can also be obtained from the smelting of lead and zinc ores . Manganese nodules found on the ocean floor also contain some thallium , but the collection of these nodules has been and continues to be prohibitively expensive . There is also the potential for damaging the environment of the oceans . In addition , several other thallium minerals , containing 16 % to 60 % thallium , occur in nature as complexes of sulfides or selenides that primarily contain antimony , arsenic , copper , lead , and / or silver . However , these minerals are rare , and they have had no commercial importance as sources of thallium . The <unk> deposit in southern Macedonia was the only area where thallium was ever actively mined . This deposit still contains a loosely estimated 500 tonnes of thallium , and it is a source for several rare thallium minerals , for example <unk> . 
 The United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) estimates that the annual worldwide production of thallium is about 10 metric tonnes as a by @-@ product from the smelting of copper , zinc , and lead ores . Thallium is either extracted from the dusts from the smelter flues or from residues such as slag that are collected at the end of the smelting process . The raw materials used for thallium production contain large amounts of other materials and therefore a purification is the first step . The thallium is leached either by the use of a base or sulfuric acid from the material . The thallium is several times precipitated from the solution and to remove further impurities . At the end it is converted to thallium sulfate and the thallium is extracted by electrolysis on platinum or stainless steel plates . The production of thallium decreased by about 33 % in the period from 1995 to 2009 – from about 15 metric tonnes to about 10 tonnes . Since there are several small deposits or ores with relatively high thallium content , it would be possible to increase the production of it if a new application , such as a hypothetical thallium @-@ containing high @-@ temperature superconductor , becomes practical for widespread use outside of the laboratory . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Historic uses = = = 
 The odorless and tasteless thallium sulfate was once widely used as rat poison and ant killer . Since 1972 this use has been prohibited in the United States due to safety concerns . Many other countries followed this example in the following years . Thallium salts were used in the treatment of ringworm , other skin infections and to reduce the night sweating of tuberculosis patients . However this use has been limited due to their narrow therapeutic index , and the development of more advanced medicines for these conditions . 
 = = = Optics = = = 
 Thallium ( I ) bromide and thallium ( I ) iodide crystals have been used as infrared optical materials , because they are harder than other common infrared optics , and because they have transmission at significantly longer wavelengths . The trade name KRS @-@ 5 refers to this material . Thallium ( I ) oxide has been used to manufacture glasses that have a high index of refraction . Combined with sulfur or selenium and arsenic , thallium has been used in the production of high @-@ density glasses that have low melting points in the range of 125 and 150 ° C. These glasses have room temperature properties that are similar to ordinary glasses and are durable , insoluble in water and have unique refractive indices . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 Thallium ( I ) sulfide 's electrical conductivity changes with exposure to infrared light therefore making this compound useful in <unk> . Thallium selenide has been used in a bolometer for infrared detection . Doping selenium semiconductors with thallium improves their performance , and therefore it is used in trace amounts in selenium rectifiers . Another application of thallium doping is the sodium iodide crystals in gamma radiation detection devices . In these , the sodium iodide crystals are doped with a small amount of thallium to improve their efficiency as scintillation generators . Some of the electrodes in dissolved oxygen analyzers contain thallium . 
 = = = High @-@ temperature superconductivity = = = 
 Research activity with thallium is ongoing to develop high @-@ temperature superconducting materials for such applications as magnetic resonance imaging , storage of magnetic energy , magnetic propulsion , and electric power generation and transmission . The research in applications started after the discovery of the first thallium barium calcium copper oxide superconductor in 1988 . Thallium cuprate superconductors have been discovered that have transition temperatures above 120 K. Some mercury @-@ doped thallium @-@ cuprate superconductors have transition temperatures above 130 K at ambient pressure , nearly as high as the world @-@ record @-@ holding mercury <unk> . 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 Before the widespread application of technetium @-@ 99m in nuclear medicine , the radioactive isotope thallium @-@ 201 , with a half @-@ life of 73 hours , was the main substance for nuclear <unk> . The nuclide is still used for stress tests for risk stratification in patients with coronary artery disease ( CAD ) . This isotope of thallium can be generated using a transportable generator which is similar to the technetium @-@ 99m generator . The generator contains lead @-@ 201 ( half @-@ life 9 @.@ 33 hours ) which decays by electron capture to the thallium @-@ 201 . The lead @-@ 201 can be produced in a cyclotron by the bombardment of thallium with protons or deuterons by the ( p , 3n ) and ( d , 4n ) reactions . 
 = = = = Thallium stress test = = = = 
 A thallium stress test is a form of <unk> , where the amount of thallium in tissues correlates with tissue blood supply . Viable cardiac cells have normal Na + / K + ion exchange pumps . The Tl + cation binds the K + pumps and is transported into the cells . Exercise or <unk> induces widening ( vasodilation ) of normal coronary arteries . This produces coronary steal from areas where arteries are maximally dilated . Areas of <unk> or ischemic tissue will remain " cold " . <unk> and post @-@ stress thallium may indicate areas which will benefit from myocardial revascularization . Redistribution indicates the existence of coronary steal and the presence of ischemic coronary artery disease . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 A mercury – thallium alloy , which forms a eutectic at 8 @.@ 5 % thallium , is reported to freeze at − 60 ° C , some 20 ° C below the freezing point of mercury . This alloy is used in thermometers and low @-@ temperature switches . In organic synthesis , thallium ( III ) salts , as thallium <unk> or triacetate , are useful reagents performing different transformations in aromatics , ketones , olefins , among others . Thallium is a constituent of the alloy in the anode plates in magnesium seawater batteries . Soluble thallium salts are added to gold plating baths to increase the speed of plating and to reduce grain size within the gold layer . 
 The saturated solution of equal parts of thallium ( I ) formate ( Tl ( <unk> ) ) and thallium ( I ) malonate ( Tl ( <unk> ) ) in water is known as Clerici solution . It is a mobile odorless liquid whose color changes from yellowish to clear upon reducing the concentration of the thallium salts . With the density of 4 @.@ 25 g / cm3 at 20 ° C , Clerici solution is one of the heaviest aqueous solutions known . It was used in the 20th century for measuring density of minerals by the flotation method , but the use is discontinued due to the high toxicity and corrosiveness of the solution . 
 Thallium iodide is used as an additive to metal halide lamps , often together with one @-@ two halides of other metals . It allows to optimize the lamp temperature and color rendering , and shift the spectral output to the green region , which is useful for underwater lighting . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Thallium and its compounds are extremely toxic , and should be handled with great care . There are numerous recorded cases of fatal thallium poisoning . People can be exposed to thallium in the workplace by breathing it in , skin absorption , swallowing it , or eye contact . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( Permissible exposure limit ) for thallium exposure in the workplace as 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 skin exposure over an 8 @-@ hour workday . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) also set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 skin exposure over an 8 @-@ hour workday . At levels of 15 mg / m3 , thallium is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
 Contact with skin is dangerous , and adequate ventilation should be provided when melting this metal . Thallium ( I ) compounds have a high aqueous solubility and are readily absorbed through the skin . Exposure by inhalation should not exceed 0 @.@ 1 mg per cubic metre in an 8 @-@ hour time @-@ weighted average ( 40 @-@ hour work week ) . Thallium will readily absorb through the skin and care should be taken to avoid this route of exposure as cutaneous absorption can exceed the absorbed dose received by inhalation at the PEL . Thallium is a suspected human carcinogen . For a long time thallium compounds were readily available as rat poison . This fact and that it is water @-@ soluble and nearly tasteless led to frequent intoxication caused by accident or criminal intent . 
 One of the main methods of removing thallium ( both radioactive and normal ) from humans is to use Prussian blue , a material which absorbs thallium . Up to 20 g per day of Prussian blue is fed by mouth to the person , and it passes through their digestive system and comes out in the stool . Hemodialysis and hemoperfusion are also used to remove thallium from the blood serum . At later stage of the treatment additional potassium is used to mobilize thallium from the tissue . 
 According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) , man @-@ made sources of thallium pollution include gaseous emission of cement factories , coal burning power plants , and metal sewers . The main source of elevated thallium concentrations in water is the leaching of thallium from ore processing operations . 
 = Texas Recreational Road 2 = 
 Recreational Road 2 ( RE 2 ) is a Recreational Road located in Val Verde County in the southwestern portion of the U.S. state of Texas . The highway is approximately 7 @.@ 2 miles ( 11 @.@ 6 km ) in length , and connects the Rough Canyon Colonia portion of the Amistad National Recreation Area to U.S. Highway 277 ( US 227 ) and US 377 . The roadway travels through mainly rural areas . A road first appeared in the location of RE 2 around 1940 . RE 2 was officially designated in June 1970 , and was just the second Recreational Road formed at the time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 RE 2 begins at the Rough Canyon boat @-@ launch ramp on the Amistad Reservoir in the Rough Canyon Colonia region of the Amistad National Recreation Area . From this terminus , the highway proceeds as a two @-@ lane , paved road , which travels through a small parking lot and turns northeastward . The road continues northeast as it passes the Rough Canyon Marina and the Rough Canyon Colonia camping area on the eastern edge of the park , as well as several houses and independent camp sites . The highway intersects Cam Real Road , which leads to the Devils Shores community and the surrounding area . The route bends eastward , passing the Rough Canyon Inn and a small parking lot and intersecting a small road before it continues into rural areas again . Proceeding along a small ridge , the highway bends northeastward and travels over a small unnamed wash before reaching its eastern terminus with US 277 / US 377 . 
 The Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) publishes yearly reports of the highway 's annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , with counts usually taken near intersections . In 2011 , the route 's AADT was 310 vehicles , taken from a point to the west of the US 277 / US 377 intersection . This count was exactly the same as the one taken in 2010 , which in turn was a decrease from the count taken in 2009 , when RE 2 's AADT count was 440 vehicles . No portion of the highway is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 A road first appeared in the location of RE 2 around 1940 . This road was an unimproved dirt route with a primitive bridge over a small creek near the middle of it . The road led to a small community made up of three residential buildings . By 1951 , the highway 's bridge had been converted to a small concrete dip which allowed the creek to flow through it . By 1956 , this road had been improved to a graded , drained gravel surface . By 1961 , it had been improved to a metal surface , and had been straightened along the eastern portion . Two additional concrete dips had been constructed , over two small creeks connecting to Devils River . In addition , the community which the road served had expanded to five residential buildings and a gate was built at the western end of the highway . 
 The first serious interest in the road came in mid @-@ 1969 , when the National Park Service approved a plan to develop the facilities with Amistad . The Rough Canyon and Diablo East portions of the park were given particular focus , since they were the only two that were in existence at the time . Large boat ramps were constructed at both areas , in an attempt to increase tourism . 
 In early August 1971 , several consecutive days of heavy rainfall led to flooding throughout the area . Several highways in the area were damaged , including RE 2 . Portions of the highway were completely washed out , which took about two weeks to repair . 
 On April 1 , 1970 , RE 2 was officially designated by TxDOT . RE 2 , along with Recreational Road 255 , became the first routes designated as " recreational roads " by the Texas State Highway Department . However , both highways still had to be approved by the Highway Department 's Administration Circle ; RE 255 was approved on April 15 , 1970 , making it the first official highway . RE 2 was approved by the Administration Circle on June 1 , 1970 , making it the second route officially designated as a recreational road . Since RE 2 's designation , each recreational road has been numbered sequentially . Between 1970 and 1972 , the highway was paved , and the concrete dips replaced with drainage pipes . One of the route 's bends was straightened , shortening it from 7 @.@ 4 miles ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) to about 7 @.@ 2 miles ( 11 @.@ 6 km ) in length . The highway has not undergone any major rerouting or redesignation since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Val Verde County . 
 = DC Comics Graphic Novel Collection = 
 DC Comics Graphic Novel Collection is a fortnightly partwork magazine published by <unk> and DC Comics . The series is a collection of special edition hardback graphic novels , collecting significant DC Comics superhero story @-@ arcs as well as bonus origin stories for the characters within . 
 The collection started in countries like Brazil but with a different order and contents . A small local test run was also run in select parts of the UK , similar to what happens with most <unk> . The debut issue , Batman : Hush Part 1 , was released in the UK on 19 August 2015 at the special price of £ 2 @.@ 99 , before gradually rising to £ 9 @.@ 99 per issue . 60 issues of the partwork are planned with the possibility of an extension . 
 The collection was likely inspired by the Hachette partwork The Official Marvel Graphic Novel Collection which began in 2012 , collecting acclaimed Marvel Comics stories , which in @-@ turn inspired another Hachette <unk> collection from the 2000 AD series Judge Dredd : The Mega Collection . 
 = = List of books = = 
 Below is a working list of the books which will be released as part of the collection . They may change and are different to the line ups of other countries who share the collection . The information is sourced from an email to their customer services department . 
 = = = Special Issues = = = 
 The following ' special ' books are due to be released as part of the collection with a UK retail price of £ 19 @.@ 99 . Subscribers get the Special issues at a discounted price of £ 18 @.@ 99 . 
 = = = Subscriber Exclusive Issues = = = 
 = Cyclone Fay = 
 Cyclone Fay was an intense , late @-@ season tropical cyclone which struck Western Australia during the 2003 @-@ 04 Australian region cyclone season . Forming from an area of low pressure on 12 March , Fay was the only Category 5 cyclone during the season . The system had a minimum pressure of 910 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 87 inHg ) and maximum sustained winds of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Moving towards the southwest and eventually towards the south , Fay gradually strengthened as it paralleled the northwestern coast of Australia , and made landfall on the Pilbara coast on the morning of 27 March as a Category 4 cyclone . 
 While no fatalities were reported , the cyclone brought record @-@ breaking rainfall to Australia , which led to a sharp decrease in the country 's gold output . The cyclone also caused minor damage in the Pilbara region of Western Australia . In the spring of 2005 , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology retired the name Fay from use , and it will never be used again as a cyclone name . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The low pressure system that later developed into Fay formed in the Gulf of Carpentaria on 12 March 2004 . Through 15 March satellite imagery indicated increasing convection and organisation of the system , as well as decreasing wind sheer aloft , adding to the favourable conditions for strengthening . On 16 March , the system was designated Tropical Cyclone 18S by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , with winds of 30 km / h ( 20 mph ) . The system then crossed Melville and Bathurst Islands and moved into the Timor Sea , where it intensified , and was given the name Fay by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology . Fay began to turn southward on 17 March ; simultaneously , the cyclone continued to intensify due to a weakening of vertical wind shear , and well @-@ defined outflow became apparent on satellite imagery . The following day , a steering ridge to the south of the system strengthened and pushed the cyclone away from the coast and to the northwest . At the same time , the system continued to intensify due to the favourable environment in the upper atmosphere . However , hot , dry air flowing into the system from the south , combined with vertical wind sheer , kept the storm from strengthening as much at its maximum potential rate . 
 By 19 March Fay 's track had turned to the west @-@ southwest , and over the next day it continued to strengthen in due to favourable upper level outflow and weak vertical sheer . On 21 March , Fay became a Category 5 cyclone on the Australian Region Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale . A mid @-@ latitude trough caused the steering ridge to weaken , and subsequently , Fay to turn to the south . Over the next two days , the environmental shear around the cyclone decreased , which would normally have led to intensification ; however , as the shear decreased , the cyclone also moved over an area of dry air , weakening the system . By 23 March , Fay had moved in a loop , and the system weakened to a Category 2 . Over the next day , favourable outflow counteracted the dry air that had weakened the system , and a banding eye feature was observed on satellite imagery . Fay then encountered moister air as it moved southward , leading it to re @-@ intensify on 25 March . A weak eye of 10 nm was observed on 26 March which grew to 15 nm as the day went on . Strengthening into a Category 4 system early on 27 March , Fay made landfall on the Pilbara coast between 8 am and 9 am AWST ( 0000 and 0100 UTC ) with winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) , weakening below cyclone strength somewhere between the towns of Nullagine and Telfer . 
 = = Preparations , Impact , and aftermath = = 
 Evacuation centres were set up in the Kimberley region of Western Australia . Schools and businesses were also closed , and flights in and out of the area were cancelled . Shelters were set up for people who could not take shelter in their own homes . Residents of the Bidyadanga Aboriginal community were warned of particularly dangerous storm tide as the centre of the cyclone passed to their west . The communities of Sandfire and Pardoo were also warned of dangerous storm tide . Cyclone warnings were issued for areas threatened by the system , and communities in the path of the system were warned of expected high rainfall , as amounts greater than 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) were expected . 
 Minor damage to buildings and limited tree damage were reported in the vicinity of Port Hedland . In the town of Nullagine , 120 residents were evacuated to the town 's police station , as heavy rain caused flooding . Flooding of the De Grey and <unk> Rivers led to the town being segmented into 4 sections . As the system passed near the Yarrie mine 200 workers were forced to go under lockdown for 8 hours . The cyclone overturned accommodation units , " shredded " water tanks , cut power lines , and damaged the rail line connecting the mine to Port Hedland . 
 Heavy rainfall was reported along the track of the cyclone , with a two @-@ day total of 701 mm ( 27 @.@ 6 in ) reported at the Nifty Copper Mine and 359 mm ( 14 @.@ 1 in ) reported in Telfer . The rain from the cyclone delayed the construction of a gas pipeline at the mine for over 7 months , while the pipeline company waited for the floodwaters to dissipate . According to <unk> Mining , the rainfall amounts at Telfer exceeded the records going back at least 100 years . The heavy rainfall from both Cyclone Monty in February and Cyclone Fay caused gold output in Australia for the quarter to be the lowest in 10 years . 
 A survey performed by the Australian Institute of Marine Science discovered that the Scott Reef suffered " severe damage , " and many coral colonies were uprooted or damaged . Because of the record @-@ breaking rainfall produced across northwestern Australia , the Bureau of Meteorology retired the name Fay after its usage . 
 = Cyclone Alessia = 
 Tropical Cyclone Alessia was the first tropical cyclone to affect the Northern Territory of Australia in November since Cyclone Joan in 1975 . The storm was first identified as a tropical low on 20 November 2013 well to the northwest of Australia . Tracking generally west to west @-@ southwest , the small system steadily organized into a tropical cyclone by 22 November . Maintaining a small central dense overcast , Alessia brushed the Kimberley region before making landfall in the Top End region with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) on 23 and 24 November respectively . Some weakening took place as the system moved over land ; however , reorganization occurred as it neared the Gulf of Carpentaria . After moving over water on 26 November , it redeveloped gale @-@ force winds . Alessia reached its peak intensity on 27 November with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 991 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 26 inHg ) and subsequently made its final landfall near Wollogorang . Weakening ensued once more as the storm traveled over land ; though , Alessia 's remnants looped eastward back over water before doubling back to the west . The system was last noted moving inland again over the Northern Territory on 1 December . 
 Throughout Alessia 's existence , it caused only minimal damage . Several areas experienced gale @-@ force winds , with gusts measured up to 109 km / h ( 68 mph ) on Centre Island . Moderate to heavy rains accompanied the system as well , with a storm maxima of 290 @.@ 4 mm ( 11 @.@ 43 in ) also occurring on Centre Island . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On 20 November 2013 , an area of low pressure , accompanied by persistent deep convection , developed over the southern Indian Ocean , roughly 1 @,@ 465 km ( 910 mi ) north of RAAF Learmonth in Western Australia . At the mid @-@ levels , the circulation appeared more broad in nature , with notable rainbands wrapping into the low . Environmental conditions favored tropical cyclogenesis , with moderate wind shear , high sea surface temperatures , and prominent outflow that extended into the mid @-@ latitude westerlies . By this time , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BOM ) noted this system as a tropical low just outside their area of responsibility . Owing to increasing organization over the following day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the system late on 21 November . Subsequently , the JTWC began issuing advisories on the system under the identifier Tropical Cyclone 02S on 22 November , estimating it to have attained gale @-@ force winds . Situated along the edge of a near @-@ equatorial ridge , the storm tracked generally east and was forecast to maintain this movement for much of its existence . Later on 21 November , the BOM classified the system as a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian cyclone intensity scale and assigned it the name Alessia , at which time it was located 390 km ( 240 mi ) north of Broome . A smaller @-@ than @-@ average cyclone , Alessia featured a core of deep convection but no notable banding features , making Dvorak satellite intensity estimates difficult . 
 The storm , having a maximum diameter of no more than 335 km ( 210 mi ) with gale @-@ force winds covering less than half that distance , maintained a very small central dense overcast as it approached the Kimberley region . Around 0600 UTC on 23 November , the JTWC estimated Alessia to have attained one @-@ minute sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Throughout 23 November , a slight northerly component took place in the track , with Alessia remaining offshore as it brushed the Kimberley region . However , dry air from over Australia was drawn into the system , causing a dramatic decrease in convection . At this time , Alessia became the first storm since Tropical Cyclone Anika in 2008 to affect Western Australia during November . Later that day , the storm passed over Troughton Island where gale @-@ force winds were measured . Moving over the Joseph Bonaparte Gulf at the southern end of the Timor Sea early on 24 November , a burst in convection over Alessia 's center indicated it was maintaining its intensity as a minimal tropical cyclone . Continued reorganization of the cyclone 's structure took place as it accelerated east toward the Top End region , with defined banding apparent on satellite <unk> and a tight circulation center seen on local radar . Alessia made landfall at 0930 UTC on 24 November near the Daly River Mouth , south of Darwin , Northern Territory , before rapidly weakening to a tropical low . Alessia 's movement onshore marked the first time since Cyclone Joan in 1975 that a tropical cyclone affected the Northern Territory during November . In light of the system moving overland , the JTWC issues their final advisory on the cyclone . Moving steadily eastward across Top End , Alessia remained weak but its proximity to water allowed significant bursts of convection to develop during this time . 
 Early on 26 November , the former cyclone emerged over the Gulf of Carpentaria near Blue Mud Bay . Once offshore , a break in the upper @-@ level ridge previously steering the storm eastward caused a southward shift in the track , bringing it directly over Groote Eylandt for several hours . Gale @-@ force winds soon redeveloped over the southeastern quadrant of Alessia ; however , it was not re @-@ designated as a tropical cyclone until 27 November when the winds extended halfway around the circulation . As Alessia re @-@ intensified over the southwestern Gulf , its movement became more southeasterly , taking the circulation parallel to the coast . With an anticyclone over the Northern Territory providing modest outflow for the cyclone , it continued to intensify ; the JTWC also re @-@ initiated advisories on the storm by 0600 UTC on 27 November . Hours later , Alessia reached its peak strength with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a barometric pressure estimated at 991 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 27 inHg ) . Simultaneously , it moved ashore near Wollogorang , roughly 130 km ( 80 mi ) east of Borroloola . Increasing shear and land interaction caused the low- and mid @-@ level circulations to separate , with the later continuing eastward over water . The storm soon weakened to a tropical low and its movement became erratic . Its remnants persisted for several days in the same general region , executing a clockwise loop before moving back over the Gulf of Carpentaria on 28 November . While environmental conditions favored redevelopment once again and deep convection had formed over the system , its low @-@ level circulation remained poorly organized . Failing to regenerate , Alessia moved eastward before doubling back to the west , passing near the Sir Edward Pellew Group of Islands on 30 November . It was last noted on 1 December over the Top End region . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Kimberley and Top End = = = 
 On 21 November , a cyclone watch was raised for coastal and nearby inland areas of Western Australia between Wyndham and Beagle Bay . This watch was soon expanded to encompass areas east to the Western Australia – Northern Territory border and west to the Mitchell Plateau . Additionally , areas from Mitchell Plateau to Cockatoo Island were placed under a cyclone warning . The following day , watches extended to Cape Hotham Light in the Northern Territory , including the city of Darwin and the Tiwi Islands . As the cyclone intensified , warnings gradually spread eastward . Warnings reached as far east as Point Stuart prior to Alessia 's landfall . All watches and warnings were dropped on 24 November as Alessia moved inland and degraded to a tropical low . 
 Though impact from the storm was expected to be fairly minimal , residents were still advised to stock up on emergency supplies and be prepared . Northern Territory Police Commissioner , John McRoberts , urged residents to heed warnings despite the generally non @-@ threatening nature of the storm , " complacency can often be your worst enemy in these types of events . " Many stores across Darwin reported a sharp increase in the sales of bottled water due to the storm . Despite the approaching storm , regional airports , schools , and businesses remained open . Ferry service to the Tiwi Islands , however , was suspended for 24 November . 
 On 23 November , Cyclone Alessia brushed the Kimberley coastline of Western Australia as a low @-@ end Category 1 . The strongest winds were measured on Troughton Island at 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) with gusts to 94 km / h ( 58 mph ) . The storm 's brisk forward motion limited rainfall , however , with only 24 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) falling on the island . Farther west , <unk> received 37 @.@ 8 mm ( 1 @.@ 49 in ) of rain . Effects across the Top End region were similar to Kimberly , some reports of gale @-@ force winds with generally light to moderate rain , peaking at 126 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) along the Upper Wickham River . Owing to previously dry conditions , the rains proved mostly beneficial to the region . Flash flooding along the <unk> River in Arnhem Land caught at least seven people off @-@ guard , including one infant , as their two vehicles were overcome with water . Six people safely made it out while another was swept downstream . He was rescued two days later by local police . In Darwin , strong winds downed a few trees in the Northern Suburbs and Howard Springs while localised flooding occurred in Palmerston . Additionally , one power line was downed in the city . Local authorities reported no serious traffic accidents in relation to the storm nor injuries . In Milne , a few residents seeking shelter at a local fire station found themselves locked out despite officials advising people to seek shelter if necessary . 
 = = = Gulf of Carpentaria = = = 
 Following Alessia 's reorganization over the Gulf of Carpentaria early on 27 November , a cyclone warning was raised for areas between Port Roper , Northern Territory to Karumba , Queensland , including Mornington Island . Once the storm moved onshore in the Northern Territory , all watches and warnings were dropped later that same day . On Centre Island , daily rainfall peaked at 162 @.@ 8 mm ( 6 @.@ 41 in ) on 27 November , with an additional 127 @.@ 6 mm ( 5 @.@ 02 in ) falling over the subsequent three days as Alessia moved erratically in the southwestern Gulf of Carpentaria . Sustained winds of 87 km / h ( 54 mph ) and gusts to 109 km / h ( 68 mph ) affected the island during the storm 's passage . The McArthur River zinc mine received 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) of rain on 27 November . Heavy rains extended eastward into Queensland with 164 @.@ 4 mm ( 6 @.@ 47 in ) falling on Mornington Island over a five @-@ day period . 
 = Pilot ( House ) = 
 " Pilot " , also known as " Everybody Lies " , is the first episode of the U.S. television series House . The episode premiered on the Fox network on November 16 , 2004 . It introduces the character of Dr. Gregory House ( played by Hugh Laurie ) — a maverick antisocial doctor — and his team of diagnosticians at the fictional Princeton @-@ Plainsboro Teaching Hospital in New Jersey . The episode features House 's attempts to diagnose a kindergarten teacher after she collapses in class . 
 House was created by David Shore , who got the idea for the misanthropic title character from a doctor 's visit . Initially , producer Bryan Singer wanted an American to play House , but British actor Hugh Laurie 's audition convinced him that a foreign actor could play the role . Shore wrote House as a character with parallels to Sherlock Holmes — both are drug users , blunt , and close to being friendless . The show 's producers wanted House handicapped in some way and gave the character a damaged leg arising from an improper diagnosis . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews ; the character of House was widely noted as a unique aspect of the episode and series , though some reviewers believed that such a cruel character would not be tolerated in real life . Other complaints with the episode included stereotyped supporting characters and an implausible premise . The initial broadcast of " Pilot " was watched by approximately seven million viewers , making it the 62nd @-@ most @-@ watched show of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Shortly after the start of class , kindergarten teacher Rebecca Adler ( Robin Tunney ) becomes <unk> , falls to the floor , and experiences seizures . Dr. James Wilson ( Robert Sean Leonard ) attempts to convince the curmudgeonly Gregory House to treat Adler , but House initially dismisses him , believing that the case would be boring . Hospital administrator Dr. Lisa Cuddy ( Lisa Edelstein ) approaches House in the elevator and attempts to persuade him to fulfill his duties at the hospital 's walk @-@ in clinic , a task House loathes because the cases are usually simplistic . House refuses , claiming that Cuddy cannot fire him due to tenure , and hurriedly leaves . When House 's team attempts to perform an MRI on Adler , they discover that House 's authorization for diagnostics has been revoked ; Cuddy restores his authorization in exchange for his working at the clinic . 
 Adler 's throat closes up during the MRI due to an allergic reaction to gadolinium , prompting two members of House 's team , Dr. Robert Chase ( Jesse Spencer ) and Dr. Allison Cameron ( Jennifer Morrison ) , to perform a tracheotomy . Working in the hospital 's clinic , House 's first patient is a man who is orange because of an over @-@ consumption of carrots and mega @-@ dose vitamins ( niacin ) . House also treats a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy whose mother allows him to use his asthmatic inhaler only intermittently instead of daily as prescribed . House criticises the mother for making such a drastic medical decision without first learning more about asthma . During his monologue , House stumbles on an idea and leaves quickly to treat Adler ; he diagnoses her with cerebral vasculitis , despite having no proof . House treats Adler with steroids , which improves her condition greatly for a time , until she starts seizing and has heart failure . The team brings her back with a defibrillator . 
 On House 's insistence , neurologist Dr. Eric Foreman ( Omar Epps ) and Cameron break into Adler 's house to find anything that might account for Adler 's symptoms . They find an opened package of non @-@ kosher ham in Adler 's kitchen . House concludes that Adler is suffering from <unk> due to eating undercooked pork ; when the tapeworm inside of her reproduced , its larvae were absorbed into her blood stream , infesting her brain . Adler , wishing to die with dignity , refuses to accept more treatments unless there is evidence that the diagnosis is correct , but House attempts to persuade her otherwise . During the conversation , Adler asks for the cause of the limp in House 's right leg . House reveals he had an infarction in his thigh muscles that led to muscle death , which could have been avoided if his doctor had made the correct diagnosis . House is ready to dismiss the case when Chase provides an idea for noninvasive evidence of Adler 's tapeworm infection ; by taking an X @-@ ray of her leg , House proves that Adler is infested with tapeworms and her condition is treatable . After seeing the evidence , Adler agrees to take her medication to kill the tapeworms . A couple of days later , Adler is visited by all 16 of her kindergarten children and their other teacher , whom she welcomes with open arms . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and filming = = = 
 Series creator David Shore traced the concept for House to his background as a patient at a teaching hospital . Shore recalled that " I knew , as soon as I left the room , they would be mocking me relentlessly [ for my cluelessness ... ] and I thought that it would be interesting to see a character who actually did that before they left the room . " In 2004 , Shore and executive producers Katie Jacobs and Paul Attanasio pitched House to Fox as a medical detective show — a hospital whodunit where the doctors would be the sleuths looking for the source of symptoms . The ideas behind House 's character were added after Fox bought the show . Shore wrote the pilot with a vivid memory of a doctor 's visit : he once had to wait two weeks to get a doctor 's appointment for a sore hip , by which point his pain had disappeared . Nevertheless , Shore stated that the doctors were " incredibly polite " . Shore later stated that , as he wrote the pilot , he fell in love with a character who , as a doctor , would actually ask the question " Why am I wasting your time ? " . 
 A central part of the show 's premise was that the main character would be handicapped . The initial idea was for House to use a wheelchair , but Fox turned down this interpretation ( for which the crew was later grateful ) . The wheelchair idea turned into a scar on House 's face , which later turned into a bad leg necessitating use of a cane . The original script called for House to be 34 years old ; however , Shore later explained that he did not want the character to be that young . 
 The episode was written by the series creator David Shore , and was shot in Canada ; later episodes would be shot on soundstages in California . Shore said that the writings of Berton <unk> , a The New Yorker staff writer who chronicled intriguing medical cases , inspired the plots for " Pilot " and other early episodes . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Producer Bryan Singer originally demanded that an American actor play the role of House ; according to Singer , the more foreign actors he watched audition for the part , the more sure he was that an American was needed . At the time of casting , Hugh Laurie was filming the movie Flight of the Phoenix . He put together an audition tape in a Namibian hotel bathroom , the only place with enough light , and apologized for its appearance ( which Singer compared to a " bin Laden video " ) . Laurie improvised by using an umbrella for a cane . Singer was impressed by Laurie 's performance and commented on how well the " American actor " grasped the character , not realizing Laurie was British . 
 Laurie initially believed that House was merely the " sidekick " of Wilson , because the script referred to Wilson as a doctor with " boyish " looks . Laurie did not realize that House was the protagonist until he read the full teleplay . According to Shore , " it 's easy to make an asshole character unlikable . What 's tricky is to make them watchable . And Hugh came in and brought everything that was there to the part , the nastiness , the not politically correct stuff . And yet you wanted to watch him , you wanted to spend time with him . " 
 Similarities between House and the famous fictional detective Sherlock Holmes appear in the pilot ; Shore explained that he was always a fan of Holmes , and found the character 's traits of indifference to his clients unique . House and Holmes have only one real friend ( Wilson and Watson , respectively ) who connects the cerebral hero to human concerns . This Holmes and Watson dynamic was something the producers were looking for in the characters of House and Wilson , especially in terms of chemistry . 
 Robert Sean Leonard ( Dr. James Wilson ) read the pilot scripts to Numb3rs and was planning to audition for the part , but was drawn to auditioning for House because he enjoyed the role of being " the guy [ the protagonist ] counts on " , as well as the similarities to Sherlock Holmes . Leonard felt he did not audition well , and thought his long friendship with Singer helped land him the role . When asked in an interview why his character would ever be friends with House , Leonard replied : 
 I think Wilson puts up with House for the same reason that millions of people watch him every week . I think he ’ s really dynamic and fun and audacious and self @-@ deprecating . All those things that I think make people really appealing , and he tells it like it is . The money things , he doesn ’ t tend to pay you back , but I have a lot of friends like that . So I don ’ t find it that much of a mystery . I think House is a very attractive character . I think most people would want to be friends with him . 
 Australian actor Jesse Spencer 's agent suggested that Spencer audition for the role of Chase , but he was hesitant , fearing the show might be similar to General Hospital . Once the actor saw the scripts , he changed his mind ; Spencer then persuaded the producers to change his character into an Australian . Omar Epps , who plays Foreman , found influence from his work as a troubled intern on the TV show ER . Epps and co @-@ star Jennifer Morrison read the scripts and believed that the show would be either a hit or miss . 
 = = Reception = = 
 House 's premiere episode was generally well received . Critics reacted positively to the character of House ; Tom Shales of The Washington Post called him " the most electrifying character to hit television in years " . The New York Magazine called the series " medical TV at its most satisfying and basic " , and stated that the cast consisted of " [ professional ] actors playing doctors who come to care about their patients " , while The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert appreciated that the episode did not sugarcoat the flaws of the characters to assuage viewers ' fears about " HMO factories " . Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times said that though the characters might be a turn @-@ off to some viewers , the gore and " derivative gall " of the show were positives to fans of procedural dramas ; TV Guide 's Matt Roush stated House was an " uncommon cure for the common medical drama " . Critics of The A.V. Club called House the " nastiest " black comedy from Fox since the 1996 's short @-@ lived television series Profit . Critics considered the series to be a bright spot among Fox 's otherwise reality television @-@ based broadcast schedule . 
 The episode 's format was compared to a rival television series , Medical Investigation . USA Today favorably stated House as more character @-@ driven than Investigation 's " plot @-@ driven procedural " , and the San Francisco Chronicle felt that House was the better show due to the title character . Variety 's Brian Lowry , meanwhile , stated that the two shows were too similar and House was mismatched among Fox 's other programs . Other complaints included perceived stereotypes of young , attractive doctors . Sherwin <unk> of Slate gave the first episodes of the series a highly negative review , stating that " Of all the medical errata in this series ( and there are some <unk> ) , the greatest is surely the conceit that a physician so remote , so neglectful of duty , so sadistic , so downright cruel as Gregory House would be tolerated in any hospital . " Kay McFadden of The Seattle Times felt that Laurie 's portrayal of House humanized the character , but also revealed the show 's deepest flaw : " a reliance on shallow cuteness for comic relief " . Other complaints included a lack of characterization for the supporting characters in the first few episodes . 
 The premiere attracted approximately seven million viewers in the United States , making it the 62nd @-@ most @-@ watched show for the week of November 15 – 21 , 2004 . The United Kingdom terrestrial premiere was broadcast on June 9 , 2005 , by Five and garnered a ten percent share ( 1 @.@ 8 million viewers ) . Christopher Hoag , who composed the music for " Pilot " and the first season of House , was nominated in the 2005 Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Music Composition for the episode . Shore received a Humanitas Prize nomination for writing the episode , but lost out to John Wells , who wrote the episode of the The West Wing entitled " NSF Thurmont " . 
 = SMS Oldenburg = 
 SMS Oldenburg was the fourth vessel of the Helgoland class of battleships of the Imperial German Navy . Oldenburg 's keel was laid in October 1908 at the Kaiserliche Werft dockyard in Wilhelmshaven . She was launched on 30 September 1909 and was commissioned into the fleet on 1 May 1912 . The ship was equipped with twelve 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in six twin turrets , and had a top speed of 21 @.@ 2 knots ( 39 @.@ 3 km / h ; 24 @.@ 4 mph ) . Oldenburg was assigned to the I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career , including World War I. 
 Along with her three sister ships , Helgoland , Ostfriesland , and Thüringen , Oldenburg participated in all of the major fleet operations of World War I in the North Sea against the British Grand Fleet , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 , the largest naval battle of the war . The ship also saw action in the Baltic Sea against the Imperial Russian Navy . She was present during the unsuccessful first incursion into the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 , though she saw no combat during the operation . 
 After the German collapse in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet was interned and then scuttled in Scapa Flow during the peace negotiations . The four Helgoland @-@ class ships were allowed to remain in Germany but eventually ceded to the victorious Allied powers as war reparations ; Oldenburg was given to Japan , which sold the vessel to a British ship @-@ breaking firm in 1920 . She was broken up for scrap in Dordrecht in 1921 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Oldenburg was ordered by the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) under the provisional name Ersatz Frithjof , as a replacement for the old coastal defense ship Frithjof . The contract for the ship was awarded to the Schichau @-@ Werke shipyard in Danzig under construction number 828 . Her three sisters had been ordered for 1908 , but because of budget constraints , Oldenburg 's order was delayed to 1909 . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the State Secretary of the Navy , gave the contract to Schichau before the 1909 budget had been approved , and the shipbuilder began stockpiling materials to build the ship . This gave the impression that Germany was building more battleships than publicly admitted , which prompted a naval scare in Britain . The British public demanded " we want eight [ new battleships ] and we won 't wait " , and in the span of a year eight new battleships had been laid down in Britain , a major escalation in the international naval arms race . Work began on 1 March 1909 with the laying of her keel , and the ship was launched a little more than a year later on 30 June 1910 . Duchess Sophia Charlotte of Oldenburg christened her , and Friedrich August , the Grand Duke of Oldenburg , gave the speech . After launching , the incomplete ship was transferred to Kiel for fitting @-@ out , including completion of the superstructure and the installation of armament , until August 1911 . Named for the Duchy of Oldenburg in northern Germany , the ship was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 May 1912 , just over three years after work commenced , at a cost of 45 @.@ 801 million gold marks . 
 The ship was 167 @.@ 2 m ( 548 ft 7 in ) long , had a beam of 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 ft 6 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 94 m ( 29 ft 4 in ) , and displaced 24 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 24 @,@ 310 long tons ) at full load . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion steam engines and fifteen water @-@ tube boilers . The engines were rated at 28 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 27 @,@ 617 ihp ; 20 @,@ 594 kW ) and were capable of producing a top speed of 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 23 @.@ 9 mph ) . Oldenburg stored up to 3 @,@ 200 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 100 long tons ) of coal , allowing her to steam for 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . After 1915 the boilers were modified to burn oil , which would be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate ; the ship could carry up to 197 metric tons ( 194 long tons ) . Oldenburg had a crew of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 027 enlisted men . 
 Oldenburg was armed with a main battery of twelve 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns in six twin gun turrets , with one turret fore , one aft , and two on each flank of the ship . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns and fourteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns . After 1914 , two of the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed and replaced by 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns ; later , an additional two 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were replaced with anti @-@ aircraft guns . This brought the total number of 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 guns to ten , and the number of 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns to four . Oldenburg was also armed with six 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes ; one was in the bow , one in the stern , and two on each broadside . She was protected a main belt that was 300 mm ( 12 in ) thick , with the same thickness of armor on her main battery turrets . She had a deck that was 63 @.@ 5 mm ( 2 @.@ 50 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning on 1 May 1912 , Oldenburg conducted sea trials in the Baltic . On 17 July , she was assigned to the I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , alongside her sisters . After individual ship training exercises , she joined I Squadron maneuvers and then fleet maneuvers in November . The annual summer cruise in July and August , which typically went to Norway , was interrupted by the Agadir Crisis . As a result , the cruise only went into the Baltic , in order to keep the fleet closer to Germany . Oldenburg and the rest of the fleet then fell into a pattern of individual ship , squadron , and full fleet exercises over the next two years of peace @-@ time training . 
 The annual summer cruise to Norway began on 14 July 1914 , despite the rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills in the Skagerrak before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany due to Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On 27 July , the entire fleet assembled off Cape Skudenes before returning to port , where they remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out on the 28th , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict . By 29 July Oldenburg and the rest of I Squadron were back in Wilhelmshaven . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Oldenburg was present during the first sortie by German fleet into the North Sea , which took place on 2 – 3 November 1914 . No British forces were encountered during the operation . A second operation followed on 15 – 16 December . This sortie was the initiation of a strategy adopted by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet . Admiral von Ingenohl intended to use the battlecruisers of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group to raid British coastal towns in order to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . Early on 15 December the fleet left port to raid the towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby . That evening , the German battle fleet of eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts and twelve dreadnoughts , including Oldenburg and her three sisters , came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . Skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet , so von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany , under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily . 
 The Battle of Dogger Bank , in which Vice Admiral David Beatty 's 1st and 2nd Battlecruiser Squadrons ambushed the I Scouting Group battlecruisers , occurred on 24 January 1915 . Oldenburg and the rest of I Squadron were sortied to reinforce the outnumbered German battlecruisers ; I Squadron left port at 12 : 33 CET , along with the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of II Squadron . They were too late , however , and they failed to locate any British forces . By 19 : 05 , the fleet had returned to the Schillig Roads outside Wilhelmshaven . In the meantime , the armored cruiser Blücher had been overwhelmed by concentrated British fire and sunk , while the battlecruiser Seydlitz was severely damaged by an ammunition fire . As a result , Kaiser Wilhelm II removed von Ingenohl from his post and replaced him with Admiral Hugo von Pohl on 2 February . 
 From 22 February to 13 March 1915 , I Squadron was in the Baltic for unit training . Following their return to the North Sea , the ships participated in a series of uneventful fleet sorties on 29 – 30 March , 17 – 18 April , 21 – 22 April , 17 – 18 May , and 29 – 30 May . The fleet was largely inactive until 4 August , when I Squadron returned to the Baltic for another round of training maneuvers . From there , the squadron was attached to the naval force that attempted to sweep the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces in August 1915 . The assault force included the eight I Squadron battleships , the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz , several light cruisers , 32 destroyers and 13 minesweepers . The plan called for channels in Russian minefields to be swept so that the Russian naval presence , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Slava , could be eliminated . The Germans would then lay minefields of their own to prevent Russian ships from returning to the Gulf . Oldenburg and the majority of the other big ships of the High Seas Fleet remained outside the Gulf for the entirety of the operation , to prevent possible intervention by the Russian fleet outside the Gulf . The dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen were detached on 16 August to escort the minesweepers and to destroy Slava , though they failed to sink the old battleship . After three days , the Russian minefields had been cleared , and the flotilla entered the Gulf on 19 August , but reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted a German withdrawal from the Gulf the following day . By 26 August , I Squadron had returned to Wilhelmshaven . 
 On 23 – 24 October , the High Seas Fleet undertook its last major offensive operation under the command of Admiral von Pohl , though it ended without contact with British forces . Weakened by hepatic cancer and unable to carry out his duties , he was replaced by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer in January . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the British Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . Scheer 's first operation was a sweep into the North Sea on 5 – 7 March , followed by two more on 21 – 22 March and 25 – 26 March . During his next operation , Oldenburg supported a raid on the English coast on 24 April 1916 conducted by the German battlecruiser force . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short gun duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Oldenburg was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . During the operation , Oldenburg was the fourth ship in the I Division of I Squadron and the twelfth ship in the line , directly astern of her sister ship Helgoland and ahead of Posen . At the center of the German line was I Squadron , behind the eight König- and Kaiser @-@ class battleships of III Squadron . The six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the III and IV Divisions , II Battle Squadron , formed the rear of the formation . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , the crew of the leading German battleship , König , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 At first , Oldenburg was too far away to effectively engage any British ships . Shortly before 18 : 30 , the German line came across the British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled earlier in the engagement . Naval historian John Campbell states that " Thüringen and Helgoland , and possibly Oldenburg and Posen , fired turret guns " , as well as secondary weapons , at Nestor . The ship was destroyed by several large explosions and sank at 18 : 35 ; most of her crew was rescued by German torpedo boats . Shortly after 19 : 15 , the British dreadnought Warspite came into range ; she was the first major warship Oldenburg could engage . She fired her 30 @.@ 5 cm guns briefly during the 180 @-@ degree turn ordered by Scheer to disengage from the British fleet . Oldenburg claimed to have straddled Warspite once , though her gunners had difficulty discerning the British battleship in the growing haze . 
 At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night cruising formation . Oldenburg was now the fifth ship , stationed toward the front of the 24 @-@ ship line . At around 01 : 10 , the German line encountered the six destroyers of the British 4th Destroyer Flotilla . Oldenburg fired on several of the destroyers at close range , including Fortune and Porpoise . Fortune scored a single hit on Oldenburg with her 4 @-@ inch guns . The shell struck a forward searchlight above the bridge and caused serious casualties . The officer responsible for directing the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns was killed , along with three other officers on the bridge . The helmsman was incapacitated and the ship 's commander , Captain <unk> , was wounded . Oldenburg was briefly steaming <unk> , and was in danger of ramming Posen and Helgoland until Captain <unk> managed to reach the wheel and take control of the ship . Oldenburg and several other battleships then took Ardent under fire ; the destroyer was reduced to a flaming wreck . In the darkness , Fortune and Ardent were sunk and the remaining four ships were scattered . 
 Despite the ferocity of the night fighting , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 4 : 00 on 1 June . A few hours later , the fleet arrived in the Jade ; Thüringen , Helgoland , Nassau , and Westfalen took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead and Kaiser , Kaiserin , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Kronprinz anchored just outside the entrance locks to Wilhelmshaven . Oldenburg and the other seven remaining dreadnoughts entered port , where those that were still in fighting condition restocked ammunition and fuel . In the course of the battle , Oldenburg fired fifty @-@ three 30 @.@ 5 cm , eighty @-@ eight 15 cm , and thirty 8 @.@ 8 cm shells . The hit from Fortune was the only damage the ship incurred from enemy action , though a misfire occurred in the Number 4 port @-@ side 15 cm gun . In total , Oldenburg 's crew suffered eight men killed and fourteen wounded . 
 = = = = Subsequent operations = = = = 
 After Jutland , Oldenburg was assigned to guard duties in the German Bight . The damage incurred at Jutland was quickly repaired in Wilhelmshaven from 30 June to 15 July . On 18 August , Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the 31 May operation . Moltke and Von der Tann , the two serviceable German battlecruisers , were supported by three dreadnoughts in a mission to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Oldenburg , would trail behind and provide cover . On the approach to the English coast , Scheer turned north and aborted the bombardment after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 On 25 – 26 September , Oldenburg and the rest of I Squadron covered an advance conducted by the II Führer der Torpedoboote ( Leader of Torpedo Boats ) to the Terschelling Bank . Scheer conducted another fleet operation on 18 – 20 October in the direction of the Dogger Bank , though again they failed to find British forces . For the majority of 1917 , Oldenburg was assigned to guard duty in the German Bight . During Operation Albion , the amphibious assault on the Russian @-@ held islands in the Gulf of Riga , Oldenburg and her three sisters were moved to the Danish straits to block any possible British attempt to intervene . On 28 October the four ships arrived in Putzig Wiek , and from there steamed to Arensburg on 29 October . On 2 November the operation was completed and Oldenburg and her sisters began the voyage back to the North Sea . A final abortive fleet sortie took place on 23 – 24 April 1918 . Scheer had intended to intercept a British convoy to Norway and destroy the escorting battleships . During the operation , the battlecruiser Moltke suffered mechanical problems and had to be towed back to port . Oldenburg took the ship in tow , and the main body of the fleet turned back to Germany while Hipper searched in vain for the convoy . German intelligence had incorrectly placed the date for the scheduled convoy on 24 April , and after several hours of fruitless steaming , Hipper turned for port as well . By 18 : 37 , the fleet was outside the Jade and Moltke had been repaired enough to allow her to enter port under her own power . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Oldenburg and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet . Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to improve Germany 's bargaining position , despite the expected casualties . But many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt that the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy " . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the most modern capital ships of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow , but Oldenburg , commanded by Hermann Bauer , and the rest of I Squadron remained in Germany . On the morning of 21 June 1919 , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and in their absence Reuter ordered the crews to scuttle the ten battleships and five battlecruisers interned at Scapa Flow . Oldenburg was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 and placed out of commission . The fate of the eight remaining German battleships was determined in the Treaty of Versailles , which stated that the ships were to be disarmed and surrendered to the governments of the principal Allied powers . She was surrendered to Japan as " M " on 13 May 1920 . The Japanese Navy had no need for the ship ; she was sold to a British ship @-@ breaking firm in June 1920 and broken up for scrap the following year in Dordrecht . 
 = Flow ( video game ) = 
 Flow ( stylized as flOw ) is an indie video game created by Jenova Chen and Nicholas Clark . Originally released as a free Flash game in 2006 to accompany Chen 's master 's thesis , it was reworked into a 2007 PlayStation 3 game by his development studio , thatgamecompany . SuperVillain Studios released a PlayStation Portable version of the game in 2008 , and PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita versions in 2013 . In Flow , the player navigates a series of two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) planes with an aquatic microorganism that evolves by consuming other microorganisms . The game 's design is based on Chen 's research into dynamic difficulty adjustment at the University of Southern California 's Interactive Media Division , and on psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 's theoretical concept of mental immersion or flow . 
 The Flash version of Flow received 100 @,@ 000 downloads within its first two weeks of release , and had been played over 3 @.@ 5 million times by 2008 . Its PlayStation 3 re @-@ release was the most downloaded game on the PlayStation Network in 2007 , and won the Best Downloadable Game award at the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards . It was nominated for awards by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) . Reviewers praised Flow 's visual and audio appeal , but noted the simplicity of its gameplay ; several considered it to be more of an art piece than a game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Flow , the player guides a small , multi @-@ segmented <unk> or snake @-@ like creature through an aquatic environment . There are no menus or guidelines ; the game begins immediately . The game world , which is viewed from a top @-@ down perspective , consists of two @-@ dimensional planes stacked vertically upon each other . A blurred version of the layer below appears in the background of each plane . Planes contain organisms of varying sizes ; the player 's creature automatically attempts to consume them when they are nearby . The majority of these creatures are non @-@ confrontational , and are composed of cells that increase the number of segments in the player 's creature when eaten . All planes , except for the highest and lowest , contain two specially colored organisms that move the player 's creature up or down one plane when touched . 
 Certain planes feature aggressive , multi @-@ segmented creatures that perish when all of their segments are eaten by the player 's creature ; however , they can eat segments of the player 's creature to regrow their own . These creatures release many cells upon death , which can restore the health of the player 's creature , temporarily increase the size of its mouth , or cause it to sprout decorative protrusions . Players are not required to eat these or any other organisms ; they may travel to higher or lower planes at any time . Being defeated by aggressive creatures does not result in death , but causes the player 's creature to float to a higher plane . In the Flash version , the player can replay the game with a jellyfish @-@ like organism by defeating an aggressive creature on the bottom plane . If the player reaches the bottom again , the creature there is their original worm @-@ like creature , and defeating it starts the game over as that organism . 
 = = = PlayStation versions = = = 
 The PlayStation 3 version of Flow features enhanced visuals and three additional playable organisms : one that can move with a short burst of speed , one that can paralyze other creatures , and one that lunges toward its prey 's weak point . The worm creature from the original game was given the ability to move faster , while the jellyfish may now create a vortex to attract small creatures . These special moves are activated by hitting any button on the controller . When the player reaches the bottom plane with each creature , the next creature type is unlocked and becomes selectable at the beginning of the game . The PlayStation 3 version features a multiplayer mode for up to four players ; a game in progress can be joined at any time , players may play different creatures if they desire so . The PlayStation Portable version contains all of the features introduced by PlayStation 3 version , but reduces the size of each plane . On November 20 , 2007 , the PlayStation 3 version received an add @-@ on pack that allows players joining a multiplayer game to select their creatures . The pack also includes new enemies , food types , and a playable creature with a shield ability . 
 = = Development = = 
 Flow was originally developed as part of Jenova Chen 's master 's thesis for the Interactive Media Program at the University of Southern California 's School of Cinematic Arts . His thesis was on the concept of dynamic difficulty adjustment ( DDA ) , wherein a game adjusts its reactions to a player based on the past and present actions of that player . He illustrated his ideas with Flow , which he created in collaboration with Nicholas Clark . Chen implemented DDA by causing the player to change the game 's difficulty subconsciously ; he allowed players to dive between planes at will , and provided the option of eating or not eating any creature . Players may decide to rush downwards , or to grow stronger before attacking powerful opponents . Chen described Flow as " a simple game . It 's the simplest test of active DDA . " Another influence on the game was psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 's work on flow , wherein a person fully immerses themselves in an activity and gains a feeling of energized focus . To achieve this state , the person or player must have control over the activity ; Chen believed that his DDA theory gave players the control necessary to achieve flow while playing . 
 The game was released in March 2006 , after two months of development — during which Chen and Clark taught themselves Flash programming . The game 's source code was later released in 2009 . The game 's score was composed by Austin Wintory . A PlayStation 3 version was announced for the PlayStation Store in May of that year , and was released in February 2007 . Chen had graduated by that point , and had founded Thatgamecompany , which handled the conversion to the PlayStation 3 ; Nicholas Clark was one of the employees and served as the game version 's designer . Impressed by Flow , Sony provided Thatgamecompany with finances , supplies , and additional staff , and offered them a three @-@ game contract ; the PlayStation 3 version of Flow was the first of these . Chen originally believed that the conversion could be completed in four months , and that it would be ready for the November 2006 launch of the PlayStation Network . However , when it was finally released in February 2007 , it did not include " half of the original design " . 
 A version for the PlayStation Portable , developed by SuperVillain Studios , was released in March 2008 . The company coded it from scratch , as the PlayStation 3 version 's code and art were too platform @-@ specific to reuse . The add @-@ on pack for the PlayStation 3 version was also developed by SuperVillain . Thatgamecompany was not involved in the development of either project beyond a design influence and art direction role , as they were creating their next title , Flower . Sony Santa Monica created ports of the PlayStation 3 game for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita , which were published in November 2013 to correspond with the release of the PlayStation 4 . Although no album of music specifically for Flow has been released , in 2012 Austin Wintory released Journey Bonus Bundle as a download @-@ only album on Bandcamp , containing variations on themes from Flow and Journey , a 2012 PlayStation 3 game by Thatgamecompany . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Flash version of Flow received 100 @,@ 000 downloads within its first two weeks of release . By July 2006 , it had been downloaded over 650 @,@ 000 times ; by February 2008 , it had been played over 3 @.@ 5 million times . Its PlayStation 3 re @-@ release was the most downloaded game on the PlayStation Network in 2007 . Flow received the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards nominations for the Innovation Award and Best Debut , and was presented with Best Downloadable Game . The game was nominated for the Best Downloadable Game of the Year award at the 2008 Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Interactive Achievement Awards , and for the Best Innovation award at the 2007 British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) awards . Its music garnered nominations for Best Interactive Score and Most Innovative Use of Audio from the Game Audio Network Guild , and won composer Austin Wintory the Rookie of the Year award . Flow was a finalist at the 2007 Slamdance Guerrilla Games Competition , but withdrew along with several other finalists after Super Columbine Massacre RPG ! was removed from the competition . In 2011 it was chosen through a public vote out of an initial selection of 240 to be one of 80 games showcased in a 2012 exhibit at the Smithsonian American Art Museum titled " The Art of Video Games " . 
 Flow received mixed reviews from critics , who focused on the game 's PlayStation versions . The visuals and presentation were among its most praised elements , with IGN 's Chris Roper calling them " one of Flow 's greatest strengths " . Alex Navarro of GameSpot agreed , saying that it was " hard to argue with those aesthetics " ; he lauded the use of color , the designs of the creatures , and the dynamic soundtrack . Will Freeman of VideoGamer.com called it " attractive and stylish " , which made the game " immensely satisfying to toy with " . Richard Leadbetter of Eurogamer claimed that the game 's main purpose was to " look pretty " and " sound cool " . 
 Reviewers were mixed in their opinions on the gameplay ; Roper said that " simply see [ ing ] what 's next " was enjoyable , but acknowledged that the game 's activities were limited beyond this aspect . Leadbetter went further , saying that Flow " feels like a tech demo in many ways " , and that its small amount of gameplay existed primarily " to act as a tour guide " through the visuals and audio . Freeman said that " it would not be unfair to describe Flow as empty and without substance . " Navarro concluded that Flow was enjoyable for the few hours needed to complete it , but that it lacked " a lasting gameplay experience " ; he attributed this to the game 's " heavy emphasis on aesthetics over gameplay " . Luke Mitchell of PALGN , however , felt that " anything more complicated would take away from the friendly nature of an experience of this type . " 
 Reviewers found the game to be largely unchallenging . Roper stated that " there really isn 't any sort of a challenge here " , particularly due to the player character 's inability to die ; Leadbetter summed up the game 's difficulty as " negligible " . However , when reviewing the PlayStation Portable version of the game , Justin <unk> of GameSpot took the view that " the game 's difficulty masterfully scales to match your skill level " , so that it does not become overly " frantic or frustrating " . Reviewers were universally dismissive of the multiplayer mode , with <unk> saying that " whatever it is , it 's not good " . Leadbetter called the PlayStation 3 version 's multiplayer " little more than an afterthought " , while Navarro said that it " doesn 't add a lick of depth to the experience " . 
 Overall , reviewers saw Flow as being more akin to an art piece than a game . Navarro called it an " arty piece of gaming " , and <unk> said that it had the " vibe of an art @-@ school project " . Leadbetter believed that it was more of an experiment than a traditional game , and described it as a " trippy ornament " . Freeman called it the PlayStation 3 's " first art @-@ house title " . Roper summarized Flow as " not so much a game as it is an experience " , and Mitchell claimed that it " tries to do something entirely unique and experimental , and on that level , it succeeds " . 
 = <unk> swellshark = 
 The blotchy swellshark , or Japanese swellshark , ( Cephaloscyllium umbratile ) is a common species of catshark , belonging to the family Scyliorhinidae . The <unk> swellshark is found at depths of 90 – 200 m ( 300 – 660 ft ) in the northwestern Pacific Ocean , from Japan to Taiwan . It is benthic in nature and favors rocky reefs . Reaching 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , this thick @-@ bodied shark has a broad head , large mouth , and two unequally @-@ sized dorsal fins positioned far back past the pelvic fins . It can be identified by its dorsal coloration , consisting of seven brown " saddles " and extensive darker mottling on a light tan background . This species has often been confounded with the draughtsboard shark ( C. isabellum ) and the Sarawak pygmy swellshark ( C. <unk> ) in scientific literature . 
 <unk> and opportunistic in feeding habits , the blotchy swellshark is known to consume numerous types of fishes and invertebrates , including an unusually high diversity of cartilaginous fishes . Like other Cephaloscyllium species , it is capable of rapidly inflating its body as a defense against predators . This species is oviparous , with females laying encapsulated eggs two at a time . There is no well @-@ defined breeding season and reproduction occurs year @-@ round . The eggs hatch after approximately one year . The blotchy swellshark is harmless and fares well in captivity . It is caught as bycatch in commercial bottom trawls , though its population does not seem to have suffered from fishing activity . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks sufficient information to assess its conservation status . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 American ichthyologists David Starr Jordan and Henry Weed Fowler described the blotchy swellshark in a 1903 volume of Proceedings of the United States National Museum , based on a 98 cm ( 39 in ) long stuffed dry skin originally obtained from Nagasaki , Japan . They gave it the specific epithet umbratile ( from the Latin <unk> , meaning " shaded " ) and assigned it to the genus Cephaloscyllium . 
