 The taxonomy of the blotchy swellshark has a history of confusion . The holotype dried skin could not be located when shark expert Stewart Springer prepared his 1979 review of the catsharks , and in its absence he synonymized C. umbratile with C. isabellum on the basis of " inconclusive morphometric differences " . Some authors followed Springer 's judgment while others , particularly in Japan , preferred to keep referring to C. umbratile . The taxonomy of this species was further muddled by the application of the name C. umbratile to a similar but smaller species sharing part of its range . This second species , once referred to as " pseudo @-@ umbratile " by Leonard Compagno , has since been identified as C. <unk> . Recently , the holotype was found again , and in 2008 Cephaloscyllium umbratile was re @-@ described as distinct from C. isabellum by Jayna Schaaf @-@ Da Silva and David Ebert . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The blotchy swellshark is known to inhabit the northwestern Pacific Ocean from Hokkaido , Japan southward to Taiwan , including the Yellow Sea . Its range may extend as far as New Guinea . This abundant species is a bottom @-@ dweller that inhabits rocky reefs on the continental shelf , at depths of 90 – 200 m ( 300 – 660 ft ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The maximum reported length of the blotchy swellshark is 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) . It has a firm , stout body with a soft , distensible abdomen , and a short , broad , flattened head . The snout is proportionately long and rounded , with large nostrils divided by short , triangular flaps of skin in front . The small , horizontally oval eyes are placed high on the head and equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . A tiny spiracle lies closely behind each eye . Behind the spiracle are five pairs of gill slits , which are short and become progressively smaller posteriorly . The capacious mouth forms a broad arch , and lacks furrows at the corners . The small teeth have a central cusp flanked by a smaller cusplet on both sides . There are around 59 tooth rows in the upper jaw and 62 tooth rows in the lower jaw . 
 The pectoral fins are moderately large and wide , with rounded tips . The dorsal fins have rounded apexes and are placed well back on the body , the first originating behind the midpoints of the small pelvic fins . The first dorsal fin is about twice as high as the second . The anal fin is nearly as large as the first dorsal fin and placed slightly ahead of the second dorsal fin . The caudal fin is large and broad , with the upper lobe longer than the lower and bearing a prominent ventral notch near the tip . The skin is thick and sparsely covered by large , well @-@ calcified dermal denticles ; each denticle has a diamond @-@ shaped crown with three horizontal ridges . This shark is cream @-@ colored with dark brownish to grayish mottling on the back and sides , and seven dark brown dorsal " saddles " on the body and tail . The mottling intensifies with age , while the saddles fade and may become obscured . Older sharks may also have a dark blotch on either side between the pectoral and pelvic fins . The underside is pale , with scant darker marks . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Like other members of its genus , when threatened the blotchy swellshark is capable of rapidly inflating its stomach with water or air . This allows the shark to wedge itself inside a rocky crevice , becoming extremely difficult to remove . This species is an opportunistic , highly voracious predator ; one recorded female 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long had 10 fish about 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long and 15 squid about 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long in her stomach . Predominantly piscivorous , this species is known to prey upon hagfish and at least 50 species of bony fishes , including fast @-@ swimming types that inhabit open water ; significant prey species include the mackerel Scomber japonicus , the sardine Sardinops <unk> , the filefish <unk> modestus , and the <unk> <unk> japonicus . Unusually for such a small shark , it also feeds on at least 10 species of cartilaginous fishes , including lantern sharks , catsharks ( particularly the cloudy catshark , Scyliorhinus torazame , and its eggs ) , the electric ray Narke japonica , and skates ( including their eggs ) . It also <unk> smaller members of its own species . Cephalopods , mostly the squid <unk> <unk> and the cuttlefish Sepia spp . , are also frequently taken , while crabs , shrimp , and isopods are occasionally consumed . The dietary composition of juveniles varies notably from place to place . 
 The blotchy swellshark is oviparous , and reproduction proceeds throughout the year with no obvious seasonal cycling . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional oviducts . The species is thought to be relatively prolific , as the ovary contains numerous ova at various stages of development . Pairs of eggs are laid at a time , one per oviduct . Females have been documented producing eggs even after years without male contact , suggesting that they may be able to store sperm . The purse @-@ shaped egg capsules are relatively large and thick , measuring around 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long and 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) across . The capsule surface is smooth with lengthwise striations , and opaque cream in color with yellow margins . Long , coiled tendrils extend from the four corners of the capsule . When the embryo is 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long , the external gills have been lost , the dermal denticles have begun to develop , and light brown saddles are present . The eggs take roughly one year to hatch ; newly emerged sharks measure 16 – 22 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 7 in ) long . From a series of captive rearing experiments , Sho Tanaka reported that hatchling sharks grew in length by up to 0 @.@ 77 mm ( 0 @.@ 03 in ) per day . Males and females attain sexual maturity at the size of 86 – 96 cm ( 34 – 38 in ) and 92 – 104 cm ( 36 – 41 in ) respectively ; the growth rate after maturity is very low . Known parasites of this species include the nematode <unk> <unk> , and the leech Stibarobdella macrothela . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the blotchy swellshark adapts readily to captivity and has reproduced in public aquariums . This species is caught incidentally by Japanese and Taiwanese bottom trawlers and brought to market . Intensive commercial fishing within its range do not yet appear to have impacted its numbers , but until more data are available the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Data Deficient . 
 = Ashley Massaro = 
 Ashley Marie Massaro ( born May 26 , 1979 ) is an American former professional wrestler , valet , former WWE Diva and current general manager signed to World Independent Ladies Division Wrestling . She is best known for her time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) under the ring name Ashley ( Massaro ) and for her appearance on Survivor : China . 
 Massaro made her debut in WWE after winning the WWE Diva Search in 2005 . Following an initial rivalry with Vince 's Devils – an alliance of female villains – she became the valet for the WWE Tag Team Champions Paul London and Brian Kendrick . Her most high profile matches were a WWE Women 's Championship match against Melina at WrestleMania 23 and a Playboy <unk> Lumberjill match at WrestleMania XXIV . She left WWE in mid @-@ 2008 . During her tenure in the company , she appeared on the covers of several magazines , including the April 2007 issue of Playboy . She has also made guest appearances on several television shows and performed in music videos . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Diva Search ( 2005 ) = = = = 
 Massaro initially found out about World Wrestling Entertainment 's ( WWE ) 2005 Raw Diva Search when she met a WWE casting director during a swimsuit pageant . After beating the seven other chosen finalists , Massaro was declared the winner on the August 15 , 2005 edition of Raw . Her winnings included $ 250 @,@ 000 and a one @-@ year contract with WWE . 
 = = = = Feud with Vince 's Devils and Mickie James ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 A week later on Raw , Candice Michelle and Torrie Wilson attacked Massaro after pretending to welcome her to Raw . Massaro 's storyline feud with Wilson and Michelle continued over the next couple weeks , as the duo , along with their enforcer Victoria ( dubbed as the " <unk> " by commentator Jim Ross ) , made things difficult for Massaro . Massaro made her in @-@ ring debut on the August 29 episode of Raw , in losing effort to Victoria . On the September 5 episode of Raw , Massaro was defeated by the evil Wilson due to interference from Victoria and Candice . Massaro evened the score on the September 12 , 2005 episode of Raw when she brought out the returning Trish Stratus , and the duo proceeded to attack the villains . On the September 18 episode of Raw , The pair defeated the trio — who became known as the Ladies in Pink ( and later Vince 's Devils ) . This led to a tag team match at Unforgiven , where the team of Stratus and Massaro defeated Wilson and Victoria . The following night on Raw , Massaro accompanied Trish where she defeated Wilson . After the match , The duo were attacked by The Vince Devils . The feud continued into WWE Homecoming , where Stratus and Massaro defeated Wilson , Candice , and Victoria in the first ever three on two Bra and Panties match by stripping all three of their opponents . Massaro continued to wrestle matches through the rest of 2005 and was involved in the annual Fulfill Your Fantasy Diva Battle Royal at Taboo Tuesday for her first shot at the WWE Women 's Championship . Massaro eliminated Candice Michelle before being eliminated by Victoria . At New Year 's Revolution in January , Massaro won the first ever Bra and Panties Gauntlet match by being the final Diva left still wearing her clothes . Following WWE tradition , to please the fans , she removed them herself before making her exit . 
 Through the early part of 2006 , Massaro became the victim of a series of attacks from Mickie James . At the Royal Rumble , James defeated Massaro with then Women 's Champion , Trish Stratus , as the special guest referee . Massaro got her revenge one week later by pinning James in the rematch on Raw . During the February 20 , 2006 edition of Raw , however , Massaro suffered a fractured left fibula while being eliminated from the Women 's Battle Royal , and her feud with James was cut short . She underwent surgery to insert a five @-@ inch metal plate and eight screws into her leg . During her recovery , Massaro still occasionally appeared on Raw as part of the Stratus / James feud , albeit in a non @-@ active role . Massaro returned on the March 20 , 2006 episode of Raw , being kidnapped by James to lure Stratus in to saving her but James was successful and attacked Stratus . 
 = = = = SmackDown ! ( 2006 @-@ 2007 ) = = = = 
 She returned to television on June 2 , now on SmackDown ! , as a special guest commentator during the Kristal Marshall versus Jillian Hall match . On the June 9 edition of SmackDown ! , Ashley defeated Kristal , Jillian Hall and Michelle McCool in a Bikini contest . Massaro later aligned herself with Hall , and they feuded with Michelle McCool and Marshall . Massaro won her SmackDown ! debut match on July 21 , when she teamed up with Hall to defeat McCool and Marshall . At The Great American Bash , Massaro won the Fatal Four @-@ Way Bra and Panties match by removing all of her opponents clothing . On the August 4 edition of SmackDown ! , Massaro broke her knuckle in a match against Marshall . 
 Massaro , Paul London , and Brian Kendrick defeated Idol Stevens , K.C. James and Michelle McCool in a Six @-@ Person Mixed Tag Team match . Following the victory , Massaro became the valet for London and Kendrick , accompanying them to the ring for their matches on SmackDown ! and pay @-@ per @-@ views . On the October 27 episode of SmackDown ! , Ashley participated in a Diva ’ s “ Trick or Treat Battle Royal which was won by Kristal . On the December 19 edition of SmackDown ! , Ashley teamed up with Layla in a winning effort defeating Jillian Hall and Kristal in a divas @-@ tag @-@ team match . On the January 2 edition of SmackDown ! , Ashley competed against Hall in a winning effort . On the January 26 episode of SmackDown ! , Ashley teamed up with London and Kendrick in a losing effort to the MNM ( Mercury & Nitro & Melina ) in a six @-@ person mixed @-@ tag @-@ team match . During the February 16 , 2007 edition of SmackDown ! , Massaro unveiled her Playboy cover . Surrounding the release of the magazine , Massaro engaged in a feud with Jillian Hall , who was jealous over the attention Massaro received due to the Playboy cover . At No Way Out , Massaro won the first ever Diva Invitational by removing her top to reveal her breasts which were covered with Playboy bunny pasties . 
 Massaro also began a feud with then WWE Women 's Champion , Raw 's Melina , who was angry over the publicity Massaro had been receiving because of the cover . On the March 9 episode of SmackDown ! , the rivalry was taken to the next level when a catfight broke out between the Divas on the inaugural edition of Miz TV . On the March 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Ashley teamed up with London and Kendrick in a losing effort to the MNM ( Mercury & Nitro & Melina ) in a six @-@ person mixed @-@ tag @-@ team match . On the March 23 episode of SmackDown ! , Ashley would get a catfight after Melina attempted to make an interference during <unk> and Paul 's match with MNM . On the March 26 episode of Raw , Ashley teamed up with Torrie Wilson and Candice Michelle in a winning effort defeating Melina , Hall and Victoria . At WrestleMania 23 , Massaro unsuccessfully challenged Melina for the WWE Women 's Championship in a <unk> match to retain her title . 
 After WrestleMania , Massaro continued as a valet for WWE Tag Team Champions Paul London and Brian Kendrick . In storyline , on the April 13 episode of SmackDown ! , Massaro was attacked by Jillian Hall . In reality , Massaro had loosened a screw in her ankle , which had been inserted the previous year after she legitimately fractured her tibia and fibula while in a battle royal . Massaro returned on the June 1 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , helping McCool defeat Hall after she distracted her . This return was short lived when on the June 8 edition of SmackDown ! , Massaro was suspended indefinitely after accidentally spilling Mr. McMahon 's coffee on him . In reality , Massaro was taking time off to participate on the show Survivor . 
 = = = = Various storylines and departure ( 2008 ) = = = = 
 Massaro returned on January 7 , 2008 to the Raw brand , winning a Divas Lingerie Pillow Fight against Maria , Jillian Hall , Melina , and Mickie James . On the January 14 episode of Raw , Ashley teamed up with Mickie James and Maria in a losing effort to the team of Beth Phoenix , Jillian Hall , and Melina in a 6 person @-@ tag @-@ team match . 
 Ashley began a storyline with Maria and Santino Marella at the January 21 , 2008 episode of Raw , attempting to convince Maria to pose for Playboy but was interrupted by Marella . At the Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ashley again attempted to convince Maria by telling her that Hugh Heffner wanted her to pose for Playboy before Maria could answer Marella interrupted and objected to the proposal . Ashley would then beat down Marella 's surprise Big Dick Johnson when he attempted to perform a strip tease . At the No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ashley would appear with Maria in a segment at the Playboy <unk> . On the March 24 , 2008 episode of Raw , Ashley interfered in the match between Maria and Melina . After the match , Santino Marella came down to the ring so Jerry “ The King ” Lawler ( whom was tired of Marella 's actions over previous weeks ) knocked Santino out of the ring . Which set up the six person mixed @-@ tag @-@ team match , in which they lost to Marella , Melina and Phoenix . Massaro replaced Candice Michelle , who was out with an injury , in the Playboy <unk> Lumberjack match at WrestleMania XXIV teaming up with Maria , losing to Beth Phoenix and Melina after the interference from Marella . 
 On the April 14 episode of Raw , Ashley teamed up with Maria in a losing effort to the team of Melina and Hall in a tag @-@ team match . Massaro also participated in a 12 Diva Tag Team match at Backlash , where Phoenix pinned her to get the win for her team . On the April 28 episode of Raw , Ashley competed in her last match by teaming up with Michelle McCool , Cherry , Kelly Kelly , Maria and James in a winning effort defeating Layla , Melina , Phoenix , Natalya , Hall and Victoria . Massaro was released from her WWE contract on July 9 , 2008 . A week prior to her release , she announced that she had asked to be let go from her contract due to her daughter being sick . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Survivor = = = 
 Massaro was a contestant on CBS 's Survivor : China in 2007 . Massaro approached the WWE with the idea of doing the show , and after going through the casting process , she found out she made the show ten days before she had to leave for China to film . Prior to the experience , Massaro had never been camping before , so to train for the show she had to get used to being outside . She was assigned to the Zhan Hu tribe in the first episode and quickly began quarreling with fellow contestant Dave <unk> . In the second episode , Massaro was voted off after six days with a 6 – 1 vote . 
 = = = Modeling and acting = = = 
 She has competed in Miss Hawaiian Tropic pageants and was crowned Miss Hawaiian Tropic USA in 2002 and Miss Hawaiian Tropic Canada in August 2004 . She has appeared in FHM , Stuff , Maxim , and on the cover of Playboy after joining WWE , though she had previously posed for Playboy in 2003 and 2004 . Massaro tried out for Playboy scouts when they were searching for models for the 50th Anniversary Playmate Hunt . She appeared in the accompanying pictorial in the December 2003 . In addition , she has appeared in both Femme Fatales and Flex magazines . Massaro has also hosted several E ! channel Wild On ! episodes and appeared on Breaking Bonaduce as Danny Bonaduce 's personal trainer . Massaro has guest starred on an episode of Extreme Makeover : Home Edition alongside WWE Superstars John Cena and Batista . In addition , she has appeared in campaign ads for both Hawaiian Tropic and Yamaha . 
 In February 2007 , Massaro and Glenn " Kane " Jacobs filmed an episode of the CW 's Smallville that aired on March 22 , 2007 . In April 2007 , Massaro also appeared as a guest on Fuse TV 's show The Sauce . On April 20 , 2007 , Massaro and several other Divas filmed Timbaland 's video , " Throw It on Me " featuring The Hives . In 2008 , she appeared in Rev Theory 's video for " Hell Yeah . " 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Massaro grew up in Babylon , New York , where her brother and father competed in amateur wrestling . She received her Bachelor of Science degree in Communication with a minor in Business from the State University of New York . 
 Massaro previously dated fellow wrestler Matt Hardy . Afterward , she dated wrestler Paul London . Massaro also had a relationship with Chuck Comeau of the band Simple Plan . 
 Massaro has one daughter , Alexa " Lexi " Massaro ( born July 23 , 2000 ) . When her daughter became sick in mid @-@ 2008 , Massaro asked for an early release from WWE to care for her . 
 She has several tattoos , including a black and pink nautical star on the back of both of her elbows ; a pink and red dragon surrounding kanji lettering that translates to ' Trust No One ' going down the right side of her torso ; symbols on the small of her lower back ; and a butterfly on her right hip . She also has several piercings , including a ' Monroe ' ( a piercing near the upper lip that resembles a beauty mark ) and ' <unk> ' ( a piercing on each side of the lower lip ) . 
 Massaro is a Christian . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Diving crossbody – 2005 – 2006 
 Hurricanrana – 2005 – 2008 
 Spear – 2005 – 2008 
 Starstruck ( Diving elbow drop , with theatrics ) – 2006 – 2008 
 Signature moves 
 Diving clothesline 
 Facebuster 
 Headscissors takedown 
 Hair @-@ pull whip 
 Monkey flip 
 Multiple pinning variations 
 Crucifix 
 La magistral 
 Roll @-@ up , sometimes from out of the corner 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Trish Stratus 
 Mickie James 
 Paul London and Brian Kendrick 
 Entrance themes 
 " Be Yourself " by Audioslave ( 2005 @-@ 2007 ) 
 " Light A Fire " by Jim Johnston ( 2007 @-@ 2008 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Diva Search ( 2005 ) 
 = Claverton Pumping Station = 
 Claverton Pumping Station in the village of Claverton , in the English county of Somerset , pumps water from the River Avon to the Kennet and Avon Canal using power from the flow of the River Avon . It is a grade II listed building . 
 The pumping station was built by John Rennie between 1809 and 1813 to overcome water supply problems on the canal . It uses a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 m ) wide wooden breastshot water wheel to drive two Boulton and Watt 18 @-@ foot ( 5 m ) long cast iron rocking beams , which power lift pumps to raise water 48 feet ( 15 m ) up to the canal . The pumping station has undergone several modifications since its initial construction , including revising the wheel into two sections each 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide separated by a 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) gap . The station 's operational life ended in 1952 , by which time its maintenance and repair had become uneconomical in the light of falling traffic on the canal . 
 In the 1960s and 1970s restoration was carried out by students from the University of Bath and the Kennet and Avon Canal Trust , who replaced and repaired the buildings and equipment and returned the pumping station to a functional state by 1978 . It is now operated by volunteers from the Trust , open to the public as an industrial heritage museum . 
 = = Description = = 
 At Claverton , the Kennet and Avon Canal is cut into the side of the Avon valley 48 feet ( 15 m ) above the River Avon . The pumping station is located in a pump house built of Bath Stone , located at river level and separated from the canal by the Wessex Main Line . It was designed by John Rennie and built by Fox of Bristol . The pump house has a slate hipped roof . The wheelhouse projects to the west of the pump house and has weatherboard sides . The east gable wall has three doors allowing access to the wheel itself . 
 Water is diverted from the river by Warleigh Weir , about 200 yards ( 183 m ) upstream . The water flows to the pumping station down a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide leat , which is crossed by a single segmental arch bridge with a central keystone . The water passes over depressing sluices which can be raised or lowered by hand cranking , and then powers a breastshot water wheel . The 24 @-@ foot ( 7 m ) wide wheel is in two sections each 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide and 17 feet ( 5 m ) in diameter with a 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) gap between them . The wheel has 48 wooden " starts " , supporting 96 float boards each of which is 13 inches ( 33 cm ) by 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) by 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) and made of <unk> . The breastshot wheel is vertically mounted , and falling water strikes the blades . <unk> wheels are less efficient than overshot wheels , more efficient than undershot wheels , and are not <unk> . 
 At full power the wheel uses 2 tons ( 2 tonnes ) of water per second and rotates five times a minute . The water wheel drives a flexible coupling to a pit wheel with a diameter of 16 feet 3 inches ( 4 @.@ 95 m ) , which has 408 hand @-@ fitted wooden teeth that mesh with a 5 feet 1 inch ( 1 @.@ 55 m ) cast iron gear , increasing the speed to 16 rpm . From there , cranks drive vertical connecting rods that transfer the energy to two 18 @-@ foot ( 5 m ) long cast iron rocking beams made by Boulton and Watt . Each rocking beam drives an 18 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) diameter lift pump , which also takes its supply from the mill leat . Each pump stroke raises 50 imperial gallons ( 230 litres ) of water to the canal via 150 feet ( 46 m ) of 19 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 48 m ) diameter cast iron pipe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The idea of an east to west waterway link across southern England was first mentioned in Elizabethan times , between 1558 and 1603 , to take advantage of the proximity of the rivers Avon and Thames , only 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) apart at their closest . Plans for a waterway were shelved until the early 18th century . In 1723 the Kennet Navigation through Reading opened . The Avon navigation from Bristol to Bath was opened in 1727 . In 1788 the so @-@ called " Western Canal " was proposed to improve trade and communication links to towns such as Hungerford , Marlborough , Wiltshire , Calne , Chippenham and Melksham . The following year the engineers Barns , Simcock and Weston submitted a proposed route for this canal , although there were doubts about the adequacy of the water supply . The name was changed from Western Canal to Kennet and Avon Canal to avoid confusion with the Grand Western Canal , which was being proposed at the same time . 
 In 1793 a further survey was conducted by John Rennie , and the route of the canal was altered to take a more southerly course through Great Bedwyn , Devizes , Trowbridge and Newbury . The proposed route was accepted by the Kennet and Avon Canal Company . In July 1793 Rennie suggested further alterations to the route , including the construction of the Bruce Tunnel in the Savernake Forest . On 17 April 1794 the Kennet and Avon Canal Act received the Royal Assent and construction began . 
 The new route added several locks to the canal , making water supply problems more severe . Because of the way the system of locks work , water is lost from the upper part of a canal each time a vessel passes through . This is a particular issue for the pound between Bradford Lock at Bradford on Avon and the Bath Locks , where a series of locks need to be opened each time the gates are opened . Most lock gates are not watertight , therefore some water leaks from the higher levels of the canal to those lower down . The water has to be replaced , or eventually the upper levels of the canal would not hold enough water to be navigable . Canals are usually fed by diverting water from streams and rivers into the upper parts of the canal , but if no suitable source is available or sufficient , a pumping station , such as the one at Claverton , can be used to maintain the water level . Crofton Pumping Station was built to supply water to the summit pound of the canal , opening in 1810 but , unlike Claverton , was powered by steam . 
 Protracted negotiations over water rights with the owners of Saltford Brass Mill and around 30 other mills on the river between Bath and Bristol , delayed construction until 1809 ; the wheel was installed in March 1810 . Further delays relating to obtaining specific items of machinery meant that the pumping station did not open until early 1813 , and until then boats were prohibited from using Bath Locks during periods of low rainfall . 
 = = = Operation and decline = = = 
 The pumping station operated continuously , providing water for the increasing traffic on the canal . Problems with the size of the water wheel , which was supported at either end , meant that the middle of the wheel sagged , putting strain on the bearings and stays . In the 1840s the <unk> was changed from stays to tension rods to strengthen and lighten the wheel , along with improvements to the pumps . The changes to the wheel were unsuccessful , and in the 1850s a central bearing was added dividing the wheel in two . 
 The opening of the Great Western Railway in 1841 led to a significant decline in the canal 's traffic , even though the canal company lowered tariffs . In 1852 the railway company took over the canal 's operation . In 1877 the canal recorded a deficit of £ 1 @,@ 920 and never subsequently made any profit . The Somerset Coal Canal and Wilts and Berks Canal , which each supplied some of the trade to the Kennet and Avon , including freight from the Somerset coalfield , closed in 1904 and 1906 respectively . At Claverton various minor repairs were needed to the wheel and pump , and the wheel had to be levelled at regular intervals during the later part of the 19th and early 20th centuries . The 408 " green oak " teeth on the pitwheel also had to be replaced several times . 
 In 1926 , following a loss of £ 18 @,@ 041 the previous year , the Great Western Railway sought to close the canal by obtaining a Ministry of Transport Order , but the move was resisted and the company charged with improving its maintenance of the canal . After the Second World War the Transport Act of 1947 meant that control of the canal passed to the British Transport Commission , but by the 1950s large sections had been closed because of poor lock maintenance following a breach in the bank west of the Avoncliff Aqueduct . Claverton Pumping Station ceased operation in 1952 , after the failure of a number of the pitwheel 's oak teeth . The British Transport Commission installed a 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) centrifugal pump to maintain the statutory minimum water level . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 After its closure the pumping station lay derelict until the late 1960s , when the Kennet and Avon Canal Trust proposed to the British Waterways Board that students from the University of Bath conduct a survey and report on the viability of returning the pumping station to working order . Work started in 1969 with engineering students from Bath providing the labour under the supervision of John Butt , and the Trust providing the funding . Within the building rotten woodwork was replaced and electric lighting installed . To work on the sluices and the waterwheel the leat was dammed . Specialist wood and metal work was undertaken by apprentices from the British Aircraft Corporation in Filton . By 1972 some progress had been made ; John Butt retired and Derrick Dudden took over as restoration manager , with more volunteers from the Canal Trust helping to provide the labour . Silt was removed from the pond , hatches replaced and the waterwheel restored . The 408 oak teeth on the pitwheel were replaced and the pumps overhauled with new rope packing . By February 1976 all the machinery was working and water could be pumped from the river to the canal . The pumping station was formally re @-@ opened in 1978 . 
 In 1981 , British Waterways installed two 75 @-@ horsepower ( 56 kW ) electric pumps and presented the old diesel pump to the Kennet and Avon Canal Trust for preservation . Wessex Water Authority agreed to the extraction of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 l ) per day from the Avon at Claverton to be pumped east ; the costs of the pumps was £ 175 @,@ 000 . 
 The pumping station is maintained by volunteers from the Trust and is open to the public every Wednesday , Saturday , Sunday and Bank Holiday except during the winter maintenance period , when opening is only on Saturdays . There is a working model of the pumping station at the Kennet & Avon Canal Museum at Devizes . The restoration work received an Engineering Heritage Award from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers . 
 = The Slim Shady LP = 
 The Slim Shady LP is the second and major @-@ label debut studio album by American rapper Eminem . It was released on February 23 , 1999 , under Interscope Records and Dr. Dre 's Aftermath Entertainment . Recorded in Ferndale , Michigan following Eminem 's recruitment by Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine , the album features production from Dr. Dre , the Bass Brothers , and Eminem himself . The majority of the record 's lyrical content is written from the perspective of the rapper 's alter ego Slim Shady , whom the rapper created on Slim Shady EP ( 1997 ) . The lyrics are noted for their over @-@ the @-@ top depictions of violence and heavy use of profanity . 
 The album was met with both critical and commercial success ; critics praised Eminem for his unique lyrical style , and the record debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart behind TLC 's FanMail with 283 @,@ 000 copies sold in its opening week . The first official single , " Just Don 't Give a Fuck " , did not enter the " Billboard " Hot 100 but at least did enter the " Bubbling Under " Hot 100 , peaking at number 14 , which is equivalent to 114 . The second official single , " My Name Is " , peaked at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming his first entry on that chart . The Slim Shady LP went on to be certified quadruple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The record won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album , and in 2012 , the album was ranked number 275 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 The Slim Shady LP turned Eminem from an underground rapper into a high @-@ profile celebrity . Interscope Records awarded him with his own record label , Shady Records , and he embarked on an extensive touring schedule to promote the album . In the summer of 1999 , the rapper frequently performed on the Vans Warped Tour and in hip @-@ hop clubs . He also became a highly controversial figure due to his lyrical content , which some perceived to be misogynistic and a negative influence on American youth . 
 = = Background = = 
 Eminem , born Marshall Bruce Mathers III , began rapping at age fourteen . In 1996 , his debut album Infinite , which was recorded at the <unk> , a recording studio owned by the Bass Brothers , was released under their independent label Web Entertainment . Infinite achieved very little commercial success and was largely ignored by Detroit radio stations . The disappointment from this experience greatly influenced his lyrical style : " After that record , every rhyme I wrote got angrier and angrier . A lot of it was because of the feedback I got . <unk> was like , ' You 're a white boy , what the fuck are you rapping for ? Why don 't you go into rock & roll ? ' All that type of shit started pissing me off . " After the release of Infinite , Eminem 's personal struggles and abuse of drugs and alcohol culminated in a suicide attempt . 
 The disappointment of Infinite inspired Eminem to create the alter ego Slim Shady : " Boom , the name hit me , and right away I thought of all these words to rhyme with it . " Slim Shady served as Eminem 's vent for his frustrations , and in the spring of 1997 , he recorded the eight @-@ song extended play the Slim Shady EP . During this time , Eminem and his girlfriend Kim Scott lived in a high @-@ crime neighborhood with their newborn daughter Hailie , where their house was burglarized numerous times . After being evicted from his home , Eminem traveled to Los Angeles to participate in the Rap Olympics , an annual nationwide rap battle competition . He placed second , and the staff at Interscope Records who attended the Rap Olympics sent a copy of The Slim Shady EP to company CEO Jimmy Iovine . Iovine played the tape for record producer Dr. Dre , founder of Aftermath Entertainment . Dr. Dre recalled , " In my entire career in the music industry , I have never found anything from a demo tape or a CD . When Jimmy played this , I said , ' Find him . Now . ' " Eminem and Dr. Dre subsequently began work on Eminem 's major label debut album . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Slim Shady LP was recorded at Studio 8 at 430 8 Mile Road in Ferndale , Michigan . Eminem , who had idolized Dr. Dre since listening to his group N.W.A as a teenager , was nervous to work with him on the album : " I didn 't want to be starstruck or kiss his ass too much ... I 'm just a little white boy from Detroit . I had never seen stars , let alone Dr. Dre . " However , Eminem became more comfortable working with Dr. Dre after a series of highly productive recording sessions . The recording process generally began with Dr. Dre creating a beat and Eminem using the tracks as a template for his freestyle raps ; " Every beat he would make , I had a rhyme for " , Eminem recalled . He later said : " Every time I sat down with a pen , everything was just like : fuck you , fuck this , fuck them , fuck that , fuck the world , fuck what everybody thinks . Fuck them . " " On the first day of recording , Eminem and Dr. Dre finished " My Name Is " in an hour . Three other songs , including " Role Model " , were also recorded that day . 
 " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " , which was formerly featured on the Slim Shady EP as " Just the Two of Us " , was rerecorded for The Slim Shady LP to feature his daughter Hailie 's vocals . Because the song focuses on disposing of his girlfriend 's corpse , Eminem was not comfortable with explaining the situation to Kim , and instead told her that he would be taking Hailie to Chuck E. Cheese 's . However , he really took her to the recording studio . He explained , " When she found out I used our daughter to write a song about killing her , she fucking blew . We had just got back together for a couple of weeks . Then I played her the song and she bugged the fuck out . " Eminem also said , " When she ( Hailie ) gets old enough , I 'm going to explain it to her . I 'll let her know that Mommy and Daddy weren 't getting along at the time . None of it was to be taken too literally , although at the time I wanted to fucking do it . " The song " Guilty Conscience " contains a humorous reference to an occasion in which Dr. Dre assaulted rapper Dee Barnes . Having only known Dr. Dre for a few days , Eminem was anxious about how he would react to such a line , and to his relief , Dr. Dre " fell out of his chair laughing " upon hearing the lyric . " Ken Kaniff " , a skit involving a prank call to Eminem , featured fellow Detroit rapper Aristotle . After a falling out between the two in the wake of Eminem 's breakthrough success , Eminem instead played Ken Kaniff on skits on future albums . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Many of the songs from The Slim Shady LP are written from the perspective of Eminem 's alter ego , Slim Shady , and contain cartoonish and over @-@ the @-@ top depictions of violence , which he refers to as " made @-@ up tales of trailer @-@ park stuff " . The rapper explained that this subject matter is intended for entertainment value , likening his music to the horror film genre : " Why can 't people see that records can be like movies ? The only difference between some of my raps and movies is that they aren 't on a screen . " Some of the lyrics have also been considered to be misogynistic by critics and commentators . Eminem acknowledged the accusations , and clarified , " I have a fairly salty relationship with women ... But most of the time , when I 'm saying shit about women , when I 'm saying ' bitches ' and ' hoes ' , its so ridiculous that I 'm taking the stereotypical rapper to the extreme . I don 't hate women in general . They just make me mad sometimes . ' " Despite the record 's explicit nature , Eminem refused to say the word " nigga " on the album , with the rapper noting , " It 's not in my vocabulary . " The Slim Shady LP begins with a " Public Service Announcement " introduction performed by producer Jeff Bass of the Bass Brothers , and serves as a sarcastic disclaimer discussing the album 's explicit lyrical content . Later in the album , a skit entitled " Paul " features a phone call from Paul Rosenberg to Eminem telling him to " tone down " his lyrics . 
 " Guilty Conscience " is a concept song featuring Dr. Dre . The song focuses on a series of characters who are faced with various situations , while Dr. Dre and Eminem serve as the " angel " and " devil " sides of the characters ' conscience , respectively . The song draws inspiration from a scene in the 1978 comedy film National Lampoon 's Animal House , in which a man takes advice from an angel and devil on his shoulder while considering raping an unconscious girl at a party . In the film , he ends up deciding not to go through with the rape , but in " Guilty Conscience " , the outcome is unclear . On " My Fault " , Eminem tells the story of a girl who overdoses on psychedelic mushrooms at a rave . " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " features Eminem convincing his infant daughter to assist him in disposing of his wife 's corpse . It is an epilogue to the song " Kim " , although " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " was released first . Eminem wrote the song at a time in which he felt that Kim was stopping him from seeing his daughter . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic explained that " There have been more violent songs in rap , but few more disturbing , and it 's not because of what it describes , it 's how he describes it -- how the perfectly modulated phrasing enhances the horror and black humor of his words . " On the song " Brain Damage " , Eminem discusses his childhood experiences with bullies at school . 
 Although many of the lyrics on the album are intended to be humorous , several songs depict Eminem 's frustrations with living in poverty . When discussing The Slim Shady LP , Anthony <unk> of Rolling Stone described Eminem as " probably the only MC in 1999 who boasts low self @-@ esteem . His rhymes are jaw @-@ droppingly perverse , <unk> a minimum @-@ wage life devoid of hope , flushed with rage and weaned on sci @-@ fi and slasher flicks . " Eminem was inspired to write " Rock Bottom " after being fired from his cooking job at a restaurant days before his daughter 's birthday . The song bemoans human dependency on money , discussing its ability to brainwash an individual . He illustrates his struggles to provide for his daughter , describing himself as " discouraged , hungry , and malnourished . " " If I Had " follows a similar theme , as he describes living on minimum wage and remarks that he is " tired of jobs starting off at $ 5 @.@ 50 an hour " . In the song , he expresses his irritation with fitting the " white trash " stereotype . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The album 's production was handled primarily by the Bass Brothers , Dr. Dre , and Eminem . The beats have been compared to West Coast hip hop and G @-@ funk musical styles . Kyle Anderson of MTV wrote that " The beats are full of bass @-@ heavy hallucinations and create huge , scary sandboxes that allow Em to play . " According to the staff at IGN , " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " is backed by the " lulling serenity of a super silky groove " . " Cum on Everybody " ; which features guest vocals from American singer Dina Rae contains an upbeat dance rhythm , while " My Name Is " , which is built around a piano sample from British musician Labi Siffre 's " I Got The " , features a prominent bassline and psychedelic @-@ style keyboards . " I 'm Shady " was originally written over a Sade track , but after hearing a sample of Curtis Mayfield 's " <unk> " in Ice @-@ T 's song " I 'm Your Pusher " , Eminem decided it would be more fitting to use " <unk> " . 
 Eminem 's vocal inflection on the record has been described as a " nasal whine " ; Jon Pareles of The New York Times likened his " calmly sarcastic delivery " to " the early Beastie Boys turned cynical " . Writing for the Chicago Tribune , columnist Greg Kot compared the rapper 's vocals to " Pee @-@ wee Herman with a nasal Midwestern accent " . A skit entitled " Lounge " appears before " My Fault " featuring Eminem and the Bass Brothers imitating rat pack crooners . Jeff Bass came up with the line " I never meant to give you mushrooms " for the skit , which in turn inspired Eminem to write " My Fault " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial response = = = 
 In the album 's first week of release , The Slim Shady LP sold 283 @,@ 000 copies , debuting at number two on the Billboard 200 chart behind TLC 's FanMail . The record remained on the Billboard 200 for 100 weeks . It also reached number one on the R & B / Hip Hop Albums chart , staying on the chart for 92 weeks . On April 5 , 1999 , The Slim Shady LP was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over one million copies . On November 15 , 2000 , the album was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA . " My Name Is " , the album 's lead single , peaked at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 , remaining on the chart for ten weeks . The single additionally peaked at number 18 on the magazine 's R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , 29 on the Pop Songs chart , and 37 on the Alternative Songs chart . " Guilty Conscience " reached number 56 on the Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , while " Just Don 't Give a Fuck " peaked at number 62 on the chart . By November , 2013 , the album sold 5 @,@ 437 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Outside of the United States , The Slim Shady LP reached number nine on the weekly Canadian Albums Chart and remained on the chart for twelve weeks . Additionally , the album was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 200 @,@ 000 units . The record was also certified double platinum in the United Kingdom , where it peaked at number ten on the UK Albums chart and remained on the chart for a total of 114 weeks . In Australia , the album peaked at number 49 on the ARIA Chart , and was eventually certified platinum in the country . The album was also certified gold in the Netherlands and New Zealand , where it peaked at the number 20 and 23 chart positions , respectively . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album was met with generally positive reviews . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the album five stars out of five , praising the rapper 's " expansive vocabulary and vivid imagination " , adding that " Years later , as the shock has faded , it 's those lyrical skills and the subtle mastery of the music that still resonate , and they 're what make The Slim Shady LP one of the great debuts in both hip @-@ hop and modern pop music . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly described the album 's " unapologetic outrageousness " as a reaction to the " soul positivity " of conscious hip hop , noting that " The Slim Shady LP marks the return of irreverent , <unk> attitude to the genre , heard throughout the album in its nonstop barrage of crudely funny rhymes ... Even pop fans deadened to graphic lyrics are likely to flinch . " Soren Baker of the Los Angeles Times gave the album three and a half stars out of four and stated that " He isn 't afraid to say anything ; his lyrics are so clever that he makes murder sound as if it 's a funny act he may indulge in simply to pass the time " but lamented the " sometimes flat production that takes away from the power of Eminem 's verbal mayhem . " 
 Many reviewers commented on the album 's lyrical content . Gilbert Rodman of Popular Communications states , " Eminem 's music contains more than its fair share of misogynistic and homo @-@ phobic lyrics , but simply to reduce it to these ( as many critics do ) doesn 't help to explain Eminem . It merely invokes a platitude or a sound bite to explain him away . " Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone enjoyed the record 's comedic nature , writing " Simply put : Eminem will crack you up " , but also felt that the misogynistic lyrics grow tiresome , noting that " the wife @-@ killing jokes of " 97 Bonnie and Clyde ' aren 't any funnier than Garth Brooks ' , and ' My Fault ' belongs on some sorry @-@ ass Bloodhound Gang record . " Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club felt that although the album is " sophomoric and uninspired " at times , Eminem 's " surreal , <unk> , trailer @-@ trash / post @-@ gangsta @-@ rap extremism is at least a breath of fresh air in a rap world that 's despairingly low on new ideas . " Mike Rubin of Spin noted that " his scenarios are so far @-@ fetched the songs almost never sound as ugly as they actually are . " Chris Dafoe of The Globe and Mail opined that " Abused by fellow students and teachers , cheated on by his girlfriend , despised by society , Shady goes over the top now and then - or rather way over the top - but Dre 's lean production , full of strange voice and comic interjections , hold things together . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Rolling Stone Magazine ranked The Slim Shady LP number 273 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " and 33 on its list of the " 100 Best Albums of the ' 90s " . At the 42nd Grammy Awards in 2000 , the record won Best Rap Album , while " My Name Is " won Best Rap Solo Performance . " Ken Kaniff " was listed as number 15 on Complex 's " 50 Greatest Hip @-@ Hop Skits " list , while the " Public Service Announcement " introduction to the album , along with the " Public Service Announcement 2000 " introduction from The Marshall Mathers LP , was listed as number 50 on the list . It also won Outstanding National Album at the 2000 Detroit Music Awards . In 2015 , it was ranked at number 76 by About.com in their list of " 100 best hip @-@ hop albums of all time " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the success of The Slim Shady LP , Eminem went from an underground rapper into a high @-@ profile celebrity . Interscope Records awarded him with his own record label , Shady Records ; the first artist Eminem signed was rapper and his best friend Proof . Eminem , who had previously struggled to provide for his daughter , noted a drastic change in his lifestyle : " This last Christmas , there were so many fucking presents under the tree ... My daughter wasn 't born with a silver spoon in her mouth . But she 's got one now . I can 't stop myself from spoiling her . " 
 To promote The Slim Shady LP , Eminem embarked on an extensive tour schedule . He joined the Vans Warped Tour as a last @-@ minute replacement for Cypress Hill , a schedule that included 31 North American dates from June 25 to July 31 , beginning in San Antonio and ending in Miami . He often played a show in the afternoon on the Warped Tour , and then drove to another location to perform at a hip hop club at night . During a performance in Hartford , Connecticut near the end of the Warped Tour , Eminem slipped on a puddle of liquid and fell ten feet down off the stage , cracking several ribs . He recalled that the stress of his newfound fame led him to drink excessively , and reflected , " I knew I had to slow it down . The fall was like a reminder . " However , after receiving medical attention , he was well enough to travel to New York the following day for a performance on Total Request Live . 
 Eminem also became a highly controversial figure due to his lyrical content . He was labeled as " misogynist , a nihilist and an advocate of domestic violence " , and in an editorial by Billboard editor in chief Timothy White , the writer accused Eminem of " making money by exploiting the world 's misery . " During a radio appearance in San Francisco , Eminem reportedly angered local DJ Sista Tamu due to a freestyle about " slapping a pregnant bitch " to the extent that she broke a copy of The Slim Shady LP on @-@ air . The rapper defended himself by saying , " My album isn 't for younger kids to hear . It has an advisory sticker , and you must be eighteen to get it . That doesn 't mean younger kids won 't get it , but I 'm not responsible for every kid out there . I 'm not a role model , and I don 't claim to be . " 
 = = Lawsuits = = 
 On September 17 , 1999 , Eminem 's mother , Deborah Nelson , filed a $ 10 million lawsuit against him for slander based on his claim that she uses drugs in the line " I just found out my mom does more dope than I do " from " My Name Is " . After a two @-@ year @-@ long trial , she was awarded $ 25 @,@ 000 , of which she received $ 1 @,@ 600 after legal fees . Eminem was not surprised that his mother had filed the lawsuit against him , referring to her as a " lawsuit queen " , and alleging that " That 's how she makes money . When I was five , she had a job on the cash register at a store that sold chips and soda . Other than that , I don 't remember her working a day in her life . " She later filed another lawsuit against him for emotional damages suffered during the first trial , which was later dismissed . 
 In December 2001 , DeAngelo Bailey , a janitor living in Roseville , Michigan who was made the subject of the song " Brain Damage " in which he is portrayed as a school bully , filed a $ 1 million lawsuit against Eminem for slander and invasion of privacy . Bailey 's attorney stated " Eminem is a Caucasian male who faced criticism within the music industry that he had not suffered through difficult circumstances growing up and he was therefore a ' pretender ' in the industry ... Eminem used Bailey , his African @-@ American childhood schoolmate , as a pawn in his effort to stem the tide of criticism . " In 1982 , Eminem 's mother unsuccessfully sued the Roseville school district for not protecting her son , as she claimed that attacks from bullies caused him headaches , nausea , and antisocial behavior . Additionally , Bailey had previously admitted to bullying Eminem in the April 1999 issue of Rolling Stone . The lawsuit was later dismissed by a judge in 2003 , who rapped in her explanation that the lyrics — which include the school principal collaborating with Bailey , and Eminem 's entire brain falling out of his head — were too exaggerated for a listener to believe that they were recalling an actual event . The verdict was upheld in 2005 , and Bailey 's lawyer ruled out any further appeals . 
 In September 2003 , 70 @-@ year @-@ old widow <unk> Stein filed suit against Eminem and Dr. Dre on the grounds that " Guilty Conscience " contains an unauthorized sample of " Go Home Pigs " composed for the film Getting Straight by her husband , Ronald Stein , who died in 1988 . Although the album 's liner notes state that the song contains an " interpolation " of " Go Home Pigs " , Stein is not credited as a composer and his wife was not paid royalties for use of the song . The lawsuit requested for 5 percent of the retail list price of 90 percent of the all copies of the record sold in America , and 2 @.@ 5 percent of the retail price of 90 percent of the copies of the album sold internationally . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " Bitch " , " Cum On Everybody " , " Just Don 't Give a Fuck " and " Still Don 't Give a Fuck " are retitled " Zoe " , " Come on Everybody " , " Just Don 't Give " and " Still Don 't Give " on the clean version of the album . 
 " If I Had " loosely references the melody to the chorus of " If I Had $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 " by Barenaked Ladies 
 " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " is a merged version of Slim Shady EP 's " Mommy ( skit ) " and " Just the Two of Us " , albeit with a different backing track for the latter 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Anna Howard Shaw Day = 
 " Anna Howard Shaw Day " is the thirteenth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 71st episode of the series overall . It was written by supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Ken Whittingham . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on February 11 , 2010 . Elizabeth Banks , Jon Hamm , <unk> Jackson , Douglas Rees , Horatio Sanz , Jason Sudeikis , and Dean Winters guest star in this episode , and there is a cameo appearance by musician Jon Bon Jovi . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) schedules a dentist appointment on Valentine 's Day to avoid feeling lonely on the holiday . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) meets a successful and attractive CNBC host ( Banks ) . Elsewhere , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) is frustrated when her stalker ( Sanz ) finally loses interest . 
 " Anna Howard Shaw Day " was generally , though not universally , well received among television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 6 @.@ 004 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . For his work in this episode , Matt Hubbard received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 TGS with Tracy Jordan head writer Liz Lemon is due for a root canal . To avoid feeling lonely on Valentine 's Day , she schedules her surgery for that day , but soon realizes she will need someone to escort her home from the dentist 's office due to the aftereffects of anesthesia . She asks her colleagues at the 30 Rock building for a ride home , but all of them have Valentine 's Day plans and cannot help . When Liz calls the dentist 's office to say she does not have anyone to pick her up , the receptionist ( <unk> Jackson ) informs her that after her procedure she can only leave alone if she signs a liability waiver . Liz initially intends to sign the document , but is dissuaded at a party by Jon Bon Jovi , and instead decides to claim to the receptionist that she has a ride home after all . 
 Jack Donaghy , who is Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for General Electric , makes an appearance on the fictional CNBC show The Hot Box . During the appearance , Jack interacts with the show 's host , Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) , with the two flirting during the broadcast . Avery and Jack share Republican viewpoints , and she asks him out for a drink after the show , which he accepts . They eventually embark on a number of both successful and unsuccessful dates . During one of those dates , Jack invites her to a TGS VIP party he has hastily staged , whereupon he enlists the help of musician Jon Bon Jovi — at the time NBC 's real @-@ life Artist in Residence — to come over and talk to them , in an effort to impress the successful Avery . When Bon Jovi approaches them , though , Jack disregards him due to his own intriguing conversation with Avery , which impresses her even more . After the TGS party , the two go back to Jack 's apartment and end up sleeping together . 
 Elsewhere Jenna begins to worry that her stalker , Maynard Roger Hoynes ( Horatio Sanz ) , has lost interest in her . Jenna tracks down Maynard and her suspicions are confirmed , after he tells her that his therapist encouraged him to stop his obsession with her and move forward . Later , in the 30 Rock building , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) finds Jenna upset in her dressing room . She tells him why she is in that state and shows him letters that Maynard sent to her in the past . Kenneth , however , is confused as to why Jenna misses her stalker , leading her to reveal that Maynard has been the longest relationship she has ever had . The next day , Jenna enters her dressing room and sees that her picture is inscribed with the words " I want to eat your <unk> . " Jenna is touched to find that Kenneth is responsible for the graffito , and thanks him for his thoughtfulness . 
 On Valentine 's Day , Liz goes to her dentist appointment and tells the receptionist that she did not sign the waiver . After her surgery , Liz reassures the dental staff that the anesthesia is having no effect on her and can take herself home . In the lobby , Liz sees her former boyfriends Drew Baird ( Jon Hamm ) , Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) , and Floyd DeBarber ( Jason Sudeikis ) , and is moved that they came back so that she not be alone on Valentine 's Day . Liz is hallucinating , however , and the people she sees as Drew , Dennis , and Floyd are actually the three Jamaican women who are dental assistants at the oral surgeon 's office . One of them calls Jack , Liz 's boss , asking if he could come pick up Liz and take her home . Jack had just spent the night with Avery , who thinks that the phone call was made up by Jack as an excuse to end the date , but when he invites her to come along , she is impressed by his kindness to Liz . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Anna Howard Shaw Day " was written by 30 Rock supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Ken Whittingham . This episode was Hubbard 's ninth writing credit , and the second episode for Whittingham who had directed the March 12 , 2009 , season three episode " The Funcooker " . " Anna Howard Shaw Day " originally aired in the United States on February 11 , 2010 , on NBC as the thirteenth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 71st overall episode of the series . This episode was filmed on December 9 , 2009 , and January 27 , 2010 . 
 In December 2009 , it was confirmed that actress Elizabeth Banks would guest star on the show , and in this episode , she played right @-@ wing CNBC anchor Avery Jessup , and love interest to Alec Baldwin 's Jack Donaghy . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello , Banks revealed that she approached the show 's staff about making an appearance on the show . " I definitely put feelers out , like , ' I would love to be on your show . ' And they did it . They made it happen ! I 'm a huge fan , so this is a dream come true . " She said that on her first day on set she " begged " producers if she could use a teleprompter — in which she is first introduced in the episode on the set of her show The Hot Box , with her interviewing Jack and another guest ( Douglas Rees ) — so that she could deliver her lines quickly , explaining that her fast delivery would help " sell " the comedy and her 30 Rock character . They agreed to it , though , a problem ensued when they could not figure the prompter out , which resulted in Banks " throwing fastballs at [ Baldwin ] and him battling them back as fast as possible and hoping they could cut it together faster than we were doing it . " Banks revealed to Ausiello that she had no intention on becoming a series regular , explaining that she has been having " too much fun " making movies to commit to a television show full @-@ time . According to a February 2010 report in the New York Post , after the airing of this episode , the Avery character was based on CNBC news anchor Melissa Francis , and it was Francis who " pitched " the character to a 30 Rock producer . Banks , however , denied this report , calling it " false " . 
 In October 2009 , it was reported that musician Jon Bon Jovi would serve as the first artist in NBC 's brand new " artist in residence " program . In a November 25 , 2009 , appearance on NBC 's The Today Show , Jon Bon Jovi explained that his band ( Bon Jovi ) had released a new album , The Circle , and that for two months the group would be making appearances on a wide range of NBC broadcast and cable channels to promote it . On 30 Rock , Jon Bon Jovi played himself and his title as artist in residence was referenced , in which he appears as a contestant on the Bravo cooking reality television series Top Chef , and is later shown strumming the NBC Nightly News theme . 
 Actors Jon Hamm , Jason Sudeikis , and Dean Winters reprised their roles , respectively , as Drew Baird , Floyd DeBarber , and Dennis Duffy ; former boyfriends of Liz Lemon ( Fey ) . In the final scene of " Anna Howard Shaw Day " , in which she is still under the after effects of anesthesia , Liz " sees " Drew , Floyd , and Dennis speak in Jamaican accents , however , the three men are really three Jamaican dental assistants . In regards to the accent , Hamm said in an interview " That was given to me literally the day before we shot it . They were like , ' We wrote some more stuff , so we 'll see you tomorrow . ' I was like , ' Okay , how much more can it be ? Oh great , it 's a completely different take , awesome . ' " 
 Comedic actor Jason Sudeikis , who appeared in this episode as Floyd DeBarber , was at the time a main cast member of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) . Additionally in this episode , Horatio Sanz , who played Maynard Roger Hoynes — Jenna Maroney 's stalker — has also appeared in the main cast of SNL . Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The name of " Anna Howard Shaw Day " is based on Liz 's hatred of Valentine 's Day , for which she substitutes " Anna Howard Shaw Day " , a fictional holiday celebrating the real February 14 birthday of Woman 's Civil Rights leader Anna Howard Shaw . Liz tells Jack that she does not watch CNBC , a business news channel , but that she gets all her money advice from a fictitious cartoon character , Foxy Moneybags , on PBS . While confronting him , Jenna asks Maynard if the dog who gives him his orders has died , a reference to the Son of Sam killer allegedly being commanded to kill by a neighbour 's possessed dog . As he does not stalk her anymore , Jenna asks Maynard if he is stalking " one of those kids from Glee " , the latter being a Fox program that focuses on a high school show choir . During his appearance on The Hot Box , Avery asks Jack what his favorite movie is with him responding that it is a tie with The Fountainhead ( 1949 ) and Uncle Buck ( 1989 ) . During her hallucination , in which she sees Drew , Dennis , and Floyd , Liz confesses to Dennis that watching the period drama The Color Purple with him drunk " was one of the funnest nights of my life . " 
 The character Astronaut Mike Dexter was referenced in this episode , in which Liz tells the dental receptionist that she did not sign the liability waiver as her " boyfriend " Mike Dexter would come and take her home . Liz considers the character to be her imaginary perfect husband . The character was first introduced in " Sun Tea " , in which " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) pretended to be Mike Dexter , Liz 's " crazy black boyfriend " , after she planned to get her roommate out of his apartment with Dot Com 's help , but her plan backfired . In " Dealbreakers Talk Show " , Liz 's imagination of Mike Dexter was played by actor John Anderson , in a scene where Liz fantasizes about what her life would be like following the success of her talk show , and is then notified by Mike Dexter that he has to go back to outer space . Astronaut Mike Dexter would be mentioned further in the season , but near its end Liz decides her infatuation with him is pathetic and " breaks up " with him in a dream ; along with her S4 finale meeting of a pilot played by Matt Damon and her brusque breakup with and dismissal of an annoying anti @-@ love interest played by Michael Sheen ; this sets the stage for Liz Lemon to be portrayed as much less of a loser from Season 5 through the series finale . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Anna Howard Shaw Day " was seen by 6 @.@ 004 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings . The show claimed a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 8 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was an increase from the previous episode , " Verna " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 93 million American viewers . Matt Hubbard received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost it to Modern Family 's Steven Levitan and Christopher Lloyd for their work on the pilot episode . In December 2010 , Hubbard received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for " Anna Howard Shaw Day " . In reviewing the best television programs of 2010 , The A.V. Club named 30 Rock number 18 and cited this episode as amongst the best of the year . 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed Elizabeth Banks ' appearance , writing that she played her character " perfectly " and hoped she returned to the series . Rabin was " delighted " to see the show " get back some of its blinding speed " , regarding some episodes of the show 's fourth season not getting well @-@ received reception , as it was Jack and Avery 's courtship here that " was a refreshing reminder of just how fucking sharp 30 Rock can be . " Sean Gandert of Paste was appreciative towards Banks ' role , noted that Jon Bon Jovi 's appearance was " completely unnecessary but pretty awesome nonetheless " , and concluded that Liz and Jack 's plotlines were " particularly strong " and that despite not anything " new " occurring here " it was largely just some fun , top @-@ form 30 Rock . " Meredith Blake , a contributor of the Los Angeles Times , opined that the three plots featured were " equally strong " , and added that Jenna 's stalker plot " could easily have fallen flat " but it turned out to be very funny . In conclusion , Blake deemed this a " stellar episode , and it was especially enjoyable " than last week 's episode , " Verna " . Adam Mersel of TV Guide reported that the Valentine 's Day theme in the episode was " hilarious " , as it was " full of the usual belly @-@ laughs and spit @-@ takes . " Entertainment Weekly contributor Margaret Lyons commented that it was " one of the <unk> , silliest episodes in a while , but it worked . " Lyons enjoyed Tina Fey 's performance here , writing that it provided Fey with her " most interesting acting showcase all season " . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning said that this episode of 30 Rock " wasn 't as fun and funny as it could have been " , explaining that it had some great laughs , but that as a whole it " felt a bit flat and joyless . " He wrote that the cameos by Jon Hamm , Jason Sudeikis , and Dean Winters " did little in the body of the episode " , nonetheless , the " real payoff " came in the end when the three portrayed the dental assistants . " It was a gag mostly unrelated to the rest of the episode , and it was the best part of the half hour . " In conclusion , Canning gave it a 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 rating . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that the episode was a " pretty lifeless outing " , reasoning it had the " usual laughs in the margin " but overall " there were a lot of long , flat , deadly stretches , and entire subplots like Jenna with her stalker that just lay there . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad enjoyed Liz 's story here , but noted that he disliked Jenna 's stalker story , concluding " ... there were a few really funny lines ... but overall I found her missing @-@ her @-@ stalker @-@ on @-@ Valentine 's @-@ Day plot to be rather ... icky [ ... ] Honestly , I want to see more of the human , normal side of Jenna " . Nick Catucci of New York magazine felt that Liz 's plot here was " one of the worst story lines in recent memory " . 
 = Hurricane Fausto ( 2002 ) = 
 Hurricane Fausto was a long @-@ lived tropical cyclone that formed during the 2002 Pacific hurricane season . The eighth tropical cyclone and fifth named storm of the season , Fausto developed on August 21 from a tropical wave that had crossed the Atlantic , and entered the Pacific on August 17 . Becoming a tropical depression , the system intensified , and quickly became Tropical Storm Fausto early on August 22 . Fausto rapidly intensified , and was already a hurricane on that same day as becoming a tropical storm . Rapid intensification continued , and the tropical cyclone ultimately peaked as a strong Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . At that time , the winds 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Fausto began to gradually weaken after attaining peak intensity on August 24 , and was eventually downgraded to a tropical storm two days later . Weakening continued , and Fausto degenerated into a remnant low on August 28 while well northeast of Hawaii . 
 Passing north of the Hawaiian Islands , the remnants of the hurricane later began to revive , and had re @-@ developed into a tropical depression on August 30 . Additional re @-@ intensification was not significant , although Fausto managed to become a tropical storm again on September 1 . Remaining a minimal tropical storm , no further intensification occurred , and by September 3 , Fausto was absorbed by a frontal system . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Fausto were from a tropical wave that emerged into the eastern Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 11 . It crossed the Atlantic and Caribbean Sea uneventfully . The tropical wave ultimately entered the Eastern Pacific Basin on August 17 . Rapidly organizing , the system was classified using the Dvorak technique at 1800 UTC on August 18 . Although a broad closed circulation was present on August 19 , the system became less organized and thus was not immediately classified as a tropical depression . 
 Over the next two days , however , the system became much more organized . Early on August 21 , the National Hurricane Center had initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Eight @-@ E. After the existence of banding features was noted , the intensity was increased to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , indicating that the system had intensified into a tropical storm , which was named Fausto by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) . Although no further strengthening initially occurred , Fausto began to intensify after a burst in convection early on August 22 . Rapid deepening began to occur thereafter , and the NHC noted that Fausto exhibited a classic @-@ type banding feature and also noted that the outflow was increasing . The large size and widespread convection closely resembled a system that would become a major hurricane , Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The associated banding features began to wrap completely around the system , and evidence of a developing eye was seen via weather satellite . Simultaneously , satellite estimates made via the Dvorak technique indicated that intensity of Fausto was 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , and as a result , the NHC upgraded it to a hurricane . 
 = = Intensification and peak intensity = = 
 Although the eye feature became obscured and banding features appeared to be dissipating six hours after becoming a hurricane , the NHC predicted rapid intensification . As the eye became visible on satellite imagery early on August 23 , winds increased to 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , and Fausto became a Category 2 hurricane . Although the convective cloud tops had warmed slightly late that day , wind speeds continued to increase , and intensity estimates made at the University of Wisconsin were as high as 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) , though the National Hurricane Center was in agreement with estimates from all three Dvorak Technique agencies ( the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch ( TAFB ) , the Satellite Analysis Branch ( SAB ) , and the Air Force Weather Agency ( AFWA ) ) , which estimated winds at 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Based on this , Hurricane Fausto had intensified into a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 The hurricane continued to intensify , although the NHC anticipated strengthening to cease , because the hurricane was expected to move into areas of colder sea surface temperatures . During this period , the winds of the system increased and Fausto became a Category 4 hurricane . Becoming a Category 4 hurricane , Fausto attained its peak intensity , with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 64 inHg ) . After attaining peak intensity , the NHC again noted that it was very likely that Fausto attained its peak intensity , as it was nearing a region of sea surface temperatures less than 78 ° F ( 26 ° C ) . 
 = = Weakening and re @-@ development = = 
 Deep convection around the eyewall began to diminish , and Fausto then weakened to a Category 3 hurricane . After quickly dropping in strength to a Category 2 hurricane , Fausto weakened at nearly the same rate as it had intensified . Although Fausto held steady as a Category 2 hurricane for 18 hours , it then began to rapidly weaken back into a Category 1 hurricane , then a tropical storm six hours later early on August 26 . Upon weakening into a tropical storm , Forecaster Miles Lawrence at NHC noted " ... there is no longer any deep convection associated with its circulation ... " , although Fausto still remained a tropical cyclone . On August 27 , the NHC issued its final advisory on Fausto , although not for dissipation , but rather that the storm crossed 140 ˚ W , and had entered the area of responsibility for the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) . While post @-@ storm analysis from the CPHC indicated that Fausto was a tropical storm upon emerging into the CPHC 's area of responsibility ( AOR ) , the storm was operationally classified as a tropical depression upon entering the AOR . With no deep convection remaining , the CPHC downgraded Fausto into a tropical depression at 0000 UTC August 28 . Fausto degenerated into a remnant low while located over 800 mi ( 1287 km ) north of Hilo , Hawaii on August 28 at 1200 UTC . 
 Although Fausto headed generally northwest while a tropical cyclone , it curved west @-@ northwest after degenerating into a remnant low . Passing several hundred miles north of Hawaii , deep convection began to re @-@ develop as the remnants of Fausto interacted with a tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough . By 1800 UTC on August 28 , the low had enough deep convection to be reclassified as a tropical depression while located roughly 635 mi ( 1020 km ) north of Oahu . No further re @-@ intensification occurred for almost 48 hours , and then Fausto became a tropical storm again at 1800 UTC September 1 . This regeneration at high latitude was attributed to a temperature anomaly with waters 3 @.@ 4 ° F ( 2 ° C ) above normal and a favorable upper @-@ level atmospheric pattern . Although sea surface temperature anomalies are usually attributed to the development of an El Niño , the El Niño had no effect with atmospheric conditions . A mid @-@ latitude cyclone approached Tropical Storm Fausto and caused the system to accelerate northward . The mid @-@ latitude cyclone eventually absorbed Fausto , and the combined system reached the Aleutian Islands of Alaska shortly thereafter . 
 Hurricane Fausto 's regeneration north of Hawaii was unusual but not unprecedented . The other time this happened since 1966 was in the 1975 season . That time , another TUTT absorbed the remnant of Hurricane Ilsa , which led to the formation of an unnamed hurricane at high latitude . Other tropical cyclones have strengthened north of Hawaii , but the actual formation of one is rare . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Fausto did not have any effect on land , and only one ship named Jo <unk> reported minimal gales on August 24 , and again the next day . No reports of damage or casualties were attributed to Fausto . The mid @-@ latitude cyclone that absorbed Fausto passed over the Aleutian Islands . Impact from the remnants of Fausto in the Aleutian Islands or mainland Alaska is unknown . 
 = Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná = 
 Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná ( 11 January 1801 – 3 September 1856 ) was a politician , diplomat , judge and monarchist of the Empire of Brazil . Paraná was born to a family of humble means in São Carlos do <unk> , in what was then the captaincy of Minas Gerais . After attending the University of Coimbra in Portugal and having returned to Brazil , Paraná was appointed a judge in 1826 and later elevated to appellate court justice . In 1830 , he was elected to represent Minas Gerais in the Chamber of Deputies ; he was re @-@ elected in 1834 and 1838 , and held the post until 1841 . 
 In the aftermath of Dom Pedro I 's abdication in 1831 , a regency created to govern Brazil during the minority of the former Emperor 's son , Dom Pedro II , soon dissolved into chaos . Paraná formed a political party in 1837 that became known as the Reactionary Party , which evolved into the Party of Order in the early 1840s and in the mid @-@ 1850s into the Conservative Party . He and his party 's stalwart and unconditional defence of constitutional order allowed the country to move beyond a regency plagued by factious disputes and rebellions that might easily have led to a dictatorship . Appointed president of Rio de Janeiro Province in 1841 , Paraná helped put down a rebellion headed by the opposition Liberal Party the following year . Also in 1842 , he was elected senator for Minas Gerais and appointed by Pedro II to the Council of State . In 1843 , he became the de facto first president ( prime minister ) of the Council of Ministers , but resigned after a quarrel with the Emperor . 
 After years in opposition , in 1849 , Paraná was appointed by the national government as president of Pernambuco Province to investigate a Liberal rebellion that had taken place a year earlier , and seek a fair trial for the rebels . <unk> by his party colleagues for the years in opposition and having lost much of his influence within his own party , Paraná accepted the post , believing he could regain his place among his peers . With the nation internally pacified , he was sent to Uruguay in 1851 to forge an alliance with that country , and with the rebel Argentine provinces of Corrientes and Entre Ríos , against the Argentine Confederation . The alliance triumphed , and the Emperor elevated Paraná to the ranks of the titled nobility . 
 In 1853 Paraná was again appointed president of the Council of Ministers , at the head of a highly successful cabinet , and became the most powerful politician in the country . The electoral reform he ushered in was credited with undermining national political processes and causing severe harm to the system of parliamentary government . For his role in pushing through restructuring , Paraná met with fierce opposition from the majority of his colleagues , leading to a virtual split in the Conservative Party over his policies . On 3 September 1856 , while still in office and at the height of his political career , he died unexpectedly of an unknown febrile condition . He is widely regarded by historians as one of the most influential statesmen of his time . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Birth and childhood = = = 
 Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão was born on 11 January 1801 , in the freguesia ( civil parish ) of São Carlos do <unk> , Minas Gerais , then a captaincy ( later province ) of the Portuguese colony of Brazil . Named after Saint Honorata , Honório Hermeto was the son of Antônio Neto Carneiro Leão and Joana Severina Augusta de Lemos . On his father 's side , he was descended from Portugal 's powerful Carneiro Leão clan , which had settled in Brazil in the 17th century . Antônio Neto , however , was much less prosperous than his relatives . An impoverished military officer in 1801 , he held the rank of <unk> ( third sergeant ) . Advancement of his career was thwarted by his character flaws . Antônio Neto was hotheaded and had a strong personality which once led to his arrest for insubordination . 
 Honório Hermeto first lived in <unk> , then moved to Vila Rica ( now Ouro Preto ) , at that time the capital of Minas Gerais , where he spent his childhood and adolescence . His father was widowed on 10 February 1806 ; on 11 January 1807 he wed Rita de Cássia Soares do Couto , the daughter of his late wife 's sister . Honório Hermeto regarded Rita de Cássia as his mother and her father , Colonel Nicolau Soares Couto , actually raised him . Honório Hermeto had an elder sister , Balbina , and three half @-@ sisters and a half @-@ brother , Nicolau Neto Carneiro Leão ( later Baron of Santa Maria ) , from his father 's second marriage . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 At age 16 , Honório Hermeto was commissioned as a lieutenant and standard @-@ bearer of the 2nd Militia Cavalry Regiment , 1st Company , in Vila Rica . Antônio Neto made great efforts to provide Honório Hermeto with an education of much higher quality than would normally have been expected in a family of their limited financial means . The promotion to captain in 1819 increased Antônio Neto 's income , allowing his eldest son to go to Portugal and enroll in the University of Coimbra 's law school in 1820 , thus ending Honório Hermeto 's brief military career . He was an excellent student and struck up acquaintances among his fellow Brazilians in Coimbra , including Paulino Soares de Sousa ( who would become one of his greatest allies and later the 1st Viscount of Uruguai ) and Aureliano de Sousa Oliveira Coutinho ( later Viscount of Sepetiba ) . 
 During the Portuguese Liberal Revolution of 1820 , he supported the <unk> , who advocated a national constitution to limit the powers of the Portuguese monarchy , against the <unk> , who preferred an absolute monarchy . It is unknown whether he actively took part in the uprising , however , and if so , to what degree . Honório Hermeto was a member of a secret society called A Gruta ( The Den ) , founded by Brazilian students at Coimbra with the primary goal of changing Brazil from a monarchy into a republic . His republicanism would fade with time and eventually be replaced by staunch support for monarchism . 
 Honório Hermeto received a bachelor 's degree in Law in 1824 , and his masters diploma on 18 June 1825 . He was also employed in a law firm for a few months . He returned to Brazil on 8 August 1825 aboard a ship with other Coimbra graduates , among them Aureliano Coutinho and Joaquim Rodrigues Torres ( who would later found the Conservative Party with Honório Hermeto and become the Viscount of Itaboraí ) . During Honório Hermeto 's time in Europe his native country had gained independence from Portugal and become the Empire of Brazil . 
 = = Entry into politics = = 
 = = = Magistrate and politician = = = 
 On 20 May 1826 , Honório Hermeto married his 17 @-@ year @-@ old first cousin Maria Henriqueta Neto , the daughter of his father 's brother João Neto Carneiro <unk> . Unlike his brother , João Neto was a rich and influential man . Honório Hermeto and Maria Henriqueta had five children : Honório , Henrique ( later Baron of Paraná ) , Maria <unk> , Maria Henriqueta and Pedro . The advantageous marriage allowed Honório Hermeto to become a slave owner , assume his uncle 's business , which included domestic slave trading , and later , in the 1830s , purchase a coffee farm in the province of Rio de Janeiro . Coffee was quickly becoming Brazil 's most important export commodity and was a highly lucrative crop . 
 Honório Hermeto pursued a typical course open to 19th century Brazilians who became affluent through family connections and patronage : a judicial career , with expectations of entering politics . On 14 October 1826 , he was named to a three @-@ year term as <unk> de fora ( external judge ) with jurisdiction over the three villages in the province of São Paulo . On 25 August 1828 , Honório Hermeto left São Paulo upon being promoted to the post of auditor da marinha ( admiralty judge ) in Rio de Janeiro , the imperial capital located in the province of same name . His tenure in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro helped expand his connections . Emperor Dom Pedro I appointed him <unk> ( superior judge ) in late 1828 and <unk> ( regional appeal judge ) in 1829 , an office Honório Hermeto held until his retirement in 1848 . 
 Well established in the imperial capital , Honório Hermeto campaigned in 1829 to become a general deputy ( member of the Chamber of Deputies , the national lower house ) as a representative for his native Minas Gerais . He was elected to a seat in the legislature for the term beginning April 1830 . He became a member of the Liberal Party , which stood in opposition to Pedro I and his policies . As a general deputy , Honório Hermeto had an unobtrusive role for the first couple of years , having been overshadowed by Bernardo Pereira de Vasconcelos , the leader of the deputies representing Minas Gerais . Short , slim and with a speech impediment , the dark @-@ haired Honório Hermeto appeared an unimpressive figure at first glance . Like his father , he was headstrong , opinionated and often scathing . However , he had self @-@ confidence and a powerful charisma , and was energetic , intelligent , perspicacious and a natural born leader . 
 = = = Political crises = = = 
 Due to the weakening of his political position and his own concomitant motives , Pedro I abdicated on 7 April 1831 and departed for Europe . Without a common cause in the person of the former Emperor , the radical wing of the Liberal Party seceded . Honório Hermeto remained in the Liberal Party , which changed its name to Moderate Party to differentiate itself from its estranged radicals . Meanwhile , as the new emperor , Dom Pedro II , was only a child of five , a regency — with little effective authority — was created . This resulted in nine years of chaos , during which the country was plagued by rebellions and coup attempts initiated by unruly political factions . 
 On 19 July 1831 , radicals and insubordinate military officers presented the Chamber of Deputies with a list of 89 Brazilians , including senators , whom they demanded be deported . Honório Hermeto gave a speech in which he said that " neither a senator nor the most humble citizen belonging to the lowest class may be deported without having been prosecuted and convicted ... Even when a citizen is an evildoer , his rights must be respected ... " All the deputies but one agreed with him , and the incident was settled , with several battalions being disbanded . As an adult , Pedro II would later remember that his " style of speaking was inelegant , and he had a stutter ; but it vanished when he was aroused and at all times his arguments were tight knit , and somebody wittily remarked that [ Honório Hermeto , ] the marquis of Paraná , when he stuttered , stuttered arguments . " 
 A second crisis arose on 30 July 1832 . A constitutional amendment effecting greater reforms was voted on and approved in the Chamber of Deputies , but still faced major opposition in the Senate . Diogo Antônio Feijó and Aureliano Coutinho , both Moderates , planned a coup d 'état . Feijó would assume dictatorial powers and immediately enact the constitutional amendment , thus bypassing the Senate entirely . Honório Hermeto called on his fellow deputies to uphold the Constitution : " We need not hurt the legal order and [ constitutional ] principles : we can make fair laws ... and in the respected Constitution we have safe and legal ways of giving the nation what it wants ... let us not violate it [ the Constitution ] , as it is our only safeguard . " He rallied the deputies to his view , and in defeating the unconstitutional proposal , the coup attempt was crushed . 
 = = Path to conservatism = = 
 = = = Genesis of the Conservative Party = = = 
 Honório Hermeto , by then a leading politician , was appointed Minister of Justice on 13 September 1832 , effectively becoming the head of the cabinet . He resigned after eight months to avoid becoming entangled in the aftermath of an uprising in Minas Gerais , in which one of his relatives had been involved . Vasconcelos mounted a challenge to Honório Hermeto 's position among his constituency , and by circulating rumors that the latter had links to the uprising , undercut his reputation at home and in the Chamber of Deputies . Honório Hermeto relinquished his post on 14 May 1833 to concentrate on shoring up his position in Minas Gerais , and won another term as general deputy . 
 The constitutional amendment known as the Additional Act , which effected greater reforms that served as the catalyst for the 1832 coup attempt , was promulgated on 12 August 1834 . The Act had unpredicted and catastrophic results . Local self @-@ government opened new avenues of conflict between political parties . The party that dominated the provinces would gain control over the electoral and political system . Parties that lost by ballot , unwilling to be shut out , rebelled and tried to take power by force . Honório Hermeto and several other Moderates voted against the Additional Act , as they believed that its far @-@ reaching reforms would cause far more harm than good . Honório Hermeto led the conservative Moderate dissidents to secede from the party when Feijó successfully ran for the position of sole regent in early 1835 . Honório Hermeto was eager to forestall what he described as the " triumph of the same traitor who made 30 July [ 1832 coup attempt ] to ignominiously tear down the Regency which had appointed him . " 
 The conservative Moderate opposition to Feijó had close links to coffee and sugar cane planter families and merchants in the Brazilian southeast and northeast . These groups wielded great political , social and economic influence . They began to see their interests more in alignment with men like Honório Hermeto , who were planters like themselves — people who supported the slave trade with Africa and desired a centralized state able to impose order . The often <unk> Honório Hermeto , swallowing his pride , set aside his enmity toward Vasconcelos in pursuit of an alliance . Dubbed the Reactionary Party by Feijó and his allies in 1837 , the conservative Moderate opposition born in late 1834 was the genesis of what would evolve into the Party of Order ( c . 1843 ) and finally into the Conservative Party ( c . 1853 ) . 
 = = = Party leader in the Chamber of Deputies = = = 
 Feijó 's administration was unable to suppress the uprisings in both the north and south . By 1837 , his government 's credibility and support had vanished . Feijó resigned in August 1837 and Pedro de Araújo Lima ( later the Marquis of Olinda ) , a Reactionary from Pernambuco Province , became interim regent and was elected to the office the next year . He appointed his colleagues to ministry portfolios . Honório Hermeto , who had been reelected to another term as general deputy until 1841 , remained in the Chamber as the party 's leader to bolster the new Reactionary cabinet . The ever @-@ weak Moderate Party collapsed , and <unk> 's Moderates allied with other groups with which they shared no common principles or ideology . During the late 1830s and early 1840s , this alliance evolved into the second Liberal Party . 
 The Reactionary Party ( the former dissident conservative elements within the Moderate Party ) began by passing the Interpretation of the Additional Act , which was followed by the reform of the Code of Criminal Procedure . Both laws , built upon the 1834 Additional Act , would allow the national government to reassert its control over provincial police and courts . They would provide the means to deal effectively with provincial rebellions and inevitably grant the national government greater sway over the provincial governments . In turn , the party in power would gain greater ascendancy in national politics through patronage and office appointments . Fearful that their adversaries would stay in power indefinitely , the Liberals began to call for Pedro II to attain majority at a younger age . They hoped to regain their influence by doing away with the regency and dealing directly with a pliable young emperor . Towards that end , the Liberals allied themselves with the <unk> <unk> ( Courtier Faction ) , led by Aureliano Coutinho ( Feijó 's ally in the 1832 coup attempt ) . 
 Honório Hermeto saw this new majority movement as an " attempt ... equal to that of 30 July [ 1832 coup ] . " As he had in 1832 , Honório Hermeto took up a defence based on the Constitution against this threat to the political system . In May 1840 , he proposed a constitutional amendment that would allow the monarch to attain majority , and assume full powers , at an earlier age . The slow process of passing a constitutional amendment ensured that the Reactionary Party would control the government at least until 1842 , when Araújo Lima 's term as regent would end . Facing fierce resistance from Liberals — the Chamber sessions had become embroiled in heated , often chaotic , debates — Honório Hermeto withdrew his proposal . Political and popular pressure , and even physical threats , led to the unconstitutional declaration of Pedro II 's majority at age 14 on 23 July 1840 . 
 = = Rise to power and fall = = 
 = = = Liberal rebellions of 1842 = = = 
 The Liberal @-@ Courtier coalition 's cabinet , formed upon Pedro II 's assumption of full powers , convoked national elections for seats in the legislature convene in 1842 . The voting was accompanied by so much violence and fraud that it became known as Elections of the club ( or Elections of the truncheon ) . For Honório Hermeto , this meant the loss of his seat as general deputy after his bid for reelection failed . The Liberal @-@ Courtier cabinet did not survive long , however , and its ministers presented their resignations in turn . On 23 March 1841 , a new cabinet was nominated that included Aureliano Coutinho from the Courtier Faction and other ministers drawn from the Reactionary Party . 
 Following the return of the Reactionary Party to the government , Honório Hermeto was appointed by Pedro II to the prestigious Council of State . Under advice from the Council of State , Pedro II in May 1842 dissolved the new Chamber of Deputies , elected in the fraudulent 1840 elections , before it could be convened . Instead of attempting to get reelected , Honório Hermeto ran for a Senate seat , and being among the three candidates with the most votes , in late 1842 he was selected by the Emperor as the senator representing Minas Gerais . On 2 January 1843 , he took his seat next to his rival , Aureliano Coutinho , who had been elected senator for the province of Alagoas . Having already secured two lifetime positions ( councillor and senator ) , on 4 October 1841 Honório Hermeto received an appointment as president ( governor ) of the province of Rio de Janeiro , and assumed this office on 1 December . 
 The Liberals did not take their loss of power gracefully . In May and June 1842 , three uprisings broke out , in the provinces of São Paulo , Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro . The rebels went so far as to arrest and hold hostage both Honório Hermeto 's elderly father and uncle ( who was also his father @-@ in @-@ law ) . As president , he commanded the provincial National Guard , and traveled through the province to organize a response . On 1 July , he advanced with troops towards Ouro Preto , where , after defeating the rebels , he freed his father and uncle . He joined forces there with Luís Alves de Lima e Silva ( then @-@ Baron and later Duke of Caxias ) , who commanded the National Guard of São Paulo and Minas Gerais and was also married to one of Honório Hermeto 's distant cousins . The remaining rebels were easily defeated , and by late August , the uprisings had been quelled . Among the rebel leaders was the former regent , Feijó , who was arrested . He died shortly afterwards in 1843 . As Honório Hermeto returned from Minas Gerais to Rio de Janeiro , he was welcomed with celebrations and demonstrations of joy by the authorities and populace of the districts he traversed . 
 = = = First presidency of the Council of Ministers = = = 
 Sometime around 1843 ( and certainly by 1844 ) , the Reactionary Party was renamed to the Party of Order to distinguish itself from what the Reactionaries perceived as the " unruly " Liberals . Members of the Party of Order became known as saquaremas . The new name also reflected the maturation of principles the party had long advocated : liberalism , exceptionalism , preserving the authority of the state and a representative parliamentary monarchy . On 20 January 1843 , Pedro II appointed Honório Hermeto to head a new cabinet . By personally selecting the cabinet members , Honório Hermeto became Brazil 's de facto first prime minister . Prior to this time , the Emperor himself or the regents had always designated the cabinet ministers . Four years later , following Honório Hermeto 's precedent , the office of prime minister would be formally instituted under the title of " president ( prime minister ) of the Council of Ministers " . 
 A year later , in January 1844 , Honório Hermeto requested that Pedro II dismiss the inspector of the Rio de Janeiro customs house , Saturnino de Sousa e Oliveira Coutinho , a younger brother of Aureliano Coutinho . Honório Hermeto had been in the same university class as Aureliano Coutinho and Saturnino Coutinho in Coimbra during the 1820s . However , his strained relationship with Aureliano Coutinho was not entirely the result of political rivalry between two ambitious men . Honório Hermeto nursed a sheer hatred toward him because of the role he had played both in the July 1832 coup and in the Majority movement . Honório Hermeto again pressed to have Saturnino Coutinho fired in late January , and when rebuffed yet again , said , " A boy does not have the right to mock men worn out in the service of the Nation , even if this boy is the Emperor . " Pedro II was offended and steadfastly refused to dismiss Saturnino Coutinho . 
 Instead of accepting the Emperor 's decision , Honório Hermeto offered his resignation , along with those of his colleagues . Astonished by his behavior , the Emperor would say years later when recalling the incident : " Paraná não se <unk> ! " ( " [ Honório Hermeto , the Marquis of ] Paraná did not bow down ! " ) Pedro II asked the Liberals to form a new cabinet . For most of the next five years , Honório Hermeto and his Party of Order stood in opposition to the Liberals and the Courtier Faction . For the saquaremas , it meant enduring " new elections , fixed results , partisan reprisals and policy shifts " . Only a few saquaremas managed to get themselves elected to the Chamber during this period . All the blame for this disaster fell upon Honório Hermeto . He lost much of his influence within the party , even though Vasconcelos alone in the Party of Order possessed the qualifications to challenge Honório Hermeto as the party 's elder statesman . 
 = = Special missions abroad = = 
 = = = Praieira = = = 
 The Courtier @-@ Liberal alliance held near absolute sway over Brazilian politics for several years . By 1847 , however , Pedro II had carefully removed members of the Courtier Faction from key positions . Aureliano Coutinho 's influence was destroyed after the Emperor implicitly banned him from participation in political decision making . The monarch then moved against the Liberals . From 1844 through 1848 , the country saw several successive Liberal cabinets , all plagued by internal divisions . Pedro II called upon the Party of Order to form a new cabinet in September 1848 . 
 The rise of the saquaremas ensured a purge of Liberals who had been appointed to executive and judicial posts at the national , provincial and local levels , as was normal when a new party was tapped to form a government . The most radical Liberal faction in the province of Pernambuco , known as the Partido da Praia ( Party of the Beach ) , made open preparations to revolt and retake power by force . The rebellion was limited in extent and was crushed by February 1849 . Honório Hermeto was appointed president of the province , from 2 July 1849 until 8 May 1850 , with the purpose of pacification by restraining acts of revenge and throwing his support behind fair trials for all rebels . He had observed the effect that ostracism , by both Pedro II and other saquarema party leaders , had had on the career of Vasconcelos . Honório Hermeto accepted the office , eager " to regain the favor of his Emperor and to strengthen his position among his party colleagues . " 
 He was disheartened with what he saw in Pernambuco , a province far away from the imperial capital , but one of the most important in the country . Local political bosses were aligned with the Party of Order or the Liberal Party , but these were mostly nominal affiliations . Local oligarchs had vied among themselves for centuries over power . To them , political principles , such as those preached by the national leaders of the Party of Order , meant little or nothing . Their political ambitions focused on patronage and the annihilation of their local rivals . Honório Hermeto found himself embroiled in an ongoing power struggle between the aristocratic planters , who sought to exercise control over provincial affairs . 
 = = = Platine War = = = 
 By mid @-@ 1850 , Honório Hermeto was back in Rio de Janeiro . He had found the months in Pernambuco excruciating . Being named provincial president would have been considered a great achievement for a young politician , but it added no luster to the reputation of a seasoned politician and a founding member of his party . Instead of being at the center of power , he was put in the humiliating position of having to submit to a cabinet composed of men with less political experience , such as Joaquim Rodrigues Torres , Paulino Soares de Sousa ( Honório Hermeto 's colleague along with Rodrigues Torres in Coimbra ) and Eusébio de Queirós . It was particularly grating being subordinated to Paulino Soares and Eusébio de Queirós , protégés whom Honório Hermeto had advanced during the 1830s . While in Pernambuco , Honório Hermeto 's actions were frequently reviewed and overturned by the cabinet , often with Eusébio de Queirós leading the criticism . 
 As Brazil had been pacified after the end of the last rebellion ( the Praieira revolt ) , Brazil 's government turned its attention to the growing tensions with its neighbor to the south , the Argentine Confederation . Paulino Soares , who served as Minister of Foreign Affairs , decided to forge alliances with Uruguay and Paraguay , nations which also saw a threat in the ambitions of Juan Manuel de Rosas , dictator of the Argentine Confederation . An army commanded by Caxias crossed into Uruguay in September 1851 . More than a year had passed since Honório Hermeto returned from Pernambuco , when he was named by Paulino Soares as special minister plenipotentiary in the Plata region . On 12 October 1851 , Honório Hermeto and an Uruguayan envoy signed a treaty in Rio de Janeiro setting the international border between Brazil and Uruguay . The agreement required Uruguay to abandon some claims to disputed areas in exchange for Brazilian aid in the war against Argentina . 
 Honório Hermeto departed for Montevideo , the capital of Uruguay , on 23 October . He chose José Maria da Silva Paranhos ( later Viscount of Rio Branco ) to assist him . Paranhos was a brilliant young man who had once been a Liberal Party member and protégé of the disgraced Aureliano Coutinho . This surprising choice was a clear signal from Honório Hermeto to his colleagues in the cabinet of his independence . On 21 November , Honório Hermeto signed a treaty of alliance with Uruguay and the rebel Argentine provinces of Entre Ríos and Corrientes . On 3 February 1852 , the allies defeated Rosas , who fled to the United Kingdom . As a reward for his role , the Emperor granted Honório Hermeto the title of <unk> de Paraná ( Viscount of Paraná ) in July 1852 . The title was derived from the Paraná River , a tributary of the Río de la Plata , upon which free passage rights for Brazilian shipping was secured after Rosas ' downfall . 
 = = Conciliation cabinet = = 
 = = = Second presidency of the Council of Ministers = = = 
 After years of frustration , Honório Hermeto ( or Paraná as he became known ) had largely recouped the prestige he had formerly possessed among his peers . He had liquidated his uncle 's domestic slave trading business and used the proceeds to become a coffee plantation owner in 1836 . The land he acquired was located in the hills between Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais . Although Paraná staunchly opposed the abolition of the transatlantic African slave trade , the importation of slaves was abolished in 1850 by the Eusébio de Queirós Law . The ban on slave imports seems to have had no impact over Paraná 's private affairs ; by 1852 , he had become a very wealthy man . He also married his son Honório to a niece of Rodrigues Torres , thus establishing a link between his family and the province of Rio de Janeiro 's planter aristocracy . 
 Around 1853 ( certainly by 1855 ) , the old Party of Order had become widely known as the Conservative Party . On 6 September 1853 , Pedro II called Paraná to the Imperial Palace in São Cristóvão and asked him to organize a new cabinet . After nearly ten years , the two men had made peace with one another . The Emperor wished to advance his own ambitious program : the <unk> ( conciliation ) and <unk> ( material developments ) . Pedro II 's reforms aimed to promote less political <unk> , and forward infrastructure and economic development . Rather than ushering in a government led by the Conservative Party , the Emperor had appointed the leading Conservative " to lead a non @-@ partisan reform administration to realize material developments " . 
 Paraná appointed politicians who had few , or no , links to the saquaremas to fill the new cabinet 's ministry portfolios . These men were either more loyal to the Emperor than to the party , too new to the Conservative Party to have formed close ties with the older saquarema establishment or former Liberals who had defected to the Conservatives following the Praieira revolt in the late 1840s . Two former Liberals found seats in the cabinet , including Paranhos , for whom Paraná secured a seat in the Chamber of Deputies . Other nominations went to saquaremas whose personal fealty to Pedro II was paramount . Among these was Caxias , with whom Paraná had developed a working relationship and then a close friendship . The resulting " Conciliation cabinet " owed its chief loyalties to Pedro II and Paraná , rather than to the Conservative Party . The cabinet thus represented a break with the Reactionary views of the old Party of Order , albeit under a party banner which still included members of the old guard . 
 = = = Struggle over electoral reform = = = 
 Formed in late 1853 , the Conciliation cabinet faced the Parliament only when it gathered in May 1854 . Paraná presented a bill to reform the Code of Criminal Procedure , which had already been reformed in 1841 . In search of support , Paraná went as far as to aid Liberal candidates in the 1854 provincial elections . The opposition by most saquaremas to this judicial reform was so fierce that a year later , Paraná ( who had been raised from Viscount to Marquis in late 1854 ) backed down and implicitly withdrew the bill . 
 Almost concurrently , he presented a project of electoral reform that was also vehemently opposed by the saquaremas . Historian Jeffrey D. Needell states that the saquaremas " had seen him , one of their own chieftains , pick a cabinet of relatively weak men , men he could dominate . They saw an explicit attack on party government and party deals , using patronage alone to secure support . They saw that the loyalty of the ministers was principally toward Paraná , the Emperor , and a non @-@ partisan approach to patronage ( which ipso facto , undercut their party and strengthened the cabinet ) . " <unk> found it harder to accept the cabinet 's aid being diverted — in an attempt to secure more support for cabinet initiatives — from themselves to Liberal candidates in provincial and general elections . 
 During his time in Pernambuco ( 1849 – 1850 ) , Paraná had experienced first @-@ hand how the party 's principles were seen as irrelevant and ignored at local and provincial levels . A cabinet could gain the backing of local bosses for its national candidates using patronage alone . Paraná did not need the support of the saquaremas , he could find it elsewhere . Throughout his life , Paraná managed to set aside past grievances when doing so could further opportune alliances . As Eusébio de Queirós said of Paraná , " like all men of strong temperament , he tends more to exaggerate his generosity towards his conquered enemies than in accommodations to conquering friends . " 
 = = = Apogee and unexpected death = = = 
 In the end , both the Senate and the Chamber passed the electoral reform — which became known as Lei dos <unk> ( Law of the Circles ) — by a bare margin . The majority of the saquaremas voted against the bill . Paraná succeeded because , as founder and leader of the Conservative Party , he " had enormous charisma and a broad personal clientele in the Chamber " and " could ( and did ) dispense power , prestige , and patronage . " Some saquaremas voted in favor of the reform out of fear , believing that , should the cabinet fall , the Emperor might turn to the Liberals to form a new cabinet , resulting in reprisals and loss of offices throughout the country . On the other hand , the Liberals supported the reform as a means to further weaken the divided Conservative Party . 
 The electoral reform had given Paraná unassailable dominance over the cabinet and in parliament . By September 1855 , with the sole exception of the Emperor , Paraná had become the most prominent figure in the empire . He was nicknamed El Rei Honório ( Honório the King ) by his foes . However , he would not live long to enjoy his supremacy . At the end of August 1856 , enraged by an offensive speech by Pedro de Araújo Lima , Marquis of Olinda ( former regent in the late 1830s ) in the Senate , Paraná rose to respond . As he spoke , Paraná fell to the ground in pain . Days passed and his condition worsened . On 3 September 1856 , at 07 : 15 in the morning , he died . In a fever @-@ induced delirium , Paraná believed himself to be still delivering a speech to Olinda . His last words were , " Skepticism ... the noble senator ... fatherland ... freedom . " The exact cause of Paraná 's death was never established . Doctors could not agree whether the illness was a consequence of hepatitis , pneumonia , disease in the liver , lungs , intestines or something else . 
 Pedro II lamented the death of Paraná , saying , " I can see no one else possessed of the energy with which the late Marquis was endowed , and joined to it uncommon talents , even if they were unpolished . " His death had a profound impact on the government and the Brazilian people . He was honored with a grand funeral procession attended by a huge crowd , then a rare event in Brazil . His remains were interred in the <unk> São João Batista ( Cemetery of Saint John the Baptist ) in Rio de Janeiro city . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the early 1850s , Paraná had seen both his main foes – Aureliano Coutinho and Feijó – and their political factions fall into oblivion , while he rose to power . Eusébio de Queirós , his main rival within the Conservative Party , had attempted to rally the saquaremas against his project , and failed . Eusébio de Queirós and Paraná carried on their power struggle during debates in the Senate , and in the end , Paraná emerged victorious . His success came at the expense of his weakened and deeply divided party . Just as serious were the consequences of the Law of the Circles . In theory , Paraná 's initiatives for judicial and electoral reform would have ensured fairer elections , since they attempted to curtail the corrupting influence of political parties on elections . In practice , however , the opposite happened ; tampering by parties was merely replaced by greater interference by the cabinet . Paraná probably knew that the reform , as enacted , had the potential to do more harm than good , as it gave him unprecedented control over national politics . According to Needell , " Paraná might well have seen the cabinet and its victory as his personal vindication before the party rivals and his monarch , his political triumph after the dismissal of 1844 and the second @-@ rank status and saquarema disrespect of 1850 . " 
 Since his death , Paraná has been widely praised by historians and others for his political achievements , although the detrimental consequences of the electoral reform in his Conciliation cabinet were generally ignored by historians until recently . This oversight can be seen in the writings of many renowned writers and historians since the 19th @-@ century cabinet . Conservative politician and writer José de Alencar called Paraná a " distinguished statesman " . Writer Joaquim Manuel de Macedo said that " the marquis of Paraná was a politician well suited to the great State crises , and to a time of most difficult and contentious political strife . " Joaquim Nabuco , who viewed him a statesman , summarized his character as that of a man " made not only to dominate , but also to lead . " José Paranhos , Baron of Rio Branco regarded him an " illustrious statesman " . <unk> da Cunha , who also called him a statesman , labeled him a " great man " who " demarcates a decisive stretch in our [ Brazilian ] Constitutional History " . 
 Many historians praised Paraná . <unk> de Gouveia regarded him as a statesman who revealed " himself to posterity as an example of tenacity , energy , patriotism and honor " . To Heitor Lira , Paraná " was one of the pillars responsible for the political stability of Pedro II 's reign . His policy of conciliation ended a period of rebellions , and led to the appearance of a new generation of monarchist politicians raised " in the school of tolerance , mutual respect and public interest " ; which produced " the constitutional environment where the two great [ political ] parties of the Monarchy would take turns [ in power ] without excluding each other . " Fernando da Cruz <unk> called him an " authentic statesman " . Aldo <unk> considered Paraná , alongside Vasconcelos , responsible for the maintenance of Brazilian unity and preventing its territorial dismemberment . According to Hermes Vieira , he was a " great statesman " . " Of all politicians of imperial Brazil , it is without a doubt , " said historian Hélio Viana , " Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná , the one who deserves to be called statesman " . Ronaldo Vainfas considered him one of the greatest statesmen in Brazilian imperial history . 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Nobility = = = 
 Viscount of Paraná ( Grandee ) on 26 June 1852 . 
 Marquis of Paraná on 2 December 1854 . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Member of the Brazilian Council of State . 
 Member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute . 
 <unk> ( steward ) of the Santa Casa de Misericórdia ( Holy House of Mercy ) in Rio de Janeiro city ( 1854 – 1856 ) . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of Christ awarded on 18 March 1851 . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa awarded on 26 January 1856 . 
 Grand Cross of the Russian Order of the White Eagle . 
 Officer of the Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross awarded on 10 August 1841 . 
 Officer of the Brazilian Order of the Rose . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Underwire bra = 
 An underwire bra ( also under wire bra , under @-@ wire bra , or <unk> bra ) is a brassiere that utilizes a thin , semi @-@ circular strip of rigid material fitted inside the brassiere fabric . The wire may be made of metal , plastic , or resin . It is sewn into the bra fabric and under each cup , from the center gore to under the wearer 's armpit . The wire helps to lift , separate , shape , and support a woman 's breasts . Many different brassiere designs incorporate an underwire , including shelf bras , demi bras , nursing bras , and bras built into other articles of clothing , such as tank tops , dresses and swimsuits . 
 The concept of an underwire can be traced to an 1893 patent that describes a breast supporting device using a rigid plate under the breasts for stability . The modern underwire bra was designed in the 1930s , and gained widespread popularity by the 1950s . As of 2005 , underwire bras were the largest and fastest growing segment of the bra market . A bra without an underwire is a <unk> bra . 
 Underwire bras are occasionally linked to health conditions including breast pain , mastitis , and metal allergies . Women wearing an underwire bra have in a few rare instances been subjected to extra scrutiny when their bra set off metal detectors at security checkpoints in airports or prisons . There have been a few recorded incidents where the underwire deflected a bullet or other weapon that struck the woman 's chest . 
 = = History = = 
 The precursor to the underwire bra can be traced back to at least 1893 , when New Yorker Marie <unk> was granted a patent for a " breast supporter " . The breast supporter was described as a modification of the corset , and was very similar to a modern push @-@ up bra designed to support the breasts . It consisted of a plate made of metal , cardboard , or other stiff material , shaped to fit against the torso under the breasts , following the contour of the breasts . It was covered with silk , canvas , or other cloth , which extended above the plate to form a pocket for each breast . The plate curved around the torso and ended near the armpits , held in place and adjusted to a snug fit by shoulder straps that crossed the back , forming an X @-@ shape . It was secured with hook @-@ and @-@ eye closures . 
 The underwire bra design emerged and took hold in the United States starting in the 1930s . Helene Pons received a patent in 1931 for a brassiere design that incorporated an " open @-@ ended wire loop " that laid flat against the chest , encircling the bottom and sides of each breast . A 1932 patent describes a U @-@ shaped piece of wire used between the cups to keep the breasts separated . A patent issued in 1938 to Pauline Boris describes a " breast support " which used pieces of wire to entirely encircle each breast . In 1940 , Walter Emmett Williams was issued a patent which described a wire framework , shaped like a spiderweb , that encircles and covers each breast to provide support . Although development of the underwire bra started in the 1930s , it did not gain widespread popularity until the 1950s , when the end of World War II freed metal for domestic use . 
 In the 1940s , Howard Hughes had an underwire push @-@ up bra designed for Jane Russell to emphasize her breasts in The Outlaw . According to Russell , the " ridiculous " contraption was painful and she secretly wore her own bra during the movie . The brassiere is now in a Hollywood museum . 
 With the popularity and widespread use of the underwire bra that started during the 1950s , the underwire was incorporated into many bra designs , and underwire bras were built into other articles of clothing . By 1990 , Norma Kamali had incorporated underwire bras into both one- and two @-@ piece ( bikini ) swimsuits . Scott Lucretia was granted a patent for a camisole with an integrated underwire bra in 1989 . 
 Underwire bras accounted for 60 % of the United Kingdom bra market in 2000 and 70 % in 2005 . In 2001 , 500 million bras were sold in the United States , of which approximately 70 % ( 350 million ) were underwire bras . As of 2005 , underwire bras were the fastest growing segment of the market . 
 = = Underwire construction = = 
 Underwire bras are built with a semi @-@ circular " underwire " , " bra wire " , or " wire " embedded in the wire channel that circles the bottom and sides of each cup . One end , or head element , of the underwire is close to the front and center of the bra , and the other close to the armhole . The underwire can be made of metal or molded plastic ; most are metallic . Plastic underwire has a very small share of the market because it does not provide the same support and rigidity offered by metal underwire . A metallic underwire is a thin strip of metal , usually with a nylon coating at both ends . Metals used include steel and nickel titanium , a shape memory alloy . According to underwire manufacturer S & S Industries of New York , which supplies underwire for bra makers such as Bali , Playtex , Vanity Fair , Victoria 's Secret , Warner 's , and other bra labels , about 70 percent of women who wear bras wear steel underwire bras . 
 When the underwire breaks through the bra fabric , it can cause tremendous discomfort . Celebrity chef , television personality , and businesswoman Clarissa Dickson Wright only wears a bra on special occasions . At her 50th birthday party , she was dancing when she suddenly felt a " terrifying pain in my chest . " She initially thought she was having a heart attack . " The pain got more and more intense . I staggered off and discovered I 'd broken my <unk> bra . " 
 Because underwire can tear through cloth , most women hand @-@ wash underwire bras or machine @-@ wash them on a delicate cycle . Bra wash bags , usually zippered mesh pouches , can also be used to protect bras and prevent the underwire from separating from the bra during machine washing . 
 = = = Recent patents = = = 
 In 2002 , S & S Industries obtained a patent for an underwire design that includes a spring @-@ loaded plastic cushion tip on one or both ends . The spring is designed to keep the wire from poking through the bra . In 2008 , Scott Dutton of Wales invented the " Bra Angel " , a simple device to repair a bra when the underwire pops out of its channel . It is a barbed plastic cap that fits onto the end of the underwire , which is then inserted back into the bra and held in place by the barbs . 
 = = Health = = 
 Underwire bras can rub and pinch the breast , causing skin irritation and breast pain , and the wire of a worn bra can protrude from the fabric and scrape or cut the skin . When the fabric of worn bra exposes an underwire , skin contact with nickel and other metals may cause contact dermatitis in a few women . 
 = = = Effect on lactation = = = 
 Underwire bras , like other constrictive garments , may contribute to clogged milk ducts in lactating women . Fluctuating breast size during pregnancy poses another problem . Because underwire bras are rigid , they do not easily accommodate changes in breast size , and an ill @-@ fitting bra that does not support the breasts correctly can cause discomfort and pain . For several days after a mastectomy , or as long as the breast is tender , a woman is advised not to use an underwire bra . 
 = = = <unk> use = = = 
 Use of an automated external defibrillator on a patient in a metal underwire bra can cause burns , and the bra should be removed by the first responder before the AED is applied . In their 2007 season , the television program MythBusters tested the possibility of burns resulting from using a defibrillator on a patient who is using an underwire bra , and concluded that while it is possible , it is not likely unless the metal underwire is exposed and paddles of the defibrillator are very close to it . 
 = = = Tropical disease = = = 
 A medical report documented that wearing an underwire bra in the Tropics , specifically East Africa , can lead to severe <unk> <unk> of the breast caused by the <unk> fly . The eggs and larvae from this fly are deposited in clothing , especially along the length of the metal wires of an underwire bra , and can only be killed by applying heat through ironing . It is almost impossible when ironing a traditional underwire bra to achieve the required heat to kill the larvae deposited along the underwire . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 The United States Transportation Security Administration recommends that women do not wear underwire bras because they can set off metal detectors . Though most women travelers wear them without any problem , it can depend on the material of the underwire . 
 = = = Transportation security = = = 
 On Sunday , 24 August 2008 , film maker Nancy Kates set off a metal detector during security screening . She objected when the agent attempted to pat @-@ down her breasts . She said she told the agent , " ' You can 't treat me as a criminal for wearing a bra . " A TSA supervisor told her she had to either submit to the pat @-@ down search in a private room or not fly . Kates offered to take off her bra , which the TSA accepted . She went to the restroom , removed her bra , and walked through the airport and security screening braless . She said that a supervisor told her that underwire bras were the leading cause of metal detector false alarms . 
 In August 2010 , cancer survivor Cathy Bossi , an on @-@ duty flight attendant for U.S. Airways , was passing through security screening at Charlotte Douglas International Airport on the way to her next flight . Due to the radiation involved , she reluctantly passed through a full @-@ body scanner . " The <unk> Agent told me to put my I.D. on my back , " she said . " When I got out of there the agent said because my I.D. was on my back , I had to go to a personal screening area . " During what she described as an " aggressive " pat @-@ down search , security screening personnel forced her to remove and show her prosthetic breast . Their action violated TSA guidelines , which state that agents do not need to touch or inspect a mastectomy prosthetic . 
 In October , 2010 , CNN employee Rosemary Fitzpatrick was subject to a personal search after her underwire bra set off a metal detector . The TSA security official applied an invasive " hand @-@ sliding inspection " during which she " ran her hands around her breasts , over her stomach , buttocks and her inner thighs , and even touched her most private areas . " Fitzpatrick said that she cried during the experience . " I felt helpless , I felt violated , and I felt humiliated . " 
 In response , Triumph International , a Swiss company , launched what it called a " Frequent Flyer Bra " in late 2001 . The bra uses metal @-@ free clasps and <unk> made of resin instead of metal that are guaranteed to not set off metal detectors . The bras were not available in the United States , and in 2004 a Canadian spokeswoman did not know whether they were still manufactured . 
 = = = Correctional facility rules = = = 
 Some correctional facilities , like San Quentin State Prison , require visitors to either cut their bras and remove the underwire , or temporarily use a soft cup bra provided by the institution before being granted entry . The result can be embarrassment and consternation for unsuspecting visitors . Other facilities require women to remove their underwire bras in a bathroom , pass through the metal detector , and return to the bathroom to put their bras back on . 
 In June 2010 , attorney Britney Horstman was barred from visiting her client in the Federal Detention Center at Miami , Florida when her underwire bra set off the metal detector . Although she reminded guards of a detention center memo that permitted female attorneys visiting clients to wear an underwire bra , the guard refused her entry . That memo existed as a result of an agreement negotiated by the Federal Public Defender 's Office , which represents inmates held at the institution before trial . That agreement allows female lawyers entry if her underwire bra is detected by a metal @-@ detecting wand . Horstman removed her bra in a bathroom and returned to the security checkpoint braless , but was then turned away because she did not meet the facility 's dress code . Horstman had previously worn an underwire bra into the facility without problems . Warden Linda McGrew later promised the incident would not happen again . 
 = = Accidents and attacks = = 
 There have been several cases where the underwire from a bra has helped deflect bullets or other objects , saving the wearer 's life . In 1996 , the underwire of a girl 's bra helped save her life when she was impaled on a railing and , according to hospital personnel , the underwire from her bra probably helped deflect the spike from her heart . There have been multiple incidents where bullets were deflected by the underwire of a woman 's bra , either keeping her entirely from harm , or directing the bullet away from the heart to another part of the body . One such incident occurred in 2004 when a stray bullet shot by a member of the Ghetto Boys hit the narrow metal wire in Helen Kelly 's bra and was deflected away from her heart . In 2008 , a robbery victim was saved from being stabbed in the chest when the attacker 's knife was caught and deflected by the underwire of her bra . 
 = Clement of Dunblane = 
 Clement ( died 1258 ) was a 13th @-@ century Dominican friar who was the first member of the Dominican Order in Britain and Ireland to become a bishop . In 1233 , he was selected to lead the ailing diocese of Dunblane in Scotland , and faced a struggle to bring the bishopric of Dunblane ( or " bishopric of Strathearn " ) to financial viability . This involved many negotiations with the powerful religious institutions and secular authorities which had acquired control of the revenue that would normally have been the entitlement of Clement 's bishopric . The negotiations proved difficult , forcing Clement to visit the papal court in Rome . While not achieving all of his aims , Clement succeeded in saving the bishopric from relocation to Inchaffray Abbey . He also regained enough revenue to begin work on the new Dunblane Cathedral . 
 He faced a similar challenge with the impoverished bishopric of Argyll in the 1240s . He was given the job of restoring the viability of the diocese and installing a new bishop ; this involved forming a close relationship with King Alexander II of Scotland . Clement was with the king during his campaign in Argyll in 1249 and was at his side when he died during this campaign . In 1250 Clement had been able to install a new bishop in Argyll and had become one of the Guardians appointed to govern Scotland during the minority of King Alexander III . By 1250 he had established a reputation as one of the most active Dominican reformers in Britain . Clement helped to elevate Edmund of Abingdon and Queen Margaret to sainthood . After his death , he received veneration as a saint himself , although he was never formally canonised . 
 = = Early years and background = = 
 The Analecta <unk> Fratrum <unk> claims that he was " a Scot by birth " , and that he was admitted into the Dominican Order of Paris in 1219 . The latter source , however , is often highly unreliable , and cannot be fully trusted . The historian Archie Duncan was cautious about a date as firm and early as 1221 , and wrote that Clement " had entered the Dominican order by the later 1220s " . Although " Clement " is neither a Scottish nor an English name , the large number of French @-@ speakers in both Scotland and England during this period means that this consideration carries limited weight ; indeed " Clement " need not even have been his birth @-@ name . The diocese of Dunblane was entirely Gaelic @-@ speaking in Clement 's day , and in this era it was often frowned upon for a bishop to be ignorant of the language of his diocese . If this had been a consideration in Clement 's later appointment , then this would strongly suggest that Clement was in fact a Scot . It is worth adding that Clement was later noted for his skill in languages . Clement received his university education at either the University of Oxford or the University of Paris , perhaps at both of these institutions . There is a possibility that he can be identified more fully as " Clement Rocha " . A " Father Clement Rocha " was the owner of a manuscript from the period now held in Edinburgh . This , however , says nothing more about his background . 
 The Dominican Order had its origins in the reformist ideology of Dominic de Guzmán , later Saint Dominic . By 1219 , Dominic had established houses as far apart as Paris , Bologna , Madrid and Segovia ; at his death in 1221 , there were 21 houses . Expansion of the order continued into England as houses were established at Oxford in 1221 and London in 1224 . There were five houses in England by 1230 , by which time the Order was poised to enter Scotland . Later tradition had it that the Dominican Order entered Scotland in 1230 , encouraged by King Alexander II and William de <unk> , Bishop of St Andrews . However , the earliest certain date for the foundation of a Dominican house in Scotland is 1234 . 
 These details form the context for Clement 's appearance in Scotland and his selection as the new Bishop of Dunblane . Three years had passed since the death of the last bishop , Osbert . Since there was no electoral college for the diocese , Pope Gregory IX charged the bishops of St Andrews , Brechin and Dunkeld , to find and nominate a suitable replacement . There can only be informed speculation regarding the choice of Clement . Importantly , perhaps , King Alexander was later noted for " his concern for building churches for the Friars Preacher [ Fratrum <unk> <unk> ] " . The status of the Dominicans at the cutting edge of religious reform , together with Clement 's background , may have been the decisive factors . At any rate , Clement was consecrated as bishop at <unk> on 4 September 1233 , by William de <unk> , Bishop of St Andrews . His consecration meant that he was the first Dominican in the British Isles to obtain a bishopric . This has prompted the historian Archie Duncan to comment that " the choice of the first friar @-@ bishop ... can only be called daring " . 
 = = Bishopric of Dunblane = = 
 The bishopric of Dunblane was a small diocese , essentially confined to the earldoms of Strathearn and Menteith . Size was a problem for providing the bishopric with adequate income , a problem compounded by the fact that Gille <unk> , Mormaer of Strathearn , had established Inchaffray Priory in 1200 ( promoted to Abbey in 1221 ) . In the 1440s , Bower wrote that Gille <unk> : 
 Divided his earldom into three equal portions . One he gave to the church and bishop of Dunblane , the second to St John the Evangelist and the canons of Inchaffray , the third he kept for himself and his own needs . 
 If this were not enough , much of the income not granted to Inchaffray had since been given to other religious institutions ; some revenue was even controlled by the Bishop of Dunkeld . Dunblane had its origins in an older Gaelic monastic establishment , that is , in an institution with an abbot @-@ bishop heading a relatively informal establishment of smaller cells with little geographical compactness . Dunblane emerged as a bishopric in 1155 , probably , like bishoprics with a similar history ( e.g. Brechin ) , having changed in little more than name . There was a community of Céli Dé at <unk> until at least the end of the 13th century , and the base for the archdeaconry of the diocese appears to have varied between there and Dunblane until the time of Bishop Clement . The bishopric itself appears to have been without a single base , although it was probably associated with both locations . Clement visited the papal court to present his difficult situation . In spring 1237 , the Pope wrote to the Bishop of Dunkeld that : 
 Bishop Clement ... found the Church so desolated that there was no place in the Cathedral Church where he could lay his head ; it had no college of clergy ; the divine offices were celebrated in a roofless church and by a rural chaplain only ; and the episcopal revenues were so slender , and had been alienated to such a degree , that they scarcely sufficed to support him for half a year . 
 In response to Clement 's visit , moreover , the Pope had empowered the Bishops of Dunkeld , Brechin and St Andrews to take action to rescue the bishopric . He told these bishops that , 
 Since the continual care of all the churches is our daily burden , we grant to the said Church [ Dunblane ] , so far as we personally can , and authorise you , if you find the situation to be as described , to assign to the said Bishop , if it can be done without scandal , a quarter of the <unk> of all the parish churches of the Diocese of Dunblane , so that under your guidance and that of upright men , he may set aside a suitable portion of them for his own maintenance , and thereafter assign revenues for a dean and canons whom we wish and authorise you to institute there . 
 Failing this , the Pope wrote , 
 The quarter <unk> of all the churches of the Diocese assigned to the Bishop , which are held by laymen , you shall transfer with the episcopal seat to the Canons Regular of St. John in the Diocese [ i.e. to Inchaffray Abbey ] , who shall have power to elect a Bishop in any vacancy . 
 So the Pope 's help was two @-@ sided . It made Clement 's task vis @-@ à @-@ vis these institutions easier , but on the other hand the possibility had emerged that Dunblane could disappear as an episcopal centre . 
 = = Recovery and rebuilding = = 
 In the three or four years after his visit to the papacy , agreements were made with the various institutions who were drawing income from Clement 's diocese – namely Coupar Angus Abbey , Lindores Abbey , Cambuskenneth Abbey , Arbroath Abbey , the nunnery of North Berwick and the Hospital of Brackley , Northamptonshire . These agreements did not constitute complete success . Clement was able to recover some revenue , but in fixed payments liable to real decline by way of inflation . Moreover , he had to concede permanent <unk> to several of the abbots , concessions which would give them a role in the election of his successors . Another partial set @-@ back took place . Walter Comyn , Earl of Menteith , had decided to found a monastery in his earldom and take up the income of Menteith 's churches to do it ; the whole of Menteith constituted nearly half of the diocese . Despite the Pope 's previously helpful behaviour towards Clement 's cause , he granted the earl permission to found the new monastery . The earl established Inchmahome Priory in the Lake of Menteith in 1238 . Walter and Clement came to conflict over the new priory 's rights , but in the same year an agreement was drawn up in a meeting of churchmen at Perth . The agreement placed most of Menteith 's churches under the control of the earl ; however , Clement obtained several concessions , including the right to receive episcopal dues from the new priory . Overall , Clement 's successes were considerable considering the opposition which he faced , but even after his death , only 12 of the 26 parish churches in the diocese were under the bishop 's direct control . 
 Although his successor Robert de <unk> claimed that the income of the see was still inadequate , it was nevertheless enough for Clement to begin building a new cathedral . This was despite the virtual hostility of the earl of Menteith and what Cynthia Neville has noted as the lack of interest by the earls of Strathearn , evidenced by their reluctance to bestow patronage on the bishopric . Neville 's explanation for this is that " the bishops ' ambition represented a challenge to their proprietary interests " . It has been suggested that Clement dismantled the small church building which had served Dunblane previously , before beginning work . The cathedral was constructed in the Gothic manner , beginning with the " Lady Chapel " ; the Lady Chapel was used while the rest of the cathedral was being built . It is possible that the cathedral of Dunblane was completed during Clement 's episcopate , and it is almost certain that most of it was . 
 = = On the wider stage = = 
 Clement 's position as Bishop of Dunblane provided the opportunity to participate on the larger national and international stage . In 1241 , the Cistercian general chapter began postulating the Pope about the saintliness of Edmund of Abingdon , formerly Archbishop of Canterbury . In the following year , various clerics wrote pieces and compiled evidence supporting this Edmund 's claim to sainthood . Clement was one of these clerics . Edmund 's saintliness was endorsed by Pope Innocent IV in 1246 . Clement took part in a similar campaign in 1249 . He was part of the movement to <unk> Queen Margaret , one of the ancestors of the contemporary Scottish kings . Clement was appointed to investigate her saintliness , and in the following year Margaret too was canonised . Meanwhile , in 1247 , Pope Innocent IV gave Clement the more onerous and demanding appointment of papal tax collector . Clement was charged with collecting one twentieth of all ecclesiastical revenues within the Kingdom of the Scots . The purpose was to finance a new crusade , and Clement 's appointment was part of a money @-@ raising initiative carried out throughout Western Christendom . 
 Perhaps Clement 's most significant activities were , however , in relation to the bishopric of Argyll . In 1241 , Argyll 's last bishop , William , had been drowned while at sea . Argyll was the poorest bishopric in Scotland , and the area lacked strong royal authority , and hence good royal protection . In the following six years , no one had taken up the vacant bishopric . From at least 1247 , then , Clement was given charge of the diocese . He was essentially being asked to do for Argyll what he had previously done for Strathearn . The sources are quite thin on this ground , but by 1249 he had brought at least one more church into the control of the bishopric . On 23 December 1248 , he was also authorised by the Pope to appoint , with the agreement of the Bishop of Glasgow , a new bishop for Argyll . In January 1249 , Clement was given permission to move the cathedral of Argyll , based on Lismore , to the mainland . Clement 's problem seems to have been with the ruler of Argyll , Eóghan . The lack of royal authority in Argyll made it difficult for the national and international church to exercise control in the province ; at the same time , establishing a strong bishopric in the area was vital to integrating the area fully into the kingdom , an aim cherished by the contemporary king , Alexander II . Thus Alexander 's goal and Clement 's goal were essentially one and the same . It is impossible to be more specific , but in 1249 , King Alexander II launched an expedition against Eóghan . The king was attempting to force Eóghan , whose lands lay within both the overlordship of the Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of Norway , to renounce his allegiance to the King of Norway . Eóghan told Alexander that he was unable to do this . The contemporary historian Matthew Paris wrote that : 
 The king therefore declared Eóghan unfaithful and pursued him <unk> by ship near Argyll ; urged , as is said , by the vehement promptings of a certain indiscreet bishop of Strathearn , a friar to wit of the order of the Preachers . 
 This " indiscreet bishop ... friar " was , of course , Clement . Alexander died from ill @-@ health on this expedition , with Clement by his side at his deathbed . Alexander 's last act was to make a grant to the bishopric of Argyll . Despite the king 's death , the expedition was a success for Clement . There was a new Bishop of Argyll by 27 September 1250 ; in the longer term , the see continued to be ruled by bishops with no long vacancies until the Reformation . Moreover , by 1255 Eóghan had given his full allegiance to the Scottish crown , albeit because of lack of favour given to him by the King of Norway . Clement 's close association with the late King Alexander II and his reputation as a successful bishop made him a key political figure during the minority of Alexander III . Clement was on the Council of Guardians , the small group of nobles and clerics who were to " govern " Scotland until the end of Alexander III 's boyhood . The governing Council broke down around two rival factions , one centred on Walter Comyn and the other around Alan Durward . There is little evidence about Clement 's activities in regard to the Council , but he was associated with the Comyn faction , who enjoyed the ascendency after Walter gained control of government in 1251 . In 1255 , the <unk> staged a coup at Roxburgh and ousted the " Comyn faction " from effective power . Unfortunately for Alan Durward , Comyn 's supporter Gamelin , who had been placed in the bishopric of St Andrews and excluded from his diocese by Durward , had fled to the papal court and convinced the Pope to excommunicate Alan . The sentence was delivered by Bishop Clement and the abbots of Melrose and Jedburgh . This is Clement 's last known act . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 The Chronicle of Melrose reports Clement 's death under the year 1258 . Clement 's legacy was to be remembered as the restorer of the diocese of Dunblane and the builder of its cathedral . Thus for future generations , Clement became the father @-@ figure of the see . Clement was later commemorated as a saint , though there is no record of formal canonisation . He was commemorated on 19 March , meaning that was almost certainly believed to have been the date of his death . Clement 's death was also noted by Walter Bower , a Lowland Scottish historian writing in the 1440s , who included the following obituary : 
 Clement bishop of Dunblane died , that outstanding member of the Order of Preachers , a man most eloquent in translating various tongues , powerful in speech and action in the sight of God and of men . He found the cathedral church of his diocese reduced by the neglect of his predecessors to such a state of decay that the divine offices were celebrated in it scarcely three times a week , as if it were some rural chapel . He built it up to be a hallowed sanctuary , enriched it with lands and possessions , and increased its prestige by adding prebends and <unk> . 
 Such flattering sentiments had even been expressed during Clement 's lifetime . In 1250 , the General Chapter of the Dominican Order met in London , and decreed that : 
 we grant to Friar Clement of our Order , a bishop of Scotland , after his death , one mass throughout the Order by every friar <unk> is a priest . 
 Although there survives a sermon almost certainly written by him , Clement was also credited with being a prolific translator and writing four books ( including a hagiography of St Dominic ) , all of which are now lost . 
 Some historians have been ambiguous about Clement 's episcopate . For instance , Cynthia Neville , despite acknowledging that " the successful reform of the see was , in fact , accomplished almost exclusively as a consequence of the efforts of Clement and his successors " , nevertheless expresses some scepticism about his achievements and notices his failure to gain the patronage of the native rulers of Strathearn . Others have been more enthusiastic . The ecclesiastical historian and former minister of Dunblane Cathedral , James Hutchison Cockburn , agreed with Bower 's eulogy and declared that the " title " of sainthood " would have been worthily bestowed " . Archie Duncan , more recently , stated that Clement " clearly enjoyed a reputation far wider than his domestic accomplishments alone would explain " and concluded that Clement " represents the occasional triumph of the ideal of reform of church life over the careerism which generally motivated thirteenth @-@ century clergy " . 
 = Aeneas Mackintosh = 
 Aeneas Lionel Acton Mackintosh ( 1 July 1879 – 8 May 1916 ) was a British Merchant Navy officer and Antarctic explorer , who commanded the Ross Sea party as part of Sir Ernest Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1914 – 17 . The Ross Sea party 's mission was to support Shackleton 's proposed transcontinental march by laying supply depots along the latter stages of the march 's intended route . In the face of persistent setbacks and practical difficulties , Mackintosh 's party fulfilled its task , although he and two others died in the course of their duties . 
 Mackintosh 's first Antarctic experience was as second officer on Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition , 1907 – 09 . Shortly after his arrival in the Antarctic , a shipboard accident destroyed his right eye , and he was sent back to New Zealand . He returned in 1909 to participate in the later stages of the expedition ; his will and determination in adversity impressed Shackleton , and led to his Ross Sea party appointment in 1914 . 
 Having brought his party to the Antarctic , Mackintosh was faced with numerous difficulties . Confused and vague orders meant he was uncertain of the timing of Shackleton 's proposed march . His problems were compounded when the party 's ship , SY Aurora , was swept from its winter moorings during a gale and was unable to return , causing the loss of vital equipment and supplies . In carrying out the party 's depot @-@ laying task , one man died ; Mackintosh barely survived , owing his life to the actions of his comrades who brought him to safety . Restored to health , he and a companion disappeared while attempting to return to the expedition 's base camp by crossing the unstable sea ice . 
 Mackintosh 's competence and leadership skills have been questioned by polar historians . Shackleton commended the work of the party , and equated the sacrifice of their lives to those given in the trenches of the First World War , but was critical of Mackintosh 's organising skills . Years later , Shackleton 's son , Lord Shackleton , identified Mackintosh as one of the expedition 's heroes , alongside Ernest Joyce and Dick Richards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mackintosh was born in <unk> , India , on 1 July 1879 , one of six children ( five sons and a daughter ) of a Scottish indigo planter , Alexander Mackintosh , a descendant from the chieftains of Clan Chattan . Aeneas would in due course be named as an heir to the chieftainship , and to the ancient seat at Inverness that went with it . When Aeneas was still a young child , his mother , Annie Mackintosh , suddenly returned to Britain , bringing the children with her . The reasons for the family rift are unknown , but it was evidently permanent . At home in Bedfordshire , Aeneas attended Bedford Modern School . He then followed the same path as had Ernest Shackleton five years earlier , leaving school at the age of 16 to go to sea . After serving a tough Merchant Officer 's apprenticeship , he joined the P and O Line , and remained with this company until he was recruited by Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition , which sailed for Antarctica in 1907 . Before the expedition 's departure Mackintosh was commissioned Sub @-@ Lieutenant in the Royal Naval Reserve . 
 = = Nimrod Expedition = = 
 The Nimrod Expedition , 1907 – 1909 , was the first of three Antarctic expeditions led by Ernest Shackleton . Its objective , as stated by Shackleton , was to " proceed to the Ross Quadrant of the Antarctic with a view to reaching the Geographical South Pole and the South Magnetic Pole " . Mackintosh was recommended to Shackleton as a suitable officer by the P & O Line , and soon earned Shackleton 's confidence while impressing his fellow @-@ officers with his will and determination . While the expedition was in New Zealand , Shackleton added Mackintosh to the shore party , as a likely candidate for the polar march . 
 = = = Accident = = = 
 On 31 January 1908 , not long after Nimrod 's arrival at McMurdo Sound in the Antarctic , Mackintosh was assisting in the transfer of sledging gear aboard ship when a hook swung across the deck and struck his right eye , virtually destroying it . He was immediately taken to the captain 's cabin where , later that day , expedition doctor Eric Marshall operated to remove the eye , using partly improvised surgical equipment . Marshall was deeply impressed by Mackintosh 's fortitude , observing that " no man could have taken it better . " The accident cost Mackintosh his place on the shore party , and required his return to New Zealand for further treatment . He took no part in the main events of the expedition , but returned south with Nimrod in January 1909 , to participate in the closing stages . Shackleton , who had earlier fallen out with the ship 's master , Rupert England , had wanted Mackintosh to captain Nimrod on this voyage , but the eye injury had not healed sufficiently to make this appointment possible . 
 = = = Lost on the ice = = = 
 On 1 January 1909 , on its return to Antarctica , Nimrod was stopped by the ice , still 25 miles ( 40 km ) from the expedition 's shore base at Cape Royds . Mackintosh decided that he would cross this stretch of ice on foot . Historian Beau Riffenburgh describes the journey that followed as " one of the most ill @-@ considered parts of the entire expedition " . 
 Mackintosh 's party , which left the ship on the morning of 3 January , consisted of Mackintosh and three sailors , with a sledge containing supplies and a large mailbag . Two sailors quickly returned to the ship , while Mackintosh and one companion went forward . They camped on the ice that evening , only to find next day that the whole area around them had broken up . After a desperate dash over the moving floes , they managed to reach a small glacier tongue . They camped there , and waited for several days for their snow @-@ blindness to subside . When their vision returned , they found that Cape Royds was in sight but inaccessible , as the sea @-@ ice leading to it had gone , leaving a stretch of open water . They had little choice but to make for the hut by land , a dangerous undertaking without appropriate equipment and experience . 
 On 11 January they set out . For the next 48 hours they struggled over hostile terrain , through regions of deep crevasses and treacherous snowfields . They soon parted company with all their equipment and supplies . At one point , to proceed , they had to ascend to 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) and then slide to the foot of a snow @-@ slope . Eventually , after stumbling around in the fog for hours , they fortunately encountered Bernard Day , a member of the shore party , a short distance from the hut . The ship later recovered the abandoned equipment . John King Davis , then serving as Nimrod 's chief officer , remarked that " Mackintosh was always the man to take the hundredth chance . This time he got away with it . " 
 Mackintosh later joined Ernest Joyce and others on a journey across the Great Ice Barrier to Minna Bluff , to lay a depot for Shackleton 's polar party , whose return from their southern march was awaited . On 3 March , while keeping watch on the deck of Nimrod , Mackintosh observed a flare , which signalled the safe return of Shackleton and his party . They had fallen just short of their South Pole objective , having reached a Farthest South of 88 ° 23 ' S. 
 = = Between expeditions = = 
 Mackintosh returned to England in June 1909 . On reporting to the P & O , he was informed that due to his impaired sight he was discharged . Without immediate prospects of employment , he agreed , early in 1910 , to accompany Douglas Mawson ( who had served as a geologist on the Nimrod Expedition and was later to lead the Australasian Antarctic Expedition ) on a trip to Hungary , to survey a potential <unk> which Shackleton was hoping would form the basis of a lucrative business venture . Despite a promising report from Mawson , nothing came of this . Mackintosh later launched his own treasure @-@ hunting expedition to Cocos Island off the Panama Pacific coast , but again returned home empty @-@ handed . 
 In February 1912 , Mackintosh married Gladys Campbell , and settled into an office job as assistant secretary to the Imperial Merchant Service Guild in Liverpool . The safe , routine work did not satisfy him : " I am still existing at this job , stuck in a dirty office , " he wrote to a former Nimrod shipmate . " I always feel I never completed my first initiation — so would like to have one final wallow , for good or bad ! " He was therefore delighted , early in 1914 , to receive an invitation from Shackleton to join the latter 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , which was to attempt the first crossing of the Antarctic continent . 
 = = Ross Sea party = = 
 = = = Early difficulties = = = 
 Shackleton 's expedition contained two separate components . The main party would establish a base in the Weddell Sea , from which a group of six led by Shackleton was to march across the continent , via the South Pole . A supporting Ross Sea party , based on the opposite side of the continent in McMurdo Sound , would lay supply depots across the Great Ice Barrier , to assist the transcontinental party on the final stage of its journey . Mackintosh was originally to have been a member of Shackleton 's transcontinental party , but difficulties arose over the appointment of a commander for the Ross Sea party . Eric Marshall , the surgeon from the Nimrod expedition , turned the assignment down , as did John King Davis ; Shackleton 's efforts to obtain from the Admiralty a naval crew for this part of the enterprise were rejected . The post of Ross Sea party leader was finally offered to , and accepted by , Mackintosh . His ship would be the Aurora , lately used by Mawson 's Australasian Antarctic Expedition and presently lying in Australia . Shackleton considered the Ross Sea party 's assignment routine , and saw no special difficulties in its execution . 
 Mackintosh arrived in Australia in October 1914 to take up his duties , and was immediately faced with major difficulties . Without warning or notification , Shackleton had cut the Ross Sea party 's allocated funds in half , from £ 2 @,@ 000 to £ 1 @,@ 000 . Mackintosh was instructed to make up the difference by soliciting free gifts , and to mortgage the expedition 's ship to raise further money . It then emerged that the purchase of Aurora had not been legally completed , which delayed Mackintosh 's attempts to mortgage it . Also , Aurora was unfit for Antarctic work without an extensive overhaul , which required co @-@ operation from an exasperated Australian Government . The task of dealing with these difficulties within a very restricted timescale caused Mackintosh great anxiety , and the various muddles created a negative image of the expedition in the eyes of the Australian public . Some members of the party resigned , others were dismissed ; recruiting a full complement of crew and scientific staff involved some last @-@ minute appointments which left the party noticeably short of Antarctic experience . 
 Shackleton had given Mackintosh the impression that he would if possible attempt his crossing during the coming 1914 – 15 Antarctic season . Before departing for the Weddell Sea , he changed his mind about the feasibility of this timescale . Mackintosh was not informed of this change of plan ; this misunderstanding led to the underprepared and near @-@ chaotic depot @-@ laying journeys of January – March 1915 . 
 = = = Depot @-@ laying , first season = = = 
 Aurora finally left Hobart , Tasmania , on 24 December 1914 . On 16 January 1915 the shore party landed at McMurdo Sound , where Mackintosh established a base camp at Captain Scott 's old headquarters at Cape Evans . Believing that Shackleton might have already begun his march from the Weddell Sea , he was determined to begin depot @-@ laying at once . Joyce , the expedition 's most seasoned Antarctic traveller — he had been with Scott 's Discovery Expedition in 1901 – 04 , and with the Nimrod Expedition — protested that the party needed time for acclimatisation and training , but was overruled . Joyce was shocked by the rebuff ; he had expected that Mackintosh would defer to him on sledging matters : " If I had <unk> here I would make him see my way of arguing " , he wrote in his diary . The depot @-@ laying journey which followed began with a series of mishaps . A blizzard delayed their start , a motor sledge broke down after a few miles , and Mackintosh and his group lost their way on the sea ice between Cape Evans and Hut Point . Conditions on the Barrier were harsh for the untrained and inexperienced men . Many of the stores taken on to the Barrier were dumped on the ice to reduce loads and did not reach the depots . After Mackintosh insisted , over Joyce 's urgent protests , on taking the dogs all the way to 80 ° S , all died on the journey . The men , frostbitten and exhausted , returned to the old Discovery expedition hut at Hut Point on 24 March , but were cut off from the ship and from their Cape Evans base by unsafe sea ice and had to wait , idle , for nearly three months . After this experience , confidence in Mackintosh 's leadership was low , and bickering rife . 
 = = = Loss of Aurora = = = 
 When Mackintosh and the depot @-@ laying party finally reached Cape Evans in mid @-@ June , they learned that Aurora , with 18 men on board and carrying most of the shore party 's supplies and equipment , had broken loose from its winter mooring during a gale . Ice conditions in McMurdo Sound made it impossible for the ship to return ; the shore party of ten was effectively marooned , with drastically depleted resources . However , most of the stores required for the depots had been landed . Mackintosh therefore resolved that the following season 's work would be carried out to the full : depots would be laid across the Great ice Barrier all the way to the Beardmore Glacier . The party would seek to make up its lack of supplies and equipment by salvaging the stores left by earlier expeditions , particularly from Captain Scott 's recent sojourn at Cape Evans . The entire party pledged its support to this effort , though it would require , wrote Mackintosh , a record @-@ breaking feat of polar travel to accomplish it . However , the long months of preparation were difficult for Mackintosh . The only officer in the party , he found it hard to form close relationships with his companions . His position became increasingly isolated , and subject to the frequent vocal criticisms of Joyce in particular . 
 = = = March to Mount Hope = = = 
 On 1 September 1915 , nine men in teams of three began the task of hauling approximately 5 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) of stores from the Cape Evans base on to the Barrier — the scientist Alexander Stevens remained at base camp , alone . This operation was the first stage in the process of laying down depots at intervals of one @-@ degree latitude ( 60 nautical miles / 110 km / 69 statute miles ) , down to Mount Hope at the foot of the Beardmore Glacier . A large forward base was then established at the Bluff depot , just north of 79 ° , from which the final journeys to Mount Hope would be launched early in 1916 . During these early stages , Mackintosh clashed repeatedly with Joyce over methods . In a showdown on 28 November , confronted with incontrovertible evidence of the greater effectiveness of Joyce 's methods over his own , Mackintosh was forced to back down and accept a revised plan drafted by Joyce and Richards . Joyce 's private comment was " I never in my experience came across such an idiot in charge of men . " 
 The main march southward from the Bluff depot began on 1 January 1916 . Within a few days , one team of three was forced to return to base , following the failure of their Primus stove . The other six carried on : Mackintosh , Joyce , Ernest Wild , Dick Richards , Arnold Spencer @-@ Smith and Victor Hayward . The 80 ° depot laid the previous season was reinforced , and new depots were built at 81 ° and 82 ° . As the party moved on towards the vicinity of Mount Hope , both Mackintosh and Spencer @-@ Smith , the expedition 's photographer , were hobbling . Shortly after the 83 ° mark was passed , Spencer @-@ Smith collapsed and was left in a tent while the others struggled on the remaining few miles . Mackintosh rejected the suggestion that he should remain with the invalid , insisting that it was his duty to ensure that every depot was laid . On 26 January , Mount Hope was attained and the final depot put in place . 
 On the homeward march , Spencer @-@ Smith had to be drawn on the sledge . Mackintosh 's condition was deteriorating rapidly ; unable to pull , he staggered along , crippled by the growing effects of scurvy . As his condition worsened , Mackintosh was forced at intervals to join Spencer @-@ Smith as a passenger on the sledge . Even the fitter members of the group were handicapped by frostbite , snow @-@ blindness and scurvy , as the journey became a desperate struggle for survival . On 8 March , Mackintosh volunteered to remain in the tent while the others tried to get Spencer @-@ Smith to the relative safety of Hut Point . Spencer @-@ Smith died the next day . Richards , Wild and Joyce struggled on to Hut Point with the now stricken Hayward , before returning to rescue Mackintosh . By 18 March , all five survivors were recuperating at Hut Point , having completed what Shackleton 's biographers Marjory and James Fisher describe as " one of the most remarkable , and apparently impossible , feats of endurance in the history of polar travel . " 
 = = = Disappearance and death = = = 
 With the help of fresh seal meat which halted the ravages of scurvy , the survivors slowly recovered at Hut Point . The unstable condition of the sea ice in McMurdo Sound prevented them from completing the journey to the Cape Evans base . Conditions at Hut Point were gloomy and depressing , with an unrelieved diet and no normal comforts ; Mackintosh in particular found the squalor of the hut intolerable , and dreaded the possibility that , caught at Hut Point , they might miss the return of the ship . On 8 May 1916 , after carrying out reconnaissance on the state of the sea ice , Mackintosh announced that he and Hayward were prepared to risk the walk to Cape Evans . Against the urgent advice of their comrades , they set off , carrying only light supplies . 
 Shortly after they had moved out of sight of Hut Point , a severe blizzard developed which lasted for two days . When it had subsided , Joyce and Richards followed the still visible footmarks on the ice up to a large crack , where the tracks stopped . Neither Mackintosh nor Hayward arrived at Cape Evans and no trace of either was ever found , despite extensive searches carried out by Joyce after he , Richards and Wild finally managed to reach Cape Evans in June . 
 After Aurora finally returned to Cape Evans in January 1917 , there were further searches , equally fruitless . All the indications were that Mackintosh and Hayward had either fallen through the ice , or that the ice on which they had been walking had been blown out to sea during the blizzard . 
 A memorial to Mackintosh exists on the grave of his mother Annie in the grave yard of St. Johns church in Burgess Hill in West Sussex . The memorial also mentions two of Mackintosh 's brothers who died prematurely in Thailand and Southern Rhodesia and a sister who lived into old age and died in 1962 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Mackintosh 's own expedition diaries , which cover the period up to 30 September 1915 , have not been published ; they are held by the Scott Polar Research Institute . The two main accounts available to general readers are Joyce 's diaries , published in 1929 as The South Polar Trail , and the account of Dick Richards : The Ross Sea Shore Party 1914 – 17 . Mackintosh 's reputation is not well @-@ served by either , particularly Joyce 's partisan record which is described by one commentator as a " self @-@ aggrandizing epic " . Joyce is generally scathing about Mackintosh 's leadership ; Richards 's account is much shorter and more straightforward , although decades later , when he was the only member of the expedition still alive ( he died in 1985 , aged 91 ) , he spoke out , claiming that Mackintosh on the depot @-@ laying march was " tremendously pathetic " , had " lost his nerve completely " , and that the fatal ice walk was " suicide " . 
 The circumstances of Mackintosh 's death have led commentators to emphasise his impetuousness and incompetence . This generally negative view of him was not , however , unanimous among his comrades . Stevens , the party 's scientist , found Mackintosh " steadfast and reliable " , and believed that the Ross Sea party would have achieved much less but for Mackintosh 's <unk> drive . John King Davis , too , admired Mackintosh 's dedication and called the depot @-@ laying journey a " magnificent achievement " . Shackleton was equivocal . In South he acknowledges that Mackintosh and his men achieved their object , praises the party 's qualities of endurance and self @-@ sacrifice , and asserts that Mackintosh died for his country . On the other hand , in a letter home , he is highly critical : " Mackintosh seemed to have no idea of discipline or organisation ... " . Shackleton did , however , donate part of the proceeds from a short New Zealand lecture tour to assist the Mackintosh family . His son , Lord Shackleton , in a much later assessment of the expedition , wrote : " Three men in particular emerge as heroes : Captain Aeneas Mackintosh , ... Dick Richards , and Ernest Joyce . " 
 Mackintosh had two daughters , the second born while he was in Australia awaiting the Aurora 's departure . On the return Barrier journey in February 1916 , expecting to die , he wrote a farewell message , with echoes of Captain Scott . The message concludes : " If it is God 's will that we should have given up our lives then we do so in the British manner as our tradition holds us in honour bound to do . Goodbye , friends . I feel sure that my dear wife and children will not be neglected . " In 1923 , Gladys Mackintosh married Joseph Stenhouse , Aurora 's first officer and later captain . 
 Mackintosh , who had received a silver Polar Medal for his work during the Nimrod Expedition , is commemorated by Mt . Mackintosh at 74 ° 20 ′ S 162 ° 15 ′ E. 
 = Music of the American Civil War = 
 During the American Civil War , music played a prominent role on both sides of the conflict : Union and Confederate . On the American Civil War battlefield , different instruments including bugles , drums , and fifes were played to issue marching orders or sometimes simply to boost the morale of one 's fellow soldiers . Singing was also employed as a recreational activity , but as a release from the inevitable tensions that come with fighting in a war , particularly a war in which the issue of freedom of a race is to be decided . In camp , music was a diversion away from the bloodshed , helping the soldiers deal with homesickness and boredom . Soldiers of both sides often engaged in recreation with musical instruments , and when the opposing armies were near each other , sometimes the bands from both sides of the conflict played against each other on the night before a battle . 
 Each side had its particular favorite tunes , while some music was enjoyed by Northerners and Southerners alike , as exemplified by United States President Abraham Lincoln 's love of Dixie , the unofficial anthem of the Confederacy . To this day , many of the songs are sung when a patriotic piece is required . The war 's music also inspired music artists such as Lynyrd Skynyrd and Elvis Presley . 
 = = Development of American music = = 
 The Civil War was an important period in the development of American music . During the Civil War , when soldiers from across the country commingled , the multifarious strands of American music began to <unk> each other , a process that was aided by the burgeoning railroad industry and other technological developments that made travel and communication easier . Army units included individuals from across the country , and they rapidly traded tunes , instruments and techniques . The songs that arose from this fusion were " the first American folk music with discernible features that can be considered unique to America " . The war was an impetus for the creation of many songs that became and remained wildly popular ; the songs were aroused by " all the varied passions ( that the Civil War inspired ) " and " echoed and re @-@ echoed " every aspect of the war . John Tasker Howard has claimed that the songs from this era " could be arranged in proper sequence to form an actual history of the conflicts ; its events , its principal characters , and the ideals and principles of the opposing sides " . 
 In addition to , and in conjunction with , popular songs with patriotic fervor , the Civil War era also produced a great body of brass band pieces , from both the North and the South , as well as other military musical traditions like the bugle call " Taps " . 
 = = Regulations = = 
 In May 1861 the United States War Department officially approved that every regiment of infantry and artillery could have a brass band with 24 members , while a cavalry regiment could have one of sixteen members . The Confederate army would also have brass bands . This was followed by a Union army regulation of July 1861 requiring every infantry , artillery , or cavalry company to have two musicians and for there to be a twenty @-@ four man band for every regiment . The July 1861 requirement was ignored as the war dragged on , as riflemen were more needed than musicians . In July 1862 the brass bands of the Union were disassembled by the adjutant general , although the soldiers that comprised them were sometimes reenlisted and assigned to musician roles . A survey in October 1861 found that 75 % of Union regiments had a band . By December 1861 the Union army had 28 @,@ 000 musicians in 618 bands ; a ratio of one soldier out of 41 who served the army was a musician , and the Confederate army was believed to have a similar ratio . Musicians were often given special privileges . Union general Phillip Sheridan gave his cavalry bands the best horses and special uniforms , believing " Music has done its share , and more than its share , in winning this war " . 
 Musicians on the battlefield were drummers and buglers , with an occasional fifer . <unk> had to learn forty @-@ nine separate calls just for infantry , with more needed for cavalry . These ranged from battle commands to calls for meal time . Some of these required musicians were drummer boys not even in their teens , which allowed an adult man to instead be a foot soldier . The most notable of these under aged musicians was John Clem , also known as " Johnny Shiloh " . Union drummers wore white straps to support their drums . The drum and band majors wore baldrics to indicate their status ; after the war , this style would be emulated in civilian bands . Drummers would march to the right of a marching column . Similar to buglers , drummers had to learn 39 different beats : fourteen for general use , and 24 for marching cadence . However , buglers were given greater importance than drummers . 
 = = On the battlefield = = 
 Whole songs were sometimes played during battles . The survivors of the disastrous Pickett 's Charge returned under the tune Nearer My God to Thee . At the Battle of Five Forks , Union musicians under orders from Sheridan played Stephen Foster 's minstrel song Nelly Bly while being shot at on the front lines . Samuel P. Heintzelman , the commander of the III Corps , saw many of his musicians standing at the back lines at the Battle of Williamsburg , and ordered them to play anything . Their music rallied the Union forces , forcing the Confederate to withdraw . It was said that music was the equivalent of " a thousand men " on one 's side . Robert E. Lee himself said , " I don 't think we could have an army without music . " 
 Sometimes , musicians were ordered to leave the battlefront and assist the surgeons . One notable time was the 20th Maine 's musicians at Little Round Top . As the rest of the regiment were driving back wave after wave of Confederates , the musicians of the regiment were not just performing amputations , but doing it in a very quick manner . 
 = = In camp = = 
 Many soldiers brought musical instruments from home to pass the time at camp . Banjos , fiddles , and guitars were particularly popular . Aside from drums , the instruments Confederates played were either acquired before the war , or imported , due to the lack of brass and the industry to make such instruments . 
 Musical duels between the two sides were common , as they heard each other as the music traveled across the countryside . The night before the Battle of Stones River , bands from both sides dueled with separate songs , until both sides started playing Home ! Sweet Home ! , at which time soldiers on both sides started singing together as one . A similar situation occurred in Fredericksburg , Virginia in the winter of 1862 – 3 . On a cold afternoon a Union band started playing Northern patriotic tunes ; a Southern band responded by playing Southern patriotic tunes . This back and forth continued into the night , until at the end both sides played Home ! Sweet Home ! simultaneously , to the cheers of both sides ' forces . In a third instance , in the spring of 1863 , the opposing armies were on the opposite sides of the Rappahannock River in Virginia , when the different sides played their patriotic tunes , and at taps one side played Home ! Sweet Home ! , and the other joined in , creating " cheers " from both sides that echoed throughout the hilly countryside . 
 Both sides sang Maryland , My Maryland , although the lyrics were slightly different . Another popular song for both was Lorena . When Johnny Comes Marching Home was written in 1863 by Patrick Gilmore , an immigrant from Ireland , and was also enjoyed by both sides . 
 = = Homefront = = 
 The first song written for the war , The First Gun is Fired , was first published and distributed three days after the Battle of Fort Sumter . George F. Root , who wrote it , is said to have produced the most songs of anyone about the war , over thirty in total . Lincoln once wrote a letter to Root , saying , " You have done more than a hundred generals and a thousand orators " . 
 The southern states had long lagged behind northern states in producing common literature . With the advent of war , Southern publishers were in demand . These publishers , based largely in five cities ( Charleston , South Carolina ; Macon , Georgia ; Mobile , Alabama ; Nashville , Tennessee ' and New Orleans , Louisiana ) , produced five times more printed music than they did literature . 
 In the Confederate States of America , God Save the South was the official national anthem . However , Dixie was the most popular . United States President Abraham Lincoln said he loved Dixie and wanted to hear it played , saying " as we had captured the rebel army , we had also captured the rebel tune " . At an April 9 , 1865 rally , the band director was surprised when Lincoln requested that the band play Dixie . Lincoln said , " That tune is now Federal property ... good to show the rebels that , with us in power , they will be free to hear it again " . The other prominent tune was The Bonnie Blue Flag , and like Dixie was written in 1861 , unlike Union popular tunes which were written throughout the war . 
 The United States did not have a national anthem at this time ( Star Spangled Banner would not be recognized as such until the twentieth century ) . Union soldiers frequently sang the Battle Cry of Freedom , and the Battle Hymn of the Republic was considered the north 's most popular song . 
 = = Different versions = = 
 Although certain songs were identified with one particular side of the war , sometimes the other would adapt the song for their use . A Southern revision of the Star Spangled Banner was used , entitled " The Southern Cross " . In an example of the different lyrics , where the Banner had " O say does that Star Spangled Banner yet wave " , the Cross had " ' Tis the Cross of the South , which shall ever remain " . Another Confederate version of the Star Spangled Banner , called The Flag of Secession , replaced the same verse with " and the flag of secession in triumph doth wave " . Even a song from the American Revolutionary War was adapted , as the tune Yankee Doodle was changed to " Dixie Doodle " , and started with " Dixie whipped old Yankee Doodle early in the morning " . The Union 's Battle Cry of Freedom was also altered , with the original lines of " The Union forever ! Hurrah , boys , hurrah ! Down with the traitor , up with the star " being changed to " Our Dixie forever ! She 's never at a loss ! Down with the eagle and up with the cross ! " 
 The Union also adapted Southern Songs . In a Union variation of Dixie , instead of the line " I wish I was in the land of cotton , old times there are not forgotten , Look away , look away , look away , Dixie Land " , it was changed to " Away down South in the land of traitors , Rattlesnakes and alligators , Right away , come away , right away , come away " . John Brown 's Body ( originally titled John Brown ) was originally written for a soldier at Fort Warren in Boston in 1861 . It was sung to the tune of Glory , Hallelujah and was later used by Julia Ward Howe for her famous poem , Battle Hymn of the Republic . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The music derived from this war was of greater quantity and variety than from any other war involving America . Songs came from a variety of sources . Battle Hymn of the Republic borrowed its tune from a song sung at Methodist revivals . Dixie was a minstrel song that Daniel Emmett adapted from two Ohio black singers named Snowden . American soldiers would continue to sing Battle Hymn of the Republic in the Spanish – American War , World War I , and World War II . 
 The Southern rock style of music has often used the Confederate Battle Flag as a symbol of the musical style . Sweet Home Alabama by Lynyrd Skynyrd was described as a " vivid example of a lingering Confederate mythology in Southern culture " . 
 A ballad from the war , Aura Lee , would become the basis of the song Love Me Tender by Elvis Presley . Presley also sang An American Trilogy , which was described as " smoothing " out All My Trials , the Battle Hymn of the Republic , and Dixie of its divisions , although Dixie still dominated the piece . 
 In 2013 , a compilation album by current popular musicians , like Jorma Kaukonen , Ricky Skaggs , and Karen Elson , was released with the title , Divided & United : The Songs of the Civil War . 
 = = Songs published per year = = 
 w . 
 = Words by 
 m . = 
 Music by 
 = = = 1861 = = = 
 The First Gun is Fired , w.m. George F. Root 
 The Bonnie Blue Flag , w . Mrs Annie Chamber @-@ Ketchum m . Harry MacCarthy 
 Dixie , w . Dan Emmett a . C. S. <unk> 
 John Brown 's Body , <unk> anonymous m . William <unk> ( came to be the unofficial theme song of black soldiers . ) 
 Maryland , My Maryland , w . James Ryder Randall m . Walter de <unk> ( Music " Mini est <unk> " 12th century ) 
 The Vacant Chair , w . Henry S. Washburne m . George Frederick Root 
 = = = 1862 = = = 
 Here 's Your Mule , - C. D. Benson 
 Battle Cry of Freedom , - George F. Root 
 The Battle Hymn of the Republic , - Julia Ward Howe 
 = = = 1863 = = = 
 All Quiet Along the Potomac Tonight , w.m. John Hill Hewitt 
 Just Before the Battle , Mother , by George F. Root 
 Mother Would Comfort Me , w.m. Charles C. Sawyer 
 Tenting on the Old Camp Ground , w.m. Walter Kittredge 
 Weeping Sad And Lonely , w . Charles Carroll Sawyer m . Henry Tucker 
 When Johnny Comes Marching Home Again , by Louis Lambert & Patrick Gilmore 
 You Are Going to the Wars , Willie Boy ! , w.m. John Hill Hewitt 
 The Young Volunteer , w.m. John Hill Hewitt 
 = = = 1864 = = = 
 Tramp ! Tramp ! Tramp ! ( The Boys Are Marching ) , w.m. George F. Root 
 Pray , Maiden , Pray ! , w . A. W. Kercheval m . A. J. Turner . 
 = = = 1865 = = = 
 Jeff in <unk> , w.m. Henry Tucker 
 Marching Through Georgia , w.m. Henry Clay Work 
 Good Bye , Old Glory , w . L. J. Bates , m . George Frederick Root 
 = = Media = = 
 = Edward Norton = 
 Edward Harrison Norton ( born August 18 , 1969 ) is an American actor , filmmaker and activist . He has been nominated for three Academy Awards for his work in the films Primal Fear ( 1996 ) , American History X ( 1998 ) and Birdman ( 2014 ) . He also starred in other roles , such as Everyone Says I Love You ( 1996 ) , The People vs. Larry Flynt ( 1996 ) , Fight Club ( 1999 ) , Red Dragon ( 2002 ) , 25th Hour ( 2002 ) , Kingdom of Heaven ( 2005 ) , The Illusionist ( 2006 ) , Moonrise Kingdom ( 2012 ) and The Grand Budapest Hotel ( 2014 ) . He has also directed and co @-@ written films , including his directorial debut , Keeping the Faith ( 2000 ) . He has done uncredited work on the scripts for The Score ( 2001 ) , Frida ( 2002 ) and The Incredible Hulk ( 2008 ) . 
 Alongside his work in cinema , Norton is an environmental and social activist , and is a member of the board of trustees of Enterprise Community Partners , a non @-@ profit organization for developing affordable housing founded by his grandfather James Rouse . Norton is president of the American branch of the Maasai Wilderness Conservation Trust . He ran in the 2009 New York City Marathon to raise money for the Trust . He also raises money for charity through <unk> , a social networking community for volunteers and a micro @-@ donations fundraising platform . In July 2010 , Norton was designated as the United Nations Goodwill Ambassador for Biodiversity by UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon . On July 2 , 2014 , Norton was elected Chairman of the Board of Trustee to Signature Theatre , a not @-@ for @-@ profit theater Company in New York . Norton has been on Signature 's board since 1996 and served as the co @-@ Chair of the Capital Campaign during the building of the Pershing Square Signature Center . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Norton was born on August 18 , 1969 in Boston , Massachusetts and raised in Columbia , Maryland . His father , Edward Mower Norton Jr . , served in Vietnam as a Marine lieutenant and was later an environmental lawyer and conservation advocate working in Asia , as well as a former federal prosecutor in the Carter administration . His mother , Lydia Robinson " Robin " ( née Rouse ) , a teacher of English , died of a brain tumor in 1997 . His maternal grandfather , James Rouse , was the founder of The Rouse Company , who developed the city of Columbia , Maryland ( where Norton grew up ) , helped develop Baltimore 's Inner Harbor , Norfolk 's Waterside Festival Marketplace and Boston 's Quincy Market , as well as co @-@ founded Enterprise Community Partners with Norton 's maternal step @-@ grandmother , Patty Rouse . Norton has two younger siblings , Molly and Jim , with whom he has professionally collaborated . 
 From 1981 to 1985 , along with his brother , Norton attended Camp <unk> on the shores of Newfound Lake in Bristol , New Hampshire , where he won the acting cup in 1984 ; he returned to the camp 's council for two years by directing theater , and maintains close connections with the camp . Norton was raised Episcopalian . He graduated in 1987 from Columbia 's Wilde Lake High School , where his classmates included New York City Council member Mark Levine and best @-@ selling author Robert Kolker . He attended Yale University , where he was a competitive rower and acted in university productions alongside Ron Livingston and Paul Giamatti , graduating in 1991 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in History . After graduation , Norton worked in Osaka , Japan , consulting for his grandfather 's company , Enterprise Community Partners , and speaks some Japanese . He appeared in an EFL textbook , Only in America , used by Nova , a formerly major English language school in Japan . He moved to New York City to star in the Off @-@ Broadway theater , breaking through with his 1993 involvement in Edward Albee 's Fragments , at the Signature Theatre Company . 
 = = Career = = 
 In his film debut Primal Fear , Norton played Aaron <unk> , an altar boy charged with the murder of a Roman Catholic Archbishop who is defended by Martin Vail ( Richard Gere ) . The film is an adaptation of William Diehl 's novel . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote : " Norton gives a performance that 's fully the equal of Gere 's – he 's as slyly self @-@ effacing as Gere is slyly ostentatious . " Alison <unk> of The Austin Chronicle , in review of the film , wrote , " Norton 's performance and the well @-@ paced tension preceding the movie 's climactic sequence provide an entertaining if slightly predictable thriller . " Despite the mixed reviews , Norton won a Golden Globe Award and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . That same year , Norton played lawyer Alan <unk> in The People vs. Larry Flynt . In 1998 , he played Derek Vinyard , a reformed neo @-@ Nazi , in the film American History X , David Denby of The New Yorker noted that he gives Derek " ambiguous erotic allure ; he 's almost appealing " . The film received positive reviews and grossed over $ 23 million worldwide at the box office . His performance earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor . Later , Norton starred with Matt Damon in Rounders , that follows two friends who need to quickly earn enough cash playing poker to pay off a huge debt . In David Fincher 's 1999 film Fight Club , Norton played an unreliable narrator who feels trapped with his white @-@ collar position in society . It is based on Chuck Palahniuk 's novel of the same name . To prepare for the role , Norton took lessons in boxing , taekwondo and grappling . Fight Club premiered at the 1999 Venice International Film Festival . During promotion for the film , he said , " I feel that Fight Club really , in a way ... probed into the despair and paralysis that people feel in the face of having inherited this value system out of advertising . " The film failed to meet expectations at the box office , and received polarized reactions from film critics . However , it became a cult classic after its DVD release . 
 In 2002 , Norton starred in Brett Ratner 's Red Dragon as FBI profiler Will Graham and in Spike Lee 's 25th Hour . While Red Dragon received mixed reviews , it was commercially successful . 25th Hour was about post @-@ 9 / 11 New York City . In 2003 , Norton was forced by Paramount Studios , under threat of lawsuit having signed a three @-@ film contract when he signed up for Primal Fear , to appear in The Italian Job ( 2003 ) , for which he accordingly refused to promote upon its release . Norton won critical praise for his role as Baldwin IV , the leper king of Jerusalem , in Kingdom of Heaven . Norton portrayed Marvel Comics character Bruce Banner / The Hulk in the Marvel Studios film The Incredible Hulk , released in 2008 . Norton 's failed attempt to rewrite the film along lines of his own choosing resulted in his refusal to promote the film . He was expected to reprise his role in the 2012 film The Avengers , but was replaced by Mark Ruffalo . 
 In 2006 , Norton starred in three films : Down in the Valley , as a dangerous drifter affecting to be a <unk> , The Illusionist , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival and later became a sleeper hit when it went into general release , and The Painted Veil , for each of which he won an award . In 2010 , Norton appeared in two films again : in Leaves of Grass , as estranged identical twins ( one a small @-@ time drug dealer and the other a Harvard professor ) ; and in Stone , which reunited Norton with his The Score cast @-@ mate Robert De Niro , and in which Norton plays a convict trying to con his parole officer ( De Niro ) into an early release . In 2008 , Norton starred in New Line Cinema 's Pride and Glory , as an honest detective assigned to investigate the precinct run by his older brother . The film was not well received by critics , not strongly supported by the studio , and despite also starring Colin Farrell and Jon Voight , its worldwide grosses totaled only $ 31 @.@ 1 million , against a production budget of $ 30 million . Norton played himself in a cameo role in the experimental comedy show Stella , and made another comedic television appearance on the Emmy award @-@ winning ABC show Modern Family in 2010 , playing a fictional member of real life ' 80s new wave band Spandau Ballet . In The Bourne Legacy , he played the antagonist Eric <unk> . Norton has also done uncredited script work on some of the films he appeared in specifically The Score and Frida . In 2000 , Norton made his directorial debut , Keeping the Faith . He had a reputation of being a perfectionist and managed to receive final cut of American History X , clashed with the director while shooting Red Dragon , and ( with the director ) clashed with the studio during the shooting of The Incredible Hulk ( and refused to do promotion for it ) . In 2013 , Norton starred in The Lonely Island 's music video , " Spring Break Anthem , " alongside Andy Samberg , Zach <unk> , James Franco , Akiva Schaffer and Jorma <unk> . The video premiered on Funny or Die 's Between Two Ferns during a segment between <unk> and Franco . In 2014 , Norton played Mike Shiner , a prickly Broadway actor in the black comedy film Birdman and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the role . On February 20 , 2014 , it was announced that Norton was directing Motherless Brooklyn . In June 2014 , Norton 's Class 5 Films and <unk> Entertainment acquired the film rights to the non @-@ fiction article American Hippopotamus , by Jon Mooallem , about the meat shortage in the U.S. in 1910 and the attempts made by Major Frederick Russell Burnham , Captain Fritz Joubert Duquesne and Congressman Robert Broussard to import hippopotamuses into the Louisiana bayous and to convince Americans to eat them . The film will highlight the Burnham - Duquesne rivalry , two famous spies who had previous been under orders to assassinate each other . Norton , William <unk> and Brett Ratner will produce this feature film . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 After six years of dating , Norton proposed to Canadian film producer Shauna Robertson in 2011 and they married in 2012 . They have one son , Atlas ( born March 18 , 2013 ) . 
 Norton is generally known for his reluctance to embrace his celebrity status and says , " If I ever have to stop taking the subway , I 'm gonna have a heart attack . " 
 Norton has stated in interviews that he is a fan of the Baltimore Orioles , and was involved in many of Cal Ripken Jr . ' s retirement activities in 2001 when he was asked to be a part of Ripken 's biography for Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He attended Ripken 's ceremony at the Hall of Fame in July 2007 . 
 Norton has a private pilot license and discussed his flight training when interviewed on episodes of the Late Show with David Letterman and Inside the Actor 's Studio . One of his personal aircraft was a Cessna 206 substantially modified by the AOPA . 
 Norton was a strong supporter of former New York State Governor Eliot Spitzer . Norton is a member of the board of trustees of Enterprise Community Partners , a non @-@ profit developer of affordable housing based in his hometown . He is also well known for his support for environmental causes and renewable energy projects , such as Enterprise 's Green Communities Initiative and BP 's Solar Neighbors program . He also put time and money toward social activist causes , including improving the quality of living in low @-@ income communities . 
 Norton 's work with the HBO documentary By the People : The Election of Barack Obama led to a soundtrack , with proceeds going to Enterprise Community Partners and United Way . Norton also participated in a 2008 Fast Company story about Enterprise 's green affordable housing . Norton is the president of the American branch of the Maasai Wilderness Conservation Trust . To raise money for the trust , Norton fielded a team of thirty runners in the New York City Marathon on November 1 , 2009 . The team included Alanis Morissette and David Blaine . Norton finished the event first among celebrities with a time of 3 hours , 48 minutes . Norton and his team raised over $ 1 million for the Trust . 
 In addition to his involvement with the Maasai Wilderness Conservation Trust , Norton supports African Wildlife Foundation , appearing in a public awareness ad about the dangers of buying elephant ivory as part of the " Say No " campaign . He is also a United Nations Goodwill Ambassador , as well as a spokesperson for the Convention on Biological Diversity . In May 2010 , Norton launched a website called <unk> , which uses a social networking platform to help raise funds for charity . In May 2012 , Norton played football for an ' England vs. The Rest of the World ' match the charity event Soccer Aid , along with James McAvoy and Woody Harrelson . The event eventually raised over £ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 for UNICEF UK . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Actor = = = 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 2009 : By the People : The Election of Barack Obama 
 2012 : Thanks for Sharing 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Givors canal = 
 The Givors canal ( French : Canal de Givors ) was built between 1761 and 1781 to carry coal , other goods and passengers from Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier to Givors on the Rhone , running beside the Gier river . 
 The canal was approved in 1760 and after many problems opened in 1780 . The canal was originally 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) long . Goods were loaded on flat barges that could carry several tons . It took about 18 hours for two or three men to pull a barge through the canal . The Givors canal played an important role in the early industrialization of Givors and the Gier valley , and became highly profitable . At its peak , in 1827 , the canal transported 332 @,@ 000 tons . 
 The canal became obsolete when the Saint @-@ Étienne – Lyon railway , the first passenger railway in France , was built in 1828 – 33 along the same route . In an attempt to compete , in 1839 the canal was extended to 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) long , with 42 locks to raise or lower boats moving between the sections of level water . Despite the extension , traffic volumes slumped , although the canal was kept open until the start of the 20th century . Little now remains of the canal , which has mostly been covered by the A47 autoroute between Givors and Saint @-@ Étienne . 
 = = Plans = = 
 The original plan conceived by <unk> de <unk> in 1749 was to build a canal that would link the upper Loire to the Rhone . The route would run through the Gier basin from Givors on the Rhone most of the way to Saint @-@ Étienne , then through the Saint @-@ Étienne basin to Saint @-@ Just on the Loire . It was sometimes called the Canal des Deux @-@ Mers ( Two @-@ Seas Canal ) since it would link the Atlantic and the Mediterranean . 
 A more immediate need for a canal covering the section between Givors and Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier emerged in the 1750s , when a cheaper method than pack mules was needed to carry coal to heat houses in Lyon and to fuel the glass works that had been opened in Givors in 1749 . In 1751 , there were 1 @,@ 200 mules engaged in carrying the coal from Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier to Givors , from where it was taken by water north to Lyon and south to the towns of the Midi . Lyon was consuming 36 @,@ 000 tons annually . The coal sold for 5 francs a ton at the mine head and 21 @.@ 70 francs per ton at the Lyon docks . 
 The watchmaker and engineer François Zacharie proposed to connect the Loire to the Rhone by a navigable canal 56 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 34 @.@ 9 mi ) long that would mount the Gier and its tributary the <unk> , cross the watershed at Saint @-@ Etienne and descend the <unk> to exit on the Loire near <unk> . He filed his proposal early in 1758 , and had to wait in Paris until 28 July 1760 for a favorable report from the Conseil du Roi . 
 Letters patent were issued to François and Guillaume Zacharie on 6 September 1761 giving them the right to build and then use the canal for forty years , after which it would revert to the crown . They would be responsible for building bridges for the roads cut by the canal and for paying for the lands taken . The letters @-@ patent were not registered in Parliament until 6 June 1768 . Zacharie was only authorized to open the channel from Givors as far as Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier , a rise of 80 metres ( 260 ft ) . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Work began on the canal in 1763 . When water was let into the first section of the canal in 1764 the side walls of a lock chamber collapsed . Zacharie had to borrow money to continue . In 1766 , to satisfy his creditors , he prematurely opened the canal . The water broke the banks and the participants in the ceremony had to scramble to escape . Work was halted with the canal reaching only to Saint @-@ Romain @-@ en @-@ Gier . In 1768 , Zacharie died penniless of a heart attack . 
 Zacharie 's death threatened to disrupt the project , but King Louis XVI of France was personally interested , and Zacharie 's oldest son , Guillaume , was allowed to resume the work . On 14 December 1771 , new letters patent were given to Guillaume and his partners , replacing the earlier ones . Under the new terms , all the land needed could be expropriated including two <unk> , or 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) , of land on either side for tow paths . The builder could take materials wherever they could be found . 
 The king appointed an engineer to oversee construction , and an inspector of roads and bridges , to be paid by the concessionary . The concessionary and his heirs , successors and assigns would enjoy the canal for sixty years before transferring it to the king . He could deploy as many boats as he chose , being paid defined fees for the weight and distance of goods carried , and for passage of empty boats through each lock . Passenger fees were also defined . He could deploy armed guards to enforce regulations . 
 The project continued to run into difficulties with malfunctions , financial problems and threats of work stoppages . New letters patent were issued on 12 August 1779 that doubled the rates and extended the term to ninety @-@ nine years . The concessionary could now also expropriate land for shops , warehouses and housing for employees . The work was complete in May 1780 and was finally opened for navigation from Givors to Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier the following December . The <unk> reported that they had spent six million francs , but the canal probably cost much more . 
 The canal from Givors to Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier had nine aqueducts and 16 bridges . At <unk> a tunnel 100 metres ( 330 ft ) long and 5 metres ( 16 ft ) wide had been broken through solid rock . The canal was 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) in length , and had 26 locks , several of them double . It was 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) deep , and could accommodate vessels 2 @.@ 8 metres ( 9 ft 2 in ) high . The maximum length of vessels was 22 @.@ 5 metres ( 74 ft ) and maximum width 4 @.@ 65 metres ( 15 @.@ 3 ft ) . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The canal had to contend with initial opposition from the carters , who used force to prevent coal being taken from the pits to the loading points . However , the canal provided a greatly superior method of transporting coal and was an immediate success . In 1782 it earned 114 @,@ 000 livres . The Compagnie du canal de Givors was established in December 1788 to take over operations . In letters @-@ patent of December 1788 , registered on 5 September 1789 , the concession was declared to be permanent . 
 Goods were carried on <unk> , flat wooden boats about 20 to 22 metres ( 66 to 72 ft ) long that could carry several tons . They were hauled by two or three <unk> , men who walked on the towpaths pulling the barge with a harness over their shoulder . It took about 18 hours to pull a barge through the canal . A <unk> stood on the front of the barge steering it with a wooden pole . Lock @-@ keepers operated the locks and helped manoeuver the barges using a boat hook . Porters loaded and unloaded the barges . They were called <unk> after the iron hooks that they used to move bales of goods . 
 The combination of the glass works and the canal transformed the sleepy rural village of Givors into an industrial town . The canal and the river both helped Givors distribute its manufactures . By the time the French Revolution began in 1789 Givors had 2 @,@ 800 inhabitants . Its nodal position , later reinforced by construction of various railways , explains the development of the glass works and later of iron and steel manufacture . 
 In December 1788 , King Louis XVI approved construction of a reservoir to supply water to the canal in dry periods . François Zacharie had proposed a site for the reservoir high up near Saint @-@ Etienne , but the chosen site was low down on the Couzon river near to Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier . This short @-@ sighted decision ruled out the plan to continue the canal up to Saint @-@ Etienne and then down to the Loire . The French Revolution ( 1789 – 1799 ) delayed the work , but the Barrage de Couzon ( Couzon Dam ) was completed in 1809 , capable of containing 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 35 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of water . It was modeled on the dam built at Saint @-@ <unk> for the Midi canal . 
 In 1821 , revenue was 816 @,@ 444 francs , and the company paid a dividend of 555 @,@ 500 francs . The company was able to raise its rates without reducing traffic . In 1822 , the canal earned almost a million francs from carrying 243 @,@ 200 tons of coal and 96 @,@ 000 tons of other merchandise . The concession holders had repaid most of the debts they had incurred to build the canal , including many improvements since it was opened , and were able to pay healthy dividends . By 1824 , the canal was giving annual revenues of 850 @,@ 000 francs . An 1824 account described a superb water station at Givors on the right bank of the Rhone , an excellent basin at Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier for loading , fine buildings for administration of the canal and spacious shops and warehouses . 
 In 1827 , at its peak , the canal transported 332 @,@ 000 tons . The main purpose of the canal was still to transport coal to Givors , from where it could be taken to other towns on the river Rhone . On the return trip , boats carried some of the merchandise of the Midi including iron , oak wood and other things needed by the factories of the Loire department . By 1831 , the population of Givors had risen to 9 @,@ 210 . There were many factories making window panes , bottles and glasses , and the port had a busy trade in coal shipment . Ten large glass works had been established at Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier that also transported their products by the canal . 
 = = Railway competition = = 
 The canal 's high tariffs and excellent profits attracted interest in building a competing railway . This was a bold venture . Planning for the Saint @-@ Etienne railway preceded the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , opened in 1830 , which was used as the prototype by other pioneering railways , so many new technical problems had to be solved . In fact the steep section from Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier to Saint @-@ Etienne was beyond the power of steam traction engines of the day . 
 Construction of the Saint @-@ Étienne – Lyon railway began in September 1826 under the direction of Marc Seguin . The section between Givors and Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier was open for freight traffic on 28 June 1830 . The wagons were drawn up the slope by horses . One horse could pull five or six empty wagons at about 3 kilometres per hour ( 1 @.@ 9 mph ) . On the downhill return journey , the horses were placed in wagons , and the 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) distance could be covered in an hour . In early 1831 the steam locomotive Seguin came into operation , able to tow seven cars loaded with 21 tons or up to 28 empty cars from Givors to Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier in an hour and a half . The full line from Saint @-@ Étienne to Lyon was open for goods and passengers on 4 April 1833 . 
 The population was hostile to the railway since it threatened many trades . Trains were derailed and wagons set on fire . In 1835 the poet Guillaume <unk> published his Franco @-@ Provençal language collection Ballon d ’ <unk> d ’ un jeune poète <unk> ( Trial balloon of a young <unk> poet ) . He violently attacked the arrival of the Saint @-@ Étienne – Lyon railway , which would ruin the canal on which his father worked as a porter . The canal company responded to competition by lowering rates but still lost business . They had steam boats built in England that could tow barges from Givors to Lyon , avoided the expense of transferring the coal to river boats . On 3 December 1831 a royal ordinance allowed the company to extend the canal west to La Grand @-@ Croix . Work began at once and was completed in 1839 . The 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) extension brought the length to 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) and the number of locks to 42 . 
 However , economics were on the side of the railway . An 1836 report noted that coal had never been carried directly from Saint Etienne to Lyon using the canal . It would first have to be carried by land for 18 to 20 kilometres ( 11 to 12 mi ) , then for 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) by the canal , and then up the Rhone for 20 to 22 kilometres ( 12 to 14 mi ) . With the opening of the railway , all the coal could be carried non @-@ stop by the much cheaper land route . Only the mines of Rive @-@ de @-@ Gier had use for the canal , and for those mines the charges were excessive . 
 = = Obsolescence = = 
 The canal was leased to the Compagnie des Mines de la Loire on 1 January 1846 . Tonnage had fallen from 246 @,@ 000 tons in 1830 to 172 @,@ 000 tons in 1840 . It rose to 238 @,@ 000 tons in 1850 , then resumed its decline : 146 @,@ 000 tons in 1860 , 82 @,@ 000 tons in 1870 and 24 @,@ 000 tons in 1878 . Until the end of the 19th century the municipality of Givors held that the canal was essential to development of the town , and that barge traffic was still a viable industry , fighting against closure of the canal and demanding that it remain navigable for its entire length despite mounting evidence that it was obsolete . However , by 1881 , it was clear that the canal was in poor shape . The natural shores were eroded and the sides of locks 1 – 32 needed to be completely rebuilt . From locks 32 to 35 the canal was mostly silted up and in some places had disappeared completely , taken over by vegetable gardens . 
 The industrial development of the Gier valley had its negative aspects . An 1884 writer described the region of <unk> and Saint @-@ Romain @-@ en @-@ Gier , where the country was furrowed by the river , the canal , the railway and the national road . He described the people as the most miserable in the canton of Givors . He said that everything showed this misery : agriculture , roads , houses , church . Work in the mines was the only choice for the poor villagers . An 1885 travel guide mentions the station of Givors @-@ canal on the railway south from Lyon , where the Nîmes line separated from the line to Saint Etienne . The canal then was mainly used by coal barges . The route from Givors @-@ Canal to St. Etienne passed coal mines , large smelting works and iron foundries . 
 The canal company went bankrupt and was bought by the state in 1886 . This briefly gave it a new lease of life , but the canal had an obsolete gauge . By the start of the 20th century it was almost abandoned . The canal was neglected and parts were filled in . In the 1970s the A47 autoroute between Givors and Saint @-@ Étienne covered almost all the sections that remained , apart from the site at <unk> where the double lock and tunnel have been preserved as a heritage site . 
 = Bruton Dovecote = 
 The Bruton Dovecote is a limestone tower that was built between the 15th and 17th century in Bruton in the English county of Somerset . The structure was once used as a dovecote , and may have been a watchtower or prospect tower prior to this . It is a Grade II * listed building and scheduled monument . 
 It has been associated with Bruton Abbey and the Berkley family who owned the estate after the dissolution . It is known that the conversion to house pigeons and doves took place around 1780 . It was acquired by the National Trust in 1915 and they have managed the site since then undertaking restoration work . 
 = = History = = 
 Though the Bruton Dovecote 's date of construction is not known precisely , the structure was built some time between the 15th and 17th century . Architectural historian Lydia Greeves suggests that the building was once within the <unk> of Bruton Abbey and was adapted by the monks from a gabled Tudor tower . However , John and Pamela McCann , authors of The <unk> of Historical Somerset , claim that the structure was not built until after the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1530s . The authors claim that the Berkley family , who acquired the lands of the Abbey , constructed the building as a prospect tower . Dendrochronological dating commissioned by the National Trust found that timber in the door and window frames came from trees felled between 1554 and 1586 . 
 The conversion to be a dovecote took place around 1780 . Pigeons and doves were an important food source historically kept for their eggs , flesh , and dung . Although it is now a roofless ruin with some of the windows blocked up , it previously had a chimney and the fireplace can still be seen . The National Trust acquired the freehold from Sir Henry Hugh Arthur Hoare of the Hoare baronets , whose family seat was at Stourhead , in 1915 . The tower was subsequently designated as a scheduled monument in 1953 and a listed building ( Grade II * ) in 1961 . 
 In the 1980s the dovecote was inspected as part of an investigation into an outbreak of psittacosis ( also known as parrot disease or parrot fever ) , a zoonotic infectious disease caused by the bacterium <unk> <unk> , at the adjoining King 's School . No cause was found for the infection . In 2010 restoration work was undertaken including repairs to the tops of the walls ; these are exposed as the building no longer has a roof . Wall ties were used on the south west corner where the masonry was bulging . In addition , car parking and educational signage was provided . This was partially funded by South Somerset council , Bruton Town Council and the Heritage Lottery Fund to a total of £ 105 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Location = = 
 The dovecote stands on Lusty Hill to the south of Bruton overlooking the town . It is approximately 370 metres ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) south of the Church of St Mary , and 230 metres ( 750 ft ) south of King 's School . It is on the Leland Trail . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The square tower was built of local coursed oolitic limestone with Doulting stone dressings . The walls are 2 feet 8 inches ( 0 @.@ 81 m ) thick at the base , and the tower is 6 square metres ( 65 sq ft ) in plan . The doorway has an ovolo moulded arch which is 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) high . This suggests a construction date in the late 16th or early 17th century . Another entrance was made for cattle to enter at a later date but this has been blocked up . Several of the windows have also been filled with stone . On the north @-@ east face there were two @-@ light chamfered mullioned windows on each floor while on the north @-@ west wall they were one- and two @-@ light windows . 
 It has over 200 pigeon holes , which were installed after the original construction , possibly before 1780 . Six tiers of nest boxes remain ; however there were previously several more , possibly as many as 850 . They are made of regular blocks of tufa each around 8 inches ( 200 mm ) square and 16 inches ( 410 mm ) deep . 
 = DecembeRadio = 
 DecembeRadio was an American Christian rock band formed in 2003 and composed of bassist and lead vocalist Josh Reedy , lead guitarist Brian Bunn , rhythm guitarist Eric Miker and drummer Boone Daughdrill . 
 Reedy , Bunn and Miker first ventured out on their own as DecembeRadio after a stint as touring band for evangelist Billy Wayne Arrington . After a year of gigging , DecembeRadio released two independent albums in early 2005 . Following their signing with Slanted Records and the addition of Daughdrill on drums , the band released DecembeRadio in June 2006 . The album was nominated for " Best Rock Or Rap Gospel Album " at the 49th Grammy Awards , and won the 2007 Dove Award for " Rock Album of the Year " . A follow @-@ up , Satisfied , was released in August 2008 . DecembeRadio dissolved in 2012 , and the members moved on to other musical projects . 
 Musically , DecembeRadio is heavily influenced by hard rock and blues @-@ rock from the 1970s , owing to early exposure to family members ' record collections . Their sound has been compared to that of Aerosmith , Led Zeppelin , The Black Crowes and Lenny Kravitz , among others . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The members of DecembeRadio all began playing music in their teens . Josh Reedy and Brian Bunn attended the same schools , and the former 's rendition of " Johnny B. Goode " on guitar at a middle school talent show convinced Bunn to take up guitar , as well . " Our first year of high school , we started a Top 40 band . We played Hootie & the Blowfish covers and that sort of thing . Then shortly thereafter , we realized that God had given us these gifts , and we wanted to utilize them for him , " recalled Bunn . The pair decided to pursue music full @-@ time upon graduation from Auburn High School in Riner , Virginia . 
 After a performance opening for evangelist Billy Wayne Arrington in Dublin , Virginia , Arrington invited Bunn and Reedy to join his touring band . Bunn credits Arrington with helping to alter the band 's focus : " We were playing music for God , but we didn 't really know why we were doing it . It was more so to be ' rock stars ' , per se , and just use God as a way to get there . And so he really helped us flip @-@ flop that and get it the way it should be . " 
 Eric Miker started playing guitar at the age of sixteen when his father taught him a few chords . After two years at West Virginia University , Miker felt a calling to go into Christian ministry . He met Bunn and Reedy at a youth event in West Virginia , where he impressed the pair with the " Sweet Child o ' Mine " guitar lick that he added to a worship song . Shortly thereafter , Miker joined the band full @-@ time , playing with Arrington for a few months before the trio ventured out on their own . The band came up with its name after Miker photographed an old radio with a calendar on top of it open to the month of December . 
 = = = 2004 – 2005 = = = 
 DecembeRadio played scattered dates for churches and youth groups in 2004 with Bunn as the lead singer . However , Bunn contracted a virus that paralyzed three @-@ quarters of his vocal cords , and Reedy took over as lead singer . ( Bunn regained most of his voice after therapy . ) The band also found time to record two albums that were released independently in early 2005 . Noise was a self @-@ produced album of praise and worship covers on which each band member contributed at least two lead vocals , and Dangerous contained nine original songs and a cover of " Are You Gonna Go My Way " by Lenny Kravitz . Dangerous was produced with Scotty Wilbanks , whom the band met through Arrington . 
 Mississippi native Boone Daughdrill joined the band in late 2005 ; he had previously toured with Kimberly Perry , <unk> and <unk> . " We got Boone 's phone number from [ Wilbanks ] about a year ago . We called him up and were like , ' We need a drummer for this stint of dates . ' We met him at the airport and as soon as he walked off of the plane and gave us a big hug it was like we 'd known him forever and we decided to keep him ! " said Bunn . Wilbanks also arranged a showcase performance for DecembeRadio in front of record company executives , leading to the band ’ s signing with Slanted Records in December 2005 . 
 = = = DecembeRadio = = = 
 The band ’ s first album for Slanted was recorded at Southern Tracks Recording in Atlanta , Georgia , in early 2006 with Wilbanks in the producer ’ s chair . The self @-@ titled album was released on June 27 , with lead single " Love Found Me ( Love ’ s Got a Hold ) " released to radio two months prior . Second single " Drifter " was released in August and slowly climbed the charts , finally peaking at number 5 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart on December 30 . Tour dates in 2006 were split between residencies at youth camps , one @-@ off gigs at churches and schools , and the occasional festival date . In December , the band was nominated for a Grammy Award for " Best Rock Or Rap Gospel Album " . They were hanging out in a guitar shop when they received the call from the president of their label ; " We were kind of shocked but honored to have our first album be nominated for a Grammy , " Miker said . The band lost to Jonny Lang at the awards ceremony a few months later . 
 DecembeRadio continued playing gigs and releasing singles from DecembeRadio to radio in early 2007 , and then joined <unk> ’ s Generation Rising Tour for a string of dates in April and May . More accolades came the band 's way with their nomination for four Dove Awards ( " New Artist of the Year " , " Rock Album of the Year " , " Dangerous " for " Rock Recorded Song of the Year " , and " Drifter " for " Song of the Year " ) , though their only win was for " Rock Album of the Year " . 
 = = = Satisfied = = = 
 Recording for DecembeRadio 's fourth album began in September 2007 , again at Southern Tracks Recording . The band took a break in October and November to headline their own Drifter Tour , which also featured Nevertheless , Superhero and Bread of Stone . Near the end of the tour , Slanted Records released an expanded edition of DecembeRadio , which included a new track recorded during the aforementioned recording session . The song , " Find You Waiting " , performed similarly to " Drifter " , climbing slowly and not reaching its peak position of No. 5 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart until April 5 , 2008 . 
 Recording of the band 's fourth album continued in early 2008 , but the sessions were again interrupted for a major tour , this time in support of Third Day in March and April . Soon after the tour ended , DecembeRadio finished recording the album , which was titled Satisfied and released on August 26 . " It 's got a real southern feeling , definitely ' Crowes @-@ ish ' and swampy , " said Reedy of the album . Satisfied debuted at its peak positions of number 116 and 3 on the Billboard 200 and Top Christian Albums charts , respectively . Following a two @-@ month break , DecembeRadio embarked on a month @-@ long headlining tour in support of Satisfied with guests Ruth , <unk> and Billy Wayne . A digital @-@ only EP entitled Comfort & Joy was released on November 25 , 2008 . The EP contains covers of three Christmas songs : " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " , Chuck Berry 's arrangement of " Run Run Rudolph " and an instrumental version of " Away in a Manger " . 
 DecembeRadio began a two @-@ month North American tour in support of Newsboys in February 2009 . The following year , the band released a live album on both CD and DVD in March , and Daughdrill left DecembeRadio in September to join The Band Perry . A five @-@ song EP , Southern Attic Sessions , was released on March 15 , 2011 . 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 DecembeRadio played its last concert on November 8 , 2012 . No announcement of the band 's dissolution was ever made , but in 2013 the three remaining members formed a secular country music trio called <unk> , which played at least one show in Nashville and filmed a music video for a studio track . By 2014 , the band members had moved on to other projects . Josh Reedy toured as a bass player with Chris Cagle , then joined Thomas Rhett 's band as a keyboardist and guitarist . Brian Bunn had a stint as a touring guitarist with Third Day , then joined Reedy in Rhett 's band . Eric Miker became a youth pastor and worship band musician at Jewel City Church in <unk> , West Virginia . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 DecembeRadio 's music is strongly influenced by hard rock and blues @-@ rock from the 1970s , be it directly through artists like Aerosmith and The Rolling Stones , or through later interpreters such as The Black Crowes and Lenny Kravitz . The band 's label , Slanted Records , also notes the influence of Porcupine Tree , Audioslave and other contemporary rock bands . In addition , their music has been compared to U2 , Stone Temple Pilots and King 's X. " We feel like God has called us to a musical style that is not represented as much as , say , more modern , harder edged bands . We are bringing the old school to the new school , " says Josh Reedy . 
 The band members credit family members with introducing them to rock music through old collections of vinyl records . Boone Daughdrill cites " When the Levee Breaks " as his biggest influence . " When I heard that drum fill come in the intro ... oh ! I was a little kid and my uncle had all of the Zeppelin records . He was a drummer too and he would always be like , ' Man , check these guys out . ' I was only three or four and I didn ’ t know what music was , but I knew that I loved that . " 
 Brian Bunn and Eric Miker credit Eric Clapton and Keith Richards , respectively , with their interest in taking up guitar . Bassist Reedy started out on guitar , as well , stating that his inspiration was either " Crossfire " or " The House Is Rockin ' " by Stevie Ray Vaughan . " I was really into blues before anything else , " said Reedy . 
 = = Members = = 
 Brian Bunn – lead guitar , vocals ( 2003 – 12 ) 
 Eric Miker – guitar , vocals ( 2003 – 12 ) 
 Josh Reedy – lead vocals , bass guitar ( 2003 – 12 ) 
 Boone Daughdrill – drums , percussion ( 2005 – 10 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Dangerous ( January 2005 , independent ) 
 Noise ( January 2005 , independent ) 
 DecembeRadio ( June 2006 , Slanted ) 
 Satisfied ( August 2008 , Slanted ) 
 Live ( March 2010 , Slanted ) 
 Southern Attic Sessions ( EP ) ( August 2011 , Slanted ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = GMA Dove Awards = = = 
 = Pac @-@ Man ( 1982 video game ) = 
 In 1982 , Atari Inc. released a port of Namco 's hit arcade game Pac @-@ Man for its Atari 2600 video game console . Like the original arcade version , the player controls the title character with a joystick . The object is to traverse a maze , consuming all the wafers within while avoiding four ghosts . 
 The game was programmed by Tod Frye , who was given a very limited time frame by Atari to complete the project . The technical differences between the Atari 2600 console and the original 's arcade hardware — particularly the amount of available memory — presented several challenges to Frye . Given the popularity of the property , Atari produced approximately 12 million units ( which was more than the estimated number of Atari 2600 consoles sold at the time ) , anticipating a high number of sales . 
 While the port is the best selling Atari 2600 game of all time , selling an estimated 7 million copies , and was the best @-@ selling home video game of all time when it was released , critics focused on the gameplay and audio @-@ visual differences from the arcade version . Initially , the port boosted the video game industry 's presence in retail . It was followed by Atari 2600 ports of Pac @-@ Man 's arcade sequels . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pac @-@ Man is a version of the original arcade game , which Namco released in 1980 , and features similar gameplay . 
 The maze has a landscape orientation . The warp tunnel is located at the top and bottom as opposed to the sides . The screen consists of 126 dashes ( called wafers ) . The ghost box is square with the door on the right side . The four ghosts start in the box one on top of the other . The point values of items are much lower . The prize at the bottom of the ghost box is a square called a vitamin worth 100 points . It behaves like a regular fruit . However , if Pac @-@ Man loses a life when the vitamin is shown , the vitamin may not be necessarily forfeited . 
 The player uses a joystick to navigate the round , yellow title character , which starts each game at the center of a maze . The goal is to eat wafers scattered throughout the maze by moving Pac @-@ Man over them while avoiding four ghosts ( enemies ) . Each time Pac @-@ Man comes into contact with a ghost , he dies , losing a life and reappearing at the center of the maze . When Pac @-@ Man runs out of lives , the game ends . The game starts with four lives and a bonus life is earned at each cleared maze . 
 The ghosts are avoided when they are white . The power pills temporarily make the character invulnerable to the ghosts , and make a distinctive sound effect . During this time , the ghosts turn a purplish blue color and Pac @-@ Man can eat the ghosts for additional points , after which the ghosts return to the center box as eyes and respawn . When the eyes reach the box , they stay there until the power pill elapses . After the power pill elapses , the eyes respawn and the ghosts exit the box . If another power pill is eaten when there are eyes in the box , the eyes stay in the box until that pill elapses . Before the power pill elapses , the sound effect stops and the ghosts ( and any eyes if ghosts are eaten ) turn pink . 
 The ghosts are known to flicker and have closed and animated eyes compared to the arcade version where the direction of the eyes determine the direction of the ghost 's travel . A ghost in " eyes " after being eaten blue is shown as two squares that look like eyes . The four ghosts are divided into two pairs with one pair slightly faster than the other pair . It is possible two ghosts can overlap each other and appear as one ghost on the screen . 
 The game has eight variations offering two different starting speeds for Pac @-@ Man and four different starting speeds for the ghosts . The ghosts get slightly faster each subsequent round , but Pac @-@ Man stays at the same speed . The A @-@ B difficulty switch can be used : in the A position , the power pills ' effects do not last as long . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the late 1970s , Atari acquired the rights to produce home versions of Namco 's arcade games . After Pac @-@ Man proved to be a success in the United States , Atari decided to produce a home port for its Atari 2600 console . The company believed the conversion would be simple because the arcade 's success was attributed to the gameplay rather than impressive visuals . Development took around four months ; the process started in May 1981 and finished in September . At the time , Atari projected 10 million consoles were still actively used by video game enthusiasts . Atari decided to produce 12 million game cartridges , anticipating every Atari 2600 owner would purchase the game , while two million new customers would purchase the system to play it ; management predicted sales would reach at least US $ 500 million . 
 Programming was handled by Tod Frye . The game uses a <unk> ROM cartridge , chosen for its lower manufacturing costs compared to <unk> cartridges , which had just become available at the time . After Atari acquired the rights to produce the game , Frye began work on a prototype version . The company wanted to release the prototype to capitalize on the 1981 holiday season . Development was hindered by the technical differences between the original Pac @-@ Man 's hardware and that of the Atari 2600 . The original 's arcade boards stored four times as much read @-@ only memory ( ROM ) in addition to <unk> of both video and general random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) . The memory types are used to store and switch between graphical sprites . By contrast , the Atari 2600 had only <unk> ( 1 / 16 of the arcade board ) of general RAM and none dedicated to video . In addition , the Zilog Z80 CPU microprocessor used by the Namco Pac @-@ Man arcade system was three times faster than the MOS <unk> CPU used by the Atari 2600 . 
 With limited memory , Frye simplified the shape of the maze with block corners as opposed to rounded ones and a less intricate pattern of corridors . The round , white pellets in the original were changed to rectangular , brown ones on the Atari 2600 . This change was to consolidate resources by using the same sprite used to create the walls . To achieve the visual effect of wafers disappearing after Pac @-@ Man eats them , the console <unk> the entire maze and wafers , excluding those that had been eaten . To accommodate technical limitations the sprites were animated differently . The Pac @-@ Man character sprite as well as the maze and wafers sprites are drawn every frame , while the four ghosts are drawn at intervals . The four different ghosts take turns displaying on the screen and only one ghost is present at any given time , which creates a flickering effect . This effect takes advantage of the slow phosphorescent fade of CRT monitors and the concept of persistence of vision , resulting in the image appearing on screen longer than once every four frames . 
 After seeing the game , Coin Division marketing manager Frank <unk> informed Ray Kassar , Atari 's president and CEO , that he felt enthusiasts would not want to play it . His opinion , however , was dismissed . The company ran newspaper ads and promoted the product in catalogs , describing it as differing " slightly from the original " . To help sales , Atari promoted and protected its exclusive licensing of Pac @-@ Man . It took legal action against companies that released clones similar to Pac @-@ Man . Atari sued Philips for its 1981 Magnavox Odyssey ² game Munchkin and obtained a preliminary injunction against the company to prevent the sale of Munchkin cartridges , but failed to stop other games , such as On @-@ Line Systems ' Jawbreaker and <unk> . Several retailers assisted Atari with the release of the game . J. C. Penney was the first retailer to launch a nationwide advertising campaign on television for a software title . Continuing a long @-@ standing relationship between it and Sears , Atari also produced Pac @-@ Man cartridges under the department store 's label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Anticipation for the game was high . Atari stated in 1981 that it had preorders for " three or four million " copies of the Atari 2600 version . Goldman Sachs analyst Richard Simon predicted the sale of 9 million units during 1982 , which would yield a profit of $ 200 million . Pac @-@ Man met with initial commercial success , selling 7 million copies and eventually becoming the best @-@ selling Atari 2600 title ; Frye reportedly received $ 0 @.@ 10 in royalties per copy . More than one million of those cartridges had been shipped in less than one month , helped by Atari 's $ 1 @.@ 5 million publicity campaign . However , purchases soon slowed and , by summer 1982 , unsold copies were still in large quantities . Many buyers returned the games for refunds , and Atari was left with 5 million excess copies in addition to the returns . By 2004 , the cartridges were still very common among collectors and enthusiasts — though the Sears versions were rarer — and priced lower . 
 Critics negatively compared the port to its original arcade form , panning the audio @-@ visuals and gameplay . In 1983 , Creative Computing Video & Arcade Games reviewer Danny Goodman commented that the game fails as a replica of its arcade form . Conversely , he stated that such criticism was unfair because the hardware could not properly emulate the arcade game . Goodman further said that the port is a challenging maze game in its own right , and it would have been a success if fans had not expected to play a game closer to the original . That year Phil <unk> of Video Games criticized the game 's poor graphics , mockingly referring to it as " Flickerman " , while Softline questioned why Atari opposed Pac @-@ Man clones when the 2600 version was " less like Midway 's original than any of the pack of imitators " . In 1998 , Next Generation magazine editors called it the " worst coin @-@ op conversion of all time " , and attributed the mass dissatisfaction to its poor quality . In 2006 , IGN 's Craig Harris echoed similar statements and listed it as the worst arcade conversion , citing poor audio @-@ visuals that did not resemble the original . Another IGN editor , Levi Buchanan , described it as a " disastrous port " , citing the color scheme and flickering ghosts . Skyler Miller of AllGame said that although the game was only a passing resemblance to the original , it was charming despite its many differences and faults . 
 Ed Logg , a former lead designer at Atari , considered the development a rushed , " lousy " effort . Frye did not express regret over his part in Pac @-@ Man 's port and felt he made the best decisions he could at the time . However , Frye stated that he would have done things differently with a larger capacity ROM . Video game industry researchers Nick Montfort and Ian Bogost attribute the poor reception to the technical differences between the 1977 Atari 2600 console and the 1980 arcade hardware used in Pac @-@ Man cabinets . They further stated that the conversion is a lesson in maintaining the social and cultural context of the original source . Montfort and Bogost commented that players were disappointed with the flickering visual effect , which made the ghosts difficult to track and tired the players ' eyes . The two further said that the effect diminishes the ghosts ' personalities present in the arcade version . Chris Kohler of Wired commented that the game was poorly received upon its release and in contemporary times because of the poor quality . However , he further described the game as an impressive technical achievement given its console 's limitations . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Initially , the excitement generated by Pac @-@ Man 's home release prompted retail stores to expand their inventory to sell video games . <unk> began stocking video game cartridges , and toy retailers vied for new releases . Kmart and J. C. Penney competed against Sears to become the largest vendor of video games . The game 's release also led to an increase in sales of the Atari 2600 console . 
 In retrospect , however , critics often cite Atari 's Pac @-@ Man as a major factor in the drop of consumer confidence in the company , which led to the North American video game crash of 1983 . Bill Loguidice and Matt Barton of Gamasutra stated that the game 's poor quality damaged the company 's reputation . Buchanan commented that it disappointed millions of fans and diminished confidence in Atari 's games . Former Next Generation editor @-@ in @-@ chief Neil West attributes his longtime skepticism of Atari 's quality to the disappointment he had from buying the game as a child . Calling the game the top video game disaster , Buchanan credits Pac @-@ Man as a factor to the downfall of Atari and the industry in the 1980s . Author Steven Kent also blames the game , along with Atari 's E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , for severely damaging the company 's reputation and profitability . Montfort and Bogost stated that the game 's negative reception seeded mistrust in retailers , which was reinforced by later factors that culminated in the crash . 
 Poor critical reception made this game one of many decisions that led to Atari 's report of a $ 536 million loss in 1983 and the division and sale of the company 's Consumer Division in 1984 . On December 7 , 1982 , Kassar announced that Atari 's revenue forecasts for 1982 were cut from a 50 percent increase over 1981 to a 15 percent increase . Immediately following the announcement , Warner Communications ' stock value dropped by around 35 percent — from $ 54 to $ 35 — amounting to a loss of $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in the company 's market valuation . Atari attempted to regain its market share by licensing popular arcade games for its consoles . The revenue from selling these console games did not reverse Atari 's decline and the company went further into debt . In 1983 , the company decreased its workforce by 30 percent and lost $ 356 million . 
 In late 1982 , Atari ported Pac @-@ Man to its new console , the Atari 5200 . This version was a more accurate conversion of the original arcade game and was a launch title for the console , along with eleven other games . The port was also followed by conversions of Pac @-@ Man 's arcade sequels , Ms. Pac @-@ Man and Jr . Pac @-@ Man , for the Atari 2600 . Both were better received than Atari 's first Pac @-@ Man title . Ms. Pac @-@ Man , for example , features a larger ROM cartridge and addressed many critics ' complaints of Pac @-@ Man . 
 = Jean Balukas = 
 Jean Balukas ( born June 28 , 1959 ) is an American pool player from Brooklyn , New York , and ranks among the stellar players in the history of the sport . At least through the 1990s , when Allison Fisher began her ascendancy , Balukas was widely acknowledged as the sole candidate for greatest female player ever . Described as a " trailblazer , a child prodigy , a loner who rebelled against dress codes for women — the pool equivalent of Billie Jean King " , she is a five @-@ time Billiards Congress of America ( BCA ) Player of the Year , was the youngest inductee into the BCA Hall of Fame and the second woman given the honor , and was ranked fifteenth on Billiard Digest 's Fifty Greatest Players of the [ 20th ] Century . 
 Balukas was considered a prodigy , coming to the public 's attention first at 6 years of age at a pool exhibition held at New York City 's Grand Central Terminal and thereafter appearing on television , including on CBS 's primetime television show , I 've Got a Secret . At just 9 years old she placed 5th in the 1969 U.S. Open straight pool championship , and placed 4th and 3rd respectively in the following two U.S. Opens . From that early start , Balukas completely dominated women 's professional pool during the 1970s and 1980s . 
 Balukas won the U.S. Open seven years in a row from 1972 through 1978 , accumulating six world championship titles , had well over 100 professional competition first @-@ place finishes with 38 majors to her name , had a streak of 16 first @-@ place finishes in women 's professional tournaments , and was the only woman to compete on equal footing with men in professional play in her era . She quit the sport amidst controversy in 1988 while at the height of her ability , due to a dispute over her conduct in a match at the World Open Nine @-@ ball Championship of that year . 
 = = Young prodigy = = 
 Jean 's father , Albert Balukas , along with his partner , professional player Frank McGown , was the proprietor of a forty @-@ eight @-@ table pool hall called the Ovington Lounge in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn , New York . Balukas 's introduction to play was at 4 years of age , not on one of her father 's tables but on a 4 @-@ 1 ⁄ 2 by 9 foot pool table in the cellar of her childhood home , purchased by her parents to keep her four billiards @-@ playing brothers out of local pool rooms . In later years Balukas explained that she " almost never went to the pool hall and if I did go , I didn 't play . I felt uncomfortable , and besides , girls didn 't go in those days . " 
 <unk> an ivory @-@ detailed cue made especially for her in 1965 by renowned cuemaker George Balabushka , at 5 and 6 years of age she would practice straight pool to 50 points after family dinners with her father 's encouragement but not participation . Many have assumed that she had been tutored in the game . However , Balukas states , " when they find out that my father doesn 't play , many people think I must have learned the game from Frank McGown . That isn 't true . I taught myself to play pool . " 
 In 1966 , McGown staged a billiards exhibition at New York City 's Grand Central Terminal . With her parents ' permission , he brought along the 6 @-@ year @-@ old Balukas , where she participated in the spectacle . The attention this generated , coupled with her prodigious talent , landed her a guest appearance in 1966 on WNEW @-@ TV 's <unk> . Later that year , Balukas , along with her younger sister Laura , appeared on CBS 's popular show I 've Got a Secret . None of the panelists were successful in guessing that the 7- and 5 @-@ year @-@ old sisters were pool enthusiasts . 
 The following year Balukas appeared in an exhibition match at the bygone Carom Club , then located at 1697 Broadway in Manhattan . A second @-@ grader at the time , according to her mother , Peggy , she did her homework and took a nap before appearing at the scheduled match . In advertisements for the match , Balukas was billed as " the Little Princess of Pocket Billiards . " She was described by a reporter present as " a little girl with honey @-@ blond hair ... wearing a short yellow dress and green leotards ... who resembles a young Shirley Temple . " To great applause she edged out her opponent , Roland DeMarco , a pool enthusiast and the President of Finch College . The final score was 50 to 42 . 
 In 1969 , at 9 years of age , Balukas competed in her first Billiard Congress of America U.S. Open straight pool championship , taking 5th place among a field of adults . In the next two U.S. Opens , in 1970 and 1971 , she placed 4th and 3rd , respectively . By that time she was already fairly well known , having had additional television appearances alongside such billiard stars and celebrities as Willie Mosconi , Sammy Davis Jr . , Peter Falk , Hugh Downs and Sonny Fox . She would later appear on television many more times , in addition to broadcasts of pool matches , including an interview on The Mike Douglas Show airing on January 11 , 1977 with Bernadette Peters and David Niven . 
 = = U.S. Open Straight Pool Champion = = 
 On August 18 , 1972 at 13 years of age Balukas won the women 's division of the U.S. Open Straight Pool Championship , along the way defeating five @-@ time champion Dorothy Wise and taking home a prize of $ 1 @,@ 500 . Balukas was the U.S Open 's youngest winner ever and by a large margin . She roundly defeated her opponent in the finals , Madelyn Whitlow of Detroit , Michigan , with a score of 75 – 32 in 44 innings . Reporting on the competition , The New York Times stated : " Miss Balukas showed signs of strong title contention throughout the tournament play as she defeated six opponents with precision shooting and near flawless strategy . " 
 In 1973 , at 14 , Balukas successfully defended her straight pool U.S. Open title , defeating runner @-@ up Donna Ries , a psychologist from Kansas City , Missouri , with a final score of 75 – 72 in 42 innings and a high run of 26 , earning her a $ 2 @,@ 000 purse . Earlier in the tournament she trounced Mieko Harada , a housewife from Kyoto , Japan , 75 @-@ 1 in 20 innings and with a 25 @-@ ball high run . In the 1974 U.S. Open held at the Sheraton Hotel in Chicago , Balukas defended her title , again beating out Harada but by a much closer , <unk> 100 @-@ 99 final score . This was Balukas ' third straight U.S. Open title at the age of 15 . The close finale echoed the results seen in the men 's division , where Joe Balsis defeated Jim <unk> 200 @-@ 199 for the men 's crown . 
 In 1975 Balukas defeated Ries again in the U.S. Open semi @-@ finals with a score of 75 – 15 in 15 innings , dispatched Ames , Iowa native Gail Breedlove 75 @-@ 19 , and then again faced and defeated Harada in the finals , claiming the $ 3 @,@ 000 purse with a score of 100 – 63 in 39 innings and posting a high run of 23 . In 1976 , then 17 , Balukas took her fifth consecutive U.S. Open title , beating Gloria Walker of Cheyney , Pennsylvania 75 – 46 in 39 innings , winning a $ 1 @,@ 700 purse . Balukas went on to win the next two U.S. Open straight pool championships for a total of seven back @-@ to @-@ back wins , her streak foreclosed after 1978 by the discontinuance of the competition itself . 
 Balukas was not just talented at pool but was an all @-@ around good athlete . Starting at age 16 , and for two other years , she was invited to participate in ABC @-@ TV 's Superstars . Held in <unk> , Florida , the event pitted championship athletes from one sport competing in sports other than their own specialties , vying for cash prizes totaling $ 69 @,@ 000 . In her first appearance in 1976 , while a junior in high school , she finished second taking titles in tennis and bowling where she won with 192 points . The winner that year was speed skater Anne Henning . Other competitors included , diver Micki King , tennis and golf pro Althea Gibson , <unk> Kiki Cutter , sprinter <unk> Tyus , and Tennis champ Martina Navratilova . The second place win was bittersweet for Balukas , because based on the award of prize money for placing at Superstars ( $ 13 @,@ 100 ) , she lost amateur standing and was thereafter banned from competing in high school sports , also becoming no longer eligible for a college athletic scholarship . 
 Balukas has won numerous other titles including a string of six wins at the World Open Pocket Billiard Championships . Upon her first win in that tournament held at a convention hall in Asbury Park , New Jersey on August 14 , 1977 , she was described as " the 18 @-@ year @-@ old prodigy from Brooklyn . " There she again outplayed Walker ( then of Ithaca , New York ) , with a score of 100 – 57 , and earned a $ 1 @,@ 001 prize . Balukas has more U.S. Open wins than any other player , male or female , the runner up for the men being Steve Mizerak with four . Her ball average over the seven U.S. Opens was in a different class than her opponents . Balukas averaged 3 @.@ 44 in 1972 with the next best , Gloria Walker , having an average of 2 @.@ 37 . In 1975 she averaged 4 @.@ 05 , while no other player averaged even 3 . 
 = = Playing with men = = 
 As early as the late 1960s , Balukas was performing exhibition matches with some of the top male players of the era , including Willie Mosconi and Irving Crane , who were together considered between 1941 and 1956 the " best in the world , flat out " . In 1975 , she again played the legendary Willie Mosconi on CBS ' " Challenge of the Sexes " in both eight @-@ ball and nine @-@ ball competition . At 62 Mosconi was well past his prime , but a handicap was nevertheless given to the eagle @-@ eyed youngster , allowing her all the breaks and the first shot regardless of whether she had made a ball or not on the break . Mosconi lost at both disciplines . She later would play televised " Battle of the Sexes " matches with Rudolph Wanderone a / k / a Minnesota Fats in 1977 , Ray Martin in 1979 and with Steve Mizerak in 1986 . 
 According to a 1987 interview with reporter Roger Starr of The New York Times , she learned much about pool through such activities but " she also learned that , even in fun , pool stars did not like losing in public , especially not to children , and less , even , to girl children . She also discovered that young men , including her brothers , shared the feeling of shame over losing to girls . She recalls , ' Whenever my brother Paul , the youngest of my four brothers , beat me at pool on the table downstairs at home , he would run through the house shouting ' I won , I beat her ' . I guess that was one reason I worked all the harder at my game . ' " 
 On August 6 , 1978 Balukas became the first woman to qualify to play in the men 's division of the World Open Pocket Billiards Championship ; a tournament with a 100 @-@ year history . This meant that she would be competing in both the women 's and men 's divisions of the tournament to be held on August 12 of that year at the Biltmore Hotel located at 43rd Street and Madison Avenue in New York City . 
 Balukas played against the men in a number of competitions , including at least one televised match aired on March 25 , 1979 , between her and men 's champion Ray Martin . The match was billed on the television schedule as part of a " Challenge of the Sexes , " alongside similar male @-@ female matchups between golfers Nancy Lopez and Andy North and coed participants in a skateboarding challenge match . During 1980 , Balukas again competed in the Men 's division , in the World Open Pocket Billiards championship hosted at New York City 's Roosevelt Hotel . She was defeated in the second round at the hands of Steve Mizerak with a score of 150 – 93 . Her final standing in the tournament overall was 22nd , with 42 men trailing her in the rankings . She also competed in the women 's division of that tournament and was the victor , defeating Billie Billings , also of Brooklyn , with a score of 100 – 75 . According to The New York Times , " Miss Balukas 's triumph ... was not only expected but routine . She was a defending champion and , in fact , has lost only two games to women in the past eight years . " 
 Balukas was initially entered in both the men 's and women 's divisions of the 1987 B.C. Classic , a nine @-@ ball competition . After notable controversy ( detailed below ) , she competed only on the men 's side . Along the way she trounced Keith McCready 11 – 3 ( at the time the 17th @-@ ranked male player by money list , and who guest @-@ starred as obnoxious hustler " Grady Seasons " in the 1986 film The Color of Money ) . Balukas finished in a tie for 9th place among many of the best players in the world . 
 = = Dress code controversy = = 
 In August 1987 , at the annual B.C. Open hosted at a Holiday Inn in Binghamton , New York , Balukas was slated for competition in both divisions . After arriving , she discovered that for evening @-@ scheduled matches she would be required to wear formal attire that she did not have with her . The men 's division , by contrast , had no similar dress code . Balukas took a stand that the women should not be treated differently from the men , and accordingly refused to procure garments that would meet the unequal mandate . 
 The women held a vote as to whether Balukas should be allowed to play . She later explained that " what hurt at Binghamton was that while I was trying to stand up for us being treated the same as men , the other girls held the tournament draw without me . By one vote , they kept me out . And some of the girls who are my best friends voted against me . " She did not agree at the time with the speculation of others that her professional rivals had their own self @-@ interest at heart , knowing that with her out of the competition they would have a much better chance at the $ 5 @,@ 000 first place prize award . Despite the women 's snub and perceived chauvinistic terms , she nevertheless competed on the men 's side , tying for ninth place . Not long afterward , she indicated to a reporter that she was " thinking of dropping out of women 's competition altogether . " 
 Soon after the dress code dust @-@ up made headlines , a letter was sent to The New York Times by the Women 's Professional Billiard Association ( WPBA ) , by its president Belinda Bearden , disputing the facts as reported . According to the WPBA , the dress code was self @-@ imposed by the players in an attempt to improve the image of women 's pool and to attract more spectators and press to the sport , and that Balukas was the only participant at Binghamton unwilling to comply . They further explained that Balukas first withdrew from the women 's division but later returned and asked to play after player assignments had been completed . A vote to allow her to play resulted in a tally of 8 – 7 in her favor , but after they moved to consult a player who was not present for the vote , Balukas again withdrew from the competition , and that was where the matter had ended . 
 = = Break with the sport = = 
 In 1988 , Balukas was playing against professional Robin Bell in a televised match of the Brunswick @-@ sponsored World Open Nine @-@ ball Championship held at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas , Nevada . Bell , who was Balukas ' best friend on the women 's tour , had never beaten Balukas but had been playing very strongly in the tournament . With the score 2 games to 3 in favor of Bell in a race to nine games , Bell made the 9 ball on the snap two games in a row , making the score 5 to 2 in very short order . 
 All television match players wore small microphones so that their words and the sounds of play could be heard by the audience . After Bell 's second 9 ball break , Balukas reportedly muttered within the range of the microphone words to the effect that Bell was having a string of inordinately lucky shots . She was cautioned by the referee and play continued , with Balukas the ultimate victor with a final score of 9 – 5 . According to an interview with Balukas appearing in New York Woman magazine in 1991 , Balukas 's exact words were " Some world championship ... beat me with skill , not luck . " Despite their off @-@ the @-@ table friendship , following the match Bell made a formal complaint to the WPBA about the incident . The WPBA 's board of directors thereafter sanctioned Balukas $ 200 for unsportsmanlike conduct . 
 Balukas was greatly incensed over the sanction and refused to pay on principle , turning away offers by others to pay the fine in her stead . Balukas explains that " It wasn ’ t the $ 200 ... [ Women ] pool players , who were ranked three and six and five , were the ones who decided I should be fined . I felt it should have been done by an outside panel , not by my competitors . " The sides were at an impasse . Balukas refused to relent and the WPBA refused to lift the sanction and would not allow Balukas to play again until she paid the fine . " Just because she was our premier player doesn 't mean she was above the rules , " said Vicki <unk> in 1992 , then president of the WPBA . Professional Loree Jon Jones in the same interview expressed mixed sentiments : " Her not playing is , I guess , sad , " but she reflected that in Balukas 's absence , " we 've all learned how to win . " 
 Balukas had also felt some heat from her solo venture into the men 's arena . She had heard taunts from the men upon finding out she was going to play in their division , such as " I ’ m gonna put on a dress and go play with the women . " In early 1988 , Balukas gave in to complaints from the men upon her entry to a Chicago based tournament that it wasn 't fair she should have the opportunity to play in both divisions when the men only had the opportunity to play in one , and withdrew from the men 's side . Balukas states that after she arrived in Chicago " I found out that the first- and second @-@ place winners in the women ’ s event were going to be invited to play in the men ’ s event . I was stabbed in the back . " 
 There were other factors at play . Balukas admits to having been under great pressure , much of it self @-@ imposed . After she reached the pinnacle of her profession , " That ’ s when I started getting nervous ... that ’ s when I started putting a lot of pressure on myself . " " Playing against the men , I learned to lose , ... but [ losing ] hurt with the women because I was expected to win all the time . " Ultimately Balukas states that her break with the sport " ... was a buildup of everything , ... A little burnout , a little frustration . It just got to a point where I had so much animosity toward the pool world . And that was my out . You know , you 're going to fine me ? Well , see you later . That was my excuse to finally say I need a break . " 
 For Balukas 's part , she returned to Bay Ridge , took over management of her family 's pool hall , Hall of Fame Billiards on Ovington Avenue in Brooklyn , and states that " I 'm enjoying my life immensely ... I have moved on . " In summing up these events in a 1992 article , The New York Times stated , " So America 's greatest woman pool player competes only for the odd soda . If you 're feeling lucky , drop by her poolroom ... If you 're thirsty ... go elsewhere . " 
 = = Honors = = 
 In 1975 , when she was 15 years old , Balukas was already described as the " best female pool player in the world " . By 1987 , Balukas 's dominance of women 's professional pool was so complete that it was described as " breathtaking " in its scope by The New York Times . Announcers had long since stopped calling Balukas " the Little Princess , " but presented her as " the Queen " . By that time she had won the World Straight Pool Championship women 's division eight of the prior nine years , and over the same time period , every single women 's professional tournament in which she competed — 16 in all . She had been honored as BCA Player of the Year five times . In 1985 became the second woman ( after Dorothy Wise ) to be inducted into the BCA Hall of Fame , with the additional honor of being its youngest inductee , at just under 27 years of age . In 1999 , Balukas was ranked number fifteen on Billiard Digest 's Fifty Greatest Players of the Century . 
 = Chincoteague Pony = 
 The Chincoteague Pony , also known as the Assateague horse , is a breed of pony that developed and lives in a feral condition on Assateague Island in the United States states of Virginia and Maryland . The breed was made famous by the Misty of Chincoteague series written by Marguerite Henry starting in 1947 . While phenotypically horse @-@ like , they are commonly called " ponies " . This is due in part to their smaller stature , created by the poor habitat on Assateague Island . Variation is found in their physical characteristics due to blood from different breeds being introduced at various points in their history . They can be any solid color , and are often found in pinto patterns , which are a favorite with breed enthusiasts . Island Chincoteagues live on a diet of salt marsh plants and brush . This poor @-@ quality and often scarce food combined with uncontrolled inbreeding created a propensity for conformation faults in the Chincoteague before outside blood was added beginning in the early 20th century . 
 Several legends are told regarding the origins of the Chincoteague , the most popular holds that they descend from survivors of wrecked Spanish galleons off the Virginia coast . It is more likely that they descend from stock released on the island by 17th @-@ century colonists looking to escape livestock laws and taxes on the mainland . In 1835 , the practice of pony penning began , with settlers rounding up ponies and removing some of them to the mainland . In 1924 the first official " Pony Penning Day " was held by the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company , where ponies were auctioned as a way to raise money for fire equipment . The annual event has continued in the same fashion almost uninterrupted to the present day . 
 Although popularly known as Chincoteague ponies , the feral ponies actually live on Assateague Island . Although the entire Island is owned by the federal government , Assateague is split by a fence at the Maryland / Virginia state line , with a herd of around 150 ponies living on each side of the fence . The herds live on land managed by two different federal agencies with very different management strategies . Ponies from the Maryland herd , referred to in literature of the National Park Service as Assateague horses , live within Assateague Island National Seashore . They are generally treated as wild animals , given no more or less assistance than other species on the island , other than to be treated with contraceptives to prevent overpopulation . Conversely , the Virginia herd , referred to as Chincoteague ponies , lives within the Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge but is owned by the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company . The Virginia ponies are treated to twice yearly veterinary inspections , which prepare them for life among the general equine population if they are sold at auction . While only around 300 ponies live on Assateague Island , around 1 @,@ 000 more live off @-@ island , having been purchased or bred by private breeders . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 While phenotypically horses , the Chincoteague is most often referred to as a pony breed . Chincoteagues average around 13 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 inches , 137 cm ) in their feral state , but grow to at least 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) when domesticated and provided better nutrition . They generally weigh around 850 pounds ( 390 kg ) . All solid colors are found in the breed , as are pinto patterns . Horses with pinto coloration tend to sell for the most money at the annual auction . Due to outside bloodlines being added to the Chincoteague herd , there is some variation in physical characteristics . In general , the breed tends to have a straight or slightly concave facial profile with a broad forehead and refined throatlatch and neck . The shoulders are well angled , the ribs well sprung , the chest broad and the back short with broad loins . The croup is rounded , with a thick , low @-@ set tail . The breed 's legs tend to be straight , with good , dense bone that makes them sound and sturdy . Domesticated Chincoteagues are considered intelligent and willing to please . They are viewed as easy to train , and are used as hunter , driving and trail ponies . In terms of health , they are generally hardy and easy keepers . In the late 19th century , one author praised their " good manners and gentle disposition " while reporting the story of one pony who was ridden a distance of around 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) in 34 days by a man with equipment , a load that weighed around 160 pounds ( 73 kg ) — the pony weighed approximately 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Legend states that Chincoteague ponies descend from Spanish horses shipwrecked off the Virginia coast on their way to Peru in the 16th century . Another story holds that they descend from horses left on the island by pirates . Both of these theories are unlikely , as no documentation has been found to show horses inhabiting the island this early , and no mention of horses already existing on the island was made by colonists on either the mainland or the island in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1600s . Evidence points , however , to their ancestors actually being horses brought to the islands in the 17th century by mainland farmers . Livestock on the islands were not subject to taxes or fencing laws , and so many animals , including hogs , sheep , cattle and horses , were brought to the islands . While the National Park Service holds to the theory that the horses were brought to the island in the 17th century , the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company , which owns the ponies on the Virginia side of Assateague , argues that the Spanish shipwreck theory is correct . They argue that horses were too valuable in the 17th century to have been left to run wild on the island , and claim that there are two sunken Spanish galleons off the Virginia coast in support of their theory . The National Chincoteague Pony Association also promotes the shipwreck theory . In the early 1900s , they were described as having been on the islands since well before the American Revolution , and were described at that time as " very diminutive , but many of them are of perfect symmetry and extraordinary powers of action and endurance . " In the early 1800s , Virginia governor Henry A. Wise released what one author called the " earliest printed testimony " on the Chincoteague . 
 During the 1920s , before the herds were managed by various agencies , many conformation faults were found — the effects of uncontrolled inbreeding . <unk> legs , narrow chests , poor bone and a lack of substance plagued the breed , with many stunted animals not growing above 12 hands ( 48 inches , 122 cm ) . This was partially due to the limited and poor @-@ quality feed found on the islands , although this harsh habitat also allowed only the hardiest and most adaptable ponies to survive . Welsh and Shetland pony blood was added to upgrade the stock , and horses with pinto coloring were introduced to give the herd its common distinctive patterns and contribute to the more horse @-@ like phenotype of the breed . Twenty Mustangs owned by the Bureau of Land Management were introduced in 1939 . Arabian blood was added in the hopes of adding refinement and height to the breed , as well as increasing the length of their legs . Arabian stallions were used at two different points within the breed history : one was released with the herd , but did not survive , while another was bred to mares that had been removed from the island for breeding and then returned once in foal . The Chincoteague pony has a similar history to the Shackleford Banker Horse , which comes from the Shackleford Banks off the coast of North Carolina . However , the Shackleford is a more isolated population , with no outside blood added to the island herd . 
 The Island itself has also undergone change . At one time , the island was connected to the lowest point of Fenwick Island . In August 1933 , a hurricane created an inlet south of Ocean City , Maryland , separating the two landforms . After the storm , between 1933 and 1935 , a permanent system of artificial jetties was built to preserve the inlet as a navigation channel . As a result of the jetties disrupting sand movement in the area , the island has drifted considerably westward , and the two landmasses are now over 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) apart . 
 = = = Pony penning = = = 
 In 1835 , the first written description of " pony penning " appeared , though the practice of rounding up livestock on the island existed for many years before that . Initially , unclaimed animals were marked for ownership by groups of settlers . By 1885 , the event had become a festival day , and two days of horse and sheep roundups were held on Assateague and Chincoteague Islands . While the sheep population diminished over time , the pony population grew . In 1909 , the last Wednesday and Thursday of July were designated as the annual days for pony penning , still taking place on both Assateague and Chincoteague Islands . However , in the early 1920s , much of Assateague Island was purchased by a wealthy farmer , forcing many settlers to move to Chincoteague Island and necessitating a change in the pony penning format . By 1923 , all parts of pony penning except for the actual roundup had moved to Chincoteague Island , with the ponies being transported by truck for the first two years before the annual swim was begun . By the early 1900s , Chincoteague Island had been established as a tourism and sport haven , and in 1922 , a causeway was completed that connected the island to the Virginia mainland . After a pair of fires ravaged Chincoteague Island that same year , the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company was established . In 1924 , the first official Pony Penning Day was held , where ponies were auctioned at $ 25 – 50 each to raise money for fire equipment . Pony Penning Day has been held annually ever since , with the exception of 1942 and 1943 . 
 Currently as many as 50 @,@ 000 visitors gather on the last Wednesday in July to watch mounted riders bring the Virginia herd from Assateague and swim them across the channel to Chincoteague Island . The swim takes five @-@ ten minutes , with both the rider and the observers on hand to assist horses , especially foals , who may have a hard time with the crossing . Before the swim , the herd is evaluated and mares in the late stages of pregnancy and those with very young foals are removed from the herd to be trailered between the islands . During the swim , some lactating mares become affected with hypocalcemia , which is treated by on @-@ site veterinarians . Larger foals are auctioned the next day and the majority of the herd , including any young foals , are returned to Assateague on Friday . As of 2015 , the highest price paid for a pony was $ 25 @,@ 000 and the lowest price was $ 500 . Some ponies are purchased under " buy back " conditions , where the bidder donates the money to the fire department but allows the pony to be released back onto Assateague Island. http : / / <unk> / pony _ swim _ <unk> 
 = = = Breed registry and preservation = = = 
 The National Chincoteague Pony Association was founded in 1985 , and the Chincoteague Pony Association in 1994 . The latter is open only to horses purchased from the annual auction , while the former maintains a breed registry and studbook that registers all ponies , including those from private breeders . Many ponies are registered with both associations . There are almost 1 @,@ 000 Chincoteague ponies owned by private individuals off Chincoteague Island , spread throughout the US and Canada . 
 = = Management = = 
 All of Chincoteague Island lies within Virginia state lines , while Assateague Island is split between two states — a smaller northern portion in Maryland and the larger southern section within Virginia . Two separate herds of ponies live on Assateague Island , separated by a fence that runs along the Maryland @-@ Virginia state border . Though descended from the same original stock , the Maryland feral ponies are called " Assateague horses " and are maintained by the National Park Service . The Virginia feral ponies are called " Chincoteague ponies " and are owned by Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Department . In 1943 , the entire island was purchased by the federal government and divided into two protected areas , Assateague Island National Seashore in Maryland and Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge in Virginia . The two herds lie under the jurisdiction of different governmental agencies , and different management strategies have been applied to each herd . The Maryland section of Assateague also contains Assateague State Park , state @-@ owned land where the ponies are allowed to roam , although the state plays little or no part in their management . 
 The feral ponies in both herds separate themselves into small bands , with most consisting of a stallion , several mares and their foals . Ponies on Assateague have a diet that consists mainly of cordgrass , a coarse grass that grows in salt marshes , which makes up around 80 percent of their food . This diet is supplemented by other vegetation such as rose hips , <unk> , <unk> , American beach grass , seaweed and poison ivy . Chincoteague ponies require up to twice as much water as most horses require due to the saltiness of their diet . The increased amount of water that they drink contributes to many ponies appearing to be bloated or fat . 
 = = = Maryland herd = = = 
 The Maryland herd , often called the Assateague herd , is owned and managed by the National Park Service . The Maryland herd is one of very few free @-@ ranging wild horse populations left in the United States . This , combined with its presence on a relatively small and naturally confined area , has made it ideal for scientific study . Since the late 1970s , scientists have used the herd to conduct studies on feral horse behavior , social structure , ecology , remote contraceptive delivery and pregnancy testing , and the effects of human intervention on other wild animal populations . There are few other wildlife populations of any species worldwide that have been studied in as much detail over as long a period as the Maryland herd of Chincoteague ponies . 
 Herd numbers grew from 28 to over 165 between 1968 and 1997 and overgrazing negatively impacted their living environment . To manage population numbers , long @-@ term , non @-@ hormonal contraceptives have been employed , proving 95 percent effective over a seven @-@ year field trial . The contraceptive , which began to be used at a management level in 1995 although it was used in smaller amounts as early as 1989 , has also proven effective at improving the health and increasing the life expectancy of older mares through the removal of pregnancy and lactation @-@ related stress . Since 1990 , general herd health has improved , early mortality has decreased and older ponies are now found , with many over the age of 20 and some even over 25 . No horse has ever been injured during the dart @-@ administered treatments , although there is a 0 @.@ 2 percent rate of abscess at the injection site , which normally heals within two weeks . Each mare between two and four years old is given contraceptives , and treatment is then withdrawn until she produces a foal . Once she has produced enough foals to be well represented genetically within the herd , she is placed on a yearly treatment plan until her death . After the introduction of the contraceptive , herd numbers continued to rise to a high of 175 in 2001 to 2005 , but then dropped significantly to around 130 in 2009 . In 2009 , a study determined that mitochondrial DNA diversity in the herd was quite low , most likely due to their isolation , but that their nuclear genetic diversity remained at a level similar to that of breeds from the mainland . 
 Other than the contraceptive and treatment in emergencies , ponies from the Maryland herd are treated much like other wildlife , with no extra attention paid to them by Park Service employees . It is thought likely that the Maryland herd carries equine infectious anemia ( EIA ) ; they are effectively quarantined , however , by allowing no riding or camping with privately owned horses along the mainland shore during the insect season which stretches from mid @-@ May to October . Due to their treatment as wild animals , ponies from the Maryland herd can be aggressive , and there have been reports of them tearing down tents and biting , kicking and knocking down visitors . In 2010 , after an increase in biting incidents , the National Park Service implemented new measures for educating visitors about the ponies . These measures included new safety information in brochures and recommended viewing distances between the visitors and the ponies . There is also some danger to the ponies from the visitors : ponies have become ill from being fed inappropriate human foods , and on average one Maryland pony a year is killed by a car . Since 1991 there has been a " Pony Patrol " , where volunteers on bikes patrol the island , educating visitors about the ponies . 
 = = = Virginia herd = = = 
 The Virginia herd , often called the Chincoteague herd , is owned and managed by the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company . The US Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) allows the ponies to live on Assateague under a special use grazing permit , allowing approximately 150 adult ponies in the Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge . 
 Thirty to 45 foals are born into the Chincoteague herd each year . The annual Pony <unk> are used to maintain the herd size at around 150 animals . Since 1943 , the FWS has been working on the island to protect and increase the wildfowl population , and their efforts have sometimes endangered the Chincoteague herd . Due to the placement of fences by the FWS , a reduced amount of land is available for grazing by the ponies . The fencing also prevents them from reaching the sea , where they often went to escape biting insects , including mosquitos . In 1962 , several ponies were trapped in an enclosure by high water and died when they were carried out to sea during a storm . Unlike the Maryland herd , ponies on the Virginia side of the island are fenced off from roadways to prevent auto accidents and to discourage visitors from feeding the ponies . 
 In the late 20th century , some ponies previously sold at auction were returned to Assateague Island when population numbers threatened to drop below the targeted numbers due to large numbers of deaths from storms or other issues . Since 1990 , the ponies from the Virginia herd have been rounded up biannually for veterinary treatment , including <unk> and vaccinations for diseases such as rabies , tetanus and Eastern and Western encephalitis , although they make the swim to Chincoteague only once per year . In addition , continual monitoring and basic first aid for any minor injuries is performed by a committee from the fire department . Such intervention is needed because many of the ponies will be brought into the general horse population through the auction and purchase by private buyers . During the veterinary visits , they are also tested for EIA . 
 = = Books = = 
 In 1947 , Marguerite Henry released the children 's book Misty of Chincoteague , the first in a series of novels that made the Chincoteague breed internationally famous . The real Misty was foaled on Chincoteague Island in 1946 , and was purchased as a weanling by Henry . In 1961 , the publicity was increased even more when the film Misty was made , based on the book . The publicity generated by the books assisted the Chincoteague Fire Department and the breed in remaining viable into the 21st century . While fictionalized , the books were based on a real horse and ranch on Chincoteague Island , and the Misty of Chincoteague Foundation was established in 1990 , to preserve the Beebe Ranch and establish a museum with memorabilia from the series . Model horse company Breyer Animal Creations has created models of Misty and five of her descendants . As of 2001 , there were around 40 surviving descendants of Misty worldwide . 
 = Empires : Dawn of the Modern World = 
 Empires : Dawn of the Modern World is a 2003 real @-@ time strategy video game developed by Stainless Steel Studios and published by Activision . Set in a world @-@ historical period that extends from the Middle Ages to World War II , the game tasks players with guiding one of nine rival great civilizations to victory . Customer surveys from Stainless Steel 's previous game , Empire Earth , were used as a starting point for Empires : these inspired the team to take a more minimalist design approach , and to include civilizations without overlapping styles of play . Empires was positively received by critics , who enjoyed its multiplayer component . However , certain reviewers disliked its single @-@ player mode , and opinion clashed on the game 's level of uniqueness compared to competitors such as Rise of Nations . The sales of Empires , when combined with those of Empire Earth , totaled 2 @.@ 5 million units by 2004 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Empires : Dawn of the Modern World is a real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) game in which the player guides a civilization through five historical periods , from the Middle Ages to World War II . As in many RTS titles , the player collects natural resources , erects buildings and trains and maintains a military . Players use a mouse cursor interface ( or hotkeys ) to direct their units , which range from crossbowmen to King Tiger tanks . A three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) camera system allows the player to view the action from any perspective , including isometric and first @-@ person angles . A mini @-@ map is included as well . 
 Each of the nine civilizations features a unique style of play : for example , the French and English have powerful defensive capabilities , while Chinese structures are mobile . During a match , the player must gather resources to progress their civilization to a new historical era , after which more advanced technologies and units ( land- , sea- and airborne ) become available . Four civilizations are playable from the medieval to the Imperial age ; at the beginning of World War I , the player transitions their civilization to one of the remaining five . For example , a player of the premodern Franks must transition to modern Germany or France . The player wins a match by destroying all opponents ' means of production , or by constructing and successfully defending a " Wonder " , such as the Notre Dame de Paris or Brandenburg Gate . 
 Empires allows up to eight players ( or artificially intelligent opponents ) to compete in two modes : the shorter , battle @-@ oriented Action mode or the longer , defense @-@ oriented Empire Builder mode . In addition , the game contains three single @-@ player storylines called " campaigns " , each of which depicts major events in a civilization 's history . These follow Richard the Lionheart 's medieval wars in France ; Admiral Yi Sun @-@ Sin 's defense of Korea against Japanese invasion in the early modern period ; and General George S. Patton 's exploits during World War II . The editor used to create Empires is packaged with the game , which allows the player to create original levels and campaign scenarios . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Stainless Steel Studios started work on Empires in 2002 . The project was led by company head Rick Goodman , designer of Ensemble Studios ' Age of Empires and Stainless Steel 's earlier Empire Earth . The Empires team began by studying their previous game for features that could be reused or improved . In addition , they mined history books for interesting " events , battle tactics , weapons , technologies and economic factors " , according to Goodman . A list was drafted of 100 historical elements that excited the team , and it formed the basis of the project . Although a heavy focus was placed on historical accuracy , designer Richard Bishop explained that " fun always comes first . " As it had with Empire Earth , Stainless Steel delegated separate teams to the multiplayer and single @-@ player modes of Empires . 
 Further inspiration came from surveys of Empire Earth players , conducted during 2002 . For example , the team found that Empire Earth 's medieval and World War II periods were the most popular , while its futuristic and prehistoric periods were the least . In response , the team reduced the span of Empires to 1 @,@ 000 years , from the Middle Ages until World War II . Goodman believed that this could make the game many times deeper than Empire Earth . Also requested by players were fully unique civilizations , without overlapping units or styles of play — a feature that Goodman claimed to be a first for a history @-@ based RTS game . The team discovered that those who favored the single @-@ player mode in Empire Earth preferred slower , more management @-@ based gameplay . However , multiplayer users were split , with half in favor of shorter matches filled with combat . To please both audiences , the Empire Builder and Action modes were included to offer " a rush @-@ oriented game for the pro gamers and a more defensive game for the casual gamer " , in Goodman 's words . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 In December 2002 , publisher Activision signed Stainless Steel to a multi @-@ game contract , the first title of which was revealed to be Empires in February 2003 . By April , the team estimated the game to be 60 – 70 % finished . The engine used to create Empire Earth — later released under the name Titan 2 @.@ 0 — was retained and upgraded for Empires . Significantly more detail was added to the units ' 3D models than had appeared in Empire Earth . Further additions included reflection mapping , environmental bump mapping and a new physics engine . According to Goodman , reusing the game engine enabled the team to place its full concentration on gameplay , without worrying about technological development . Another priority was storytelling , an element of the RTS game Warcraft III : Reign of Chaos ( 2002 ) particularly enjoyed by the Empires team . 
 Empires was designed primarily for multiplayer gameplay : the multiplayer development team created and fine @-@ tuned each civilization , which the single @-@ player team then used in campaign levels . Because the civilizations do not overlap , Bishop considered game balance to be the most difficult aspect of the project . Previously , Stainless Steel had balanced its games in a <unk> fashion : the " individual components " of each civilization — for example , the economic power of Germany versus that of England — were balanced against one another . Balance on this scale led to overarching balance . However , this technique hinged on a broad similarity between civilizations that is not present in Empires . Consequently , the company had to abandon its earlier practice and " develop an entirely new methodology " , Goodman explained . The result was a <unk> system of balance , in which civilizations are inherently unbalanced but equally powerful overall . 
 As with Empire Earth , each new build of Empires was given to " strike teams " of playtesters . By April , between six and eight months of playtesting had been performed by a group of six professional RTS players . GameSpy 's Allen Rausch wrote that the process allows a game to be " consistently tested , evaluated , balanced , and tweaked " at every stage of development , which enables complex forms of balance . This let the Empires team create a looser version of the rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors system typical of RTS games , wherein one type of unit is either very strong or very weak against other types . In Empires , each unit 's strengths and weaknesses were made subtle enough to curb " hopeless mismatches " and reward skillful micromanagement , according to Bishop . The duration of the average battle was increased to provide more opportunities to micromanage units . Empires went gold on October 7 , 2003 , and it was released on the 22nd of that month . 
