 = Illinois Route 22 = 
 Illinois Route 22 , also known as Half Day Road for part of its length , is an east – west state highway in northeastern Illinois . It runs from U.S. Route 14 ( Northwest Highway ) in Fox River Grove to U.S. Route 41 ( Skokie Highway ) in Highland Park . It travels a distance of 19 @.@ 7 miles ( 31 @.@ 7 km ) and is one of the few roads that runs almost entirely across southern Lake County while also providing access to southeastern McHenry County . Throughout its length , it shifts between two and four lanes as it passes through a frequently changing setting of scenic forestry and smaller populations , as well as busy intersections and larger developments . 
 It originally started as a massive loop around the Chicago area , however it has retained its current , much shorter route ever since 1937 . During the 1990s , it became the subject of much concern for local residents regarding expansion which slowed down any progress for capacity improvement . By the late 2000s , the delays have come and gone and it has emerged as a state route that has been largely modernized to deal with heavy traffic . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Beginning at its western terminus at a commercially developed intersection with U.S. Route 14 ( Northwest Highway ) , Illinois 22 starts out as a two lane road in Fox River Grove , just inside the McHenry County line . It quickly becomes much more rural as it enters the city of Lake Barrington and Lake County about a half mile east . The Advocate Good Shepherd Hospital and Stonehenge Golf Club on the north side are all that lie in this wooded area of sporadic residential development . Heading into North Barrington , the road continues its journey as it crosses paths with Illinois Route 59 ( Hough Street ) until soon after , when it nears the more densely populated area of Lake Zurich . 
 It becomes a four lane road as it approaches commercial development and the busy intersection of U.S. Route 12 ( Rand Road ) . Shortly after , it proceeds to briefly take a northeast direction while it bypasses the narrow , downtown area of Lake Zurich , including a grade separation at the Elgin , Joliet and Eastern Railway ( EJ & E ) . Returning due east , the road travels through a mix of light industrial and commercial developments to the north , and residential to the south before intersecting with Quentin Road . This is where , for a short distance , Illinois 22 runs past the southern edge of Forest Lake on the north side and heads into <unk> which is largely on the south side . This all takes place while it narrows back down to two lanes near two housing developments and returns to a rural setting with light forestry . The road then passes by the Kemper Lakes Business Center , Kemper Lakes Golf Club , and the Egret Marsh and then enters Long Grove . Soon after passing a mixed @-@ use development on the northwest corner at an intersection with Old McHenry Road , it briefly enters a denser forest area before widening back to four lanes while again passing by residential developments . 
 After a major intersection with Illinois Route 83 , the route takes on the name Half Day Road and enters Buffalo Grove . It passes by more neighborhoods , a shopping plaza on the northeast corner of Buffalo Grove Road , the Arboretum Club , and the Prairie View Metra Station next to the at @-@ grade North Central Service tracks . The road then enters Lincolnshire and heads nearby the Stevenson High School and an office complex before intersecting with Illinois Route 21 / U.S. Route 45 ( Milwaukee Avenue ) , with northwest corner containing a gas station , the northeast a grocery store , and the other two being undeveloped . It then travels by Crane 's Landing Golf Course , near the Half Day and Wright Woods Forest Preserves , and goes over the Des Plaines River as it once again encounters a wooded area which surrounds nearby homes . Soon the road intersects and forms a diamond interchange with Interstate 94 ( Tri @-@ State Tollway ) ; many office complexes and corporate buildings , such as Hewitt Associates , are located nearby . 
 On the east side of the interchange , Illinois 22 enters Bannockburn as it passes near Trinity International University as well as some upper class real estate areas . The road next approaches the at @-@ grade Milwaukee District / North Line tracks and major junction with Illinois Route 43 ( Waukegan Road ) while passing a shopping area on the southeast corner of that intersection . It then arrives in the last city on its journey , Highland Park , where it heads near the Prairie Wolf Slough Forest Preserve . Shortly after , it nears its end as it goes under the grade separated Union Pacific / North Line tracks and a pedestrian crossing before terminating at the well traveled , at @-@ grade intersection of U.S. Route 41 ( Skokie Highway ) ; Half Day Road continues east without a state route designation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 1918 , State Bond Issue ( SBI ) Route 22 started off as an outer beltway around the Chicago area , similar to the shape of Interstate 294 . It was even referred to in Illinois road maps , as early as 1931 , as the " 22 Loop " . In those days , it traveled in a " C " formation from the city of Lake Forest to Crystal Lake to Aurora to Joliet , and then east to the border near Indiana . If it took the same path today , it would travel the routes of U.S. 41 , modern Illinois 22 , U.S. 14 , Illinois 31 , and U.S. 30 . By 1935 it had largely been changed to its current route , except for a small section extending east of U.S. 41 . 
 The name Half Day Road is erroneously thought to derive from the tall @-@ tale that prior to the 1900s , it supposedly , and incorrectly took a half day to travel from the Lincolnshire area to Chicago . It actually came from the name of a friendly <unk> Indian chief named Aptakisic whose name meant " sun at the meridian . " An early cartographer spelled it as " Half Day " and the name has been used ever since . 
 Although , one should note that the term " half day " refers to daylight hours . For example , sunrise to sunset is one day . Ergo , a horse leaving at sunrise from Lincolnshire would arrive in Chicago by noon . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 Until the early 2000s and despite heavy traffic , Illinois 22 generally remained a two lane road . The only sections that were four lanes were the intersections of Illinois 83 , Buffalo Grove Road , Milwaukee Avenue , Interstate 94 , Illinois 43 , and U.S. 41 . The lengthy two lane gaps in between those intersections , as well as the rest of Illinois 22 were heavily discussed for expansion starting in the early 1990s . These discussions included plans that called for additional lanes on its entire length from U.S. 14 to U.S. 41 , including widening a section from U.S. 12 to Milwaukee Avenue to six lanes . Also mentioned was a bypass around the narrow , downtown area of Lake Zurich . 
 It became apparent that a major hold up with these projects was the citizens and local officials of Lincolnshire . Going back to 1971 , the section of road from Illinois 83 to Interstate 94 had been known to be opposed for widening by the residents of Lincolnshire . The dispute continued even after funding was secured for the project . This continued until 2002 when an agreement was finally reached between Lincolnshire and the Illinois Department of Transportation ( IDOT ) that led the way for expansion to proceed . Notice was also given around then that plans to widen Illinois 22 west of U.S. 12 , through North Barrington and Lake Barrington had been dropped . In December 2003 , the $ 12 @.@ 5 million of roadwork which consisted of approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles of widened concrete lanes from west of Interstate 94 to east of Milwaukee Avenue was officially over and the lanes were opened to traffic . 
 There was still a large section of Illinois 22 , from Lake Zurich to Buffalo Grove , that was in need of improvement . In 1994 , the Lake Zurich Village Board approved a bypass around its narrow downtown . This project followed a similar time frame as the Lincolnshire work , however , it was met with a much less intense opposition . The entire process of planning through securing funding was complete by 2003 when state budget cutbacks delayed construction by a year . Construction was completed by 2006 , and on October 20 , 2006 , Illinois 22 was rerouted from Main Street onto the four lane $ 27 million bypass around Lake Zurich . Several homes and business had to be removed for the new roadway , which now featured a grade separation at the Elgin , Joliet and Eastern Railway . By the end of 2006 , all surrounding major roadwork had been completed ; with landscaping continuing into 2007 . After years of delay , the entire project was complete , with four concrete lanes from west of U.S. 12 to east of Quentin Road . This included intersection upgrades along the way , highlighted by the five lane approaches with dual left turn lanes in both directions at Quentin Road . 
 An additional three @-@ mile section of Illinois 22 from Illinois 83 to Milwaukee Avenue , primarily located in Buffalo Grove , was another closely related project that was once again met with similar delays and concerns . Long Grove got on board in May 2005 and approved any widening between its eastern city limits and Illinois 83 . <unk> began in the fall on the two @-@ year project , and in September 2007 it was finished ; complete with four concrete lanes and a center grassy median . Again , intersection improvements were also made , this time adding dual left turn lanes to both east – west approaches at Illinois 83 and Buffalo Grove Road . 
 There was one final widening project that was worked on in 2005 , this time located mostly in Bannockburn . East of Illinois 43 for about a half mile , Illinois 22 was widened to four lanes while in the process a nearby bridge was replaced . 
 Beginning in 2008 , a bridge replacement and expansion project got underway on Illinois 22 at the interchange with Interstate 94 . This was necessary for the tollway which travels underneath to be widened to eight lanes . The old bridge , which was five lanes wide , was rebuilt with one that is eight lanes and includes full length dual left turn lanes in both directions . Other benefits are the improved entrances and exits to and from the interstate , modernized traffic signals , and the use of concrete pavement . The bulk of the work was completed by December 2009 , however both sets of dual left turn lanes were not in operation until the following spring . 
 In August 2009 , construction began on an intersection expansion project at Milwaukee Avenue in Lincolnshire . Its outdated design was a gap in the stretch of recently completed roadwork in the surrounding area . The improvements on Illinois 22 have widened the east – west approaches at this major intersection to five lanes , with the new additions being dual left turn lanes as well as right turn lanes . The new lanes were opened for the first time on October 15 , 2010 . 
 In 2011 , a 2 @.@ 1 mile , $ 13 @.@ 2 million project in Bannockburn and Highland Park got underway . It extended from east of I @-@ 94 to west of US @-@ 41 , with the exception of the small section that was previously worked on in 2005 . IL @-@ 22 was reconstructed and widened to four lanes with other smaller improvements along the way , including concrete pavement and dual left turn lanes at IL @-@ 43 . The new lanes were initially opened by the end of 2012 , with landscaping and finishing work carrying into 2013 . 
 = = Future = = 
 Most of Illinois 22 has been expanded to four lanes , but there are several gaps remaining which need to be addressed . As of 2002 , plans for the section west of U.S. 12 have been put on hold indefinitely . Finally , the remaining section located primarily in Long Grove from east of Quentin Road to west of Illinois 83 is also in the works for the near future at an estimated cost of $ 38 @.@ 5 million . This project , which is now supported by Long Grove , has suffered similarly mentioned delays , but is also closely related to yet another long delayed project ; the Illinois Route 53 extension . If the extension , which is a limited @-@ access expressway and currently terminates three miles south at Lake @-@ Cook Road , were ever built , it would pass through this area , where there would likely be an interchange . The project has been long delayed over the decades so it appears that this section of Illinois 22 may get widened as part of a separate project . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Number 1 's ( Mariah Carey album ) = 
 # 1 's is the first compilation album by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , released by Columbia Records on November 17 , 1998 . The album contained Carey 's then thirteen number one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 , as well as four new songs . In Japan , # 1 's also included her popular single " All I Want for Christmas Is You " , which remained Carey 's biggest selling single there . Though showing the characteristics of a regular greatest hits album , Carey expressed a dislike for the track listing , which she called a large collection of her most commercial singles . Carey felt that if # 1 's was a traditional greatest hits album , then it would include other songs that did not reach number one , but were far more important in her career . She has regularly voiced her frustration with the song choices on the album , expressing her disappointment with the omission of her " favorite songs " . 
 Upon release , reviews for the album were mixed , with criticism directed towards both the new material and the decision to include only Carey 's number one hits in the United States . While receiving tepid reviews from music critics , the album became a large commercial success throughout the world . It debuted at number four on Billboard 200 , number one in Japan , and in the top @-@ ten throughout almost every major music market around the globe . # 1 's was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of five million copies throughout the United States . Aside from the US , the album experienced its strongest sales in Japan , where the album sold 3 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 copies in the first three months after its release . The album was certified the triple @-@ million award , and currently remains the best @-@ selling album of all @-@ time in Japan by a non @-@ Asian artist . In Europe , # 1 's was certified double @-@ platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting shipments of two million copies throughout the continent . 
 Three singles were released from the album . Serving as the album 's lead single was " Sweetheart " featuring Jermaine Dupri . The song performed weakly on the charts , peaking within the top @-@ twenty only in Germany and Switzerland . The follow @-@ up single , " When You Believe " , a duet with Whitney Houston , charted well throughout the world . In the US , the song performed moderately , peaking at number fifteen . In Europe however , the song reached the top @-@ two in Norway , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland and the top @-@ five in Belgium , France , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . " When You Believe " was featured in the The Prince of Egypt soundtrack , and received the Academy Award for Best Original Song . Sales of # 1 's were much higher than expected . On May 15 , 2015 , Carey released # 1 to Infinity , an updated version of # 1 's with all 18 number @-@ ones , which coincides with her residency show in Las Vegas , Mariah Carey Number 1 's . 
 = = Background and album title = = 
 During mid @-@ 1998 , after the release of her seventh studio album , Butterfly ( 1997 ) , the previous September , Carey was in the midst of developing a film and soundtrack project titled All That Glitters . Midway through the project , All That Glitters fell into developmental hell , causing Carey to pause the entire production . During this period , Carey considered embarking on a tour to support Butterfly , which was continuing to sell strongly . However , executives at Sony Music , the parent company of Carey 's label Columbia , wanted her to prepare a greatest hits collection in time for the commercially favorable holiday season . Carey , not having time to record a studio album , agreed . However , they disagreed as to what content and singles should constitute the album . Sony wanted to release an album that featured her US number one singles , void of any new material . Carey on the other hand , felt that a greatest hits album should reflect on her most personal and favorite songs , not her most commercial . To accompany her thirteen number ones , Carey recorded four new songs . She felt that not including any new material would result in cheating her fans , therefore including some new material as well . While compromised , Carey often expressed distaste towards the album 's song selection , expressing her disappointment in the omission of her " favorite songs " . 
 For this reason , Sony titled the album # 1 's , as Carey felt the need to express the album 's true content , a collection of her number one hits . Carey has frequently cited " Underneath the Stars " ( 1996 ) and " Breakdown " ( 1998 ) as examples of songs she was unsuccessful in releasing . In the album 's liner notes , Carey wrote that she was releasing a collection of her number one singles as a " thank you " and a tribute to her fans , and explained that someday she would release a true greatest hits album containing songs that were not released as singles , as well as singles that did not reach number one . In December 2001 , Columbia released the album Greatest Hits , which featured Carey 's number one singles alongside songs she said " needed to be really heard " , such as " Underneath the Stars " and " Forever " . In an interview with MTV , Carey made the following statement regarding the album : " There 's a lot of songs that I 'm happy are gonna see the light of day . I think people are going to like this Greatest Hits because there are songs on it that were not necessarily singles . " 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 The first of Carey 's number ones to be featured on the album was " Vision of Love " . It was Carey 's first single and was the song that propelled her into the music scene . The song received acclaim , and was credited with influencing and popularizing the use of melisma throughout the 1990s . Three other songs were included from her self @-@ titled debut album , of them were " Love Takes Time " , " Someday " and " I Don 't Wanna Cry " . The fifth single featured on the album was " Emotions " , the lead single from the album of the same name . Because of the album 's strict array of chart topping singles , none of the other singles on Emotions made the track listing . Another song that was featured on # 1 's was Carey 's version of The Jackson 5 classic , " I 'll Be There " , which was the lead single from her live album , MTV Unplugged . The singles from Carey 's 1993 release Music Box , made an appearance on the album as well . " Dreamlover " , the seventh number one from the album , was the lead single from Music Box . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 for eight weeks and was described as a " slight piece of pop fluff " , representing a more commercial side to Carey than the " more ambitious " , " Vision of Love " . The song was the start of a vocal maturity for Carey , and was considered a notable song in her career . The second single from Music Box , " Hero " , also made the album 's final cut . According to author Chris Nickson , Hero was one of Carey 's " most inspirational ballads " . The album 's third single , Carey 's cover of Harry Nielsen 's " Without You " failed to make the US album version , however , due to the song 's popularity in Europe , it was included in the album 's international edition . 
 " All I Want for Christmas Is You " , the lead single from Carey 's holiday album Merry Christmas also made the international track listing . The song became one of the best @-@ selling singles by a non – Asian female , and the best @-@ selling Japanese single of 1994 , selling 1 @.@ 1 million copies . Additionally , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " was called " one of the essential musical hallmarks of the holiday season " , and is the only holiday song and ringtone to reach multi @-@ platinum status in the US . Occupying three of the thirteen number ones on the album were the singles from Carey 's 1995 release , Daydream . The album 's lead single " Fantasy " , was featured on # 1 's . However , it was the song 's official remix , which featured rap verses from Ol ' Dirty Bastard , which made the album cut . This was a personal decision made by Carey , as it was of her preference . The second song from Daydream to be featured on the album was " One Sweet Day " , Carey 's duet with Boyz II Men . The song topped the Hot 100 for an unprecedented sixteen weeks , and holds the record for longest running number one song in Hot 100 history . The third and final song from the album , " Always Be My Baby " , spent two weeks atop the charts in the US , therefore earning a place on the album as well . 
 Carey 's most recent studio effort at the time , Butterfly , also yielded two number one songs . The album 's lead single , " Honey " , was a career @-@ transitional song for Carey , which introduced her as an hip hop soul artist , as well as featured extended rap verses throughout the song . While very different than anything Carey had ever recorded , the track was described as " street Hip @-@ Hop music , with a booming bass . " The second song from Butterfly , " My All " , spent one week atop the charts . Carey described the song as " [ having ] a lush sound and intense styling . " Solely written by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , " My All " featured guitar arpeggios , which were synthetically created with the clever use of sampling and playing keyboard notes . As a result , the song was well @-@ received , being called a " slinky , slow jam R & B sound , that fit Mariah like a glove . " 
 = = = New material = = = 
 Since Carey intended # 1 's to serve as a sign of gratitude to her fans , the album contained four new songs not previously included on her albums . The first was a cover of Rainy Davis ' " Sweetheart " ( 1987 ) performed as a duet with co @-@ producer and rapper Jermaine Dupri . Dupri had worked with Carey in the past , contributing to her album Daydream , and co @-@ produced several hip @-@ hop remixes of her songs . Carey said of the inspiration for its recording , " I was thinking of the old songs I used to listen to when I was in school . It 's a really cute record . Young girls 'll like it the way I liked it when I was growing up . " Another new song featured on # 1 's was " When You Believe " , which Carey said was included because she felt it was " a miracle " that she and Houston collaborated on a record . During the development of All That Glitters , Carey had been introduced to DreamWorks producer Jeffrey Katzenberg , who asked her if she would record the song " When You Believe " for the soundtrack to the animated film The Prince of Egypt . Carey and Houston were shown the film separately , and both became very enthusiastic about participating in the project . In an interview with MTV , Carey made the following statement regarding " When You Believe " and working with Whitney Houston : 
 " It 's sort of a message song . It 's what ' Prince of Egypt ' is about , Moses . If we were ever going to come together on any kind of record , this is definitely the right one , and really the coolest thing to me is that after all of the drama and everybody making it like we had a rivalry , she was just really cool and we had a really good time in the studio . We had fun . And so , if nothing else , it was a good experience ... and diva @-@ ism , whatever . " 
 The song was co @-@ written by Stephen Schwartz and Babyface , who also produced the song . Carey had previously collaborated with Babyface on her albums , Music Box ( 1993 ) and Daydream ( 1995 ) . Babyface expressed how he went through more than one version of the song and described its production as a beautiful movie ballad , something different than he , Carey or Houston ever recorded . In an interview with Vibe , Carey said that she " liked [ the song ] the way it was . " She had characterised it as " a very big ballad but in an inspirational way " and denied speculation that there had been past rivalry or animosity between her and Houston prior to its recording : " I never even really talked to her until this . We never had any issues between us . The media and everybody made it an issue . " 
 Carey co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song " Whenever You Call " with longtime collaborator Walter Afanasieff for her album , Butterfly . However , in order to change the song 's tempo and format , Carey decided to re @-@ do the song as a duet with Brian McKnight , because she felt it was one of the best songs on Butterfly . Carey had also expressed how McKnight 's vocals added a great deal to the song , describing the project as " perfecting the song " . McKnight shared similar sentiments , saying , " It was amazing to go into the studio with someone who 's so successful , and has that kind of track record . Mariah is someone who could ask anyone in the world to sing with her , and they called me . The album contains a duet with Whitney Houston ... it 's just been great company to be in . " 
 One of the songs Carey recorded specifically for # 1 's was a cover of Brenda K. Starr 's " I Still Believe " ( 1988 ) co @-@ produced by Stevie J and Mike Mason . During the late 1980s Starr helped Carey secure a record contract while she worked as Starr 's backup singer . In the album 's liner notes , Carey wrote that the purpose of the song was solely paying tribute to her . According to Carey , the song " reminds me of the fact that not long ago I was a teenage girl with nothing to my name but a demo tape , my voice , and my ability to write songs . Brenda K. Starr treated me like a ' star ' and gave me a shot . " Another song Carey and Stevie J co @-@ produced was a cover of , " Theme from Mahogany ( Do You Know Where You 're Going To ) " ( 1975 ) by Diana Ross . The latter song was the third non @-@ original song on the album , and experienced a limited release throughout few countries in Europe . During a press release for the album , it was reported that an exclusive live version of " Hero " would be included . However , the idea fell through and was never released . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received generally mixed reviews from music critics . # 1 's was awarded four and a half out of five stars from Heather Phares of Allmusic . Phares complimented the album 's content , feeling the song selection was too commercial , but very strong . Additionally , Phares wrote " Her career has been an extraordinary succession of number ones and record @-@ breaking firsts in the music world , her entire album catalog has achieved RIAA multi @-@ platinum status . " Phares also commented on the accompanying DVD , writing , " Interviews and interactive menus make # 1s a better @-@ than @-@ average DVD video collection and one that will doubtlessly please Carey 's legions of fans . " Mark Bautz , an editor from Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B- . Bautz felt that Carey 's primary limitation was " wan , homogeneous songs " and that " hearing them months apart on the radio makes them passable , but strung together on # 1s they 're like a mile @-@ long elevator ride . " While criticizing the album for its song selection and content , he complimented the songs " My All " and the remix for " Fantasy " , writing , " that said , though , Fantasy ( with O.D.B. ) and My All stand up as two of the best pop tunes of the ' 90s . " The album received a scathing review from Britain 's NME magazine , with its critic writing : 
 " I fear Mariah Carey . Superficially , she might seem like a purveyor of saccharine bilge like ' Hero ' ... But that 's bullshit . You don 't sell 90 million records unless you reserve that <unk> stuff for your sucker fans ... you gotta be cold @-@ eyed , hard @-@ boiled and have balls of steel ... She 'll do whatever it takes . And her most fiendish weapon is the duet . If the MOR market needs servicing , she 'll duet with Luther or Whitney ... If her contemporary edge needs sharpening , she 'll hang with the Wu @-@ Tang Clan ... If you 're big in the R & B charts , like Brian McKnight , she 'll be in there ... like a heat @-@ seeking parasite . She don 't give a fuck . She destroys competition by sucking them dry and spitting them out . " 
 In a review for Carey 's 2001 album , Greatest Hits , Sal Cinquemani of Slant felt the album was solely a string of Carey 's most commercial and popular hits , however , not her best . Cinquemani complimented Greatest Hits and wrote , " It seems like only yesterday that we were served with the self @-@ congratulatory # 1s , a collection of Carey 's record @-@ breaking string of chart @-@ toppers , but the 27 @-@ track Greatest Hits is the singer 's first proper hits compilation . " In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave the album a " choice cut " rating , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money ; Some ( choice cut ) s are arbitrarily personal , others inescapably social . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 As executives at Columbia had done during the album 's development , Eric Boehlert of Rolling Stone noted the importance of the release date of # 1 's and other albums on sale during the same period : " Artists who make a habit of hitting it big during the holiday shopping season are wise indeed , as sales traditionally skyrocket . This year is no exception . " Journalist and author Marc Shapiro , in his biography of Carey , attributed the album 's high sales to the presence of new songs , writing : 
 " The consensus among the music press was that Mariah 's insistence on including the new material made all the difference in increasing sales figures more than expected . Including some new with the old in a greatest @-@ hits package had been tried from time to time by other artists with varying degrees of success , but with the triumph of # 1 's , it would become a regular element in nearly all future greatest @-@ hits albums . As such packages go , # 1 's was a solid retrospective of Mariah 's chart hits , but because these songs were <unk> the radio , including a favorite <unk> album track or two might have made a nice change . The new songs were a definite bones even though none ever really rose to the spectacular level of her best ... they added up to a nice touch but little more . " 
 # 1 's was released in the same week as several other albums by high @-@ profile musicians such as Garth Brooks , Jewel , Method Man , Ice Cube and Whitney Houston . MTV News called November 17 " what is shaping up to be the music industry 's Super Tuesday ... most onlookers know that first week sales aren 't everything , but they will also tell you that they are pretty darn important . " # 1 's entered the U.S. Billboard 200 at number four , with 221 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . In its sixth week of release ( ending January 2 ) the album 's weekly sales peaked at 360 @,@ 000 copies . It remained in the top twenty for thirteen weeks and on the chart for sixty @-@ two weeks ( making two re @-@ entries ) . In Canada , # 1 's was certified triple @-@ platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Europe , the album experienced success , peaking within the top @-@ ten in almost every major music market . By 2003 , the album received a double @-@ platinum certification by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting shipments of two million copies throughout Europe , until that year . In France , # 1 's was certified double @-@ platinum , with estimated sales of 800 @,@ 000 copies . In Italy was certified triple @-@ platinum , whit 300 @,@ 000 copies . The album received a platinum certification in Belgium , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , where it shipped 800 @,@ 000 copies . # 1 's received a gold certification in Germany , the Netherlands and Norway . Aside from its success in Europe , the album experienced its highest sales in Japan ( after the US ) , where it sold 3 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 copies in the first three months after its release . In Japan , # 1 's remains the best @-@ selling album in Japan by a non @-@ Asian artist and is certified the triple @-@ Million award and was certified six @-@ time platinum in Brazil , whit 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 copies . The album was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of five million copies throughout the United States . Worldwide # 1 's has sold 20 million copies . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Sweetheart " was released as the album 's lead single . In the US , due to the song 's low radio airplay , " Sweetheart " only reached number twenty @-@ five on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . Internationally , the song performed better , peaking within the top twenty in Germany and Switzerland . " When You Believe " , the album 's second single , was promoted as the first single from both The Prince of Egypt : Original Soundtrack and Houston 's My Love Is Your Love . It was given a wider release than " Sweetheart " and achieved worldwide success . The song peaked within the top two in Norway , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland , and in the top five in Belgium , the Netherlands , France and the United Kingdom . In the UK , " When You Believe " became one of Carey 's biggest successes , selling 260 @,@ 000 units . Despite reaching high positions around the globe , " When You Believe " performed moderately in the US , where it peaked at number fifteen . Serving as the album 's third single , " I Still Believe " performed stronger in the US than the album 's previous singles , peaking at number four . The song was certified platinum in the United States , however performing weakly in other territories . " I Still Believe " performed well in Spain , where it peaked at number seven , and in Canada , where the song reached the top @-@ ten . 
 " Whenever You Call " was considered for release as a single in mid @-@ 1999 , but its promotion was cancelled due to the impending release of " Heartbreaker " , the lead single from Carey 's following album Rainbow . " Do You Know Where You 're Going To " was issued as a promotional single in Brazil and some parts of Europe during June . The song performed weakly around the world , not charting in any major music market . In December 1999 , Columbia released the video / DVD # 1 's , which contained music videos and recordings of live performances for the number one singles featured on # 1 's , as well as " Heartbreaker " , which had gone to number one during that time . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 In 1998 , Carey received the World Music Awards for becoming the " World 's Best Selling Recording Artist of the 1990s " as well as the award for " World 's Best Selling R & B Artist " . Carey received the 1998 Billboard Music Award for Artist of the Decade . At the 1999 BMI Music Awards , Carey took home the coveted Songwriter of the Year award . " When You Believe " was nominated at the 2000 Grammy Awards for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals and won an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Duo or Group . Additionally , the song won the award for Best Original Song at the 71st annual Academy Awards . After the album 's release , Carey won a Blockbuster Entertainment Award in the category of Favorite Female Artist , and Entertainer of the Year at the Soul Train Music Awards . # 1 's won a 1999 Japan Gold Disc Award for International Pop Album of the Year . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Album credits = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Slavery by Another Name = 
 Slavery by Another Name : The Re @-@ Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II is a book by American writer Douglas A. Blackmon , published by Anchor Books in 2008 . It explores the forced labor of imprisoned black men and women , through the convict lease system used by states , local governments , white farmers , and corporations after the American Civil War until World War II in the southern United States . Blackmon argues slavery in the United States did not end with the Civil War , but instead persisted well into the 20th century . It depicts the subjugation of Convict Leasing , <unk> and Peonage and tells the fate of the former but not of the latter two . 
 Slavery by Another Name began as an article Blackmon wrote for The Wall Street Journal detailing the use of black forced labor by U.S. Steel Corporation . Seeing the popular response to the article , he began research for a more comprehensive look at the topic . The resulting book was well received by critics and became a New York Times Best Seller . In 2009 , it was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for General Non @-@ Fiction , and in 2012 , was adapted into a documentary film for PBS also titled Slavery by Another Name . 
 = = Background = = 
 Douglas Blackmon , the book 's author , is a Wall Street Journal reporter . He grew up in Washington County , Mississippi , where as a seventh grader he was encouraged by his teacher and his mother to research a local racist incident , despite the opposition of some citizens . The experience began a lifelong interest in the history of American race relations . 
 In 2003 , Blackmon wrote a story on the use of black convict labor in the coal mines of U.S. Steel . The story generated a large response , and was later anthologized in Best Business Stories . Blackmon began to research the subject more widely , visiting various county courthouses to obtain records on arrest , conviction , and sentences . 
 He later stated : 
 " ... as I began to research , even I , as someone who had been paying attention to some of these sorts of things for a long time and was open to alternative explanations , even I was fairly astonished when I put it together , basically by going county by county and finding the criminal arrest records and the jail records in county after county after county from this period of time and seeing that if there had been crime waves , there had to have been records of crimes and people being arrested for crimes . And in reality , it 's just not there . 
 " There 's no evidence that that ever happened . In fact , it 's the opposite . The crime waves that occurred by and large were the aftermath of the war and whites coming back from fighting in the Civil War and settling scores with people and all sorts of renegade activity that didn 't involve black people at all , but they were blamed for it , and that was then used as a kind of ruse for why these incredibly brutal new legal measures then began to be put in place . " 
 The resulting book , Slavery by Another Name , was published by Anchor Books in 2008 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 In the introduction to Slavery by Another Name , Blackmon describes his experience as a reporter for the Wall Street Journal " asking a provocative question : What would be revealed if American corporations were examined through the same sharp lens of historical confrontation as the one then being trained on German corporations that relied on Jewish slave labor during World War II and the Swiss banks that robbed victims of the Holocaust of their fortunes ? " His story describing corporate use of black forced labor in the post @-@ Civil War South generated more response than any other piece he had written , and inspired him to pursue a book @-@ length study of the subject ( see Reconstruction Era ) . 
 Blackmon structures his narrative around a young African American man named Green Cottenham ; though the records of Cottenham 's life are incomplete , Blackmon states that " the absence of his voice rests at the center of this book . " Cottenham , who was born in the 1880s to two former slaves , was arrested in 1908 for vagrancy , a common pretext to detain blacks without a white patron . The state of Alabama rented him to a coal mine owned by U.S. Steel Corporation , where he died . 
 As context for Cottenham 's story , Slavery by Another Name also details the beginnings of " industrial slavery " , in which convict laborers were put to work in factories or mines rather than cotton fields . Though slaves were formally emancipated by the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution following the Civil War , Southern states subsequently passed Black Codes , " an array of interlocking laws essentially intended to criminalize black life " , to restrict the economic independence of blacks and provide pretexts for jail terms . These convicts were then rented to plantations , lumber camps , and mines to be used for forced labor . Though federal prosecutors such as Eugene Reese attempted to prosecute responsible parties in the early 20th century under federal laws against debt peonage , the efforts received little support locally or nationally . The system finally comes to an end only with the advent of World War II , which focuses renewed attention on racial issues and the need for national unity . 
 In the book 's epilogue , Blackmon argues for the importance of acknowledging this history of forced labor : 
 the evidence <unk> in county courthouses and the National Archives compels us to confront this extinguished past , to recognize the terrible contours of the record , to teach our children the truth of a terror that pervaded much of American life , to celebrate its end , to lift any shame on those who could not evade it . This book is not a call for financial reparations . Instead , I hope it is a formidable plea for a resurrection and fundamental reinterpretation of a tortured chapter in the collective American past . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book was a New York Times Best Seller and met a positive reception from critics . Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that it " <unk> a basic assumption : that slavery in America ended with the Civil War . " She praised the book 's evidence as " relentless and fascinating " , though she stated that the conceit of reconstructing Cottenham 's life gives the book " a shaky start " . Leonard Pitts , a columnist for the Miami Herald , wrote that " Slavery by Another Name is an astonishing book . It will challenge and change your understanding of what we were as Americans - and of what we are . I cannot recommend it to you highly enough . " W. Fitzhugh Brundage wrote in The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education that " Blackmon deserves high praise for this deeply moving and troubling history . He especially deserves praise for teasing out the largest implications of his research . He aptly , and carefully , draws parallels between the corporate responsibility of companies that exploited slave labor in Nazi Germany and that of southerners who bought convict labor . " In the Sunday Gazette @-@ Mail , Chris Vognar called the book " chilling , doggedly reported and researched " . A review in the Rocky Mountain News stated of the book , " Displaying meticulous research , and personalizing the larger story through individual experiences , Blackmon 's book opens the eyes and wrenches the gut . " 
 African American Studies scholar James Smethurst was more critical , writing in The Boston Globe that " this catalogue of the nadir is one of the book 's weaknesses , since it sometimes departs from its account of peonage without much transition . Paying more attention to the considerable presence of involuntary servitude in African- American literature and intellectual history , reaching back to Charles Chesnutt and Paul Laurence Dunbar , would have helped " . However , he concludes that " the book vividly and engagingly recalls the horror and sheer magnitude of such neo @-@ slavery and reminds us how long after emancipation such practices persisted . " 
 Slavery by Another Name was awarded the 2009 Pulitzer Prize for General Non @-@ Fiction . The award committee called it " a precise and eloquent work that examines a deliberate system of racial suppression and that rescues a multitude of atrocities from virtual obscurity . " 
 In 2011 , Mark Melvin , an inmate at the Kilby Correctional Facility , was banned from reading the book by Alabama Department of Corrections officials who deemed it " an attempt to incite violence based on race , religion , sex , creed or nationality " . Melvin filed a lawsuit stating that his First Amendment rights had been violated . Blackmon stated of the officials ' actions that " The idea that a book like mine is somehow incendiary or a call to violence is so absurd " . 
 = = Film = = 
 Slavery by Another Name was adapted into a 90 @-@ minute documentary film , which premiered on PBS in February 2012 . The film was executive produced by Catherine Allan of Twin Cities Public Television , co @-@ executive produced by Blackmon , directed by Sam Pollard , written by Sheila Curran Bernard , and narrated by Laurence Fishburne . Slavery by Another Name premiered in competition at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2012 . 
 Neil <unk> of The New York Times wrote of the film that " by filling in an overlooked part of black history , this sobering film enhances our understanding of why race issues have proved so intractable . " Daniel Fienberg of Hitfix , viewing the film at Sundance , wrote that " Slavery By Another Name is sturdy and well @-@ researched stuff and it will play well when it airs on PBS next month and it should play well in the future in classrooms , but as a film festival entry , it isn 't nearly confident enough in its artistry . There 's no harm in a dry history lesson , but Pollard may have hoped to achieve more than that . " 
 = Don 't Cry for Me Argentina = 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " is a song recorded by Julie Covington for the 1976 concept album , Evita , and was later included in the 1978 musical of the same name . The song was written and composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice while they were researching the life of Argentinian leader Eva Perón . It appeared at the opening and near the end of the show , initially as the spirit of the dead Eva exhorting the people of Argentina not to mourn her , and finally during Eva 's speech from the balcony of Casa Rosada . Covington was signed by the songwriters for the track , based on her previous work in musicals . 
 The Evita album had taken 3 – 4 months to record , since Rice was not satisfied with the intensity of the initial recordings . It had a number of different titles before " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " was decided as the final one . The song shares its melody with " Oh What a Circus " from the same show and lyrically consists of platitudes where Eva tries to win the favour of the people of Argentina . It was released in the United Kingdom on 12 November 1976 as the first single from the album , accompanied by national and trade advertising , full @-@ colour posters , display sleeves as well as radio interviews . 
 The song reached number @-@ one on the UK Singles Chart and earned a gold certification from the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , with over a million copies sold . It also reached the top of the charts in Australia , Belgium , Ireland , New Zealand and the Netherlands . " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " was critically appreciated , with Rice and Lloyd Webber winning the 1977 Ivor Novello award in the category of Best Song Musically and Lyrically . When Evita moved to a London theatre , Covington — who had become disenchanted with the whole project — refused to reprise the part of Eva and the role went to Elaine Paige . " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " has been covered by multiple artists , including The Carpenters , Olivia Newton @-@ John , Sinéad O 'Connor as well as the TV series Glee ‍ actors Lea Michele and Chris Colfer . 
 In 1996 , American singer Madonna starred in the film adaptation of the musical in the title role . Her version of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " was released as the second single from the film soundtrack on 4 February 1997 . A separate version called the " Miami Mix " , which included re @-@ recorded vocals in English and Spanish and an Argentinean <unk> in the song 's intro , was promoted to radio . Madonna 's vocals received positive critical response and the song went on to reach the top of the charts across Europe , Spain and the remix reached number @-@ one on US Dance Club Songs charts . The song also reached the top @-@ ten of the charts a number of nations , including the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and received gold certifications from five of them . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " was written by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice while they were developing Evita for Broadway in 1976 . Both were extremely intrigued by the stories surrounding the life of Eva Perón while researching about her during the mid @-@ 1970s . Evita was initially produced as an album , before being adapted for the stage , following a formula that Lloyd Webber and Rice had employed during the production of Jesus Christ Superstar , their previous musical . The duo had written the songs for a female singer with good vocals . 
 Rice and Webber 's research showed that Eva had not in reality delivered any major oration on the day of her husband Juan Perón 's inauguration ceremony , but not long after becoming Argentina 's new First Lady she started making highly emotional speeches , the intensity of which they wanted to capture with " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " . The song was composed to appear at the opening and near the end of the show , initially as the spirit of the dead Eva exhorting the people of Argentina not to mourn her , and finally during Eva 's speech from the balcony of Casa Rosada . Its melody is similar to the opening song of the musical , " Oh What a Circus " , and puts emphasis on Eva 's funeral . As " Oh What a Circus " ended with the character Che 's sarcastic questioning of the mourning behind Eva 's death , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " started with only few lines being sung , while the rest of the song was reserved for the finale . 
 After the song was composed , Lloyd Webber and Rice were struggling to find a suitable musical actress for the songs and the titular role , since the only one they knew , Yvonne Elliman , had moved to United States . One day they were watching the British musical television show , Rock Follies , where they noticed actress and singer Julie Covington , who played an aspiring rock musician . Covington had played in London musicals like Godspell , and her acting abilities in Rock Follies convinced Rice and Lloyd Webber to sign her for Evita . 
 Covington was extremely intrigued by their proposal , considering Eva Perón to be a non @-@ commercial idea for a musical . Nevertheless , she thought that the songs were great compositions and signed on for recording them . Lloyd Webber and Rice immediately started recording and the first demos were those of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " , " I 'd Be Surprisingly Good for You " and " Buenos Aires " , with just piano as an accompaniment . They moved on to sign a deal with MCA Records , to release an album based on the songs , however with extremely poor royalty rates since the record company executives did not expect the album to be a success . In the meantime , singers for all the other roles of the musical were also signed , and the cast moved to Olympic Studios in 1975 to start recording . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Personnel working on the Evita album included recording engineer David Hamilton @-@ Smith , Simon Philips on drums , Mo Foster on bass , Joe Moretti and Ray Russell on guitars and Anne Odell on keyboards . David Snell played the harp while Anthony Bowles conducted the London Philharmonic Orchestra , while another choir called the London Boy Singles was directed by Alan Doggett . Members of The Grease Band , including bassist Alan <unk> and rhythm guitarist Neil Hubbard also played on the album . It took a total of 3 – 4 months to finish the recording . 
 The intensity which Rice looked for in the track was not immediately achieved during recording , because of the lyrical content and the song being a sentimental ballad composition . As the delivery date of the recording approached , they got more tense since most of the album was put together . Only this song was left as they could not decide on the final title , and Rice tried out names which did not make sense within the political and dramatic atmosphere of the story . They had initially tried out various lyrics as the main hook and title of the song including " It 's Only Your Lover Returning " and " All Through My Crazy and Wild Days " amid fears that mentioning Argentina would reduce the commercial appeal . Rice recalled , " What a crass decision ! It was probably the only time ( honest ) that I had made the mistake of caring more abort a lyric 's potential outside the show than its importance within it , and as a result both song and show suffered . " Covington had already recorded the phrase " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " for using it in the beginning of the show . Shortly before the album was finally mixed , Lloyd Webber suggested to Rice that the line also worked as the title of Eva 's speech . As soon as Covington recorded with the new name , the song fit " perfectly " in the mood of the sequence and was included in the album . 
 The title of the song comes from an epitaph on a plaque at Eva Peron 's grave in the La Recoleta Cemetery in Buenos Aires . The plaque was presented by the city 's taxi drivers ' union and roughly translates as : " Don 't cry for me Argentina , I remain quite near to you . " Lyrically , the song is called a " string of meaningless platitudes " by Rice , adding that it worked as a speech by a " megalomaniac woman " like Eva , trying to win the favor of the people of Argentina , with low on content and high intensity on emotional display . The lyrics go like , " And as for fortune , and as for fame / I never invited them in / Though it seemed to the world they were all desired / They are illusions " . 
 Webber 's orchestral accompaniment added a different level to the track , with its composition consisting of pizzicato strings , and its flowing tempo introducing Covington 's opening vocals . The song jumps from being light to heavy and extravagant , with one section of it being hummed by choral voices . As the final lyrics goes , " But all you have to do is look at me to know / That every word is true " is sung , the London Philharmonic Orchestra comes into play with a huge climax and ends . According to the sheet music published by Music Sales Group , the song starts with a sequence of G / D – A7 / D – D – Bm / D , changes to E – E / D – A / C ♯ – E7 – A – D , with the chorus featuring a chord progression of A – Bm – Dmaj7 – Gmaj7 – G – F ♯ m7 . The song is composed in the key of C major with Covington 's vocals spanning from the nodes of E3 to G ♯ 5 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Following the completion of the recording of the album , the Evita team switched on to full promotion of the release , with photographer Tony Snowdon shooting the promotional pictures . The single version of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " was released in the United Kingdom on 12 November 1976 , accompanied by national and trade advertising , full @-@ colour posters , display sleeves as well as radio interviews . Another song from the musical , " Rainbow High " , was listed as its B @-@ side . MCA marketing manager Stuart Watson explained to Billboard that their chief goal was to " get an explanation of the story of Eva Perón over to the public " . The song received critical appreciation , with The Sunday Times calling it a " masterpiece " . However , Rice and Lloyd Webber felt that they needed more promotion to reach the general audience who would buy the record . They had initially decided for a number of television show appearances and performances , but Covington was disinterested in the project altogether and refused to promote it further . Her reasons included wanting to perform the song with the same studio orchestra and accompaniments , and she was also against a single release from the album . 
 The song was never performed live on British music show , Top of the Pops , since Covington refused and whenever it was featured on the show , a montage of images of the real Eva was shown in the backdrops . However , during the week it was number one , she appeared in the audience . Rice and Lloyd Webber then targeted BBC Radio 1 , which although was in its infancy , but still popular among the general crowd . They had a fairly tight selection of songs they aired on their channels , and Radio 1 completely refused to add " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " in their playlists . Rice and Lloyd Webber panicked and were almost on the verge of releasing another track from Evita called " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " , recorded by Barbara Dickson , as the second single . But Radio 1 finally relented and started playing the song due to positive response from audiences . 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " debuted at number 37 on the UK Singles Chart on the week ending 25 December 1976 . It started climbing up the chart but for 3 weeks it was kept from reaching the top spot by David Soul 's " Don 't Give Up on Us " . On the week ending 12 February 1977 , the song reached the top of the charts . It was first certified silver in January 1977 , and then certified gold a month later by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , selling almost one million physical copies in the United Kingdom . Together with digital sales since it has sold about 1 @.@ 01 million copies according to the Official Charts Company . The single also reached the top of the charts in Australia , Belgium , Ireland , New Zealand and Netherlands ; in the latter country it sold around 100 @,@ 000 copies . Seeing the success of the single , Rice and Lloyd Webber proceeded with promoting the song in the United States . However , the personnel at MCA Records ' US office were not able to come to terms regarding how to promote the adult contemporary oriented track ; it was ultimately never sent to Top 40 / CHR radio , and did not appear on any US charts . 
 = = Aftermath and impact = = 
 When the cast of the London musical version of Evita was being decided , Rice and Lloyd Webber naturally approached Covington to play the titular role . However she chose not to reprise the role . Producer Hal Prince wanted to cast a relatively unknown actress to play Eva , and thus Elaine Paige was signed for the part . In 1977 , Rice and Lloyd Webber received the Ivor Novello award in the category of Best Song Musically and Lyrically . During the 1982 Falklands War between the United Kingdom and Argentina , the song was sometimes played sarcastically by British regimental bands as they deployed to the Falklands . They changed the lyrics , singing it as " You don 't frighten me Argentina / The truth is we will defeat you / We 'll sink your carrier , with our Sea Harrier / And with our Sea Kings subs 'll be sinking " . At the same time the Covington recording was banned from play on the BBC . The song was also banned in the Philippines during the dictatorship ( 1972 – 86 ) of President Ferdinand Marcos . The life of former First Lady Imelda Marcos , Marcos ' wife , is similar to that of Evita Peron . The presentation of the musical Evita was repressed . In the United States , the song is also closely linked with Patti LuPone , who performed the role of Eva in the original Broadway production of the show . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 7 " single 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " – 5 : 24 
 " Rainbow High " – 2 : 31 
 7 " Double hit single 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " – 5 : 23 
 " I Don 't Know How to Love Him " ( Performed by Yvonne Elliman ) – 3 : 55 
 7 " Old Gold single 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " – 5 : 24 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " ( Performed by Barbara Dickson ) – 3 : 00 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the 7 " single liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Since its release , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " has been covered by numerous artists . One of the earliest covers of the song was by The Carpenters in 1977 , who recorded the track for their album , Passage . It was coupled with another song from Evita , " On the Balcony of the Casa Rosada " . The same year , Olivia Newton @-@ John released the song as a single from her tenth studio album , Making a Good Thing Better . In 1978 , Shirley Bassey recorded a slower version of the track for her album , The Magic Is You ; she re @-@ recorded it in 1993 on her album Sings the Songs of Andrew Lloyd Webber . Simon Gage from the Daily Express praised the rendition , saying that Bassey " more than covers the ground " with it . Singer Tom Jones ' interpretation of the song on his 1979 album , Rescue Me , received negative reviews , with biographer Lucy Ellis describing it as " the most ludicrous massacre on the LP " . Paloma San Basilio performed the song when she played the titular role on the Spanish adaptation of the musical in 1980 . Nacha Guevara , who also starred in the musical in 1986 , has performed the song live several times . 
 Marti Webb covered the song on her album Won 't Change Places ( 1981 ) and also included it in 1995 on the album , Music and Songs from Evita . AllMusic 's Joe Francis complimented the recording . Singer Sinéad O 'Connor recorded " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " on her album Am I Not Your Girl ( 1992 ) . Her version received mixed response , with Joy Press from Spin who described the rendition as " a melodramatic , sweeping ' Je ne regrette rien ' — style apologia . O ’ Connor had a calling . Obsessed with purity and truth , she pitched herself somewhere between Christ and the Virgin Mary , as an asexual visionary whose suffering was <unk> Intertwined with the pain of Ireland and of the world . " Released as a CD maxi single , the song reached number 31 in Belgium Flanders and number 44 in Netherlands . A punk rock version was recorded by alternative band Me First and the Gimme Gimmes in 1999 for their second studio album , Are a Drag . Angus Cargill , author of Hang the DJ : An alternative book of music lists was shocked by the complete revamp of the song as punk rock , saying that " there 's a dark appeal in here , like the thought of taking a cattle prod to your grandma 's " . 
 Webber 's younger brother and cello player Julian on the 2001 album , Lloyd Webber Plays Lloyd Webber . Another version was recorded in 2010 by TV series Glee 's actors Lea Michele and Chris Colfer , as the characters Rachel Berry and Kurt Hummel respectively . It was sung as a duet with each singer taking a different stanza and performing before a different audience in a split @-@ scene . Their solo versions were also in Glee : The Music , The Complete Season Two and reached number 67 in the United Kingdom and number 97 in US . Multinational quartet Il Divo recorded it on their 2011 album , Wicked Game , and performed it live on tours . The group 's voice was considered suitable for musical numbers like " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " , by Ben Walsh from The Independent . Nicole Scherzinger performed the song live at the Andrew Lloyd Webber : 40 Musical Years tribute show . Louis Virtel from The Backlot complimented her vocals , saying that the performance " has to be seen to be believed , as Scherzinger ’ s crystal @-@ clear vocal soars like a glittery javelin " . 
 = = Madonna version = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1996 , Madonna starred in the film Evita , playing the titular role . For a long time , Madonna had desired to play Eva and even wrote a letter to director Alan Parker , explaining how she would be perfect for the part . After securing the role , she underwent vocal training with coach Joan Layder since Evita required the actors to sing their own parts . Layder noted that the singer " had to use her voice in a way she 's never used it before . Evita is real musical theater — its operatic , in a sense . Madonna developed an upper register that she didn 't know she had . " From the moment she was signed in the film , Madonna had expressed interest in recording a dance version of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " . According to her publicist Liz Rosenberg , " since she didn 't write the music and lyrics , she wanted her signature on that song ... I think on her mind , the best way to do it was go in the studio and work up a remix " . 
 For this , in August 1996 , while still mixing the film 's soundtrack , Madonna hired remixers Pablo Flores and Javier Garza . According to Flores , the singer wanted something that " would be dance but faithful to the movie and to Argentina with a latin feel " . Madonna herself said she wanted the remix to have a " Latin flavor and elements of Tango music " . The mix was completed in two weeks at Miami and Los Angeles . Madonna had to re @-@ record the vocals of the track in English and Spanish , while an Argentinean <unk> was added to the song 's intro . Named the " Miami Mix " , it was sent to radio stations and DJs on late December 1996 and was officially released as the soundtrack 's second single on 4 February 1997 . Barney Kilpatrick , VP of promotion for Warner Bros. Records , said that " the only reason this mix is being done was to accommodate Top 40 radio [ ... ] since we have a two @-@ disc soundtrack , we 're interested in selling albums , not singles " . Warner Bros wanted to create buzz for the film with the song , not the single remix . There were also talks of releasing an Evita EP , containing remixed versions of " Buenos Aires " , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " and " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " , but plans fell through . 
 = = = Recording and composition = = = 
 Recording sessions for the film 's songs and soundtrack began on September 1995 , and took place at the CTS Studios in London with Madonna accompanied by co @-@ actors Antonio Banderas and Jonathan Pryce . However , trouble arose as Madonna was not completely comfortable with laying down a " guide vocal " simultaneously with an 84 piece orchestra inside the studio . She was used to singing over a pre @-@ recorded track and not have musicians listen to her . Also , unlike her previous soundtrack releases , she had little to no control over the project ; " I 'm used to writing my own songs and I go into a studio , choose the musicians and say what sounds good or doesn 't [ ... ] To work on 46 songs with everyone involved and not have a big say was a big adjustment " , she recalled . An emergency meeting was held between Parker , Lloyd Webber and Madonna where it was decided that the singer would record her part in a more contemporary studio while the orchestration would take place somewhere else . She also had alternate days off from the recording . 
 According to the singer , she was very nervous during the first day of recording . She allegedly found herself " petrified " when it came to doing the song ; " I had to sing ' Don 't Cry For Me Argentina ' in front of Andrew Lloyd Webber [ ... ] I was a complete mess and was sobbing afterward . I thought I had done a terrible job " , she recalled . The final version recorded had much similarities to the original version by Covington , although had a much faster pace and was created as an orchestral pop to cater to the contemporary music scene . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , Madonna 's version of the song is set in common time , with a slow groove tempo of 90 beats per minute . Madonna 's vocals on the song span from G3 to C5 . The song follows a basic sequence of C – F ♭ – C when Madonna sings " It won 't be easy , you 'll think it strange " , and changes to G7 – C on the second verse . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon release , the song received generally positive feedback . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , wrote that " As Evita Perón [ ... ] she is supple and strong , and doesn 't sound at all out of place " . Author Lucy O 'Brien wrote in the book , Madonna : Like an Icon , that although Madonna 's vocals lacked emotional complexity in the tune , she nevertheless created a " compelling " version , " right up to its grand orchestral finale " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented : " Easily one of Madonna 's greatest vocal performance to date , the singer 's dramatic interpretation of Evita 's unofficial theme song was both loyal and bizarrely autobiographical " . Writing for Los Angeles Times , David Gritten opined that " show @-@ stoppers like ' Don 't Cry for Me Argentina ' , which need to be belted out , sound comfortable for her " . George <unk> from The Reading Eagle , said that " [ Madonna ] sings ' Don 't Cry For Me Argentina ' in a beautiful , soaring , goosebump @-@ inducing contralto " . J. D. Considine , from The Baltimore Sun , said it was one of the " big songs " from the soundtrack . In her review of Evita , Janet Maslin from The New York Times commented that the track was " <unk> sung " . Peter Travers from Rolling Stone , wrote : " Madonna , to her credit , puts on quite a show . She sings . She tangos [ ... ] She even belts out ' Don 't Cry for Me Argentina ' to prove she 's just folks " . Peter Keough , from the Boston Phoenix , praised Madonna 's " stunning delivery " of the track . He wrote : " [ Madonna ] sings a softly lush soprano that captures Evita 's quiet vulnerability . Her full @-@ lipped , precise notes stride across the song 's grandiose orchestrations . Webber 's songs allows her all the room she needs to be many things ; she succeeds at them all " . A very positive review came from the Hartford Courant 's Greg <unk> , who called the song " a calculated , theatrical triumph of shameless pandering and steely determination that parallels the pop diva 's own rise to the top . Madonna makes this song her own ; she was born to play the <unk> @-@ coiffed , diamond @-@ studded Santa Evita " . 
 The Huffington Post 's Matthew Jacobs placed it at number 26 of his list " The Definitive Ranking Of Madonna Singles " . Calling it one of Madonna 's most important songs , Jacobs considered the track a " stand @-@ in for the transition from Sexy Madonna to Adult Madonna " . Similarly , Spin 's Annie Zaleski wrote that the " nuanced but proud " rendition of the song " marked the start of Madonna ’ s Serious Phase , one where she balanced youthful coquettishness with a more mature , introspective outlook " . AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis praised the " Miami Mix " version of the song ; " [ ' Don 't Cry For Me Argentina ' ] was transformed into a passionate , flowing dance number " , highlighting Madonna 's " truly impassioned performance which infuriated musical purists but delighted her fans and public alike " . In his review of Madonna 's second greatest hits album , GHV2 ( 2001 ) , Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave a more critical reception , as he felt the track was out of place among other Madonna songs ; " the very presence of ' Don 't Cry for Me Argentina ' [ ... ] simply does not feel comfortable next to the rest of the savvy , modern music " . A negative review came from NME 's Alex Needham , who wrote ; " by 1996 Madonna was fast turning into the pop equivalent of Sunset Boulevard 's Norma Desmond , croaking , ' I 'm still big ! It 's just the Top 40 that got small ! " , and that " ' Don 't Cry For Me Argentina ' stank then , stinks now " . Also negative was music critic Robert Christgau , who called it a " dismal track " and criticized its mixing . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , the popularity of the " Miami Mix " version of the song enabled it to become the song with the most radio adds , and jumped to number 18 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart . Demand for the song continued to increase forcing Warner Bros. to release the CD single , and the song becoming eligible to chart . It debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 17 the week of 22 February 1997 . The single ultimately peaked at number 8 the week of 1 March 1997 . " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " reached number 1 on the European Hot 100 Singles , the week of 8 February 1997 . The track also ranked within the top 20 of Billboard 's Adult Contemporary and Adult Top 40 charts while the " Miami Mix " reached the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . It ranked at number 87 on the year end chart for 1997 . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Top Singles chart at number 34 , the week of 10 March 1997 . It ultimately reached a peak of number 11 , the week of 7 April 1997 . In the United Kingdom , the song reached number 3 on the week of 28 December 1996 , and was present on the top 100 for a total of 13 weeks . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on 1 January 1997 for shipments of 400 @,@ 000 copies . In Italy , it reached the second position of the FIMI Singles Chart . On the year @-@ end Italian charts , it was ranked at number 21 . In Australia , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " peaked at number 9 on the ARIA Singles Chart , staying on this position for one week and a total of 13 weeks on the chart . On the year @-@ end ARIA charts , the song ranked at number 56 . In France , it topped the SNEP Singles Chart for one month . In Ireland , the song peaked at number 8 , the week of 19 December 1996 . The single also proved to be a commercial success in other countries such as Belgium , Germany , Spain and the Netherlands , where it managed to have top 5 placement . 
 = = = Promotion and live performances = = = 
 No official video was shot for the song . Instead , the scene from the movie , where Eva performs the song at the balcony of the Casa Rosada , was used . In 1993 ( 2 years before being cast in Evita ) , Madonna performed an impromptu version of the song during her first visit to Argentina , as part of her Girlie Show World Tour . Eight years later , on her 2001 Drowned World Tour , an instrumental version of the song was used as an interlude , featuring several dancers doing a Tango number . The performance on 26 August 2001 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills , outside of Madonna 's hometown of Detroit was recorded and released in the live video album , Drowned World Tour 2001 . On the Buenos Aires stop of her Sticky & Sweet Tour , on December 2008 , after performing " You Must Love Me " , Madonna also performed " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " as scenes from Evita played on the backdrop screens . The performances of both songs in the city were recorded in the live CD @-@ DVD titled , Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2010 ) . The singer once again performed the song in Argentina during The MDNA Tour , in 2012 . For the performance , she had the word " Eva " painted across her back . Madonna also did a " passionate rendition " of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " , during the Miami stop of her Rebel Heart Tour on 23 January 2016 . For the performance , she was accompanied by an acoustic guitar player . 
 = = = Track listings = = = 
 = = = Credits and personnel = = = 
 Madonna – vocals , mixing 
 Tim Rice – writer 
 Andrew Lloyd Webber – writer , producer 
 Alan Parker – producer 
 Nigel Wright – producer , mixing 
 David Reitzas – mixing 
 John Mauceri – conductor 
 David Caddick and Mike Dixon – additional conductors 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Charts and certifications = = = 
 = Raid at Ožbalt = 
 The Raid at Ožbalt was an operation on 31 August 1944 in which 105 Allied prisoners of war ( POWs ) were rescued by Slovene Partisans . The majority were liberated from a work site at the village of Ožbalt ( German : St. Oswald an der Drau ) about 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) west of Maribor on the railway line to Dravograd in the German Reichsgau Steiermark ( Styria ) , now part of modern @-@ day northern Slovenia . Six of the liberated POWs were separated from the group during an engagement with the Germans a few days after their liberation , but following a 14 @-@ day trek across 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) they were flown out of a Partisan airfield at Semič to Bari , Italy . The successful escapees consisted of eight Frenchmen , nine New Zealanders , 12 Australians , and 70 British POWs . 
 = = Background = = 
 Allied POWs were used in working camps for various purposes beneficial to the German side . By June 1944 there were several working camps administered by Stalag XVIII @-@ D which was located in Maribor , Slovenia ( German : Marburg an der Drau ) . Prisoners held in one of the work camps were used for maintenance of the railway between Maribor and Dravograd ( German : <unk> ) which continued through the Drava valley and into Austria . This work camp is believed to have been Work Camp 1046 / GW . At this time , railways in Slovenia were being regularly sabotaged by Slovene Partisans , who also rescued Allied personnel including aircrew and POWs who had escaped from the Germans . A work party , consisting of about a hundred mostly British POWs were transported from their camp to Ožbalt each morning to do railway maintenance work , and returned to the camp in the evening . There were several other work camps in the vicinity of Ožbalt , mostly doing agricultural work . By late August 1944 , the Partisan 14th Slovenia Division , including the 2nd Slovenia Brigade " Ljubo <unk> " , was deployed in strength in the Pohorje mountains south of the Drava river between Maribor and Dravograd . 
 = = Escape = = 
 The raid was preceded by the escape of seven POWs on 30 August 1944 . The organisers of the escape were Private Ralph Frederick Churches , an Australian Army infantry soldier of the 2 / 48th Battalion who had been on temporary duty with Headquarters ANZAC Corps when he was captured during the Allied withdrawal from Greece in April – May 1941 , and Driver Leslie Arthur Laws , a British Army soldier of the 127th ( Dorset ) Electrical and Mechanical Engineers , Royal Engineers . By August 1944 , Churches had already attempted to escape on two occasions and had learned about the surroundings from those experiences . He realised that he had to escape while the prisoners were in an environment hostile to the Germans . Churches had learned to speak passable German during his captivity , and had been the camp leader of the work camp for eighteen months when he resigned the role so he could be involved in the escape . 
 Through a Slovene family who provided water and some food to the prisoners working on the railway , Laws managed to make contact with an agent of the 2nd Slovene Brigade " Ljubo <unk> " , and after discussing this with Churches , they agreed to include all the members of their 8 @-@ man accommodation hut at the work camp in their escape plans . In the mid @-@ afternoon of 30 August 1944 , seven of the eight POWs walked away from the work site under various pretexts , and met the Partisan agent , who led the group to a village , <unk> na <unk> , which had been temporarily liberated from German control . The remaining member of their hut was unable to get away from his work crew to join them . The escapees comprised three British , two Australian , and two New Zealand soldiers . 
 = = Raid = = 
 Churches managed to convince the commander of the brigade to conduct an operation to free the rest of the work party the following day , by giving him crucial information regarding the work site and the guards . Next morning Churches and Laws returned with some hundred Partisans to await the arrival of the work party by the usual train . As soon as work had begun the Partisans disarmed the eight guards and captured the four civilian overseers . In a short time the POWs , guards , and civilian overseers were being escorted south along a different route than that used by the first seven escapees the previous afternoon . 
 Altogether , 79 more POWs from the working camp were freed . On the same morning ten French and nine additional British POWs were freed by the Partisan brigade from two smaller working camps closer to Maribor . Churches had provided the details of one of the working camps , at a farm with a single guard , and the Partisans had freed the French POWs when they raided a different camp in error . They then corrected their error and released the British POWs from the camp Churches had mentioned . All the groups of POWs , along with their Partisan liberators , assembled in the hills of Pohorje . Altogether , including Churches and Laws and their original group of escapees , a total of 105 POWs were liberated by the Partisans during the escape and subsequent raids . 
 = = Trek to Semič and aftermath = = 
 Progress along the evacuation route south was difficult , as German patrols were very active . A night ambush by one such patrol caused the loss of six prisoners , two of them French . Eventually , after marching approximately 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) over 14 days and being ferried across the Sava by boat , they reached Semič in White Carniola , which was a Partisan base with an airfield used for communication with the Allies . After a few days delay waiting for aircraft to be available and weather conditions to be suitable , they were flown across to Bari in Italy on 21 September 1944 . 
 Both Ralph Churches and Les Laws were decorated for their actions in escaping and assisting the Partisans in planning the raid . Laws was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal , and Churches , the British Empire Medal . Churches was repatriated to Australia in November 1944 , where after three months leave he was posted to the staff of a prisoner of war camp in Murchison , Victoria as an interpreter . He was subsequently promoted to sergeant and was discharged in November 1945 . Laws ' movements after arrival in Italy are unknown . Churches returned to the site of the raid in 1972 and 1977 , and was accompanied by Laws on a further visit in 1985 . During these visits Churches and Laws were reunited with several of the Partisans that had escorted them to Semič . 
 = = Conflicting accounts of events = = 
 There are two known primary sources regarding the details of the raid , and several secondary sources which drew largely on the accounts of Churches and / or Laws . There is one passing mention of the raid in the " Prisoner of War " volume of the Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War , which varies significantly from the other sources . 
 The first primary source is the book written by Churches , who was decorated for his involvement in the planning and conduct of the escape and raid . Churches ' book , titled A Hundred Miles as the Crow Flies , was written after he was relieved of his obligation to secrecy by Australian Army . The book details the events prior to the escape and the course of escape and evacuation . His book is also translated in Slovenian as <unk> let v <unk> ( Crow 's Flight into Freedom ) . Churches was known by the nickname " Crow " as he was the only soldier from the Australian state of South Australia in the camp , and South Australians are colloquially known in Australia as " crow eaters " . Churches ' version of events has been published , in part , by several secondary sources , including Australian television programs aired in 1985 and 2003 , and newspaper articles in 1944 , 2009 and 2011 . 
 An Australian POW that was freed in the raid , Private Walter Gossner of the 2 / 15th Battalion , provided an extremely detailed account of his experiences about being part of a group of 87 POWs freed by Partisans from a location near Ožbalt . He gives the date of the raid as 27 September 1944 , four weeks after the date given by Churches . His account has been posted on the internet by his family . Gossner states that he arrived at Semič 21 days after the raid , and his account varies significantly from that of Churches . It is not known why Gossner 's dates and other details of his account differ so markedly from Churches ' account . 
 The Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War states that the raid occurred at St Lorenzen ( the German name of <unk> na <unk> ) , and that the raid was planned by two British officers . This varies significantly from all of the other sources , and it is unknown why this is the case . 
 = Against the Giants = 
 Against the Giants is an adventure module written by Gary Gygax and published by TSR in 1981 for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role @-@ playing game . It combines the G series of modules previously published in 1978 : Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl , and Hall of the Fire Giant King . All three were produced for use with the 1st edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules . In 1999 , to recognize the 25th anniversary of TSR , the company released an updated version , Against the Giants : The Liberation of Geoff . Later in 1999 , Wizards of the Coast published a novelization of Against the Giants by Ru Emerson . 
 The plot of each of the three original modules focuses on a particular type of evil giant . Each can be played as a standalone adventure , or as a series . In Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , a tribe of hill giants have been raiding lands occupied by humans , and the humans hire the player characters to defeat them . Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl pits the player characters against the evil Jarl of the frost giants . Hall of the Fire Giant King concludes the series , this time against a group of fire giants . The first two modules disclose the existence of a secret force behind the giants , which in the third module is revealed to be evil drow elves . The plot involving the drow continues in four additional modules printed between 1978 and 1980 . 
 The modules were well received by contemporary critics . In 1978 , they earned a 9 / 10 overall rating from a White Dwarf magazine reviewer , who was impressed that Gygax found time to write them while also working on the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) rulebooks . White Dwarf also reviewed the re @-@ released G module series in 1982 , giving it a 10 out of 10 . The Queen of the Spiders supermodule , which consisted of the three modules combined with the subsequent modules in the " D " series and Q1 Queen of the Demonweb Pits , was voted the single greatest adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 , on the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Each of the original three modules is a dungeon crawl . The player characters focus on battling hill giants , frost giants , and fire giants , three of the original evil giant types used in Dungeons & Dragons . 
 = = = G1 Steading of the Hill Giant Chief = = = 
 The module begins with a prologue explaining that giants of different types have been raiding lands occupied by humans . Angered by this , the human rulers hire a group of adventurers ( the player characters ) to " punish the miscreant giants . " The players ' party is informed that they must defeat the giants , or have their heads placed on the chopping block . The human nobles equip the party with weapons and horses , along with a guide and a map that shows the location of the hill giants . The players are informed that the hill giants are led by <unk> , a sly hill giant chieftain who loves to set up ambushes ; there is an unknown force binding together different giant groups . The player characters are informed that they may keep any spoils they find , but must return at once if they determine what " sinister hand " is behind the alliance . 
 The bulk of the adventure takes place in two locations : the upper level fortress of the hill giants ' lair , and the dungeon level beneath it . In the upper level there are halls , barracks and common rooms . These rooms house Chief <unk> and other hill giants , ogres , and servants . The dungeon level consists of slave quarters , torture chambers , and caverns . These house troglodytes , bugbears , and carrion crawlers . The majority of the treasure can be found by searching the dungeons . The chief 's treasure room contains a map of the glacial rift from Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl , and a magic chain that automatically transports the party there . 
 = = = G2 Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl = = = 
 This module starts in one of two ways . If the players have finished Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , they have been transported to the glacial rift via the magic chain . They will know that they are searching for some force behind the giant alliance . If the players are starting with Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl , then they have been hired by nobles to destroy the frost giants . Either way , a safe , hidden cave is easily found for a base of operations . 
 As in Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , the bulk of this adventure takes place in two locations : an upper area consisting of caves and the rift floor , and a lower area consisting of natural caverns . In the upper area there are ice caves , barracks , and a dome of ice . These are inhabited by yeti , frost giants , ogres , and winter wolves . The dome of ice houses a <unk> . In the lower area there are caverns that house the servants , serve as a prison , and contain the Jarl <unk> and emissaries who have come to meet with him . The main inhabitants are frost giants and ogres . The prison contains an attractive storm giantess . There are also polar bears ; pets of the jarl . After defeating the jarl , the adventurers have a chance to pull an iron lever which will transport them near to Snurre 's hall from Hall of the Fire Giant King . 
 = = = G3 Hall of the Fire Giant King = = = 
 If it is played as a continuation of the first two modules , the players know that they are searching for the force behind the giants ' alliance ; otherwise , they have been hired by nobles to destroy the fire giants . This module is twice as long as the previous two : sixteen pages instead of eight . Unlike the two previous modules where the giant 's complex consists of two levels , the fire giant hall contains three levels . The giants live in a hot , smoky barren area made of rock ; as in the previous module , the party is able to find a safe location for forays against the giants . The leader of the fire giants is King Snurre Iron Belly , and his hall is made of obsidian and natural caverns . 
 The first ( top ) level includes the queen 's rooms , barracks , and kennels . Creatures encountered here include fire giants , <unk> , and in the kennels , hell hounds . The second level is also made of obsidian rocks and natural caverns . It houses chambers of spiritual interest to the fire giants . There is a hall that houses the dead fire giant kings , and rooms for worship . There are also rooms that contain drow clerics . This is where the party learns that the drow are behind the giant alliance , led by <unk> , a high level drow fighter / cleric . The third level consists of natural caverns and contains a great treasure guarded by a red dragon . There are also more fire giants and drow ; to exterminate the fire giants , the adventurers must penetrate deep into the active volcano where they live . If the DM wishes , there is a tunnel that leads deep into the earth ; to the home of the drow . This allows the adventure to be continued in Descent into the Depths of the Earth . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl , and Hall of the Fire Giant King were written by Gary Gygax . In 1978 , Steading of the Hill Giant Chief became the first adventure module published by TSR . Gygax wrote them to take a break between writing the original Monster Manual ( 1977 ) and Player 's Handbook ( 1978 ) . The covers for Steading and Hall featured drawings by David C. Sutherland III . David A. <unk> drew the Glacial Rift cover . Against the Giants 's cover features a painting by Bill Willingham . Interior art was provided by David A. <unk> , Jeff Dee , David S. <unk> and Erol Otus . 
 The " Giant " modules were set in the Greyhawk campaign setting , and formed the lead @-@ in to an overall campaign that then continued on an odyssey into the Underdark . These adventures included the " Drow " series of modules , Descent into the Depths of the Earth , Shrine of the Kuo @-@ Toa , and Vault of the Drow . The campaign finally culminated with module Queen of the Demonweb Pits . Steading and Glacial Rift were eight pages long , while Hall was 16 pages in length , and each featured an outer folder . The omnibus collection combination module Against the Giants was 32 pages long , and featured two outer folders . Against the Giants was revised and reprinted in the 128 @-@ page supermodule Queen of the Spiders in 1986 in combination with the three " Drow " series modules , and Queen of the Demonweb Pits . Hall of the Fire Giant King marked the first time that Dungeons & Dragons players encountered the drow ; game statistics for the drow first appear in the module , although drow are mentioned in the 1977 edition of the Monster Manual . At the time these modules were released , each Dungeons & Dragons module was marked with an alphanumeric code indicating the series to which it belonged . The earlier modules have module codes G1 , G2 , and G3 respectively , and the combined module 's code is G1 – 3 . The " G " in the module code represents the first letter in the word " giant " . Released in 1999 to commemorate the 25th anniversary of TSR , Against the Giants : The Liberation of Geoff provided a set of adventuring materials that expanded on the original three modules . 1999 also featured a reprinting of the three modules made available in the Dungeons & Dragons Silver Anniversary Collector 's Edition boxed set , with slight modifications to make it distinguishable from the original ( for collecting purposes ) . 
 The concepts and characters from Against the Giants have made appearances in other media . It was made into a novel of the same name by Ru Emerson for the Greyhawk Classics series . In May 2006 , Wizards of the Coast 's website released new versions of the maps for the Hill Giant Stronghold . In July 2006 , they released new maps for the Fire Giant Hall . In 2004 , Wizards of the Coast released a miniature figure of the eponymous King Snurre from Hall of the Fire Giant King , and in 2007 , they released a large Frost Giant Jarl miniature inspired by Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl . In 2009 , Wizards released the super @-@ adventure Revenge of the Giants , an homage to Against the Giants , for the game 's fourth edition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When combined as a single adventure with the rest of <unk> series , this module was voted the single greatest adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 , on the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game . According to Dungeon 's editors , the drow remain popular villains in part because of their " exciting introduction " in the module . Judge Andy Collins felt the " hack @-@ and @-@ slash " classic was " packed with action " and has run the module more than any other . Judge John Rateliff said that Against the Giants was the module that showed gamers how to create a themed adventure with a mystery and clues that are periodically provided . 
 Kurt Butterfield reviewed Hall of the Fire Giant King for The Space Gamer , commenting that " the scenario is well thought out and nicely detailed , " and includes " some intriguing special instructions given for deviously playing several of the intelligent inhabitants of the dungeon " . Butterfield felt that the dungeon was not an easy challenge , especially with the strong and numerous monsters ( such as the roughly eighty trolls on one level ) . In conclusion , he stated , " I advise all DMs who are looking for an exciting , worthwhile adventure for their players to pick this one up . You won 't be disappointed . " 
 Don Turnbull of White Dwarf magazine gave the three separate modules comprising the G @-@ series 9 / 10 overall . Turnbull was impressed that Gygax was able to find time to write them while also creating AD & D 's rules , saying " Things are really buzzing at TSR . " He felt the presentation of the modules was done well , with easily read maps , although he preferred the black and white maps of the first module to the blue and white maps of the later two . Turnbull found the module 's level of detail to be an improvement over previous Dungeons & Dragons scenarios which gave the Dungeon Master ( DM ) too little information . The review declared the modules " very tough " , stating that " the notes suggest nine characters or so , each of ninth level or better and each with two or three relevant magic items . " 
 Turnbull commented on several points that he felt went unnoticed by the module 's proofreader . The maps did not contain a scale , which he assumed was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) per square . It is unclear what triggers one of the traps in the first module . In the second module , an exit from map level one does not have an entrance marked on the second level map . Ultimately he found the errors minor , and easily fixed . Turnbull 's most major criticism was that the adventure was aimed at parties of too high a level . Summing up , he said " No DM should be without them , for even if he never gets a chance to run them , they are a source of much excellent design quality . " 
 Jim Bambra reviewed the re @-@ released G module series very positively in issue 35 of White Dwarf magazine , awarding 10 out of 10 . Bambra liked the reprinting of the modules , stating that " their printing under one cover has reduced the price at no detriment to the quality . " He noted that the original tournament characters are included , although they were not included in the original three separate modules , and that not all of them conform to the rules in the Players Handbook . Two spells were also added , which had been absent from the original modules . Bambra says that he " would suggest not playing these unless you have been playing for a few years , success depends more on player skill than on high character levels and <unk> adventures of this level can be a nightmare unless you have had plenty of experience . " 
 Anders Swenson also reviewed dungeon module G @-@ 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 , for Chaosium 's Different Worlds magazine . Swenson notes that the lower level of the hill giant <unk> " is a conventional underground dungeon , populated with slaves , guards , and the odd monsters " , but that the relatively small space occupied by the revolting slaves seems unrealistic . Swenson also calls the well @-@ constructed dungeon complex of the fire giants " a tough nut for the adventurers " as the giants are in a place constructed for defense ; Swenson did feel that the scale of the map was too small . Swenson comments that the reprinting shows the progress TSR has made since these adventures were first published , such as how single products had become longer . Swenson does note that the individual room descriptions were lacking a consistent format , and that important monsters can become lost in the middle of a room 's description . Swenson felt that , although the lower levels can degenerate into a random monster mix , the strong points of these adventures outweigh their flaws . Swenson concludes by stating that " Against the Giants is a solid adventure , " and that " this would be a worthwhile purchase " . 
 Dungeon Master for Dummies lists Steading of the Hill Giant Chief as one of the ten best classic adventures . Stephen Colbert , who played Dungeons & Dragons as a child , reminisced about these modules : " Those old " Giants " modules , those were tremendous . Those are some of my favorite memories : working my way through fire giant , frost giant , and storm giant castles . " Ken Denmead of Wired said the first module is a " pretty easy crash @-@ and @-@ grab , " the second contains " some really excellent treasure , " but the third is " the end @-@ all , be @-@ all of hack @-@ fests " . According to Denmead , the hill giant adventure does not prepare players for the later adventures . Describing the difficulty of battling the fire giants he said , " remember Bambi Versus Godzilla ? You 're Bambi " . 
 = Marasmius funalis = 
 Marasmius funalis is a species of Marasmiaceae fungus known only from Japan . The species produces small mushrooms with reddish @-@ brown caps up to 6 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) in diameter and dark @-@ brown , threadlike stems of up to 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in length . The species has a number of distinctive microscopic features , including very long cystidia on the stem , visible as bristles . Described in 2002 by Haruki Takahashi , the species grows on dead wood . The closest relative of M. funalis is M. liquidambari , known from Mexico and Papua New Guinea , and it is also similar in appearance to M. <unk> and <unk> <unk> , the latter of which was named after M. funalis . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Marasmius funalis was first described and named in a 2002 article in Mycoscience by Haruki Takahashi , based on specimens collected in 2000 . The specific name , funalis , is Latin for " rope @-@ like " , and is in reference to the shape and character of the stem . Within the genus Marasmius , the species has traits that suggest that it belongs in the section <unk> , and , within the section , it seems most closely related to M. liquidambari . The Japanese common name for the species is <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Marasmius funalis produces fruit bodies in the form of mushrooms . Each mushroom has a convex ( sometimes completely hemispherical ) cap of between 2 and 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 and 0 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter . Unlike the caps of other mushrooms , it does not change shape to a flatter convex with age . The cap is fairly smooth , but can have small , parallel furrows towards the edge , which are arranged radially . The colour differs slightly , depending on the age of the mushroom . While younger specimens sport reddish @-@ brown caps , they are a paler brown in older mushrooms . The cap 's surface is dry and dull , and free from hair . The threadlike stem attaches centrally to the cap , measures from 20 to 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 2 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 008 to 0 @.@ 02 in ) thick . It is cylindrical , but may taper slightly , and is covered in short , white hairs . The base of the stem enters the substrate , and there are no rhizomorphs visible . The majority of the stem is blackish @-@ brown , but it is a lighter brown at the very top . 
 The white gills can be adnate or adnexed ; that is , they can be attached to the stem by their whole depth , or only part of it . The individual gills are distantly spaced , with between 8 and 12 reaching the stem . Each gill is up to 0 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 02 in ) thick , and the edges are even . There are sometimes lamellulae ( short gills that do not reach the cap ) . There is a thin layer , up to 0 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 01 in ) thick , of whitish flesh in the cap . It is tough , but it can be bent without breaking . The flesh has no smell or taste . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Marasmius funalis mushrooms leave a white spore print . The individual basidiospores are ellipsoidal , and measure 6 @.@ 5 to 8 by 4 to 5 micrometres ( μm ) . They have thin cell walls , and they are smooth and colourless . The spores are inamyloid , meaning that they do not stain when they come into contact with iodine from Melzer 's reagent or Lugol 's solution . The spores are borne on club @-@ shaped basidia measuring 20 to 25 by 4 @.@ 5 to 7 μm , with two spores per basidium . There are also club @-@ shaped basidioles ( under @-@ developed basidia ) . 
 The edge of the gill is sterile , made up of a mass of cystidia ( cheilocystidia ) . The club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia measure from 10 to 25 by 7 to 12 μm , and sport multiple cylindrical appendages on their tips , measuring 1 to 7 by 1 to 1 @.@ 5 μm . The cheilocystidia are colourless , with cell walls of variable thickness , and are inamyloid . There are no pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the face of the gills ) . The caulocystidia ( cystidia in the stem ) measure 60 to 200 by 4 to 7 µm . They are cylindrical and erect , forming the visible bristles . The tip is either pointed or rounded , and the cell walls are smooth and colourless , up to 2 µm thick . They are dextrinoid , meaning they stain a reddish @-@ brown when they come into contact with iodine from Melzer 's reagent or Lugol 's solution . 
 The pileipellis , the top layer of hyphae in the cap , is a cutis . The cutis is made up of cylindrical hyphae between 2 and 5 µm thick . The inamyloid and thin @-@ walled hyphae are covered in brown granules . The flesh in the cap is made up of cylindrical hyphae from 4 to 7 µm wide with thin cell walls . They are all generative hyphae , and run parallel to one another . They can be either inamyloid or only weakly dextrinoid . The flesh in the gills is basically the same as the flesh in the cap , but for the fact that it is completely inamyloid . The hyphae of the stipitipellis , the uppermost layer in the stem , also form a cutis . The cylindrical hyphae making up the cutis run parallel to one another , and measure from 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 µm in width , with walls up to 1 µm thick . They are encrusted with a brown pigment , and are dextrinoid . The flesh of the stem is made up of generative hyphae running lengthways ( that is , up and down the stem ) . The cells are 5 to 8 µm wide , and are smooth and colourless ; the cell walls up to 1 µm thick . They are dextrinoid . All M. funalis hyphae lack clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Marasmius funalis differs from its closest relative , M. liquidambari , due to the presence of cheilocystidia , the lack of clamp connections and the fact that the caulocystidia of M. liquidambari do not form bristles ; instead , they are club shaped to cylindrical . The species is known from Mexico and Papua New Guinea . M. <unk> , known from Europe , is similar in appearance to M. funalis . However , the former has a cap covered in hairs or bristles , and differs microscopically ; for instance , the hyphae feature clamp connections . The Malagasy species <unk> <unk> was named after M. funalis due to the morphological similarities between the two . The species can be differentiated by the fact that the basidiospores of S. <unk> are slightly larger and narrower , measuring from 7 to 10 by 3 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 μm , and the caulocystidia of M. funalis are significantly longer . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Marasmius funalis is known only from Kawasaki , Kanagawa and Machida , Tokyo , Japan . Mushrooms grow in groups on dead plant matter , and have been recorded on Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ) wood and leaf litter in woodland mostly made up of <unk> 's hornbeam ( Carpinus tschonoskii ) and bamboo @-@ leaf oak ( Quercus myrsinifolia ) . The mushrooms can be encountered from May to July . 
 = HMS Renown ( 1916 ) = 
 HMS Renown was the lead ship of her class of battlecruisers of the Royal Navy built during the First World War . She was originally laid down as an improved version of the Revenge @-@ class battleships . Her construction was suspended on the outbreak of war on the grounds she would not be ready in a timely manner . Admiral Lord Fisher , upon becoming First Sea Lord , gained approval to restart her construction as a battlecruiser that could be built and enter service quickly . The Director of Naval Construction ( DNC ) , Eustace Tennyson @-@ D 'Eyncourt , quickly produced an entirely new design to meet Admiral Lord Fisher 's requirements and the builders agreed to deliver the ships in 15 months . They did not quite meet that ambitious goal , but the ship was delivered a few months after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . Renown , and her sister HMS Repulse , were the world 's fastest capital ships upon completion . 
 Renown did not see combat during the war and was reconstructed twice between the wars ; the 1920s reconstruction increased her armour protection and made other more minor improvements , while the 1930s reconstruction was much more thorough . The ship frequently conveyed royalty on their foreign tours and served as flagship of the Battlecruiser Squadron when Hood was refitting . 
 During the Second World War , Renown was involved in the search for the Admiral Graf Spee in 1939 , participated in the Norwegian Campaign of April – June 1940 and the search for the German battleship Bismarck in 1941 . She spent much of 1940 and 1941 assigned to Force H at Gibraltar , escorting convoys and she participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento . Renown was briefly assigned to the Home Fleet and provided cover to several Arctic convoys in early 1942 . The ship was transferred back to Force H for Operation Torch and spent much of 1943 refitting or transporting Winston Churchill and his staff to and from various conferences with various Allied leaders . In early 1944 , Renown was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean where she supported numerous attacks on Japanese @-@ occupied facilities in Indonesia and various island groups in the Indian Ocean . The ship returned to the Home Fleet in early 1945 and was refitted before being placed in reserve after the end of the war . Renown was sold for scrap in 1948 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Admiral Lord Fisher first presented his requirements for the new ships to the Director of Naval Construction ( DNC ) on 18 December 1914 , before the ships had even been approved . He wanted a long , high , flared bow , like that on the pre @-@ dreadnought HMS Renown , but higher , four 15 @-@ inch guns in two twin turrets , an anti @-@ torpedo boat armament of twenty 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns mounted high up and protected by gun shields only , speed of 32 knots using oil fuel , and armour on the scale of the battlecruiser Indefatigable . Within a few days , however , Fisher increased the number of guns to six and added two torpedo tubes . Minor revisions in the initial estimate were made until 26 December and a preliminary design was completed on 30 December . 
 During the following week the DNC 's department examined the material delivered for the two battleships and decided what could be used in the new design . The usable material was transferred to the builders , who had received enough information from the DNC 's department to lay the keels of both ships on 25 January 1915 , well before the altered contracts were completed on 10 March ! 
 Renown had an overall length of 794 feet 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 242 @.@ 0 m ) , a beam of 90 feet 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 27 @.@ 5 m ) , and a maximum draught of 30 feet 2 inches ( 9 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 27 @,@ 320 long tons ( 27 @,@ 760 t ) at normal load and 32 @,@ 220 long tons ( 32 @,@ 740 t ) at deep load . Her Brown @-@ Curtis direct @-@ drive steam turbines were designed to produce 112 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 84 @,@ 000 kW ) , which would propel the ship at 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . However , during trials in 1916 , Renown 's turbines provided 126 @,@ 000 shp ( 94 @,@ 000 kW ) , allowing her to reach a speed of 32 @.@ 58 knots ( 60 @.@ 34 km / h ; 37 @.@ 49 mph ) . The ship normally carried 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) of fuel oil , but had a maximum capacity of 4 @,@ 289 long tons ( 4 @,@ 358 t ) . At full capacity , she could steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 410 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) . 
 The ship mounted six 42 @-@ calibre BL 15 @-@ inch Mk I guns in three twin hydraulically powered turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . Her secondary armament consisted of 17 BL 4 @-@ inch Mark IX guns , fitted in five triple and two single mounts . Renown mounted a pair of QF 3 inch 20 cwt anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the shelter deck abreast the rear funnel . She mounted two submerged tubes for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes , one on each side forward of ' A ' barbette . 
 Renown 's waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour measured 6 inches ( 152 mm ) thick amidships . Her gun turrets were 7 – 9 inches ( 178 – 229 mm ) thick with roofs were 4 @.@ 25 inches ( 108 mm ) thick . As designed the high @-@ tensile @-@ steel decks ranged from 0 @.@ 75 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 19 to 38 mm ) in thickness . After the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , while the ship was still completing , an extra inch of high @-@ tensile steel was added on the main deck over the magazines . Renown was fitted with a shallow anti @-@ torpedo bulge integral to the hull which was intended to explode the torpedo before it hit the hull proper and vent the underwater explosion to the surface rather than into the ship . 
 Despite these additions , the ship was still felt to be too vulnerable to plunging fire and Renown was refitted in Rosyth between 1 February and mid @-@ April 1917 with additional horizontal armour , weighing approximately 504 long tons ( 512 t ) , added to the decks over the magazines and over the steering gear . Flying @-@ off platforms were fitted on ' B ' and ' X ' turrets in early 1918 . One fighter and a reconnaissance aircraft were carried . 
 = = 1916 – 1939 = = 
 Renown was laid down by Fairfield at Govan , Glasgow , Scotland on 25 January 1915 . The ship was launched on 4 March 1916 and completed on 20 September 1916 , after the Battle of Jutland at the cost of £ 3 @,@ 117 @,@ 204 . She served with the Grand Fleet in the North Sea during the remaining two years of the First World War . Renown was assigned to the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron for the duration of the war , but never fired a shot in anger during the war . On 12 December 1917 Renown put to sea with other elements of the fleet in an unsuccessful attempt to intercept the German 3rd Half @-@ Flotilla of destroyers that had destroyed a Scandinavian convoy and most of its escorts off the coast of Norway . For the rest of the war the ships patrolled the North Sea uneventfully . Both Renown and Repulse were present at the surrender of the High Seas Fleet at Scapa Flow on 21 November 1918 . 
 When the Grand Fleet was disbanded in April 1919 , Renown was assigned to the Battlecruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet . In June she was refitted in preparation for a tour of Canada , Newfoundland and the United States by Edward , the Prince of Wales , and both flying @-@ off platforms were removed . A 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder replaced the 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) model in ' Y ' turret and a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder was added to the armoured hood over the conning tower . From January to March 1920 Renown was refitted more extensively as a " royal yacht " . Her aft 4 @-@ inch mounting and both 3 @-@ inch AA guns were removed so that extra accommodation and a promenade deck could be built . A large deck house was built on the shelter deck between the funnels . The port side housed a squash court while the starboard side was a cinema . The ship sailed in March for Australia and New Zealand with the Prince of Wales and his entourage aboard and made many stops en route . She returned to Portsmouth in October and was placed in reserve in November . 
 Renown was recommissioned in September 1921 for a tour of India and Japan by the Prince of Wales and sailed from Portsmouth in October . The ship arrived back in Portsmouth in June 1922 and she was placed in reserve the following month . The ship began a reconstruction that same month along the lines of her sister , although changes were made based on the experiences with Repulse . Renown 's main armour belt was removed and a new 9 @-@ inch belt was installed , using up the remaining plates made surplus by the conversion of the battleship Almirante Cochrane ( originally ordered by Chile and purchased after the war began ) to the aircraft carrier HMS Eagle as well as new armour , but installed about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) higher than on Repulse to offset any increase in draught . A strake of tapered armour was fitted underneath the main belt to deflect any shell that dived beneath the water 's surface ; it was 9 @-@ inches thick at top and thinned to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) at the bottom . The ship 's deck armour was heavily reinforced adjacent to its machinery spaces and magazines . Two longitudinal bulkheads were added between the upper and main decks that ran from the base of the conning tower to the end of the boiler rooms . The bulges were reworked and based on those used in the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships although crushing tubes were only used abreast the magazines . The rear triple 4 @-@ inch gun mount was replaced . The flying @-@ off platform on ' B ' turret was reinstated and a high @-@ angle control position ( HACP ) was added to the fore @-@ top . The pair of 3 @-@ inch AA guns and her two single four @-@ inch gun mounts were replaced with four QF four @-@ inch Mark V anti @-@ aircraft guns . They had a maximum depression of -5 ° and a maximum elevation of 80 ° . They fired a 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) high explosive shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 387 ft / s ( 728 m / s ) at a rate of ten to fifteen rounds per minute . The guns had a maximum ceiling of 31 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 400 m ) , but an effective range of much less . The reconstruction only added 3 @,@ 500 long tons ( 3 @,@ 600 t ) to the ship 's displacement and three inches to her draught . This reconstruction cost £ 979 @,@ 927 . 
 Renown finished her reconstruction in September 1926 and she was assigned to the Battlecruiser Squadron until the ship was detached to convey Prince Albert of York to Australia between January and July 1927 . Upon her return she rejoined the Atlantic Fleet . Renown became the flagship of the BCS when Hood was refitting between 1929 and 1931 . Hood resumed the role as flagship after she was recommissioned and Renown was paid off for a refit of her own . A High @-@ Angle Control System Mark I was fitted with a director on the roof of the fore @-@ top that replaced the high @-@ angle rangefinder and the conning tower platform was enlarged to accommodate a pair of Mark V octuple mounts for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mark VIII gun The Mark V mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of 80 ° . The Mark VIII 2 @-@ pounder gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 91 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 040 ft / s ( 620 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . Only one mount was initially available , however , and it , along with its director , was fitted on the starboard side . Renown had her midships triple 4 @-@ inch mount removed to make room for an aircraft catapult that was not fitted until 1933 . The port Mark V 2 @-@ pounder mount was finally fitted , albeit without its director , that same year . The ship now carried a Fairey III floatplane for reconnaissance purposes . The flying @-@ off platform was also removed . 
 Renown collided with Hood on 23 January 1935 while on exercises off the coast of Spain . The damage to her bow was temporarily repaired at Gibraltar and the ship sailed to Portsmouth for permanent repairs between February and May . The captains of both ships were court @-@ martialled , as was the squadron commander , Rear Admiral Sidney Bailey . Bailey and Hood 's Captain Tower were acquitted , but Renown 's Captain Sawbridge was relieved of command . The Admiralty dissented from the verdict , reinstated Sawbridge , and criticised Bailey for ambiguous signals during the manoeuvre . 
 The ship participated in King George V 's Silver <unk> Fleet Review at Spithead on 16 July . Together with Hood , Renown was sent to Gibraltar to reinforce the Mediterranean Fleet during the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War of 1935 – 36 and transferred to Alexandria in January 1936 where she was assigned to the 1st Battle Squadron . She returned home in May and rejoined Home Fleet . 
 Renown began a much more thorough reconstruction in September 1936 , based on that of the battleship HMS Warspite . Her superstructure and funnels were razed to the level of the upper deck , her masts taken out and the ship 's main and secondary armament was removed . A large splinter @-@ proof tower superstructure was built , topped with a director @-@ control tower for the main armament and two HACS Mark IV directors . The armoured hood formerly mounted above the conning tower was reinstalled on the rear superstructure . The ship 's engines and boilers were replaced by Parsons geared turbines and eight Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers operating at 400 psi ( 2 @,@ 758 kPa ; 28 kgf / cm2 ) . This saved some 2 @,@ 800 long tons ( 2 @,@ 800 t ) of weight and allowed the two forward boiler rooms to be converted to 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) magazines and other uses . Renown 's deck protection was somewhat upgraded by adding non @-@ cemented armour where it had not been added earlier and protecting the new 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch magazines . As in Repulse hangars were built abreast her rear funnel and a catapult was fitted between the rear funnel and the aft superstructure . 
 The ship 's 15 @-@ inch gun turrets were modified to the Mark I ( N ) standard with their elevation increased to 30 ° . Twenty dual @-@ purpose QF 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mark III guns in twin BD Mark II mountings replaced all of the 4 @-@ inch guns . Six of the gun turrets , three on each side , were abreast the forward funnel while the remaining four were mounted abreast the main mast . The BD Mark II mounts had elevation limits of − 5 ° to + 80 ° . The Mark III gun fired a 55 @-@ pound ( 25 kg ) high explosive shell at a new gun muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 457 ft / s ( 749 m / s ) . Its rate of fire was 12 rounds per minute . They had a maximum effective ceiling of 41 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . The guns were controlled by four dual @-@ purpose Mark IV directors , two mounted on the rear of the bridge structure and the remaining two on the aft superstructure . They fed tracking data to a HACS Mark IV analog computer for high @-@ angle targets and an Admiralty Fire Control Clock Mark VII for low @-@ angle targets . Each gun was provided with 400 rounds of ammunition . Three octuple Mark VI 2 @-@ pounder mounts were fitted , two on a platform between the funnels and the third at the rear of the aft superstructure . Each was provided with a Mark III * director . Four quadruple Vickers .50 @-@ calibre Mark III mounts were also added , two each on the forward and rear superstructures . The submerged torpedo tubes were removed and eight above @-@ water torpedo tubes added . This reconstruction , at £ 3 @,@ 088 @,@ 008 , was more than three times as expensive as her earlier reconstruction . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Renown was recommissioned on 28 August 1939 as part of the Home Fleet . Much like her sister , she spent September patrolling in the North Sea , but was transferred to Force K in the South Atlantic in October to help search for the " pocket battleship " Admiral Graf Spee . The ship joined Force H at the Cape of Good Hope in November to prevent Admiral Graf Spee from breaking into the South Atlantic . She was unsuccessful in this , but sank the blockade runner SS <unk> on 2 December . She remained in the South Atlantic even after Admiral Graf Spee was scuttled on 13 December and did not return to the Home Fleet until March 1940 . The ship became flagship of the Battlecruiser Squadron when Hood was paid off to refit that month . Renown supported British forces during the Norwegian Campaign and briefly engaged the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau on 9 April . Renown spotted the Germans ships and fired first , but she was hit first by two 28 @-@ centimetre ( 11 in ) shells that only slightly damaged her . A few minutes later she hit Gneisenau with one 15 @-@ inch and two 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shells that knocked out the ship 's main fire @-@ control director and damaged the rangefinder on ' A ' turret . The German ships were faster than Renown in the heavy weather and were able to disengage after about 10 minutes . The ship was under repair from 20 April to 18 May and provided cover during the evacuation from Norway in early June . Renown was transferred to Force H at Gibraltar in August and relieved Hood as flagship . 
 In November 1940 Force H covered the small aircraft carrier HMS Argus as she flew off Hurricane fighters bound for Malta from a position south of Sardinia . Later that month Force H participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento . Renown bombarded Genoa on 9 February 1941 with little effect . Force H escorted convoys both inside and outside the Mediterranean in March – May 1941 before being summoned into the Atlantic to search for the German battleship Bismarck . The ship intercepted the German supply ship <unk> , which had been intended to resupply Bismarck , on 4 June . Renown and Force H escorted another convoy to Malta in July and the ship returned home for repairs to her starboard bulge the next month . While the exact dates are not known , the ship received a variety of radars in 1941 , possibly during this refit . These included Type 284 radar for surface gunnery control , Type 285 anti @-@ aircraft gunnery radar , Type 281 air warning radar and a Type 271 surface search radar . Two quadruple " pom @-@ pom " mounts were also fitted on top of ' B ' turret . Renown was transferred to the Home Fleet in November when her repairs were complete and became deputy fleet flagship when Duke of York was detached to take Winston Churchill to the Arcadia Conference in Washington , D.C. on 9 December . She provided cover for the inbound and outbound convoys to the Soviet Union in early March 1942 . Renown was relieved as flagship by Duke of York on 3 April , but became flagship of Force W which was formed to escort carriers carrying fighters to be flown @-@ off for Malta in April – May . Renown rejoined Home Fleet once those missions were completed , but was transferred to Force H in October 1942 to participate in Operation Torch . She covered the invasion and follow @-@ up convoys against interference by the French or Italian Fleets . 
 Renown returned to Britain to refit from February to June 1943 ; her catapult and aircraft were removed while the hangar was converted to a laundry and a cinema . Furthermore , she received a total of 72 Oerlikon 20 mm light AA guns in 23 twin mounts and 26 single mounts fitted between July 1942 and August 1943 . In January 1944 a quadruple " pom @-@ pom " mounting was placed on the roof of ' B ' turret and the 20mm guns there were re @-@ sited elsewhere . Additional light AA directors with Type 282 radars were also fitted during this time . The ship brought Winston Churchill and his staff back from the Quebec Conference in September and conveyed them to the Cairo Conference in November . She rejoined the Home Fleet in December , just in time to be transferred to the Eastern Fleet a few weeks later . Renown arrived in Colombo at the end of January 1944 where she became flagship of the 1st Battle Squadron . In April she participated in Operation Cockpit , an air strike against port and oil facilities on Sabang , off the island of Sumatra . The ship bombarded Japanese @-@ occupied facilities on Car Nicobar in the Nicobar Islands and Port Blair in the Andaman Islands on 30 April – 1 May . Renown supported the air strike against Surabaya , Java ( Operation Transom ) on 17 May as well as the follow @-@ on attack against Port Blair on 21 June . After another air strike on 25 July on Sabang the ship bombarded the city . She bombarded facilities in the Nicobar Islands from 17 – 19 October . On 22 November Renown was replaced as flagship by HMS Queen Elizabeth and the ship began a refit at Durban from December to February 1945 . She was recalled in March lest the remaining German heavy ships make a final sortie and reached Rosyth on 15 April . She was given a brief refit when this concern proved illusory and was placed in reserve in May 1945 . Renown was partially disarmed in July when six of her 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch turrets were removed as well as all of her light guns . The ship hosted a meeting between King George VI and President Truman on 3 August when the latter was en route home aboard the heavy cruiser USS Augusta . The decision to dispose of the ship was announced on 21 January 1948 and she was towed to Faslane for scrapping on 3 August . She was the last of Admiral Jackie Fisher 's battlecruisers to see the scrapyard , outlasting Furious by days . 
 = HMS Brilliant ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Brilliant was a B @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy ( RN ) around 1930 . Initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , she was transferred to the Home Fleet in 1936 . The ship then patrolled Spanish waters enforcing the arms blockade during the first year of the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . She spent most of World War II on convoy escort duties in the English Channel , and the North Atlantic , based at Dover , Gibraltar , and Freetown , Sierra Leone . During the war , Brilliant never destroyed a submarine , but did sink a Vichy French minesweeper during Operation Torch . She also intercepted two German supply ships and rescued survivors of two troopships that had been torpedoed by submarines . The ship became a target ship at the end of the war and was scrapped in 1948 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Brilliant displaced 1 @,@ 360 long tons ( 1 @,@ 380 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 790 long tons ( 1 @,@ 820 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 32 feet 3 inches ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 3 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Brilliant carried a maximum of 390 long tons ( 400 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 134 officers and enlisted men , although it increased to 142 during wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Brilliant had two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on a platform between her funnels . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . The ship was fitted with a Type 119 ASDIC set to detect submarines by reflections from sound waves beamed into the water . 
 During a refit in March 1941 , Brilliant 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced when the rear set of torpedo tubes was replaced by a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ( 12 @-@ pounder ) AA gun and two 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon autocannon were added . In addition , her depth charge stowage was increased to 60 . ' Y ' gun was removed to compensate for the additional weight and two more Oerlikons were added during a refit in April 1942 . When the ship was converted into an escort destroyer beginning in January 1943 , a split Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar was installed on each side of ' A ' gun , the 3 @-@ inch AA gun was removed and the rear torpedo tubes reinstalled , and stowage was increased to 125 depth charges . By this time , the 2 @-@ pounders had been replaced by two additional Oerlikons , for a total of six . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 22 March 1929 from Swan Hunter , under the 1928 Naval Programme . She was laid down on 8 July 1929 , and launched on 9 October 1930 , as the seventh RN ship to carry this name . Brilliant was completed on 21 February 1931 at a cost of £ 221 @,@ 638 , excluding items supplied by the Admiralty such as guns , ammunition and communications equipment . After her commissioning , she was assigned to the 4th Destroyer Flotilla with the Mediterranean Fleet until September 1936 when it was transferred to Home Fleet . On 31 December 1935 , the Imperial Airways Short Calcutta flying boat City of <unk> crashed just outside the port of Alexandria , Egypt . Brilliant rescued the sole survivor , the aircraft 's pilot , with the remaining three crew members and nine passengers killed . Brilliant was assigned as guard ship at Málaga when the Spanish Civil War began in July 1936 . During the following winter , the ship enforced the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides by patrolling the Spanish ports on the Bay of Biscay . 
 At the outbreak of war in September 1939 , Brilliant was assigned to the 19th Destroyer Flotilla at Dover and spent the time before the Battle of France escorting convoys and minelaying operations . She collided with the breakwater at Dover on 12 September and required six weeks for repairs . On 12 May 1940 , the ship took part in Operation XD , the destruction of Dutch port facilities and returned with 100 evacuees aboard . On 15 May Brilliant collided with her sister ship Boreas en route for the Hook of Holland and was under repair at Sheerness Dockyard until 17 June . She was then transferred to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla at Dover , as the heavy losses suffered during the Dunkirk evacuation forced the disbandment of the 19th Flotilla . On 25 July , the ship engaged German E @-@ boats off Dover Harbour together with Boreas and was badly damaged by German Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers after she was ordered to withdraw . Brilliant was attacked by eight " Stuka " s and the ship was hit by two bombs that passed through the hull without exploding . No one was injured , but the steering gear was disabled and she stopped and flooded by the stern . The ship was lightened by jettisoning her aft guns and depth charges and was towed back to Dover . Brilliant was under repair at Chatham Dockyard until mid @-@ October . 
 Upon their completion , the ship was assigned to Home Fleet until February 1941 and was then refitted at Southampton in March . At this time she was fitted with a Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar . On 12 May , Brilliant was sailed for Freetown , Sierra Leone where she served as a local escort and searched for German blockade runners and supply ships until returning home in April 1942 for a refit at Chatham . On 4 and 5 June , the ship , together with the light cruiser London , intercepted the oil tankers SS Esso Hamburg and SS <unk> , respectively . Both ships scuttled themselves to prevent their capture . Brilliant became leader of the 18th Destroyer Flotilla in August . 
 After the refit , the ship escorted a convoy to Durban , South Africa in May 1942 before returning to Freetown in August . On 9 October 1942 , she rescued 321 survivors from the troopship HMT Oronsay which was torpedoed by the Italian submarine <unk> . The following month , Brilliant was transferred to Force H during Operation Torch , the invasion of French North Africa , in November . She was tasked to provide naval gunfire support during the landings at Oran , Algeria . When the Vichy French minesweeper Surprise sortied to oppose the landing , Brilliant sank her and then rescued 21 survivors . The ship was transferred to the Gibraltar @-@ based Escort Group 61 and remained with them until January 1943 when she returned home to begin her conversion into an escort destroyer . In addition to the armament changes , a Type 271 target indication radar was installed above the bridge that replaced her director @-@ control tower and rangefinder during the conversion . 
 After working up , Brilliant was assigned to the 13th Destroyer Flotilla in Gibraltar in July 1943 and remained with them until September 1944 when she began a refit at Portsmouth . The ship was reassigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the English Channel in November . On 24 December 1944 , Brilliant was escorting the troopship Leopoldville when the ship was struck by a torpedo from U @-@ 486 , 5 ½ nautical miles off Cherbourg . Brilliant was able to rescue about 500 survivors from the damaged troopship , but due to various communication failures , no other vessels reached her before she sank and 764 died . The ship collided with the Canadian corvette Lindsay in dense fog on 21 January 1945 off the Isle of Wight . Brilliant 's bow was badly damaged and she was transferred to Antwerp , the Netherlands , for permanent repairs after emergency repairs were made at Portsmouth . They were not completed until 23 April and the ship returned to Portsmouth for conversion to a submarine target and escort vessel . This was completed on 26 May and Brilliant escorted the light cruiser Jamaica with King George VI aboard as he visited the Channel Islands on 7 June . From 13 June , based at Holy Loch , Scotland , she escorted surrendered U @-@ boats as part of Operation Deadlight before being paid off into reserve in November 1945 . Her radar and communications equipment was removed before the ship was reduced to Category C reserve at Holy Loch on 29 April 1946 . Brilliant was allocated to the Target Trials Committee on 11 September and was used evaluate the shock effects of a 1 @,@ 090 @-@ pound ( 490 kg ) underwater explosion in April 1947 . The ship was turned over to the British Iron and Steel Company for scrapping on 21 February 1948 . She was broken up beginning in April at Troon by the West of Scotland Shipbreaking Co . 
 = Einhänder = 
 Einhänder ( <unk> ) is a scrolling shooter developed by Square for the PlayStation console . It was released in Japan on November 20 , 1997 and in North America on May 5 , 1998 . It was also re @-@ released for the Japanese PlayStation Network on June 25 , 2008 . The name Einhänder is German and denotes a type of sword that is wielded with one hand , here used to refer to the single manipulator arm possessed by the player 's spacecraft . 
 The game is based on the story of Endymion and Selene and set in a fictional future during a war between the Earth and the Moon . The player is part of the Moon 's forces and must invade enemy territories to gather reconnaissance and enemy weapons . The music of the game was composed in electro / techno style by Kenichiro Fukui and was published in Japan as a soundtrack album . The game received positive reviews from critics , who praised its gameplay and graphics , but felt the game 's short duration and lack of two @-@ player mode were minor flaws . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Einhänder is a shoot ' em up game of the scrolling shooter subgenre in the tradition of games like Gradius , in which the player controls a fighter spacecraft that must destroy enemy craft in side @-@ scrolling levels . The game 's graphics are in " 2.5D " ; that is in 3D with occasional shifting of camera angles , but with player 's movement restricted to a two @-@ dimensional plane . Pre @-@ rendered full motion videos are used to illustrate pivotal scenes between stages . 
 The player can choose between multiple difficulty settings and three different models of " Einhänder " fighter , in addition to two secret ones . The Japanese version also features a difficulty setting called " Free " , which grants unlimited continues but disables the score . The player 's fighter can move at different speeds and is equipped with a default machine gun as well as a manipulator arm , which is used to collect <unk> left by destroyed enemies . <unk> have varying amounts of power , ammunition and range , and include cannons , guided missile launchers , aircraft @-@ sized lightsabers and other types of weapons . <unk> depleted of ammunition are discarded . They can be switched between an overhead and below @-@ the @-@ belly position , causing them to fire at different angles or directions . Most stages have a middle boss and an end boss , which often possess a main core and individual parts that can be destroyed . 
 The game 's score system is based on a multiplier bar and a hit gauge counter . As the player destroys enemy cores , the hit counter increases . Points awarded for destroyed cores are multiplied by the value of the hit counter . The counter decreases when the player stops destroying cores . However , if the multiplier reaches a certain amount it will begin to flash , awarding large point bonuses for any cores destroyed during this short period of time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Einhänder takes place in a fictional future , during a war between the Earth colony , Sodom ( or Gesetz in the North American release ) and the Moon colony , Selene from space . According to the backstory of the game , the " First Moon War " resulted in the destruction of most of the Earth 's surface and the creation of a totalitarian regime on the planet . The game recounts the events of the Second Moon War , in which the Moon attacks the Earth again for natural resources . Selene 's tactic consists in sending one @-@ man fighter spacecraft called " Einhänder " on kamikaze missions , to cause as much damage as possible on the planet before being destroyed by the enemies . The player takes on the role of one of these pilots attacking the Earth capital city . 
 As the player progresses through the game , they are relayed command orders and objectives dispatched by the Selene military satellite , Hyperion . The orders are synthesized by the on @-@ board central computer EOS , which also records and relays the player 's flight and battle record data back to Hyperion . After completion of the last objective , the player is informed by Hyperion that the battle pattern of the latest EOS unmanned fighter has been completed according to the data from their battle record . The player is given the honor of being the target of the last EOS test as reward for their heroic efforts and that upon the player 's death , they shall advance two classes and be awarded the Sirius decoration . After surviving the intense barrage of artillery fire of the EOS test , the pilot wonders why they must be terminated by their ally and questions their military leaders ' rationale for the war . 
 The game 's narrative then skips to one month later , when the pilot re @-@ emerges in space flying an armed Einhänder spacecraft . A message from Hyperion communicates that the player is committing an act of treason and must remove their armament and surrender . Nevertheless , the player fights their way through Selene fighters and faces the Hyperion , the game 's final boss . The ending sequence depicts the player 's spacecraft damaged and drifting in space . The pilot engages its thrusters and dives into an army of Selene spacecraft with the Moon in the background . An epilogue follows which states that the actions of the lone Einhänder pilot effectively ended the war by destroying the armies of both sides , leading to an eventual peace ; however , the pilot 's name and deeds were stricken from the records , and they are remembered only by veterans of the war . After the end credits , a lone Einhänder spacecraft is shown powering up . 
 = = Development = = 
 Einhänder was the first 3D shooter developed by Square , a company otherwise mostly known for their role @-@ playing video games . The developers used German terms extensively for naming things in the game , in addition to a number of references from Greek mythology and the Bible . According to the gaming website IGN , a lot of the effects Square learned from creating Final Fantasy VII were also put in use in Einhänder . The game was showcased at the Tokyo Game Show in September 1997 and was initially planned for a Japanese release on October 16 , 1997 , but was eventually released five weeks later on November 20 . Square released an unrelated game the following month , Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon , which came with a bonus " Mysterious Data Disc " featuring memory card data for various Square games including Einhänder . 
 The American publisher Working Designs was interested in publishing the game in North America for its Spaz brand of shoot ' em ups , but could not as Sony Computer Entertainment used their priority over Square titles to publish the game themselves . For the North American version , the speed of the arm switching was increased and some power @-@ ups were altered ; the game mode called " Free " was removed ; and the Gallery was given a modified interface and different pictures than those from the Japanese version . The game was not released in Europe . On June 25 , 2008 , Square Enix re @-@ released the game as a digital download on the Japanese PlayStation Network . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Einhänder was composed , arranged , and produced by Kenichiro Fukui . Several tracks make use of genres of electronic music , such as progressive house , or other genres like hip hop , piano @-@ based music or opera . The soundtrack of the game was published in Japan by DigiCube , a subsidiary of Square , on December 21 , 1997 , and was reissued by Square Enix on July 18 , 2007 , after DigiCube 's bankruptcy . The final track , titled " Beginning " , was also featured on Square Enix Music Compilation 2 , a compilation album published on May 1 , 2008 for members of the Japanese Square Enix website . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 A 111 @-@ page official strategy guide , titled Einhänder Kōshiki Guidebook ( aka Einhänder der <unk> Führer ) , was published in Japan by ASCII in December 1997 . Its content includes stage maps , information on the spacecraft and data tables . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Japan , Einhänder had sold 50 @,@ 000 copies three days after its release , and sold 100 @,@ 000 copies as of February 1999 . The game received positive reviews from American gaming publications , which stated that the game was especially notable for a shoot ' em up as it had no strong competitor on the PlayStation at the time of its release . The website Allgame referred to the game as the best side scrolling shooter " to come out in the post 16 @-@ bit era of video gaming " , while Eurogamer called it " the most successful of Square 's expeditions into non @-@ RPG territory " . Pat , from The Best Friends <unk> , praised it highly , saying " This game is SO awesome ! " . In 2007 , IGN ranked it first in a top ten of the best 2D space shooters . 
 The gameplay was praised by critics . Allgame lauded the game 's intense action and diversity of spacecraft , the gun pod system and the fact that bosses are composed of different destructible parts . GamePro noted that while the gameplay scheme is common to other shoot ' em ups , the title 's " thumb @-@ busting " action and variety of weaponry made for an enjoyable experience . The site called diversity " one of the game 's biggest assets " . GameSpot further called the game 's play mechanics " finely tuned " and featuring a " fascinating " plot , while IGN felt the tilting camera angles were one of the features that make the game " so exciting " . 
 Concerning the graphics , GameSpot , Allgame and Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine appreciated the level of details and effects used in the different stages , as well as the large size of the bosses . IGN noted that the game 's 3D graphics made it " substantially better " than most of the other , sprite @-@ based shoot ' em up games of the time . 
 The soundtrack of the game was praised by reviewers such as Eurogamer , IGN , Soundtrack Central and PlayStation Magazine . GamePro noted that the techno music and sound effects fit the stages " perfectly " . However , GameSpot felt that the quality of the music and sound effects were " good " but globally not on par with that of the graphics . The game 's short duration and lack of a two @-@ player mode were noted as the game 's only flaws by Allgame and GamePro . GameSpot estimated that the game demands " just over an hour " to complete . 
 = Stockton and Darlington Railway = 
 The Stockton and Darlington Railway ( S & DR ) was a railway company that operated in north @-@ east England from 1825 to 1863 . The world 's first public railway to use steam locomotives , its first line connected collieries near Shildon with Stockton @-@ on @-@ Tees and Darlington , and was officially opened on 27 September 1825 . The movement of coal to ships rapidly became a lucrative business , and the line was soon extended to a new port and town at Middlesbrough . While coal waggons were hauled by steam locomotives from the start , passengers were carried in coaches drawn by horses until carriages hauled by steam locomotives were introduced in 1833 . 
 The S & DR was involved in the building of the East Coast Main Line between York and Darlington , but its main expansion was at Middlesbrough Docks and west into Weardale and east to Redcar . It suffered severe financial difficulties at the end of the 1840s and was nearly taken over by the York , Newcastle and Berwick Railway , before the discovery of iron ore in Cleveland and the subsequent increase in revenue meant it could pay its debts . At the beginning of the 1860 it took over railways that had crossed the Pennines to join the West Coast Main Line at Tebay and Clifton , near Penrith . 
 The company was taken over by the North Eastern Railway in 1863 , transferring 200 route miles ( 320 route kilometres ) of line and about 160 locomotives , but continued to operate independently as the Darlington Section until 1876 . The opening of the S & DR was seen as proof of the effectiveness of steam railways and its anniversary was celebrated in 1875 , 1925 and 1975 . Much of the original route is now served by the Tees Valley Line , operated by Northern Rail . 
 = = Genesis = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Coal from the inland mines in County Durham was taken away on packhorses , and then horse and carts as the roads were improved . A canal was proposed by George Dixon in 1767 and again by John Rennie in 1815 , but both schemes failed . A few years later a canal was proposed on a route that bypassed Darlington and Yarm , and a meeting was held in Yarm to oppose the route . The Welsh engineer George Overton was consulted , and he advised building a tramroad . Overton carried out a survey and planned a route from the Etherley and Witton Collieries to Shildon , and then passing to the north of Darlington to reach Stockton . The Scottish engineer Robert Stevenson was said to favour the railway , and the Quaker Edward Pease supported it at a public meeting in Darlington on 13 November 1818 , promising a five per cent return on investment . Approximately two @-@ thirds of the shares were sold locally , and the rest were bought by Quakers nationally . A private bill was presented to Parliament in March 1819 , but as the route passed through Earl of Eldon 's estate and one of the Earl of Darlington 's fox coverts , it was opposed and defeated by 13 votes . 
 Overton surveyed a new line that avoided Darlington 's estate and agreement was reached with Eldon , but another application was deferred early in 1820 , as the death of King George III had made it unlikely a bill would pass that parliamentary year . The promoters lodged a bill on 30 September 1820 , the route having changed again as agreement had not been reached with Viscount Barrington about the line passing over his land . The railway was unopposed this time , but the bill nearly failed to enter the committee stage as the required four @-@ fifths of shares had not been sold . Pease subscribed £ 7 @,@ 000 ; from that time he had considerable influence over the railway and it became known as " the Quaker line " . The Act that received royal assent on 19 April 1821 allowed for a railway that could be used by anyone with suitably built vehicles on payment of a toll , that was closed at night , and with which land owners within 5 miles ( 8 km ) could build branches and make junctions ; no mention was made of steam locomotives . This new railway initiated the construction of more railway lines , causing significant developments in railway mapping and cartography , iron and steel manufacturing , as well as in any industries requiring more efficient transportation . 
 = = = George Stephenson = = = 
 Concerned about Overton 's competence , Pease asked George Stephenson , an experienced <unk> of the collieries of Killingworth , to meet him in Darlington . On 12 May 1821 the shareholders appointed Thomas Meynell as Chairman and Jonathan Backhouse as treasurer ; a majority of the managing committee , which included Thomas Richardson , Edward Pease and his son Joseph Pease , were Quakers . The committee designed a seal , showing waggons being pulled by a horse , and adopted the Latin motto <unk> <unk> <unk> publica ( " At private risk for public service " ) . By 23 July 1821 it had decided that the line would be a railway with edge rails , rather than a plateway , and appointed Stephenson to make a fresh survey of the line . Stephenson recommended using malleable iron rails , even though he owned a share of the patent for the alternative cast iron rails , and both types were used . Stephenson was assisted by his 18 @-@ year @-@ old son Robert during the survey , and by the end of 1821 had reported that a usable line could be built within the bounds of the Act , but another route would be shorter by 3 miles ( 5 km ) and avoid deep cuttings and tunnels . Overton had kept himself available , but had no further involvement and the shareholders elected Stephenson Engineer on 22 January 1822 , with a salary of £ 660 per year . On 23 May 1822 a ceremony at Stockton celebrated the laying of the first track , the rails 4 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 42 m ) apart , the same gauge used by Stephenson on his Killingworth Railway . 
 Stephenson advocated the use of steam locomotives on the line . Pease visited Killingworth in mid @-@ 1822 and the directors visited Hetton colliery railway , on which Stephenson had introduced steam locomotives . A new bill was presented , requesting Stephenson 's deviations from the original route and the use of " loco @-@ motives or moveable engines " , and this received assent on 23 May 1823 . The line included embankments up to 48 feet ( 15 m ) high , and Stephenson designed an iron truss bridge to cross the River <unk> . The stone bridge over the River <unk> was designed by the Durham architect Ignatius <unk> . 
 In 1823 Stephenson and Pease opened Robert Stephenson and Company , a locomotive works at Forth Street , Newcastle , from which the following year the S & DR ordered two steam locomotives and two stationary engines . On 16 September 1825 , with the stationary engines in place , the first locomotive , Locomotion No. 1 , left the works , and the following day it was advertised that the railway would open on 27 September 1825 . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The cost of building the railway had greatly exceeded the estimates . By September 1825 the company had borrowed £ 60 @,@ 000 in short @-@ term loans and needed to earn some income . A railway coach , named Experiment , arrived the evening of 26 September 1825 , was attached to Locomotion No. 1 , and Pease , Stephenson and other members of the committee made an experimental journey between Shildon and Darlington , with James Stephenson , George 's elder brother , at the controls . On 27 September , between 7 am and 8 am , 12 waggons of coal were drawn up Etherley North Bank by a rope attached to the stationary engine at the top , and then let down the South Bank to St Helen 's Auckland . A waggon of flour bags was attached and horses hauled the train to the bottom of Brusselton West Bank , where thousands watched the second stationary engine draw the train up the incline . The train was let down the East Bank to Shildon Lane End , where Locomotion No. 1 , Experiment and 21 new coal waggons fitted with seats were waiting . 
 The directors had allowed room for 300 passengers , but the train left carrying between 450 and 600 people , most travelling in empty waggons but some on top of waggons full of coal . <unk> were placed between the waggons , and the train set off , led by a man on horseback with a flag . It picked up speed on the gentle downward slope and reached 10 to 12 miles per hour ( 16 to 19 km / h ) , leaving behind men on field hunters ( horses ) who had tried to keep up with the procession . The train stopped when the waggon carrying the company surveyors and engineers lost a wheel ; the waggon was left behind and the train continued . The train stopped again , this time for 35 minutes to repair the locomotive and the train set off again , reaching 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) before it was welcomed by an estimated 10 @,@ 000 people as it came to a stop at the Darlington branch junction . Eight and a half miles ( 14 km ) had been covered in two hours , and subtracting the 55 minutes accounted by the two stops , it had travelled at an average speed of 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) . Six waggons of coal were distributed to the poor , workers stopped for refreshments and many of the passengers from Brusselton alighted at Darlington , to be replaced by others . 
 Two waggons for the Yarm Band were attached , and at 12 : 30 pm the locomotive started for Stockton , now hauling 31 vehicles with 550 passengers . On the 5 miles ( 8 km ) of nearly level track east of Darlington the train struggled to reach more than 4 mph ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . Crowds waited for the train to cross the Stockton to Yarm turnpike . Approaching Stockton it gained speed and reached 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) again , before a man clinging to the outside of a waggon fell off and his foot was crushed by the following vehicle . The train arrived 3 hours , 7 minutes after leaving Darlington . The opening ceremony was considered a success and that evening 102 people sat down to a celebratory dinner at the Town Hall . 
 = = = Early operations = = = 
 The railway that opened in September 1825 was 25 miles ( 40 km ) long and ran from Phoenix Pit , Old Etherley Colliery , to Cottage Row , Stockton ; there was also a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) branch to the depot at Darlington , 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) of the Hagger Leases branch , and a 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) branch to Yarm . Most of the track used 28 pounds per yard ( 14 kg / m ) malleable iron rails , and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of 57 1 ⁄ 2 lb / yd ( 28 @.@ 5 kg / m ) cast iron rails were used for junctions . The line was single track with four passing loops each mile ; square sleepers supported each rail separately so that horses could walk between them . Stone was used for the sleepers to the west of Darlington and oak to the east ; Stephenson would have preferred all of them to have been stone , but the transport cost was too high as they were quarried in the Auckland area . The railway opened with the company owing money and unable to raise further loans ; Pease advanced money twice early in 1826 so the workers could be paid . By August 1827 the company had paid its debts and was able to raise more money ; that month the Black Boy branch opened and construction began on the Croft and Hagger Leases branches . During 1827 shares rose from £ 120 at the start to £ 160 at the end . 
 Initially the line was used to carry coal to Darlington and Stockton , carrying 10 @,@ 000 tons in the first three months and earning nearly £ 2 @,@ 000 . In Stockton the price of coal dropped from 18 to 12 shillings , and by the beginning of 1827 was 8 shillings 6 pence ( 8s 6d ) . Initially the drivers had been paid a daily wage , but after February 1826 they were paid 1 ⁄ 4d per ton per mile ; from this they had to pay assistants and fireman and to buy coal for the locomotive . The 1821 Act had received opposition from the owners of collieries on the River Wear who supplied London and feared competition , and it had been necessary to restrict the rate for transporting coal destined for ships to 1 ⁄ 2d per ton per mile , which had been assumed would make the business uneconomic . There was interest from London for 100 @,@ 000 tons a year , so the company began investigations in September 1825 . In January 1826 the first <unk> opened at Stockton , designed so waggons over a ship 's hold could discharge coal from the bottom . A little over 18 @,@ 500 tons of coal was transported to ships in the year ending June 1827 and this increased to over 52 @,@ 000 tons the following year , 44 1 ⁄ 2 per cent of the total carried . 
 The locomotives were unreliable at first . Soon after opening , Locomotion No. 1 broke a wheel , and it was not ready for traffic until 12 or 13 October ; Hope , the second locomotive , arrived in November 1825 but needed a week to ready it for the line – the cast @-@ iron wheels were a source of trouble . Two more locomotives of a similar design arrived in 1826 ; that August 16s 9d was spent on ale to motivate the men maintaining the engines . By the end of 1827 the company had also bought Chittaprat from Robert Wilson and Experiment from Stephenson . Timothy Hackworth , locomotive superintendent , used the boiler from the unsuccessful Chittaprat to build the Royal George in the works at Shildon ; it started work at the end of November . John Wesley Hackworth later published an account stating that locomotives would have been abandoned were it not for the fact that Pease and Thomas Richardson were partners with Stephenson in the Newcastle works , and that when Timothy Hackworth was commissioned to rebuild Chittaprat it was " as a last experiment " to " make an engine in his own way " . Both Tomlinson and Rolt state this claim was unfounded and the company had shown earlier that locomotives were superior to horses , Tomlinson showing that coal was being moved using locomotives at half the cost of horses . Robert Young states that the company was unsure as to the real costs as they reported to shareholders in 1828 that the saving using locomotives was 30 per cent . Young also showed that Pease and Richardson were both concerned about their investment in the Newcastle works and Pease unsuccessfully tried to sell his share to George Stephenson . 
 New locomotives were ordered from Stephenson 's , but the first was too heavy when it arrived in February 1828 . It was rebuilt with six wheels and hailed as a great improvement , Hackworth being told to convert the remaining locomotives as soon as possible . In 1828 two locomotive boilers exploded within four months , both killing the driver and both due to the safety valves being left fixed down while the engine was stationary . Horses were also used on the line , and they could haul up to four waggons . The dandy cart was introduced in mid @-@ 1828 : a small cart at the end of the train , this carried the horse downhill , allowing it to rest and the train to run at higher speed . The S & DR made their use compulsory from November 1828 . 
 Passenger traffic started on 10 October 1825 , after the required licence was purchased , using the Experiment coach hauled by a horse . The coach was initially timetabled to travel from Stockton to Darlington in two hours , with a fare of 1s , and made a return journey four days a week and a one @-@ way journey on Tuesdays and Saturdays . In April 1826 the operation of the coach was contracted for £ 200 a year ; by then the timetabled journey time had been reduced to 1 1 ⁄ 4 hours and passengers were allowed to travel on the outside for 9d . A more comfortable coach , Express , started the same month and charged 1s 6d for travel inside . <unk> began running coaches , two to Shildon from July , and the Union , which served the Yarm branch from 16 October . There were no stations : in Darlington the coaches picked up passengers near the north road crossing , whereas in Stockton they picked up at different places on the quay . Between 30 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 passengers were carried between July 1826 and June 1827 . 
 = = Founding of Middlesbrough = = 
 The export of coal had become the railway 's main business , but the staiths at Stockton had inadequate storage and the size of ships was limited by the depth of the Tees . A branch from Stockton to Haverton , on the north bank of the Tees , was proposed in 1826 , and the engineer Thomas Storey proposed a shorter and cheaper line to Middlesbrough , south of the Tees in July 1827 . Later approved by George Stephenson , this plan was ratified by the shareholders on 26 October . The Tees Navigation Company was about to improve the river and proposed that the railway delay application to Parliament , but , despite opposition , at a meeting in January 1828 it was decided to proceed . A more direct northerly route from Auckland to the Tees had been considered since 1819 , and the Tees & Weardale Railway had applied unsuccessfully to Parliament for permission for such a line in 1823 , 1824 and 1825 . This now became a 11 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) line linking Simpasture on the S & DR 's line near today 's Newton Aycliffe station with Haverton and Stockton , via a route that was 6 miles ( 10 km ) shorter than via the route of the S & DR , and named the Clarence Railway in honour of the Duke of Clarence , later King William IV . Meetings held in Stockton in early 1828 supported the Tees Navigation and the Clarence Railway , but the S & DR received permission for its branch on 23 May 1828 after promising to complete the Hagger Leases Branch and to build a bridge across the Tees at least 72 feet ( 22 m ) wide and 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) above low water , so as not to affect shipping . Two members of the management committee resigned , as they felt that Stockton would be adversely affected by the line , and Meynell , the S & DR chairman , stepped down from leadership . The Clarence Railway was approved a few days later , with the same gauge as the S & DR. The route of the Clarence Railway was afterwards amended to reach <unk> Batts , later known as Port Clarence , and traffic started in August 1833 ; by the middle of 1834 Port Clarence had opened and 28 miles ( 45 km ) of line was in use . The S & DR charged the 2 1 ⁄ 4d per ton per mile <unk> rate for coal it carried the 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the collieries to Simpasture for forwarding to Port Clarence , rather than the lower shipping rate . By July 1834 , the Exchequer Loan Commissioners had taken control of the Clarence Railway . 
 The Croft branch opened in October 1829 . Construction of the suspension bridge across the Tees started in July 1829 , but was suspended in October after the Tees Navigation Company pointed out the S & DR had no permission to cross the Old Channel of the Tees . The S & DR prepared to return to Parliament but withdrew after a design for a drawbridge was agreed with the Navigation Company . The line to Middlesbrough was laid with malleable iron rails weighing 33 lb / yd ( 16 kg / m ) , resting on oak blocks . The suspension bridge had been designed to carry 150 tons , but the cast iron retaining plates split when it was tested with just 66 tons and loaded trains had to cross with the waggons split into groups of four linked by a 9 yards ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) long chain . For the opening ceremony on 27 December 1830 , " Globe " , a new locomotive designed by Hackworth for passenger trains , hauled people in carriages and waggons fitted with seats across the bridge to the staiths at Port Darlington , which had berths for six ships . Stockton continued to be served by a station on the line to the quay until 1848 , when it was replaced by a station on the Middlesbrough line on the other side of the Tees . Before May 1829 Thomas Richardson had bought about 500 acres ( 200 ha ) near Port Darlington , and with Joseph and Edward Pease and others he formed the Owners of the Middlesbrough Estate to develop it . Middlesbrough had only a few houses before the coming of the railway , but a year later had a population of over 2 @,@ 000 and at the 2011 census had over 138 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Railway improvements = = 
 In 1830 the company opened new offices at the corner of Northgate and Union Street in Darlington . Between 1831 and 1832 a second track was laid between Stockton and the foot of Brusselton Bank . Workshops were built at Shildon for the maintenance and construction of locomotives . In 1830 approximately 50 horses shared the traffic with 19 locomotives , but travelled at different speeds , so to help regulate traffic horse @-@ drawn trains were required to operate in groups of four or five . This had led to horses , startled by a passing locomotive and coming off their dandy cart , being run down by the following train . On one occasion a driver fell asleep in the dandy cart of the preceding train and his horse , no longer being led , came to a stop and was run down by a locomotive . The rule book stated that locomotive @-@ hauled trains had precedence over horse @-@ drawn trains , but some horse drivers refused to give way and on one occasion a locomotive had to follow a horse @-@ drawn train for over 2 miles ( 3 km ) . The committee decided in 1828 to replace horses with locomotives on the main line , starting with the coal trains , but there was resistance from some colliery owners . After the S & DR bought out the coach companies in August 1832 , a mixed passenger and small goods service began between Stockton and Darlington on 7 September 1833 , travelling at 12 – 14 miles per hour ( 19 – 23 km / h ) ; locomotive @-@ hauled services began to Shildon in December 1833 and to Middlesbrough on 7 April 1834 . The company had returned the five per cent dividend that had been promised by Edward Pease , and this had increased to eight per cent by the time he retired in 1832 . When the treasurer Jonathan Backhouse retired in 1833 to become a Quaker minister he was replaced by Joseph Pease . 
 = = The way north = = 
 = = = Great North of England Railway = = = 
 On 13 October 1835 the York & North Midland Railway ( Y & NMR ) was formed to connect York to London by a line to a junction with the planned North Midland Railway . Representatives of the Y & NMR and S & DR met two weeks later and formed the Great North of England Railway ( GNER ) , a line from York to Newcastle that used the route of the 1 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) Croft branch at Darlington . The railway was to be built in sections , and to allow both to open at the same time permission for the more difficult line through the hills from Darlington to Newcastle was to be sought in 1836 and a bill for the easier line south of Darlington to York presented the following year . Pease specified a formation wide enough for four tracks , so freight could be carried at 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) and passengers at 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and George Stephenson had drawn up detailed plans by November . The Act for the 34 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 55 @.@ 5 km ) from Newcastle to Darlington was given royal assent on 4 July 1836 , but little work had been done by the time the 43 miles ( 69 km ) from Croft to York received permission on 12 July the following year . In August a general meeting decided to start work on the southern section , but construction was delayed , and after several bridges collapsed the engineer Thomas Storey was replaced by Robert Stephenson . The S & DR sold its Croft branch to the GNER , and the railway opened for coal traffic on 4 January 1841 using S & DR locomotives . The railway opened to passengers with its own locomotives on 30 March . 
 Between November 1841 and February 1842 the S & DR introduced a service between Darlington and <unk> , on the Clarence Railway , where an omnibus took passengers the 3 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) to the Durham & Sunderland Railway at <unk> . Early in 1842 the nominally independent Shildon Tunnel Company opened its 1 @,@ 225 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 120 m ) tunnel through the hills at Shildon to the Wear basin and after laying 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of track to South Church station , south of Bishop Auckland , opened in May 1842 . The SD & R provided a 3 1 ⁄ 4 hour service between Darlington and Newcastle , with a four @-@ horse omnibus from South Church to Rainton Meadows on the Durham Junction Railway , from where trains ran to Gateshead , on the south side of the River Tyne near Newcastle . 
 = = = Railway operations in the 1830s = = = 
 By 1839 the track had been upgraded with rails weighing 64 lb / yd ( 32 kg / m ) . The railway had about 30 steam locomotives , most of them six coupled , that ran with four @-@ wheeled tenders with two water butts , each capable of holding 600 imperial gallons ( 2 @,@ 700 l ; 720 US gal ) of water . The line descended from Shildon to Stockton , assisting the trains that carried coal to the docks at a maximum speed of 6 mph ( 9 @.@ 7 km / h ) ; the drivers were fined if caught travelling faster than 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) , and one was dismissed for completing the forty @-@ mile return journey in 4 1 ⁄ 2 hours . On average there were about 40 coal trains a day , hauling 28 waggons with a weight of 116 tons . There were about 5000 privately owned waggons , and at any one time about 1000 stood at Shildon depot . 
 The railway had modern passenger locomotives , some with four wheels There were passenger stations at Stockton , Middlesbrough , Darlington , Shildon and West Auckland , and trains also stopped at Middlesbrough Junction , Yarm Junction , Fighting Cocks and Heighington . Some of the modified road coaches were still in use , but there were also modern railway carriages , some first class with three compartments each seating eight passengers , and second class carriages that seated up to 40 . Luggage and sometimes the guard travelled on the carriage roof ; a passenger travelling third class suffered serious injuries after falling from the roof in 1840 . Passenger trains averaged 22 – 25 mph ( 35 – 40 km / h ) , and a speed of 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) was recorded . Over 200 @,@ 000 passengers were carried in the year to 1 October 1838 , and in 1839 there were twelve trains each day between Middlesbrough and Stockton , six trains between Stockton and Darlington , and three between Darlington and Shildon , where a carriage was fitted with Rankine 's self @-@ acting brake , taken over the <unk> Inclines , and then drawn by a horse to St Helens Auckland . The Bradshaw 's railway guide for March 1843 , after South Church opened , shows five services a day between Darlington and South Church via Shildon , with three between Shildon and St Helens . Also listed were six trains between Stockton and Hartlepool via Seaton over the Clarence Railway and the Stockton and Hartlepool Railway that had opened in 1841 . 
 By this time Port Darlington had become overwhelmed by the volume of imports and exports and work started in 1839 on Middlesbrough Dock , which had been laid out by William Cubitt , capable of holding 150 ships , and built by resident civil engineer George Turnbull . The suspension bridge across the Tees was replaced by a cast iron bridge on masonry piers in 1841 . After three years and an expenditure of £ 122 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ <unk> at 2011 prices ) , the formal opening of the new dock took place on 12 May 1842 . The S & DR provided most of the finance , and the dock was absorbed by the company in 1849 . 
 = = = Newcastle and Darlington Junction Railway = = = 
 The GNER had authority for a railway from York to Newcastle ; it opened to Darlington in 1841 having spent all of its authorised capital and could not start work on the extension to Newcastle . At the time Parliament was considering the route of a railway between England and Scotland and favoured a railway via the west coast . Railway financier George Hudson chaired a meeting of representatives of north @-@ eastern railways that wished a railway to be built via the east coast . In the 1830s a number of railways had opened in the area between Darlington and Newcastle , and Robert Stephenson was engaged to select a route using these railways as much as possible . The Newcastle and Darlington Junction Railway ( N & DJR ) differed slightly from the GNER route in the southern section before joining the Durham Junction Railway at Rainton and using the <unk> & South Shields Railway from Washington to Brockley <unk> , where a new curve onto the Brandling Junction Railway allowed direct access to Gateshead . This required the construction of 25 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 41 @.@ 0 km ) of new line , 9 miles ( 14 km ) less than the GNER route , but trains would need to travel 7 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) further . 
 This route ran parallel to S & DR lines for 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) and Pease argued that it should run over these as it would add only 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) . The bill was presented unchanged to Parliament in 1842 , and was opposed by the S & DR. Despite this , the Newcastle and Darlington Junction Railway Act received royal assent on 18 June 1842 , and a second Act the following year secured the deviations from the GNER route in the south recommended by Stephenson . After the opening celebration on 18 June 1844 , through services ran from London to Gateshead the following day . 
 The N & DJR made an offer to lease the GNER and buy it within five years , and GNER shares increased in value by 44 per cent as the N & DJR took over on 1 July 1845 ; the N & DJR became part of the larger York , Newcastle & Berwick Railway ( YN & BR ) in 1847 . 
 = = Wear Valley Railway = = 
 The Bishop Auckland & Weardale Railway ( BA & WR ) received permission in July 1837 to build a 8 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 3 km ) line from South Church to Crook . The line opened on 8 November 1843 with a station at Bishop Auckland . 
 The Stanhope and Tyne Railway , a 33 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 54 @.@ 3 km ) line between South Shields and Stanhope had opened in 1834 . Steam locomotives worked the section east of <unk> , and in the western section inclines were worked by stationary engines or gravity , with horses hauling waggons over level track . The lime kilns and the line between Stanhope and <unk> closed in 1840 , and with the Stanhope to <unk> section losing money , the insolvent railway company was dissolved on 5 February 1841 . The northern section became the <unk> and South Shields Railway and the southern section from Stanhope to <unk> was bought by the newly formed Derwent Iron Company at Consett , renamed the Wear & Derwent Railway , and used to transport limestone from quarries in the Stanhope area to its works at Consett . The Weardale Extension Railway ran from <unk> on the Wear & Derwent to Crook on the BA & WR and included the Sunniside Incline worked by a stationary engine . Sponsored by the Derwent Iron Company , the 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) line was built by the S & DR and opened on 16 May 1845 . A passenger service started to <unk> Gill and Stanhope ( Crawley ) on 1 September 1845 ; the Stanhope service was withdrawn at the end of 1846 . Travelling north from Crook the carriages and waggons were drawn up the Sunniside Incline , a locomotive hauled the mixed train to <unk> Park Junction , then they were let down Nanny Mayor 's Incline and a locomotive took them forward . When returning , regulations required that the carriages run loose down the Sunniside Incline and they were let to run into Crook station , controlled by the guard using the carriage brakes . Later , a 730 feet ( 220 m ) viaduct replaced the two inclines at <unk> Gill ravine on 1 July 1858 . A deviation replacing Nanny 's Mayor 's Incline and a curve that allowed trains from Crook direct access to Rowley opened for freight on 23 May 1859 and for passenger traffic on 4 July 1859 . 
 The Middlesbrough & Redcar Railway , a short extension to Redcar , received permission on 21 July 1845 . The line branched off before the Middlesbrough terminus , which was closed and a new through station opened with the line on 4 June 1846 . Also authorised in July 1845 was the Wear Valley Railway , a 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) line from the Bishop Auckland & Weardale line to <unk> . The line opened on 3 August 1847 , and the Act also gave the S & DR permission for the <unk> branch , over which 500 @,@ 000 tons of limestone travelled in 1868 . The line was extended in 1862 from <unk> to Stanhope . 
 Just before the line opened on 22 July 1847 , the Wear Valley Railway absorbed the Shildon Tunnel , Bishop Auckland & Weardale Railway , Weardale Extension Railway and Wear & Derwent Railway and then the S & DR leased the Wear Valley Railway and Middlesbrough & Redcar Railways for 999 years . This required a payment of £ 47 @,@ 000 each year , exceeding the SD & R 's net revenue ; traffic from the Derwent Iron Company was reduced during a period of financial difficulty and the Black Boy colliery switched to sending its coal to Hartlepool . No dividend was paid in 1848 and the next few years ; lease payments were made out of reserves . The S & DR announced a bill in November 1848 to permit a lease by and amalgamation with the YN & BR , but this was withdrawn after the YN & BR share price crashed and its chairman Hudson resigned after questions were raised about his share dealings . In 1850 the S & DR had share capital of £ 250 @,@ 000 but owed £ 650 @,@ 000 , most of this without the authority of Parliament until 1849 ; the debt was converted into shares in 1851 . 
 = = Cleveland iron ore = = 
 In mid @-@ 1850 Henry Bolckow and John Vaughan discovered a seam of iron ore at Eston . They opened a mine , laid a branch line to the Middlesbrough & Redcar Railway and started hauling ironstone over the S & DR to their blast furnaces west of Bishop Auckland . By 1851 Derwent Iron had opened a mine in the area and began moving ironstone 54 miles ( 87 km ) to Consett , and the S & DR had paid the arrears on its debt and was able to pay a dividend the following year , albeit only 4 per cent ; between 1849 and 1853 the traffic more than doubled . 
 In 1852 the Leeds Northern Railway ( LNR ) built a line from Northallerton to a junction with the Stockton to Hartlepool line and a section of the route ran parallel to the S & DR alongside the Yarm to Stockton Road . The S & DR was originally on the east side of the road , but the LNR built its line with four tracks on the other side of the road , leasing two to the S & DR for a rental of 1s a year . On 25 January 1853 the LNR and SD & R opened a joint station at Eaglescliffe with an island platform between the tracks , and one side was used by S & DR trains and the other by the LNR . Rather than allow trains to approach the platform line from either direction , the Board of Trade inspecting officer ruled that trains approaching on a line without a platform must first pass through and then reverse into the platform line . 
 The Middlesbrough & Guisborough Railway , with two branches into the iron @-@ rich hills , was approved by Parliament on 17 June 1852 ; Pease had to guarantee dividends to raise the finance needed . The 9 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) single @-@ track railway was worked by the S & DR , and opened to minerals on 11 November 1853 and passengers on 25 February 1854 . With electric telegraph installed between stations , passenger trains were not permitted to leave a station until confirmation had been received that the line was clear . 
 By 1857 a blast furnace had opened close to the Durham coalfield on the north side of the Tees . Backed by the rival West Hartlepool Harbour & Railway , the Durham & Cleveland Union Railway proposed a line from the mines in Skinningrove and Staithes , via Guisborough and a bridge over the Middlesbrough & Redcar Railway to a jetty at Cargo Fleet , from where a ferry would carry the ore across the Tees to the blast furnaces . When the proposal was before Parliament the S & DR suggested that their Middlesbrough & Redcar could be extended to Saltburn , and the Tees crossed by a swing bridge . The Cleveland Railway received permission for a line from Skinningrove as far as Guisborough , and the S & DR permission for an extension to Saltburn and a branch to a mine at Skelton . This 1858 S & DR Act also authorised the merger of the S & DR with the railways it held on lease . 
 An application to Parliament for a jetty in the following year was unsuccessful , but in 1860 the Upsall , Normanby & <unk> Railway received permission for a line with access to the river , the S & DR claim of exclusive rights to the foreshore having been rejected . The jetty was also opposed by the Tees Conservancy Commissioners and they moored barges along the foreshore to obstruct construction . In what became known as the Battle of the Tees , a fight broke out when a steam tug sent by the Commissioners interrupted men moving the barges . The barges were successfully moved , but a more serious fight developed the following night when three of the Commissioners ' steam tugs arrived . The police then kept watch on the works until they were finished . 
 Henry Pease , a S & DR director and Quaker , visited his brother Joseph in mid @-@ 1859 at his house by the sea at Marske @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea . Returning late for dinner , he explained he had walked to Saltburn , then a group of fisherman 's cottages , where he had had a " sort of prophetic vision " of a town with gardens . With other S & DR directors he planned the town , with gardens and Zetland Hotel by the station , and bought a house at 5 Britannia Terrace , where he stayed for a few weeks every summer . The extension opened in 1861 , a station on the through line replacing the terminus at Redcar . 
 = = Over Stainmore = = 
 A railway to serve Barnard Castle , from the S & DR at a junction near North Road station and along the River Tees , was proposed in 1852 ; this route bypassed as far as possible the Duke of Cleveland 's estate , as he had opposed an earlier railway . An application that year failed , but the Darlington & Barnard Castle Railway Act was given royal assent on 3 July 1854 and the 15 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 24 @.@ 5 km ) railway opened on 8 July 1856 . 
 Cleveland iron ore is high in phosphorus and needs to be mixed with purer ores , such as those on the west coast in Cumberland and Lancashire . In the early 1850s this ore was travelling the long way round over the Newcastle & Carlisle Railway to the Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness area , and Durham coke was returning . Both the South Durham & Lancashire Union Railway ( SD & LUR ) and the Eden Valley Railway ( EVR ) companies were formed on 20 September 1856 . Taking advantage of the new railway at Barnard Castle , the SD & LUR crossed the Pennines via Kirkby Stephen to meet the West Coast Main Line ( WCML ) at Tebay , on the section then controlled by the Lancaster & Carlisle Railway , and also linked Barnard Castle with West Auckland . The EVR was a branch from Kirkby Stephen to the WCML near Penrith via Appleby . The routes were surveyed by Thomas Bouch and SD & LUR received permission on 13 July 1857 . The EVR route followed the east bank of the River Eden , a mile longer than a more expensive route on the west bank , and its Act received royal assent on 21 May 1858 . 
 Bouch had laid out an economical route that followed the contours and avoided tunnels , but there were formidable gradients up to the 1 @,@ 370 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 420 m ) Stainmore summit . Land for two tracks was purchased , and a single track line was laid ; valleys were crossed by viaducts , three made from wrought iron , including the Belah Viaduct , 1 @,@ 040 feet ( 320 m ) long and 196 feet ( 60 m ) high . A new station was built to replace the terminus at Barnard Castle . A mineral train ran between Barnard Castle and Barras on 26 March 1861 , and mineral traffic worked through to Tebay from 4 July 1861 . There was an opening ceremony on 7 August 1861 and the SD & LUR west of Barnard Castle opened to passengers the following day . Two 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives with enclosed cabs had been built for the line in 1860 by Stephenson and Co , and the S & DR worked traffic from the start : two return services a day were provided for passengers . The EVR opened to mineral traffic on 8 April 1862 and passengers on 9 June 1862 , to the south @-@ facing junction at Clifton ( later Clifton & Lowther ) . The S & DR had presented a bill in 1861 to provide better connections for passengers on the WCML by extending the line up to Penrith , and to link up with the Cockermouth , Keswick & Penrith Railway to provide access for mineral traffic to Cumberland . The L & CR agreed to allow the S & DR running rights over its line and services were extended to Penrith from 1 August 1863 . 
 = = Progress and amalgamation = = 
 In 1854 there were five or six trains a day between Darlington and Redcar and three a day between Darlington and <unk> . Travelling at average speeds of 19 – 24 miles per hour ( 31 – 39 km / h ) , passengers were charged from 1d per mile for third class to <unk> per mile for first . Horses were still used on trains in the mid @-@ 1850s : a horse @-@ drawn coach was still independently operated between Middlesbrough and Stockton in 1854 on Sundays , as the only S & DR services that run on that day were the mail trains , and locomotives replaced horses on passenger trains to West Auckland in 1856 . The S & DR opened a carriage works south of Darlington North Road station in 1853 and later it built a locomotive works nearby to replace its works at Shildon . Designed by William Bouch , who had taken over from Hackworth as Locomotive Supervisor in 1840 , it completed its first locomotive in 1864 . In 1858 the Brusselton Inclines were bypassed by a line from the north end of Shildon Tunnel ; the same year a passenger service started on the Hagger Leases branch and a mineral line opened from Crook via two inclines to Waterhouse . The section of the SD & LUR between West Auckland and Barnard Castle opened for minerals in July 1863 and passengers on 1 August 1863 , together with a direct line from Bishop Auckland to West Auckland . Stations at <unk> and Cockfield replaced stations on the Hagger Leases branch . 
 In 1859 a company had been formed to link the Newcastle & Carlisle Railway with the SD & R via the Derwent Valley ; by 1860 this had grown into the Newcastle , Derwent & Weardale Railway , which now bypassed the SD & R and linked with the SD & LUR , and the North British and London & North Western ( LNWR ) railways were providing two thirds of the capital . The LNWR proposed to build warehouses in Hartlepool and buy shares in the West Hartlepool Harbour & Railway . The North Eastern Railway ( NER ) , formed in 1854 by amalgamation , at the time was the largest railway company in the country and controlled the East Coast Main Line from Knottingley , south of York , through Darlington to Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed . When they approached the S & DR with a proposal to merge , the directors deciding they preferred a merger with the NER than eventually becoming part of the LNWR , entered negotiations . Opposed by the NER , the Newcastle , Derwent & Weardale Railway bill was approved by the House of Commons in 1861 , but the line was eventually rejected by the House of Lords . The SD & LUR and EVR were absorbed by the S & DR on 30 June 1862 . 
 With 200 route miles ( 320 km ) of line and about 160 locomotives , the Stockton & Darlington Railway became part of the North Eastern Railway on 13 July 1863 . Due to a clause in the Act the railway was managed as the independent Darlington Section until 1876 , when the lines became the NER 's Central Division . After the restoration of the dividend in 1851 , by the end of 1854 payments had recovered to 8 per cent and then had not dropped below 7 1 ⁄ 2 per cent . 
 = = Later history = = 
 The NER had built a branch in the late 1850s from Durham to Bishop Auckland , but used a separate station in the town until December 1867 , when all services began to use the S & DR station . The Sunniside Incline was replaced by a deviation , albeit with gradients of 1 in 51 and 1 in 52 , which opened for mineral traffic on 10 April 1867 and for passengers on 2 March 1868 ; after 1868 trains on this line were extended to serve <unk> station ( later known as Blackhill and then Consett ) . In Cleveland , a branch from Nunthrope to Battersby opened on 1 June 1864 ; passengers were carried from 1 April 1868 . A branch from Barnard Castle to Middleton @-@ in @-@ Teesdale opened on 12 May 1868 . 
 The locomotive works at Darlington operated independently under Bouch until 1875 , the locomotives having been renumbered by the NER a couple of years earlier . There was a varied range of locomotives , but the most common type was used on the mineral trains and had a wheel arrangement of 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 ; the later engines were of the Stephenson long boilered type . Most passenger locomotives had four driven wheels in the form 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 ; some were 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2 . Bouch had designed two bogie 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives for the line over Stainmore in 1860 , and another fourteen with this wheel arrangement had been built by 1874 . S & DR services and those on the <unk> called at different stations in Darlington until 1887 , when S & DR trains were diverted through a rebuilt Darlington Bank Top station , rejoining the route to Stockton from a junction south of Darlington and a new line to Oak Tree Junction . An extension from Stanhope to <unk> opened in 1895 , and the line over Stainmore to Tebay was doubled by the end of the century . 
 From 1913 former S & DR lines were electrified with 1 @,@ 500 <unk> overhead lines and electric locomotives hauled coal trains between Shildon and <unk> marshalling yard , which had opened in 1908 between Middlesbrough and Thornaby . The trains took the former S & DR line from Shildon to Simpasture Junction , joining the former Clarence Railway line to Carlton , where a later line allowed access to the Stockton to Middlesbrough extension . The locomotives operated for 20 years , but then coal traffic had reduced , which made it uneconomical to maintain the electrification system . 
 As a result of the Railways Act 1921 , on 1 January 1923 the North Eastern Railway became the North Eastern area of the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) . The passenger service was withdrawn north of Tow Law on 1 May 1939 . Britain 's railways were nationalised on 1 January 1948 and the lines were placed under the control of British Railways . In the early 1950s control was split between the North Eastern and London Midland regions with Kirkby Stephen as the boundary . Local passenger trains were withdrawn between Kirkby Stephen and Tebay on 1 December 1952 . The service along Weardale was withdrawn on 29 June 1953 and services north of Crook on 11 June 1956 . 
 The 1955 Modernisation Plan , known formally as the " Modernisation and Re @-@ Equipment of the British Railways " , was published in December 1954 . With the aim of increasing speed and reliability steam trains were replaced with electric and diesel traction . From 1954 Diesel Multiple Units took over passenger services in the north east except those on the <unk> , and were introduced to the line over Stainmore in February 1958 . The passenger service was withdrawn between Barnard Castle and Penrith on 20 January 1962 , and between Bishop Auckland and Barnard Castle on 12 June 1962 . 
 In 1963 Richard Beeching published his report The Reshaping of British Railways , which recommended closing the network 's least used stations and lines . This included the remaining former SD & R lines except for the line between Darlington and Saltburn via Stockton and Middlesbrough . Passenger service between Nunthrope and Guisborough was withdrawn in 1964 ; the service between Middlesbrough and Nunthrope was retained . The line between Darlington and Barnard Castle and the branch to Middleton @-@ in @-@ Teesdale were closed to passengers on 30 November 1964 . Trains were withdrawn north of Bishop Auckland on 8 March 1965 , but the passenger service to Bishop Auckland was saved because of regional development concerns . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 19 March 1828 , the boiler of locomotive No. 5 exploded at Simpasture Junction . One of the two firemen was killed , the other severely scalded . The driver ( George Stephenson 's older brother ) was unharmed . 
 On 1 July 1828 , the boiler of Locomotion No. 1 exploded at Aycliffe Lane station , killing the driver . 
 = = Anniversary celebrations = = 
 The Stockton and Darlington was not the first railway and a train had previously carried passengers , but its opening in 1825 was seen as proof of the effectiveness of steam railways as a means of public transport . A jubilee was held on 27 and 28 September 1875 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the opening of the world 's first steam operated public railway : the Darlington North Road workshops housed a locomotive exhibition , a statue of Joseph Pease was unveiled in Darlington , his portrait presented to the Darlington Corporation and a banquet held . Fifty years later centenary celebrations were held in July to allow foreign men visiting the International Railway Congress to take part . An exhibition of rolling stock at the new <unk> Wagon Works in Darlington was opened by the Duke and Duchess of York ( later King George VI and the Queen Mother ) . The following day the royal couple watched as procession of locomotives passed between Stockton and Oak Tree Junction , starting with a Hetton Colliery locomotive that had been built in 1822 and finishing with a replica train of ten <unk> waggons and " the company 's coach " hauled by Locomotive No.1 propelled by a petrol engine in a specially built tender . A festival was held in Belle Vue , Manchester on 27 September 1925 , a Sunday to allow railwaymen to attend , where a pageant showed how transport had changed through time , beginning with a group of ancient Britons dragging a log with their belongings on top and ending with Stephenson 's Rocket ; another procession included Locomotion No.1 , propelled by its tender , and more modern locomotives . On 31 August 1975 , to celebrate the 150th anniversary , a cavalcade was held between Shildon and Heighington , where a replica of Locomotion headed a procession of locomotives , which was completed by the prototype high @-@ speed train . In the same year the National Railway Museum opened in York that combined exhibits from a Museum in York , which had opened after the 1875 festivities , and the National Transport Museum at Clapham . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The current Tees Valley Line uses the most of the former Stockton & Darlington Railway between Bishop Auckland and Saltburn . From Bishop Auckland the non @-@ electrified line is single track to Shildon , double track to Heighington , and single track to the junction with the East Coast Main Line north of Darlington . This section is a Community Rail service called the Bishop line , and is sometimes known as the Heritage Line because of its links with the S & DR. South of Darlington , trains take the 1887 line before joining the original 1825 route to Stockton at the site of Oak Tree Junction . The line is 8 miles ( 13 km ) to Eaglescliffe South Junction , where the 1853 Leeds Northern route is taken through Eaglescliffe station to Stockton Cut Junction . The non @-@ electrified line then follows the S & DR route for 19 miles ( 31 km ) to Saltburn , except for later deviations at Thornaby ( 1908 ) and Redcar ( 1978 ) . The former Middlesbrough & Guisborough Railway line is open between Guisborough Junction and Nunthorpe as part of the Community Rail Esk Valley Line to Whitby . 
 On 14 June 2007 , during excavations for road building , some of the original stone sleepers used by the railway in 1825 were discovered intact near <unk> Point . The stones each weigh about 75 pounds ( 34 kg ) and have bolt holes for the chairs that secured the rail . Officials involved in the road project hope to preserve the stones along a new bicycle path . 
 As of September 2015 a two train per hour off @-@ peak service is provided by Northern Rail between Saltburn and Darlington , and ten trains a day continue to Bishops Auckland . One train per hour leaves Middlesbrough going south to Manchester Airport via Yarm and another travels north to Newcastle via Sunderland . There are eighteen trains a day between Middlesbrough and Nunthorpe , and four of these continue to Whitby . Tees Valley Unlimited , the local enterprise partnership , published in December 2013 its ambition to improve passenger services , with the priority of an all day two trains an hour service over the Darlington to Saltburn and Nunthorpe to Hartlepool routes using new trains ; additional platforms are needed at Darlington station to allow this service frequency . A station serving James Cook University Hospital opened in May 2014 . A Hitachi train plant opened in September 2015 at Newton Aycliffe to build trains for the Intercity Express Programme . 
 At North Road railway station the station buildings and goods shed are Grade II * listed . The station building is now the Head of Steam – Darlington Railway Museum , which has particular reference to the Stockton & Darlington Railway and houses Locomotion No. 1 . Nearby , the former carriage works are now used as workshops for steam locomotives . At Shildon is " Locomotion " or National Railway Museum Shildon , part of the National Railway Museum , which contains heritage railway vehicles . The site includes Timothy Hackworth 's house , the Soho Workshop and a former coal drops , which are listed buildings . The heritage Weardale Railway runs special services over its line from Bishop Auckland to Eastgate @-@ in @-@ Weardale . 
 = Rumours ( Glee ) = 
 " Rumours " is the nineteenth episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the forty @-@ first overall . The episode was written by series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy , directed by Tim Hunter , first aired on May 3 , 2011 on Fox in the United States , and it features the return of guest star Kristin Chenoweth . In " Rumours " , the glee club is swept by rumors that strain the friendships and relationships of the members , so director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) has them perform songs from Fleetwood Mac 's 1977 album Rumours . The episode is a tribute to that album , and all the songs covered in the episode are from it . This generated strong interest in the album : Rumours reentered the Billboard 200 chart at number eleven the week after the show was aired in the US , and the Australian album charts at number two five days after the show was aired in that country . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " the episode had its moments that made lovin ' Glee fun " , but called the Sue Sylvester subplot " tired " . Many critics were impressed with how well the album 's music was incorporated into the episode including Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone , who wrote " the songs of Rumours fit the New Directions ' drama in an organic way . " The " Fondue for Two " segments were a favorite of reviewers , and were developed from an idea by one of the show 's fans . 
 The musical performances received mostly praise , especially " Never Going Back Again " and " Go Your Own Way " . Five of the six Rumours cover versions debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and four of these were featured on the subsequent Glee : The Music , Volume 6 soundtrack album . Upon its initial airing , the " Rumours " episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 85 million American viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings for this episode was up slightly from the previous episode , " Born This Way " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) revives the student newspaper The <unk> . She wants to publish libel about the McKinley High glee club to cause conflict between the club 's members and destroy it from within . Brittany 's ( Heather Morris ) new internet talk show — " Fondue for Two " — gives the newspaper some grist when she seems to out Santana ( Naya Rivera ) on it . Santana berates Brittany for her ill @-@ chosen words , and Finn ( Cory Monteith ) nearly comes to blows with Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) over another item that pairs Sam and Finn 's girlfriend Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) . Although Quinn and Sam both deny dating , Finn plans a stakeout with Rachel 's help to see if it is true . Their surveillance of a shabby motel instead finds Sam and Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) leaving a room , after which Sam goes back inside alone . 
 April Rhodes ( Kristin Chenoweth ) visits Will to ask for his help with her new Broadway project : a one @-@ woman show entitled <unk> . He tells her about the current glee club tensions , which she likens to Fleetwood Mac when they made their Rumours album . Will and April sing " Dreams " to the club , and he assigns them to perform songs from the album , to focus them back on music . 
 Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) confronts Brittany : he becomes upset that Brittany cannot recognize that she is cheating on him with Santana , and calls her stupid . Brittany walks away in tears , and he sings " Never Going Back Again " . Santana further opens up to Brittany about her true feelings by singing " Songbird " to her . She agrees to go on Brittany 's online talk show to let Brittany ask her to the prom , but she backs out at the last minute . Brittany later overhears Santana claim in an interview for The <unk> that she is in love with Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) , her running mate for prom king and queen . 
 Most of New Directions , minus Kurt and Sam , meet for coffee and speculate about the absent pair . Quinn maintains that Kurt would never cheat on his boyfriend Blaine ( Darren Criss ) , and states that Sam is not gay . When Finn and Rachel resume their stakeout that night , they see Quinn leaving the same motel room , and Sam giving her a hug before going back inside . 
 The next day , the newspaper has an item about Finn and Rachel , who were spotted on their stakeout . Quinn is furious with Finn , and Finn is already mad about seeing Quinn with Sam . They confront each other , then sing a barbed version of the duet " I Don 't Want to Know " as their glee club assignment . Quinn then gives an ultimatum : if Finn wants their relationship to continue , he cannot sing any more duets with Rachel . Rachel has other ideas , and later sings " Go Your Own Way " to Finn , who accompanies her on the drums . The subsequent recriminations end in the revelation that Sam was at the motel because his parents are unemployed and his family lives there now that their house has been foreclosed on — Kurt was bringing Sam some clothes , and Quinn was helping Sam babysit his younger brother and sister . Sam storms out . When the club discovers from Quinn that Sam has pawned his guitar , they buy it back for him and offer their support . Sam brings his siblings to a glee club rehearsal , and everyone sings " Don 't Stop " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The show 's co @-@ creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan had long " wanted to do an episode " that would be a tribute to a single album rather than to a " musical act " . Glee had covered " Landslide " by Stevie Nicks several weeks earlier in the episode " Sexy " ; Nicks had visited the set to watch the song being filmed , and stayed for six hours . This relationship helped them obtain the rights to cover the songs on the 1977 Fleetwood Mac studio album from which the episode is named . 
 The idea for Brittany 's " Fondue for Two " segments in the episode came from a Glee fan . Teresa <unk> went to the 2010 Glee Live ! In Concert ! show at Radio City Music Hall in New York , and she had a letter delivered to Cory Monteith that mentioned she was writing her own internet program : " More like a Youtube show called ' Fondue for Two . ' " According to <unk> , " Heather Morris who plays Brittany admits the idea came from a letter " , and the show later sent <unk> an autographed copy of the script and an autographed cast picture in thanks . 
 Chenoweth 's reappearance marks her third time on the series as April . She last appeared in the season one episode " Home " . Murphy explained the reason for her return as the failure of her attempt at an all @-@ white musical production of The Wiz . Other recurring guest stars in the episode include glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , school bully Azimio ( James Earl ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , and cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) . Additional guests include Sam 's sister Stacey and brother Stevie , played by Ava Chelsea Ingram and Cody Hamilton respectively , a barista played by Cathy Doe , and a coffee shop patron played by Connie Ventress . 
 All six songs from Rumours covered in the episode were released as singles , available for digital download . Chenoweth and Morrison were featured on " Dreams " , McHale sang " Never Going Back Again " , Rivera covered " Songbird " , Monteith and Agron duetted on " I Don 't Want to Know " , Michele sang " Go Your Own Way " , and the glee club combined on " Don 't Stop " . The episode also included a portion of an original song , " Nice to Meet You , Have I Slept with You ? " — written by Brennan and Adam Anders and sung by Chenoweth and Morrison — which was not released . " The Chain " , also from Rumours , was used as backing music in the second motel stakeout scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Rumours " was first broadcast on May 3 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received 8 @.@ 85 million American viewers during its initial airing . It was the third most @-@ watched scripted show of the week among adults aged 18 – 49 . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were slightly up from those of the previous episode , " Born This Way " , which was watched by 8 @.@ 62 million American viewers and acquired a 3 @.@ 4 / 11 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic upon first airing . 
 The episode 's Canadian broadcast , also on May 3 , 2011 , drew 1 @.@ 49 million viewers and was the eighteenth most @-@ watched program of the week . It dropped three places from the previous episode , which attained 82 @,@ 000 more viewers . In Australia , " Rumours " was watched by 959 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the twelfth most @-@ watched show of the night . The episode was the thirty @-@ second most @-@ watched program of the week , but ranked fifth in the 16 – 39 demographic . Viewership again increased from " Born This Way " , which drew 805 @,@ 000 viewers and ranked fourteenth on the night of broadcast . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 50 million viewers — 2 @.@ 07 million on E4 , and 432 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 . It was the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the second most @-@ watched on cable . Here , viewership registered a slight decline on the previous episode , which attained 20 @,@ 000 more viewers and ranked first on cable . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Rumours " was met with mixed to favorable reviews from the critics , though many of the latter listed significant caveats . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " the episode had its moments that made lovin ' Glee fun " . MTV 's Aly Semigran said " It wasn 't a perfect episode , but it was certainly an improvement over the last few " . Lisa Respers France of CNN " had a whole ball of tissue " in her hand by the time the cast sang the " Don 't Stop " finale , and concluded , " Well played , Glee . " 
 Time 's James Poniewozik said " while ' Rumours ' had its flaws ... the structure allowed the show to serve the stories , rather than feeling like the stories were there to service the songs " , and particularly praised how " the songs were integrated into the drama " . Semigran and Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone concurred with the latter point , and Futterman wrote that " despite a forced theme premise , the songs of Rumours fit the New Directions ' drama in an organic way . " The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon called the episode 's focus on the Fleetwood Mac songs " a refreshing change of pace " . Robert Canning of IGN liked the album concept , but felt it " didn 't fully deliver " . He gave " Rumours " a " good " rating of 7 out of 10 , and wrote , " What made the episode at least mildly entertaining were the comedy bits . Brittany 's ' Fondue For Two ' segments were fantastic " . Most other reviewers were similarly smitten with the " Fondue for Two " segments , including the aforementioned Reiter , Poniewozik , Semigran , and Respers France . 
 Futterman praised the return of Chenoweth 's character April Rhodes , and The Wall Street Journal 's Raymund Flandez said that she " brings such lightness , humor and zaniness that 's endearingly button @-@ nose cute " . Fallon wrote , " Chenoweth 's every sly smirk , eyebrow tick , and note sung — well , that was my week 's highlight . " Reiter was unenthusiastic : she acknowledged " Chenoweth 's amazing pipes " , but added " her character , which was thin to start with , has kind of worn out its welcome " . The subplot of Will thinking about going to Broadway with April was roundly criticized : both Meghan Brown of The Atlantic and Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle said there was no tension at all because the viewer knows that he will stay . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen called the entire scenario " ludicrous " , made even more so by the highly compressed time frame , and their dress rehearsal " bizarre " , criticisms echoed by Brown . 
 Sue 's scenes were generally not well @-@ liked . Although Canning wrote that the newspaper " delivered on the laughs " , Entertainment Weekly 's Sandra Gonzalez characterized the newspaper subplot was " neither important nor substantive " and was unimpressed with the " random , frightening costume changes " , and Reiter said Sue 's storyline was one that " felt as tired as secondhand news " . Poniewozik said that the episode " recognized that she is not really a character but a human obstacle " , which he suggested was " a better way for the show to use her " . 
 According to Hankinson , " One of the best parts of the episode centered around Brittany and Santana , but I think all the principals — Artie , Finn , Rachel , and Quinn too — did a great job portraying the tension and distrust pervading the team . " Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times felt the show was " absurdly preachy " on the matter of rumors , though he said the episode was " decent " . The scene in the motel room with Sam , Rachel , Finn and Sam 's brother and sister was called " arguably the most affecting scene of the entire episode " by Handlen , and Poniewozik wrote that " Chord Overstreet sold Sam 's feeling of loss " . Canning felt otherwise : " It may have had a better impact if we cared more about Sam or if Chord Overstreet had delivered more believable tears , but as things were , it was just some ordinary , blah drama . " 
 The developments in the relationship between Brittany and Santana received considerable attention . John Kubicek of BuddyTV thought the plot was pointless , and said it " boiled down to : I 'm not ready to come out . I 'm ready . Now I 'm not again . " He added , " If you 're going to have Santana question herself , at least show it and don 't have it all happen off screen . " Both Hankinson and Respers France were impressed by the acting of both Morris and Rivera . Hankinson wrote , " It feels like their relationship is developing organically " , while Respers France commended Morris for Brittany 's breakup scene with Artie , and Rivera for far surpassing her expectations . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 All of the musical numbers were generally praised , though not every number was received with the same enthusiasm . Benigno was disappointed that there was " nothing special " in any of the arrangements , but Futterman saw the performances from a different perspective : " They 're not as visually stunning , but they 're vocally some of the more impressive renditions Glee has done all season . " She said of the " Dreams " rendition by Chenoweth with Morrison , " The harmonies and bare @-@ bones arrangement make for one of Glee 's most faithful covers yet . " Most critics welcomed the Chenoweth version . Gonzalez gave the song a " B + " and Brett Berk of Vanity Fair awarded it four stars of five ; both praised Chenoweth but criticized Morrison . Semigran and Kubicek simply gave kudos to Chenoweth alone . Benigno wondered why the pair were trying to imitate Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham when he felt they were better singers than those two , and gave the song a " B " . 
 Hankinson wrote , " I enjoyed all the smaller numbers tonight because I felt like the kids really sold the performances and infused some nice emotional context . " Of these , " Never Going Back Again " received the most consistent approval . Futterman said it was " better than Artie 's post @-@ Tina ' Stronger ' " , and Kubicek declared it " proof that he 's quite good at hitting emotional notes " , while Semigran said she was " blown away " . Both Gonzalez and Benigno gave it an " A − " , while Berk gave it all five stars . Berk also gave five stars to " Songbird " , which Gonzalez again gave an " A − " , while Benigno was slightly less generous with a " B + " . Futterman described Santana 's vocals as " raw and restrained " , and called her rendition of the song a " heartbreaking performance " , but while Semigran called it " sweet enough " , she also wrote " Rivera 's voice doesn 't pack quite the punch the tune requires " . Kubicek , however , said it was " easily the best song from the episode " . 
 Many reviewers appreciated the pointed " I Don 't Want to Know " performance . Kubicek called it " quite entertaining " , Gonzalez felt the " angry singing " was " hot " and gave it an " A − " , the same grade as Benigno , who said the song had " a bit more oomph than the original " , though he added that Finn " sings with the subtlety of an artillery barrage " and he was happy with Quinn 's " strong foundation in the back " . Futterman wrote that it was " better than Quinn and Sam 's ' Lucky ' " , but Berk gave the song only two stars out of five , the same grade he gave to " Go Your Own Way " . Although both Kubicek and Gonzalez criticized Rachel 's motivations in singing the song , the latter still gave it an " A " and noted " if I had to listen to someone cover this song , it 'd be her " . Semigran called it " one of Lea Michele 's strongest outings all season " , while Benigno said " this is one of those rare times her balls @-@ to @-@ the @-@ walls delivery works with the arrangement instead of distracting from it " and gave it an " A " . Hankinson was " particularly fond " of the song , and added that it had " great energy " . 
 The group finale of " Don 't Stop " received good grades — " A " from Gonzales and " B + " from Benigno , and four of five stars from Berk . Kubicek found a bright spot in that Sam got to sing a solo . The performance received encomiums such as " pretty great " from Semigran and " inspired " from Futterman . The portion of an original song for the April Rhodes musical sung by April and Will , " Nice to Meet You , Have I Slept with You ? " , received little commentary , though Flandez made specific mention of " her operatic range , and their charismatic stage presence " . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Five of the six Rumours cover versions debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Go Your Own Way " debuted at number forty @-@ five , " Songbird " at number sixty @-@ eight , " Don 't Stop " at number seventy @-@ nine , " Never Going Back Again " at number eighty @-@ one , and " Dreams " at number ninety @-@ two . The sixth , " I Don 't Want to Know " , did not chart . The first four Glee songs on the Hot 100 also charted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 : " Go Your Own Way " debuted at number thirty @-@ one , " Don 't Stop " at number sixty @-@ five , " Songbird " at number seventy , and " Never Going Back Again " at number eighty . The peak positions attained by " Songbird " and " Go Your Own Way " were fifty @-@ four and thirty , in the UK and Australia respectively . Out of the six songs from Rumours that were featured in the episode , four were also featured on the eighth soundtrack album of the series , Glee : The Music , Volume 6 : " Songbird " , " Don 't Stop " , " Go Your Own Way " , and " Dreams " . 
 The episode also sparked renewed interest in Fleetwood Mac and its most commercially successful album , and Rumours reentered the Billboard 200 chart at number twelve , the same week that Nicks ' new solo album In Your Dreams debuted at number six . The two recordings sold a little less than 30 @,@ 000 and 52 @,@ 000 units , respectively . Music downloads accounted for ninety @-@ one percent of the Rumours sales . The spike in sales for Rumours represented an uptick of 1 @,@ 951 % , and it had the highest US chart entry by a previously issued album since The Rolling Stones ' reissue of Exile on Main St. entered the chart at number two on June 5 , 2010 . In Australia , the interest had an even more profound effect : five days after the episode aired , the Rumours album entered the Australian charts at number two , and was at number three the following week . Most sales came from digital downloads . In all , the album was in the top forty for nine consecutive weeks . Rumours received its 13 × Platinum certification in Australia at the end of May 2011 . 
 = Bad Blood ( 2004 ) = 
 Bad Blood ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Subway , which took place on June 13 , 2004 , at the Nationwide Arena in Columbus , Ohio . It was the third and final annual Bad Blood event . 
 The main event was a Hell in a Cell match , in which Triple H defeated Shawn Michaels in a ring surrounded by a steel structure of metal . Two bouts were featured on the undercard . In respective singles matches , World Heavyweight Champion Chris Benoit defeated Kane to retain his title and WWE Intercontinental Champion Randy Orton defeated Shelton Benjamin to retain his title . 
 The event marked the third time the Hell in a Cell format was used by WWE in a Bad Blood event ; the first was at In Your House : Badd Blood in 1997 . Bad Blood grossed over $ 494 @,@ 000 ticket sales from an attendance of 9 @,@ 000 and received 264 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , and was instrumental in helping WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 4 @.@ 7 million compared to the previous year . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of third on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Seven professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card beforehand , which were planned with predetermined outcomes by WWE 's script writers . The buildup to these matches and scenarios that took place before , during and after the event were also planned by the script writers . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from Raw 's brand – a storyline expansion in which WWE assigned its employees . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick , as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . 
 The main event scripted into Bad Blood was fought in a Hell in a Cell match between Triple H and Shawn Michaels , a match where the ring is surrounded by a structure of metal . The buildup to the match began after Backlash , WWE 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , where the main event was a rematch of the main event of WrestleMania XX where Michaels and Triple H took on Chris Benoit in a Triple Threat Match for the World Heavyweight Championship , which saw Benoit retain by forcing Michaels to submit . On the May 3 episode of Raw , one of WWE 's primary television programs , General Manager Eric Bischoff signed a title defense between Benoit and Michaels . The title match saw Benoit successfully retain the title after interference by Triple H. On the May 10 episode of Raw , at the start of the program , a singles match between Triple H and Shelton Benjamin resulted in a no contest after Michaels attacked Triple H ; this resulted in a storyline suspension of Michaels from WWE by Bischoff . The following week on Raw , a number one contender 's battle royal was contested , with the winner facing Benoit for the World Heavyweight title at Bad Blood . During the match , Michaels interfered and eliminated Triple H. On the May 24 episode of Raw , Bischoff scheduled Michaels and Triple H in a Hell in a Cell match at the Bad Blood event . 
 One of the featured matches was contested for the World Heavyweight Championship pitting Benoit against the winner of the aforementioned battle royal , which turned out to be Kane . The following week , Kane held a promotional interview , in which he revealed that he envied Benoit for having the World Heavyweight Championship and concluded that he would win the championship . On the May 31 episode of Raw , Kane was scheduled in a match against Eugene . The match ended in a disqualification , after Kane hit Eugene with a folding chair . After the match ended , Kane chokeslammed Eugene and began to assault him . Benoit , however , came down to the ring to Eugene 's aid . The following week , Benoit and Edge faced off against La Résistance ( Sylvain Grenier and Robért Conway ) and Kane in a handicap tag team match . The match saw Kane perform a chokeslam and pin Benoit for the win . 
 The other featured preliminary match was Randy Orton versus Shelton Benjamin in a singles match for Orton 's Intercontinental Championship . On the May 17 episode of Raw , Randy Orton , who was a villain , was giving a speech . Shelton Benjamin interrupted Orton 's speech and challenged Orton to an Intercontinental Championship match . The challenge , however , was denied by Orton , in which prompted Benjamin to attack Orton . The following week , an all @-@ out brawl ensued between Orton and Chris Jericho . The brawl brought out fellow Evolution member , a group of wrestlers , Batista , to Orton 's aid . Benjamin also made his way to the ring and evened the sides . As a result of the brawl , Bischoff announced a tag team match , in which Benjamin and Jericho defeated Orton and Batista . On the May 31 episode of Raw , it was announced that Orton would defend the Intercontinental Championship against Benjamin at Bad Blood . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Batista defeated Maven in a match taped for Heat , one of WWE 's secondary television programs . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Heat , the pay @-@ per @-@ view began with a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship , where La Résistance ( Sylvain Grenier and Robért Conway ) defended the title against Chris Benoit and Edge . La Résistance gained the early advantage when Conway grabbed Edge and rammed him onto the security wall , back first . At one point , Benoit applied a crossface submission hold on Grenier . Kane 's pyrotechnics went off and made his way to the ring , as he entered the ring he hit Benoit with a big boot knocking him down , prompting the referee to end the match in a disqualification , thus La Résistance retaining the World Tag Team title . 
 The second match was Tyson Tomko , accompanied by Trish Stratus , versus Chris Jericho in a singles match . In the early stages both competitors wrestled inconclusively , reversed each other 's attacks , before Tyson backed Jericho into the ring corner and hit him numerous times with his elbows . Afterwards , Jericho attempted to springboard of the middle rope to perform a backflip , but Tomko rolled out of the way , sending Jericho to crash down to the mat . The match concluded as Jericho kicked Tyson in the back of the head to perform an enzuigiri and pinning Tomko for the win . 
 The next match was for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , in which Randy Orton defended the championship against Shelton Benjamin . The match began with Benjamin performing a drop kick on Orton , which knocked him out to the outside of the ring . Benjamin proceeded to knock Orton over the security barricade into the crowd . Orton got the advantage , after Ric Flair made his way to the ring , distracting Benjamin in the process . The match came to an end when Benjamin went off the top rope and dove onto Orton , but Orton rolled through and hooked Benjamin 's tights to pin Benjamin for the three count and retaining the Intercontinental Championship . 
 The match that followed was a standard match involving four wrestlers for the WWE Women 's Championship , in which Victoria defended the title against Trish Stratus , Lita , and Gail Kim . The start of the match saw Victoria and Lita double team Stratus , however , Stratus avoided the assault , as she rolled out of the ring . Lita and Victoria went on to double team Kim , however , Stratus pulled Lita out of the ring , afterward Victoria performed a backflip and landed on Kim 's torso . Lita then drove Kim 's head into the mat . Stratus then went on to use a roll up on Lita to gain a pinfall victory , thus Stratus ' becoming Women 's champion for a fifth time . 
 The fifth match was between Eugene and Jonathan Coachman in a standard match . The match started with Eugene hitting an arm drag on Coachman and hitting numerous headbutts . An unknown woman in a bikini came out to the ringside area with some cookies , Coachman offered cookies to Eugene . The woman lured Eugene out of the ring and Eugene went over and grabbed some cookies . As Eugene went to grab more cookies , Coachman slammed Eugene 's head into the cookie tray . A spot in the match saw Garrison Cade come out to ringside with a stuffed animal , which prompted Cade to tore up toy animal . Cade tried to hold Eugene so Coachman could get the advantage , however , Eugene was able dodge the attack , as Coachman ended up hitting Cade instead . Eugene grabbed Coachman and lifted him by holding his back horizontally and slamming it down , termed as a side slam . Eugene pinned Coachman for the three count for the win . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The featured preliminary match was for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Chris Benoit defended the championship against Kane . Benoit started the match by hitting Kane numerous times with slaps to the chest . Mid @-@ way in the match , Benoit charged towards Kane , but Kane hit a variation of the side slam and tossed him over the top rope to the arena floor , Kane then stepped out of the ring and grabbed Benoit , in which he wanted to launch Benoit into the ring post , but Benoit was able to reverse Kane 's attack and slammed him into the ring post . After blocking a crossface attempt , Kane chokeslammed Benoit for a two count . The match concluded with Kane headed to the top rope and coming off to attempt and hit Benoit with his forearm by jumping off the top rope but Benoit went for another crossface , but Kane fought out of it and Benoit rolled Kane up in a pin to get a three count , and thus retaining the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 The main event was the Hell in a Cell match between Shawn Michaels and Triple H. The match began with Michaels jumping and knocking Triple H over . This was followed with Michaels ' slamming Triple H 's head onto the steel cage , resulting in Triple H being scripted to bleed from the forehead , the blood loss results from a cut that the wrestler performs during the match called blading . Triple H got the advantage , as he was able to counter a Piledriver and performed a back body drop on Michaels . Another attack saw Triple H bring the steel steps and hit Michaels with them , which resulted in Michaels also being scripted to bleed from the forehead . A spot in the match saw Michaels lay Triple H on a table , as he climbed onto a ladder that he took out from under the ring , and performed a dive with his elbow cocked onto Triple H 's chest , thus breaking the table and enhancing the maneuver . Afterwards , Triple H gained the advantage and performed a Pedigree on Michaels . Triple H covered Michaels for the win via pinfall . After the match , Michaels staggered to his feet and was given a standing ovation by the audience . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Bad Blood , Raw commentator Jim Ross tried making amends between Shawn Michaels and Triple H by making them shake hands . Michaels and Triple H extended their hands to shake , however , Kane came out and attacked Michaels , which resulted in Kane , in storyline , crushing Michaels ' throat with a wedged chair . Michaels was then taken out in an ambulance for medical attention . Lita being pregnant was scripted into a storyline . On the June 21 episode of Raw , it appeared that Lita 's , boyfriend at that time , Matt Hardy was going to propose to Lita , who found out she was pregnant , but he was interrupted by Kane , who claimed to be the father of Lita 's child . Two months later , it was revealed that Kane was , indeed , the father . At SummerSlam , the staged rivalry between Kane and Hardy intensified , when they were booked in a " Till Death Do Us Part " match , with the stipulation that Lita would be obliged to marry Kane should Hardy lose . Kane won the match , leading to he and a reluctant Lita marrying one another on an episode of Raw . On the August 30 episode of Raw , Kane revealed that Eric Bischoff 's wedding gift to them was to name any match he wanted for at the September annual event , Unforgiven . Continuing with the scripted angle , Lita informed Kane that his opponent at the event was Shawn Michaels . At Unforgiven , Michaels defeated Kane in a no disqualification match , a match where neither wrestler can be disqualified , allowing for weapons and outside interference . 
 On the June 21 episode of Raw , a number one contender 's match between Eugene and Triple H was scheduled in which the winner would face Chris Benoit for the World Heavyweight Championship . The match , however , ended in a No Contest . On the June 28 episode of Raw , a rematch for the World Heavyweight Championship between Benoit and Kane took place . A stipulation was placed that Benoit had to win the match by submission , as Kane could 've won by pinfall , submission , disqualification or countout . Benoit won the match , after he made Kane submit to a crossface , and thus defending the World Heavyweight Championship at Vengeance against Triple H. At Vengeance , Benoit defeated Triple H to retain his Championship . 
 A heated confrontation between Randy Orton and Edge was seen . This angle led Edge to perform a shoulder block takedown on Orton , this is seen as an attack where the attacking wrestler charges towards the opponent and tackling , thus forcing the opponent down to the mat . The following week , it was announced that Orton would defend the Intercontinental Championship against Edge at Vengeance . Weeks leading to the event , both men took the upper hand over one another . At the scheduled event , Orton lost the Intercontinental Championship to Edge . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Nationwide Arena usually can accommodate 19 @,@ 500 , but the capacity was reduced for the event . This event grossed over $ 494 @,@ 000 from an approximate attendance of 9 @,@ 000 which was the maximum allowed . It also received 264 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . Bad Blood helped WWE earn $ 21 @.@ 6 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events versus $ 16 @.@ 9 million the previous year , which was later confirmed by Linda McMahon , the CEO of WWE , on September 7 , 2005 in a quarterly result . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event a five out of 10 stars . The rating was higher than the Bad Blood event in 2003 , which rated a four out of 10 stars . The World Heavyweight Championship match between Chris Benoit and Kane was rated an eight out of 10 stars . Additionally , the match between Eugene and Jonathan Coachman was rated zero out of 10 stars . 
 The event was released on DVD on July 13 , 2004 . The DVD was distributed by the label , Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached third on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of August 28 , 2004 , although falling thereafter . It remained in the chart for two consecutive weeks , until the week of September 25 , 2004 , when it ranked 19th . 
 = = Results = = 
 = The Man @-@ Eating Myth = 
 The Man @-@ Eating Myth : Anthropology and Anthropophagy is an influential anthropological study of socially sanctioned cultural cannibalism across the world , which casts a critical perspective on the existence of such practices . It was authored by the American anthropologist William Arens of Stony Brook University , New York and first published by Oxford University Press in 1979 . 
 Arens ' primary hypothesis is that despite claims made by western explorers and anthropologists since the 15th century , there is no firm , <unk> evidence for the socially accepted practice of cannibalism anywhere in the world , at any time in history . Dismissing claims of cultural cannibalism made against the Carib and Aztec peoples by invading Spanish colonialists , he tackles 19th and 20th century claims regarding socially acceptable cannibalism in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa and New Guinea . Turning to prehistory , he critiques archaeological claims to have discovered evidence for such practices in Europe and North America . In the second half of the work , Arens puts forward his argument that an erroneous belief in " others " who commit socially sanctioned cannibalism is a global phenomenon . He proceeds to chastise the anthropological community for perpetuating the " Man @-@ Eating Myth " , suggesting reasons as to why they have done so . 
 The Man @-@ Eating Myth was widely reviewed in academic journals and also attracted attention from mainstream press . Views were mixed , with most reviewers highlighting the intentionally provocative nature of the work . Critics charged Arens with constructing straw man arguments and for exaggerating the methodological problems within anthropology . Although influential , in ensuing decades , increasing archaeological study of cannibalism led many to dismiss Arens ' hypothesis . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Arens undertook the research for his PhD in Tanzania , Eastern Africa . After beginning his fieldwork in a rural community there in 1968 , he discovered that the locals referred to him as <unk> @-@ <unk> , a Swahili term meaning " blood @-@ sucker " . This was due to a widespread belief in the community that Europeans would collect the blood of Africans whom they killed , convert it into red pills , and consume it . He would note that by the time he left the community a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half later , most of the locals still continued to believe this myth . 
 In the preface to The Man @-@ Eating Myth , Arens notes that he was first inspired to begin a fuller investigation of cannibalism while teaching an introductory course on anthropology at Stony Brook University , New York . One student asked him why he focused his teaching on such topics as kinship , politics and economics rather than the more " exotic " subjects of witchcraft , fieldwork experiences and cannibalism . Arens concurred that these latter topics would interest his students to a greater extent than those which he was then lecturing on , and so undertook an investigation into the prior accounts of cannibalism in the anthropological record . 
 As he began to read up on the written accounts of cultural cannibalism , he was struck by inconsistencies and other problems in these tales . In search of reliable accounts from anthropologists who had witnessed the practice of cultural cannibalism first @-@ hand , he placed an advertisement in the newsletter of the American Anthropological Association , but again failed to come up with any first @-@ hand documented cases . Prior to its publication , rumors had circulated in the anthropological community that Arens was putting together a book that would challenge the concept of cultural cannibalism . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In chapter one , " The Nature of Anthropology and Anthropophagy " , Arens discusses the study of anthropophagy , or cannibalism , within the anthropological discipline . Noting that anthropologists have widely taken it for granted that there are societies who socially sanction cannibalism , he nevertheless states that there is no " adequate documentation " for such practices anywhere in the world . In the second part of the chapter , he explores several first @-@ hand accounts of cannibalism and highlights their implausible and inaccurate nature . Beginning with the German Hans Staden 's claims to have encountered socially sanctioned cannibalism among the Tupinambá people of South America in the 1550s , Arens illustrates a number of logical contradictions in Staden 's account , and highlights the dubious nature of the text . The anthropologist then moved on to the 19th @-@ century accounts of widespread socially approved cannibalism among the Polynesian people of Rarotonga in the Cook Islands provided by Ta 'unga , a Polynesian native who had been converted to Christianity and wrote for the London Missionary Society ; Arens again highlights a number of inconsistencies and logical impossibilities in Ta 'unga 's claims . 
 The second chapter , entitled " The Classic Man @-@ Eaters " , explores the accounts of cannibalism produced by European colonialists and travellers in the Americas during the Early Modern era . It begins by documenting the Spanish interaction with the Carib people of the Lesser Antilles , first begun by Christopher Columbus and his men in the 1490s . Columbus noted that the Caribs had been described as cannibals by the neighbouring Arawak people of the West Indies , but was initially sceptical about such claims himself . Arens highlights that it was only later , when Columbus began to oversee largescale colonization and pacification of Carib lands , that he began to assert that they were cannibals , in order to legitimize his cause . Arens then proceeds to note that the Spanish government only permitted the enslavement of cannibals in the Caribbean , leading European colonists to increasingly label the indigenous peoples as cannibalistic in order to increase their economic power . Following on from this , Arens goes on to critique the longstanding claims that the Aztec people of Mexico were cannibals ; noting that while the early Spanish accounts of the Aztecs include first @-@ hand descriptions of human sacrifice , he highlights that none of these Spanish observers actually witnessed cannibalism , despite the claims that were later made asserting the cannibalistic nature of Aztec religion . In contrast , Arens argues that the Aztecs found the idea of cannibalism – even in survival conditions – socially reprehensible , and believed that some of their neighbouring peoples were guilty of it . 
 Chapter three , " The Contemporary Man @-@ Eaters " explores the claims made for socially sanctioned cannibalism in the 20th century , with a particular focus on Sub @-@ Saharan Africa and New Guinea . Regarding the former , Arens discusses E. E. Evans @-@ Pritchard 's work in disproving that the <unk> people were cannibalistic , before arguing that the stories of socially accepted cannibalism in the " Dark Continent " were based largely on misunderstandings and the sensationalist claims of European travellers like Henry Morton Stanley , and that there was no reputable first @-@ hand accounts of such a practice anywhere in Africa . Instead , he notes that many African societies found cannibalism to be a reprehensible anti @-@ social activity that was associated with witchcraft , drawing comparisons with the Early Modern European witch hunt . Moving on to look at claims for cannibalism in New Guinea made by anthropologists like Margaret Mead and Ronald Berndt , he notes that none of them ever actually came across any evidence of the practice themselves , before going on to critique claims that cannibalism was the cause of the kuru outbreak among the New Guinean Fore people in the mid 20th century . 
 In the fourth chapter , entitled " The Prehistoric World of Anthropophagy " , Arens deals with archaeological arguments for socially approved cannibalism in European and North American prehistory . He argues that many early archaeologists , in viewing prehistoric societies as " primitive " and " savage " , expected to find widespread evidence of cannibalism within the archaeological record , just as social anthropologists were claiming that the practice was widespread in recently documented " primitive " , " savage " societies . He critiques various claims that broken bones represent evidence of cannibalism , both in Iron Age Yorkshire and in the case of Peking Man , maintaining that these breakages could represent many different things rather than cannibalism . He then moves on to look at North American examples , including those from the Pueblo period in the Southwestern United States and among the Iroquois in the country 's northeast , in both instances critiquing an interpretation of socially sanctioned cannibalism . 
 The penultimate chapter , " The Mythical World of Anthropophagy " , consists of Arens ' argument that all human groups have been accused of socially accepted cannibalism at one point in time , and that these cannibals are often usually thought of as " others " , being outside of the accuser 's society , and are associated with certain animals because of their " non @-@ human " behaviour . From this , he deduces that the belief in cannibalism is a " universal phenomenon " , and questions why this should be so . He suggests that societies gain a sense of self @-@ meaning by conjuring the image of an opposite culture that breaks societal taboos . He also describes the manner in which many societies hold origin myths that involve them once being incestuous cannibals before they became civilised , in this way referencing the ideas expressed by the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud in his Totem and Taboo . He then proceeds to discuss a variety of other related issues , such as the connection between cannibalism and witchcraft , the role of gender and class in cannibal claims , and the role of the Eucharist . 
 In " The Mythical World of Anthropology " , Arens looks at the manner in which anthropologists have approached the idea of cultural cannibalism . Noting the widespread western idea that cannibals exist " beyond the pale of civilization " , in the land of savagery and primitivism , he argues that anthropologists have taken it upon themselves to explain and rationalize the cannibalism of such " primitives " without first proving that they were cannibalistic to start with . He connects this to the attitude held by many westerners both past and present that they are the bearers of civilization who have helped to put a stop to cannibalism . Challenging and criticizing the anthropological community 's long @-@ term advocacy of what he considers the " Man @-@ Eating Myth " , he draws comparisons with the belief in demonic witchcraft and cannibalism in Europe that led to the witch trials of the Early Modern period , ending his work on a quote from the historian Norman Cohn 's book Europe 's Inner Demons . 
 = = Main arguments = = 
 = = = The existence of cultural cannibalism = = = 
 In The Man @-@ Eating Myth , Arens notes that he was unable to find any form of " adequate documentation " for the existence of socially sanctioned cannibalism in any recorded society . As such , he remained " dubious " that cannibalism has ever existed as an approved social activity . He nevertheless refused to rule out the possibility that it had ever occurred , maintaining that the correct methodological stance was to hold an open mind on the issue , and that it would be impossible to conclusively state that no society throughout human history has ever culturally sanctioned cannibalism . From this definition of " cultural cannibalism " he excludes those instances where people have resorted to cannibalism under survival conditions , or where individuals have committed cannibalism as an anti @-@ social activity that is condemned by the rest of their community . 
 = = = The universal belief in cultural cannibalism = = = 
 Arens considers the belief in cannibalism to be a " universal phenomenon " that has been exhibited in all inhabited regions of the world . He expresses his view that " all cultures , subcultures , religions , sects , secret societies and every other possible human association have been labeled <unk> by someone . " He notes that accusations of socially sanctioned cannibalism in a society typically arise from an alternative society with whom they are often in conflict . As evidence , he notes that pagan Romans labelled the early Christians as cannibals , despite the lack of any evidence for this , and subsequently Christians in Medieval Europe labelled Jews as cannibals , again without any corroborating evidence . 
 He argues that across the world , cannibals are viewed as non @-@ human entities , committing acts that no human would ordinarily perpetrate . In this way they were akin to various non @-@ human species of animal , and Arens notes that in some societies , cannibals are believed to physically transform into different species in order to kill and consume humans . 
 Arens proceeds to ponder the question as to why societies across the world believe that other , exotic societies exhibit cannibalism . He notes that the development of a " collective prejudice " against a foreign entity provides meaning for the group by conjuring up an opposite who commit social taboos . He also suggests that one society 's belief that a foreign society is cannibalistic might arise from an inability to differentiate between the latter 's conceptions of the natural and the supernatural . As evidence , he asserts that rumors that the Indigenous Americans of Northeastern Canada were cannibals arose when foreign societies learned of their folkloric beliefs in man @-@ eating giants who lived in the wilderness and conflated this fantasy with reality . 
 = = = The anthropological approach to cultural cannibalism = = = 
 Arens ' third primary argument is that ever since the development of the discipline , the anthropological community have continually perpetuated the " Man @-@ Eating Myth " that cultural cannibalism was widespread across the world . In this way , he sees anthropologists as following in the path of Christian friars from the Early Modern period who asserted the existence of cannibalism " beyond the pale of civilization " , in societies that are either historically or geographically distinct to western culture . He furthermore argues that both Christian <unk> and academic anthropologists have sought to accuse non @-@ western , non @-@ Christian peoples of cultural cannibalism in order to then explain and rationalize their " savage " ways ; in doing so , he argues , they continue to portray the Christian west as a civilizing influence on the world that suits their own socio @-@ political agendas . In this way , Arens feels that the " Man @-@ Eating Myth " furthers the " we @-@ they " dichotomy between westerners and non @-@ westerners , and has indirectly lent some justification for the western exploitation of " savage " non @-@ western peoples . 
 He does not believe that there was any conscious academic conspiracy to spread the claims of cultural cannibalism , instead believing that they have arisen as a result of poor methodologies that have been used in this area , namely a lack of properly scrutinizing sources . He furthermore suggests that anthropologists have failed to tackle this issue because – while novel ideas are certainly welcomed – they feared that by criticising long @-@ held core assumptions , they would be upsetting the established status quo within the discipline , and would ultimately tarnish the reputation of anthropology itself by suggesting that it had made major errors . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Academic reviews = = = 
 The Man @-@ Eating Myth was reviewed by Ivan Brady for the American Anthropologist journal . He noted that the framework for Arens ' scepticism was not coherent and was never spelled out explicitly in the text , even if it could be deduced from reading the entirety of the work . Brady sees this framework as an " unsophisticated " version of positivism and naturalism , an approach that he laments was becoming increasingly popular in anthropology . Casting a critical eye over Arens ' scepticism , he admits to being perplexed as to why only " direct observation " will do as evidence , pondering whether Arens would accept anything short of affidavits by practicing cannibals as evidence for the practice . Brady notes that there are other activities in the world that surely go on – such as masturbation in monasteries and homosexual activity in the armed forces – but that these would be hidden by a veil of secrecy and therefore difficult to observe directly , suggesting that the same may be true for cannibalism . Moving on , Brady attacks Arens ' criticism of anthropology , believing that he has constructed a straw man argument by comparing the early accounts of travellers to the later , 20th @-@ century accounts of anthropologists , and lambasts him for portraying himself as an objective figure in the debate . He argues that in cases such as that of the Carib people , the evidence for cannibalism is " indeterminate " , rather than negative , as Arens believes . Concluding his review , Brady admits that he agrees with Arens ' premise that socially accepted cannibalism is not as globally widespread as some anthropologists have suggested , but disagreed that anthropologists have been as " reckless " in their claims as Arens charges them with , and furthermore disagrees with Arens ' suggestion that the cause can be blamed on poor observation standards . 
 The journal Man published a highly negative review by P. G. Rivière of the University of Oxford . Criticizing what he saw as the " chatty ' Holier @-@ than @-@ Thou ' tone " of the book , Rivière asserted that at only 160 pages of text , Arens had failed to give sufficient attention to the subject and evidence , instead devoting much of the space to constructing and demolishing straw men arguments . Coming to the defence of those who believe the account of Staden regarding cannibalism among the Tupinambá by arguing that it could indeed reflect the German explorer 's genuine experiences , Rivière notes that Arens has not tackled all of the claims which assert that this South American people committed anthropophagy . Furthermore , he expresses his opinion that Arens ' work has made him reassess the evidence for Tupinambá cannibalism , the existence of which he is now even more thoroughly convinced . Proclaiming it to be both a " bad " and a " dangerous " book , he finally expresses his fear that it might prove to be " the origin of a myth " . Similarly , Shirley Lindenbaum of the New School for Social Research published her highly negative review of Arens ' work in the journal Ethnohistory . Casting a critical eye on his claims , she notes that his use of source material was " selective and strangely blinkered " , which detracted from his ideas of " collective prejudice " which she considers valuable . Critiquing his discussion of the Fore people of New Guinea as being littered with inaccuracies , she draws comparisons between cannibalism and sexual activity , noting the latter is also not directly observed by anthropologists but nonetheless undoubtedly goes on . She furthermore expresses surprise that the work was ever designed for a scholarly audience because of its poor levels of accuracy . 
 James W. Springer of Northern Illinois University reviewed Arens ' book for Anthropological Quarterly . He hoped that the book would in part have a positive legacy , in that it might make anthropologists look more closely and critically at their source material , and praised its criticism of the claims regarding Aztec cannibalism . He nevertheless proclaimed that Arens was " almost certainly wrong " , making use of faulty evaluation methods and being excessively critical of any and all claims for cultural cannibalism , failing to prove dishonesty or prejudice on the behalf of Europeans who have claimed evidence for cultural cannibalism . He criticises both Arens ' treatment of Staden 's claims and his discussion of Iroquois cannibalism , claiming that Arens has neglected to mention many Native American first @-@ hand testaments as to the cannibalistic nature of these people . Ultimately , he dismissively asserted that The Man @-@ Eating Myth " does not advance our knowledge of cannibalism . " More favourably , R.E. Downs of the University of New Hampshire reviewed the work for American Ethnologist . Noting that the book was " provocative " in its thesis , he felt that it was bound to raise many " hackles " , and that it would lead future anthropologists to challenge other long @-@ standing beliefs about non @-@ western " primitive " societies , such as that of widespread incest and promiscuity . Ultimately , he remarked that while many anthropologists might dispute Arens ' ideas , never again could they claim that the existence of cultural cannibalism was an undisputed fact . 
 The geographer Thomas <unk> of the University of California undertook a review of The Man @-@ Eating Myth for the journal Human Ecology . Believing that a critical study of cannibal claims has been long needed , he was nevertheless perturbed that Arens ' work failed to be either comprehensive or objective . Although concurring that reports of cannibalism have been all too readily accepted without being properly scrutinized , <unk> nonetheless argues that he has used a " careless and selective " approach to the literary sources . He also sees problems in Arens ' approach to the nature of the evidence , stating that the anthropologist has not given sufficient thought to what would constitute reliable testimony in the case of cannibalism . Drawing comparisons with sexual behaviour , he notes that it would not always be possible for a western anthropologist to directly view cannibalism , which would likely be hidden from their view by many practitioners , and that as such , second @-@ hand accounts would have to do . He then critiques Arens ' writing style , believing it to be " contentious and possibly offensive " , and highlighting a number of typological errors . 
 Khalid Hasan 's review of The Man @-@ Eating Myth appeared in the Third World Quarterly journal . Considering it to be a " brilliant and well documented " tome , he praised Arens ' " admirable " work and expressed his hope that others would expand on his initial thesis . The German journal <unk> published a largely positive review of Arens ' work by John W. Burton , in which he described it as an " extensive and meticulous " study which was the model of a " fair and reasoned argument " . Supporting Arens ' arguments , he proclaimed that the final chapter should be essential reading for all anthropologists . P. Van de Velve reviewed the book for the Dutch journal <unk> . Van de Velve felt that the book contained several weaknesses , for instance Arens did not , he notes , explain how the claim for cultural cannibalism can be successfully refuted . The Dutch scholar also noted that the argument that anthropology focused on examining " non @-@ bourgeoisie " cultures was not new . Ultimately however , Van de Velve considered it to be well written book that offered " good reading " , particularly for students . 
 = = = Subsequent academic reception = = = 
 = = = = In archaeology = = = = 
 Archaeologist Paola Villa , one of the primary excavators of <unk> Cave , a Neolithic site in Southeastern France where the team argued for the existence of cannibalism , made reference to Arens ' work in a 1992 paper of his published in the Evolutionary Anthropology journal . Villa noted that following the book 's publication , prehistorians always dealt with suspicions of cannibalism with " extreme reluctance and scepticism " . 
 The English archaeologist Timothy Taylor critically discussed Arens ' work in his book The Buried Soul : How Humans Invented Death ( 2002 ) . Proclaiming that " there is now overwhelming biological , anthropological and archaeological evidence that cannibalism was once all around us " , he attacked Arens for his blanket and " bizarre " accusations against the concept of cultural anthropophagy . He argued that The Man @-@ Eating Myth had become so influential upon publication because it was what a generation of anthropological and archaeological students wanted to hear , not because it represented a coherent argument , citing P.G. Rivière 's negative review in Man . Commenting on the situation in archaeology , he felt that following the publication of Arens ' work , archaeologists had ceased to cite cannibalism as an explanation , to the detriment of the discipline itself . Presenting evidence to counter Arens ' claims , Taylor cites the accounts of cannibalism among Pom and <unk> , two chimpanzees of <unk> National Park whose anti @-@ social activities were recorded by Jane Goodall , and from this discusses the evolutionary benefits of cannibalism . Proceeding to defend various ethnographic accounts of cultural cannibalism , he argues that this thoroughly disproves the beliefs which " <unk> " anthropologists find it " comfortable or fashionable " to believe . Later in The Buried Soul , he proclaims that Arens ' book is <unk> by a " hollow certainty of viscerally insulated inexperience " , and he claims that such a flawed methodology has echoes in the anthropologist Jean La Fontaine 's Speak of the Devil : Tales of Satanic Abuse in Contemporary England ( 1998 ) ; Taylor himself suggests that multiple claims of the Satanic ritual abuse have been incorrectly dismissed for being considered " improbable " . 
 Arens ' book was also briefly mentioned by the Scottish archaeologist Ian <unk> in his book , Headhunting and the Body in Iron Age Europe ( 2012 ) . <unk> noted that though influential , most anthropologists would " probably " argue that Arens ' wholesale dismissals had gone " too far " . He also saw Arens ' work as symptomatic of a trend within anthropology to neglect the " undesirable " cultural practices of non @-@ western societies . 
 = = = Press attention = = = 
 Arens ' book gained attention from the popular press soon after its publication . 
 = Harlech Castle = 
 Harlech Castle , located in Harlech , Gwynedd , Wales , is a medieval fortification , constructed atop a spur of rock close to the Irish Sea . It was built by Edward I during his invasion of Wales between 1282 and 1289 at the substantial cost of £ 8 @,@ 190 . Over the next few centuries , the castle played an important part in several wars , withstanding the siege of Madog ap Llywelyn between 1294 – 95 , but falling to Owain Glyndŵr in 1404 . It then became Glyndŵr 's residence and military headquarters for the remainder of the uprising until being recaptured by English forces in 1409 . During the 15th century Wars of the Roses , Harlech was held by the Lancastrians for seven years , before Yorkist troops forced its surrender in 1468 , a siege memorialised in the song Men of Harlech . Following the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 , the castle was held by forces loyal to Charles I , holding out until 1647 when it became the last fortification to surrender to the Parliamentary armies . In the 21st century the ruined castle is managed by Cadw , the Welsh Government 's historic environment service , as a tourist attraction . 
 UNESCO considers Harlech to be one of " the finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe " , and it is classed as a World Heritage site . The fortification is built of local stone and concentric in design , featuring a massive gatehouse that probably once provided high @-@ status accommodation for the castle constable and visiting dignitaries . The sea originally came much closer to Harlech than in modern times , and a water @-@ gate and a long flight of steps leads down from the castle to the former shore , which allowed the castle to be resupplied by sea during sieges . In keeping with Edward 's other castles in North Wales , the architecture of Harlech has close to links to that found in the County of Savoy during the same period , an influence probably derived from the Savoy origins of the main architect , James of Saint George . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th – 14th centuries = = = 
 In local mythology , the site of Harlech Castle in North Wales is associated with the legend of Branwen , a Welsh princess , but there is no evidence for a native Welsh fortification having been built there . The kings of England and the Welsh princes had vied for control of North Wales since the 1070s and the conflict was renewed during the 13th century , leading to Edward I intervening in North Wales for the second time during his reign in 1282 . Edward invaded with a huge army , pushing north from Carmarthen and westwards from Montgomery and Chester . English forces advanced down the Conwy valley and through Dolwyddelan and Castell y Bere , onto Harlech , which Sir Otton de Grandson took with 560 infantry in May . 
 Edward ordered the construction of a castle at Harlech , one of seven built across North Wales in the wake of the 1282 campaign . Money to pay for the initial phase arrived in mid @-@ May and carpenters and 35 stonemasons were dispatched in June and July to commence work . By the winter of 1283 , the first 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of the inner walls had been constructed , allowing the castle to be defended in the event of an attack , and a small , planned town had been founded alongside the castle . Sir John Bonvillars was appointed the constable of the castle in 1285 ; after his death in 1287 his wife , Agnes , took up the role until 1290 . 
 Construction continued under the overall direction of James of Saint George , a Savoy architect and military engineer . In 1286 , at the height of the construction , the workforce comprised 546 general labourers , 115 quarriers , 30 blacksmiths , 22 carpenters and 227 stonemasons , and the project was costing nearly £ 240 a month . The castle was essentially complete by the end of 1289 , having cost an estimated £ 8 @,@ 190 , around 10 percent of the £ 80 @,@ 000 that Edward spent on castle @-@ building in Wales between 1277 and 1304 . 
 Harlech was established with a garrison of 36 men : a constable , 30 men , including 10 crossbowmen , a chaplain , a smith , carpenter and stonemason , and Master James was rewarded by being made the constable of Harlech from 1290 – 93 . In 1294 , Madog ap Llywelyn began an uprising against English rule that spread quickly through Wales . Several English @-@ held towns were razed and Harlech , along with Criccieth Castle and Aberystwyth Castle , were besieged that winter . Fresh supplies were sent from Ireland by sea , arriving via Harlech 's water gate , and the uprising was quashed . In the aftermath of the revolt , additional defences were built around the route down to the sea . Further work was undertaken between 1323 – 24 , following the Despenser War ; Edward II was threatened in the region by the Mortimer Marcher Lord family , and ordered his sheriff , Sir <unk> <unk> , to extend the defences leading up to the gatehouse with additional towers . 
 = = = 15th – 17th centuries = = = 
 In 1400 a revolt broke out in North Wales against English rule , led by Owain Glyndŵr . By 1403 only a handful of castles , including Harlech , still stood against the rebels , but the castle was under @-@ equipped and under @-@ staffed to withstand a siege , the garrison having just three shields , eight helmets , six lances , ten pairs of gloves , and four guns . At the end of 1404 , the castle fell to Glyndŵr . Harlech became his residence , family home and military headquarters for four years ; he held his second parliament in Harlech in August 1405 . In 1408 English forces under the command of the future Henry V placed Harlech and its commander , Edmund Mortimer , under siege , conducting a bombardment with cannon , probably destroying the south and east parts of the outer walls . When this failed to take the castle , Henry left John Talbot in charge of the siege and moved on to deal with Aberystwyth Castle . Supplies finally ran short , Mortimer and many of his men died of exhaustion , and Harlech fell in February 1409 . 
 In the 15th century , Harlech was involved in the series of civil wars known as the Wars of the Roses that broke out between the rival factions of the House of Lancaster and York . In 1460 , following the Battle of Northampton , Queen Margaret of Anjou fled to the castle and between 1461 – 68 it was held by her Lancastrian supporters , under the command of Dafydd ap Ieuan , against the Yorkist Edward IV . Thanks to its natural defences and the supply route by sea , Harlech held out and as other fortresses fell , eventually became the last major stronghold still under Lancasterian control . The castle became a base for their operations across the region : there were planned operations in 1464 , Sir Richard Tunstall mounted attacks from Harlech in 1466 and Jasper Tudor landed there with French reinforcements in 1468 , before then raiding the town of Denbigh . Tudors ' arrival caused Edward IV to order William Herbert to mobilise an army , possibly up to 10 @,@ 000 strong , to finally seize the castle . After a month 's siege , the small garrison surrendered on 14 August . This siege is credited with inspiring the song Men of Harlech . 
 The English Civil War broke out in 1642 between the Royalist supporters of Charles I and the supporters of Parliament . Harlech had not apparently been repaired following the 1468 siege , and had become completely dilapidated , with the exception of the gatehouse , which was used for the local assizes . In 1644 Prince Rupert appointed a local Royalist , Colonel William Owen , as the castle 's constable , and Owen was entrusted with repairing the fortifications . A long siege ensued from June 1646 until 15 March 1647 , when the garrison of 44 men surrendered to Major @-@ General Thomas Mytton . The castle was the last mainland royal fortress to surrender in the war , and the date marked the end of the first phase of the war . The castle was no longer required for the security of North Wales and , to prevent any further use by the Royalists , Parliament ordered its slighting , or destruction . The orders were only partially carried out , however , and the gatehouse staircases were destroyed and the castle rendered generally unusable , but it was not totally demolished . Stone from the castle was reused to build houses in the local town . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 In the late @-@ 18th and 19th centuries , the picturesque ruins of Harlech began to attract visits from prominent artists , including John Cotman , Henry Gastineau , Paul Sandby , J. M. W. Turner and John Varley . In 1914 it was transferred from the Merioneth Crown Estate to the control of the Office of Works , who commenced a major restoration project after the end of World War I. In 1969 the castle was transferred to the Welsh Office and then to Cadw , who manage the property in the 21st century as a tourist attraction . Harlech was declared part of the Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd World Heritage site in 1986 , UNESCO considering Harlech one of " the finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe " . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Harlech Castle rests upon part of the Harlech Dome , a spur of rock almost 200 feet ( 61 m ) high ; the land falls away sharply on the north and west , and a ditch cut into the rock protects the remaining approaches to the castle . The castle has a concentric design , with one line of defences enclosed by another , forming an inner and outer ward ; the outer wall was originally somewhat taller than today . Harlech is built from local grey @-@ green sandstone , with large , regular blocks used for the towers and irregular material , possibly taken from the ditch , used for the walls . A softer yellow sandstone is used for the decorative work in the castle , possibly quarried from around <unk> Abbey near Barmouth . 
 The main entrance to the castle would have involved crossing a stone bridge between the two easterly ditch bridge towers and the main gatehouse ; little remains of the bridge towers today and a timber entrance way to the gatehouse replaces the bridge . A water gate overlooks a protected stairway of 127 steps that runs down to the foot of the cliffs . In the 13th century , the sea came up close to the stairway , allowing resupply by sea , but today the sea has retreated significantly , making it more difficult to envisage the concept in its original setting . 
 The gatehouse follows the design , sometimes termed the Tonbridge @-@ style , that became popular during the 13th century , with two massive " D @-@ shaped " defensive towers flanking the entrance . The passage into the castle was guarded by three portcullises and at least two heavy doors . The gatehouse has two upper floors , broken up into various rooms . Each floor has three large windows overlooking the inner ward ; the second floor has two additional grand windows on the sides of the gatehouse ; the gatehouse was fitted with fireplaces and would originally have had prominent chimneys . The use of these rooms has been the subject of academic debate : historian Arnold Taylor argued that the first floor of the gatehouse was used by the constable as living accommodation , with the second floor used by senior visitors ; Jeremy Ashbee has since challenged this interpretation , suggesting the high status accommodation may instead have been located within the inner ward , and the gatehouse used for other purposes . 
 The inner ward is guarded by four large circular towers . Over time these acquired various names : in 1343 , clockwise from the north @-@ east , they were called Le <unk> , Turris Ultra <unk> , Le <unk> and Le <unk> , but by 1564 they had been renamed the Debtors ' , Mortimer , Bronwen and Armourer 's Towers respectively . Le <unk> incorporated a dungeon and the Le <unk> may have contained an artillery workshop in the 16th century . Several ranges of buildings were built around the inner ward , including a chapel , kitchen , service buildings , a granary and a great hall . The battlements may originally have been built with triple finials in a similar fashion to Conwy , although little remains of these in the modern era . 
 The architecture of Harlech has close links to that found in the kingdom of Savoy in the same period . These include semi @-@ circular door arches , window styles , corbelled towers and positioning of putlog holes , and are usually ascribed to the influence of the Savoy architect Master James . The links between the Harlech and Savoy are not straightforward , however , as in some cases the relevant Savoy structures were built after James had left the region . The similarity in architectural details may , therefore , be the result of the wider role played by Savoy craftsmen and engineers on the Harlech project . 
 = Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth = 
 Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth ( often shortened to Batman : Arkham Asylum ) is a Batman graphic novel written by Grant Morrison and illustrated by Dave McKean . It was originally published in the United States in both hardcover and softcover editions by DC Comics in 1989 . The subtitle is taken from Philip Larkin 's poem " Church Going " . 
 The graphic novel was the first Batman story to be written by Morrison before becoming a regular writer in future Batman titles . Inspired by previous works like The Dark Knight Returns , Morrison conceived the story to be his own different approach to the character , using heavy symbolical references and the deconstruction of many iconic Batman villains . The story follows the vigilante Batman , who is called upon to quell a maddening riot taking place in the infamous Arkham Asylum , a psychiatric hospital housing the most dangerous supervillains in Gotham City . Inside , Batman confronts many of his enduring rogues gallery , such as the Joker , Two @-@ Face , and Killer Croc , many of whom have changed since he last saw them . As Batman ventures deeper , he discovers the origin of how the asylum was established , the history of its builder Amadeus Arkham , and the supernatural and psychological mystery that has been haunting the area . 
 Upon its release , the graphic novel garnered commercial and critical acclaim , and is considered by many to be one of the greatest Batman stories of all time , and one of the best works of Grant Morrison 's career . The graphic novel would later become the definitive story of Arkham Asylum , a critical part of the Batman mythos . The critically acclaimed video game Batman : Arkham Asylum , the first game in the Batman : Arkham series , was based on the graphic novel . 
 = = Conception and influences = = 
 The graphic novel was writer Grant Morrison 's first work on Batman , making it the earliest installment in the Morrison 's Batman saga . Morrison would later note in the annotated script of how the graphic novel was to be the start of his own undertaking of the Batman comics . Line 55 of Philip Larkin 's poem " Church Going " was used as a subtitle . In his original script printed in both the 15th Anniversary ( 2005 ) and 25th Anniversary ( 2014 ) editions , Morrison remarks on several details behind the genesis of the work : 
 Len Wein ... had written a few short and evocative paragraphs on the history of Arkham Asylum [ in the DC Who 's Who series ] and it was here I learned of poor Amadeus Arkham , the hospital 's founder ... [ Arkham ] ' s themes were inspired by Lewis Carroll , quantum physics , Jung , and Crowley ; its visual style by surrealism , Eastern European creepiness , Cocteau , Artaud , Švankmajer , the Brothers Quay , etc . The intention was to create something that was more like a piece of music or an experimental film than a typical adventure comic book . I wanted to approach Batman from the point of view of the dreamlike , emotional and irrational hemisphere , as a response to the very literal , ' realistic ' , ' left brain ' treatment of superheroes which was in vogue at the time , in the wake of The Dark Knight Returns , Watchmen , and others . 
 An additional reference to the work as a " response " to trends of the time is made in a later note : " The repressed , armored , uncertain and sexually frozen [ Bat ] man in Arkham Asylum was intended as a critique of the ' 80s interpretation of Batman as violent , driven , and borderline psychopathic . " Morrison goes on to explain that his symbolic conception of the character is for this book alone , and that his other work involving Batman has cast him in a far different light . He explains , 
 The construction of the story was influenced by the architecture of a house — the past and the tale of Amadeus Arkham forms the basement levels . Secret passages connect ideas and segments of the book . There are upper stories of unfolding symbol and metaphor . We were also referencing sacred geometry , and the plan of the Arkham House was based on the Glastonbury Abbey and Chartres Cathedral . The journey through the book is like moving through the floors of the house itself . The house and the head are one . 
 During an interview with Alex Carr , Morrison stated that Frank Miller 's The Dark Knight Returns was a huge influence during his development of the story . Morrison liked what Miller did with the Batman , creating a whole new different character who was a more driven and obsessed vigilante , and Morrison wanted to make his own " different " take on the Batman comics . Morrison also added that they tried to stay away from the original hardboiled pulp influence of the Batman and those seen in American cinema adaptations , but instead use more themes and style from European cinema . 
 Morrison admitted that he preferred Brian Bolland to have been the novel 's artist , complementing that McKean 's art doesn 't have " the most terrifying expressions of the real . " Morrison liked Bolland 's art in The Killing Joke , and initially wanted him to have drawn the comic , while criticizing McKean 's choice of making the novel more abstract , adding that it would have been better if it was more concrete . In Morrison 's assessment , his writing and McKean 's art styles clashed and competed with the novel 's symbolic systems , which he said to be its greatest weakness . In the 15th Anniversary and 25th Anniversary paperbacks , Grant Morrison recalls how an early version of the script was passed around for people to look at . Most of them thought the psychological horror and heavy symbolism was not only a failure , but the dumbest Batman story ever , many of whom laughed at the idea . After the release of the graphic novel and the paperbacks , Morrison ends up asking them " who 's laughing now , @ $ $ hole ? ? " Morrison would also add that the people " who don 't read comics regularly seemed to really enjoy the book . " 
 = = Story = = 
 Commissioner Gordon informs Batman that the patients of Arkham Asylum have taken over the facility , threatening to murder the staff unless Batman agrees to meet with them . Among the hostages are Dr. Charles Cavendish , Arkham 's administrator , and Dr. Ruth Adams , a therapist . The patients are led by the Joker , who kills a guard to spur Batman to obey his wishes . Meanwhile , Two @-@ Face 's mental condition has deteriorated as a result of Adams ' therapy ; she replaced Two @-@ Face 's trademark coin with a six @-@ sided die then a tarot deck , in each instance increasing the number of choices he has ( as opposed to two choices from his original coin ) in the hope that he will eventually not leave any of his choices up to chance . Instead , the treatment renders him incapable of even making simple decisions , such as going to the bathroom . 
 The Joker forces Batman into a game of hide and seek , giving him one hour to escape Arkham before his adversaries are sent to hunt him down . However , unbeknownst to Batman , the Joker shortens the time from one hour after being pressured by the other inmates . Batman subsequently encounters Clayface , Mad Hatter , and Maxie Zeus , among other villains . During a struggle with Killer Croc , Batman is thrown out of a window , grabbing onto the statue of the angel Michael . Clutching the statue 's bronze spear , Batman climbs back inside and impales Croc before throwing him out the window , sustaining a severe wound from the spear in the process . 
 Batman finally reaches a secret room high in the towers of the asylum . Inside , he discovers Cavendish dressed in a bridal gown and threatening Adams with a razor . It is revealed that he orchestrated the riots . When questioned by Batman , Cavendish has him read a passage from the diary of the asylum 's founder , Amadeus Arkham . In flashbacks , it is revealed that Arkham 's mentally ill mother , Elizabeth , suffered delusions of being tormented by a supernatural bat . After seeing the creature himself , Arkham cut his mother 's throat to end her suffering . He blocked out the memory , only to have it return after an inmate , Martin " Mad Dog " Hawkins , raped and murdered Arkham 's wife and daughter . 
 Traumatized , Arkham donned his mother 's wedding dress and razor , vowing to bind the evil spirit of " The Bat " with sorcery . He treats Hawkins for months before finally killing him by means of electrocution during a shock therapy session . Arkham continues his mission even after he is incarcerated in his own asylum ; using his fingernails , he scratches the words of a binding spell all over his cell until his death . 
 After discovering the diary , razor , and dress , Cavendish came to believe that he was destined to continue Arkham 's work . On April Fools Day — the date Arkham 's family was murdered — Cavendish released the patients and lured Batman to the asylum , believing him to be the bat Arkham spoke of . Cavendish accuses him of feeding the evil of the asylum by bringing it more insane souls . Batman and Cavendish proceed to struggle , which ends after Adams slashes Cavendish 's throat with the razor . 
 Seizing an axe , Batman hacks down the front door of the asylum , proclaiming that the inmates are now free . The Joker offers to put him out of his misery . Batman retrieves Two @-@ Face 's coin from Adams and returns it to him , stating that it should be up to Two @-@ Face to decide Batman 's fate . Two @-@ Face declares that they will kill Batman if the coin lands scratched side up , but let him go if the <unk> side appears . Two @-@ Face flips the coin and declares Batman free . The Joker bids Batman good @-@ bye , taunting him by saying that should life ever become too much for him in " the asylum " ( the outside world ) then he always has a place in Arkham . As Batman disappears into the night , Two @-@ Face stands looking at the coin and it is revealed that it landed scratched side up – he chose to let Batman go of his own free will . He then turns to the stack of tarot cards and recites a passage from Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland : " Who cares for you ? You 're nothing but a pack of cards . " 
 = = Themes and style = = 
 The story is influenced by many previous deconstructions of the superhero genre . Morrison himself wanted the novel to be his own re @-@ imagining of Batman . Morrison includes themes such as symbolism and psychological horror , while depicting how insanity works within the setting of Arkham Asylum . Morrison references Carl Jung , Aleister Crowley , and Alice in Wonderland , while also presenting psychologically different versions of several classic characters in the Batman universe . Examples include Maxie Zeus , an electrified , emaciated figure with messianic delusions obsessed with electric shocks and <unk> ; Clayface , who is rapidly wasting away from lack of " feeding " ; the Mad Hatter , whose obsession with Alice in Wonderland has pedophilic overtones ; and Batman himself , who is driven close to the breaking point by the Asylum . Killer Croc was originally drawn as suffering deformities similar to those of Joseph Merrick , the " Elephant Man " , although his final incarnation is that of a humanoid crocodile . The Joker 's mental condition is described as " super sanity " : He re @-@ invents himself every day , to suit his circumstances . He may be a harmless prankster one moment , and a homicidal maniac the next . 
 The Joker is portrayed with a somewhat homosexual element , described as being indirectly " in love " with Batman . In the script , Morrison initially wanted the Joker to " wear make @-@ up and black lingerie in parody of Madonna . " DC 's editors , however , removed this , believing that readers might assume that Jack Nicholson 's portrayal of the character in the Batman film would be portrayed as a transvestite . Unlike traditional superhero comics , many forms of sexual references are seen , and many of the villains in the novel are heavily sexualized . The Mad Hatter is said to be a child molester ; Clayface is described as " AIDS with two legs " ; and Amadeus Arkham is seen cross dressing . 
 The setting of Arkham Asylum plays a large role in how the inmates perceive their own insanity . As said by the Mad Hatter , " [ S ] ometimes I think the asylum is the head . We 're inside a huge head that dreams us all into being . " He also described the asylum as being a " looking glass " that shows the subject their own twisted psyche . Morrison used <unk> to push the story forward , saying that the psychoanalytic theory and Jungian archetypes was an influence . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Dave McKean drew most of the principal art , as well as the cover art of the graphic novel . In illustrating the story , McKean blends paintings , drawings , photography , and mixed @-@ media collage to come up with striking page designs , and dense symbols . He has said that he was " trying to make the book despite the subject , rather than because of it . At the end of the day , if you really love to do Batman comics , then that 's probably the best thing to do . Not liking them , and then trying to make something out of them is just a waste of time . " He also came to think that " overpainted , lavish illustrations in every panel just didn 't work . It hampers the storytelling . " McKean liberally uses symbolism , imagery , and surrealism , and many scenes involve the use of symbols to denote a particular psychological device . For example , a Greek inscription can be seen scratched on the doorway of Maxie Zeus 's electroshock chamber , which translates into " Discover thyself . " Much of this symbolism was later explained and expanded upon by the release of the 15th Anniversary Edition containing Morrison 's annotated script . 
 Arkham Asylum has also been praised for Gaspar Saladino 's distinctive lettering work and giving characters their own fonts . The practice of giving characters customized lettering treatments has since become widespread , especially in DC 's Vertigo line and many Marvel comics . Different speech bubbles were used for many characters : Batman 's is black with white lettering , Maxie gets blue with a Greek font , while Joker 's speech is without a bubble at all ; the red , ink @-@ spattered script used for his dialogue is as ungovernable as the character itself . 
 = = Critical reaction and legacy = = 
 The graphic novel was published in October 1989 in the wake of Tim Burton 's film Batman . Upon its release , the graphic novel became a commercial success and catapulted Morrison and McKean 's name in the comic book industry . Editor Karen Berger revealed that it has sold " close to a half million copies " by 2004 , making it the best @-@ selling original graphic novel in American superhero comics . According to the Grant Morrison website , the series has already sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 Hilary Goldstein of IGN Comics praised the story and its " claustrophobic " portrayal of the asylum , saying that " Arkham Asylum is unlike any other Batman book you 've ever read [ and ] one of the finest superhero books to ever grace a bookshelf . " Goldstein also ranked Arkham Asylum # 4 on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels , behind The Killing Joke , The Dark Knight Returns , and Year One . Rolling Stone praised the book as being one of Grant Morrison 's best works , calling it " [ his ] first big commercial hit – and his first shot writing Batman , a character he would spend a great deal of time with over the course of his career – was this ground @-@ breaking graphic novel featuring the grim , twisted artwork of painter Dave McKean . In this darkly poetic , psychologically rich tale , Batman faces off against the Joker , Two @-@ Face , the Scarecrow and other villains inside Gotham City 's house for the criminally insane . " Joseph Szadkowski of The Washington Times called it as " one of the key sequential @-@ art stories of the Batman library . " 
 Keith Dooley of Comics Authority describes it as " psychologically and visually jarring book [ that ] brings the reader along with Amadeus Arkham and Batman on their journeys through their psyches in a world full of symbolism . " Adding also that " Batman , his foes , and all of humanity are greatly affected by the power of symbolism , with this story laying before the reader that these fictional characters ' stories are also , in many ways , our stories . " Lucas Siegel from Newsarama also praised the comic , describing the art as " striking , beautiful , and yes , today 's secret word : disturbing . " 
 Andy Shaw of <unk> on the other hand had a more negative response , praising the artwork of Dave McKean and calling it " brilliant " , but criticized Morrison 's story as claustrophobic and " has more ponderous psychology than action and , as a result , not enough room to fit any decent action in . " Shaw would later add that Morrison 's work " doesn 't stand up to his rivals , " and that " mixing the history of the asylum – famous dumping ground for Batman 's psychotic foes – with a typical Batman adventure is interesting enough , but Morrison throws too much at the hero in too small a space . This makes Batman 's journey through Arkham 's finest <unk> appear too easy – more of a stroll through a fairground haunted house with a few old chums than a serious battle for his life . Coupled with an anti @-@ climatic ending , there 's little feeling of impending disaster – the chronicled event should probably appear in Batman 's casebook of over @-@ hyped walkovers . " Morrison himself admitted that the amount of symbolism made him " [ ending ] up being accused of doing the most pretentious Batman book ever . 
 In October 2005 , a 15th Anniversary edition was released . The new reprint contained Morrison and Karen Berger 's annotated script that breaks down and explains much of the symbolic references in the series , as well as principal art and step @-@ by @-@ step samples of the story . 
 = = In other media = = 
 In the film Batman Begins , Jonathan Crane 's entrance to the asylum 's cellar with Rachel Dawes mirrors the Joker 's own entrance with Batman in the novel . 
 The game Batman : Arkham Asylum is loosely based on the comic , which follows a similar premise and also shares the same name from the <unk> , the new warden of Arkham , Quincy Sharp , believes himself to be the reincarnation of Amadeus Arkham , and makes frequent reference to the history outlined in the comic , including Amadeus 's mother 's dementia , the murder of his wife and daughter by Martin Hawkins , and Amadeus 's murder of Hawkins ; 
 Under this delusion , Sharp " haunts " the mansion and recreates several tableaux which appear in the comic , including the cell which Amadeus inscribed his name into the floor . 
 At one point in the game , Quincy Sharp calls the Joker " filthy degenerate " , just as Batman does in the graphic novel . 
 Additionally , in the beginning of the game , The Joker says to Batman that he is " always welcome " in Arkham . 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 Callahan , Timothy ( 2007 ) Grant Morrison : The Early Years . Masters of the Medium . <unk> Research & Literacy Organization . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 615 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Khouri , Andy . " Grant Morrison : The Early Years - Part II : Arkham Asylum , " Comic Book Resources ( July 6 , 2007 ) . 
 Singer , Marc . ( 2011 ) Grant Morrison : Combining the Worlds of Contemporary Comics . University Press of Mississippi . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 136 @-@ 6 . 
 = Sea Mills railway station = 
 Sea Mills railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and serves the district of Sea Mills and nearby Westbury on Trym in Bristol , England . It is 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads , situated at the confluence of the River Avon and River Trym and near the A4 Bristol Portway . Its three letter station code is <unk> . The station has a single platform which serves trains in both directions . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every forty minutes in each direction between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth . 
 The station was opened in 1865 by the Bristol Port Railway and Pier , and had a single platform . It later became part of the Clifton Extension Railway , and had a second platform built . The station was expanded over the years , and at one point had four porters staffing it . However the Severn Beach Line declined over the latter half of the twentieth century and by the 1970s the station had no staff and only one platform . Services however have increased since 2000 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The station is located in the Sea Mills area of Bristol , and also serves residents of Stoke Bishop . The surrounding area is mostly residential , with allotments to the west and a small football ground to the north . The station is less than 100 metres ( 110 yd ) from the River Avon to the west , and directly south of a small harbour at the mouth of the River Trym , which the railway crosses on a bridge . The station has road access to the east from Sea Mills Lane , which runs parallel to the Trym , and can also be accessed via a footpath along the Avon to the west . The A4 Bristol Portway is less than 200 metres ( 220 yd ) east of the station , and crosses the railway south of the station . The station is on the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Severn Beach , 6 miles 0 chains ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Temple Meads and 7 miles 43 chains ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) from Severn Beach . It is the sixth station from Temple Meads . The next station towards Temple Meads is Clifton Down ; the next towards Severn Beach is Shirehampton . 
 The station is on an alignment of approximately 160 degrees , curving towards the south . There is a single 118 @-@ yard ( 108 m ) -long platform which serves trains in both directions , situated on the east side of the track . The station 's western platform was abandoned in 1970 and is overgrown . A user @-@ worked level crossing at the north end of the station allows vehicles and pedestrians to cross the railway , alternatively pedestrians may cross the line using a footpath which goes under the bridge over the River Trym . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – there is a brick shelter and a few seats . Timetable information is provided ; help points show next train information and allow users to contact railway staff . There is no ticket office or other means for buying or collecting tickets , nor is there any car park or cycle storage facility . The nearest bus stops are 300 metres ( 330 yd ) away on the A4 Portway . 
 The line through Sea Mills has a speed limit of 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) for locomotive @-@ hauled trains and 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) for diesel multiple units . The line handles less than 5 million train tonnes per year , has a loading gauge of W6 and a route availability of 7 . In the 2012 / 13 financial year , approximately 58 @,@ 000 passengers used Sea Mills station , making it the <unk> busiest station in the country and the tenth busiest within the Bristol unitary authority area . This was an increase of almost 70 % from the 2002 @-@ 03 financial year , and reflected a general rise in usage of the Severn Beach Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Sea Mills are all operated by Great Western Railway , using mainly Class 150 Sprinter units . On Monday to Friday , three trains every two hours run from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach , giving a service at Sea Mills of one train in each direction every 40 minutes . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , but more trains continue to Severn Beach . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . 
 As Clifton Down is the Severn Beach Line 's passing point , trains to Avonmouth usually arrive roughly ten minutes after trains to Bristol . Most trains call at all stations , but some services omit Lawrence Hill . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is roughly 25 minutes , and 10 minutes to Avonmouth . In 2012 , the single fare to Clifton Down or Severn Beach was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 = = History = = 
 The station was opened on 6 March 1865 when services began on the Bristol Port Railway and Pier ( BPRP ) , a self @-@ contained railway which ran along the north bank of the River Avon to a deep water pier on the Severn Estuary at Avonmouth . The route was 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge single track , with Sea Mills initially the first station along the line , 2 miles 01 chain ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the southern terminus at Hotwells . A single 150 feet ( 46 m ) -long uncovered platform was provided on the north side of the line , with a wooden building containing the booking office and porter 's office . The station staff consisted of a stationmaster with a porter being brought in from Hotwells when needed . A south @-@ facing goods siding was provided , but the station mostly dealt with passengers and parcels . The initial service was six trains per day in each direction . 
 The BPRP ran in to trouble by 1871 when the terminal pier at Avonmouth became difficult to use due to a build @-@ up of silt . With no prospect of a proper dock being funded without a connection to the national rail network , the Clifton Extension Railway ( CER ) was approved . This was a joint venture by the BPRP , Great Western Railway and Midland Railway which ran from Sneyd Park Junction , 21 chains ( 420 m ) south of Sea Mills , via Clifton Down , to join up with the national network at Narroways Hill Junction . The link opened in 1877 , but only for goods trains : Colonel William Yolland , the chief inspector of British railways , considered the platforms at Sea Mills to be too short for passenger interchange , as they were 250 feet ( 76 m ) shorter than at any station on the CER . Rather than build a new interchange station at Sneyd Park Junction , the platforms at Sea Mills were extended to 300 feet ( 91 m ) at the expense of the BPRP . The goods siding was also removed at this time , as Yolland had expressed concern that the points were not interlocked . The route from Sneyd Park Junction to Clifton Down was subsequently cleared for passenger use on 3 August 1878 , but the Midland and Great Western Railways did not think the BPRP track was in a suitable condition and so refused to run any passenger trains beyond Clifton Down . Services along the BPRP however increased to eight trains per day in each direction from 1877 , and then to ten each way by 1887 . From 1 September 1885 , when passenger services along the link finally started , the Great Western offered six trains per day each direction between Avonmouth and Bristol Temple Meads . Fearing competition , the BPRP did not allow passengers to use GWR services between its stations . The Midland Railway did not run any passenger services beyond Clifton Down , apart from a one @-@ month trial service in September 1885 . Despite the increased traffic , the BPRP suffered financially , and was taken over by the CER in 1890 . 
 Following the takeover , a new stationmaster 's house was built at Sea Mills , at a cost of £ 240 . The stationmaster is recorded as having kept a variety of farm animals and sold eggs to passengers . Increased levels of traffic saw the line through Sea Mills doubled in the early 1900s , and the opportunity was taken to rebuild the station . A second platform opened on 6 January 1907 to the west of the tracks to serve northbound trains . The original platform now exclusively served southbound trains , and was lengthened to 330 feet ( 100 m ) , the same length as the new platform . A station building was constructed on the original platform in a domestic style , with an arched terracotta entrance , spar @-@ covered walls and a high @-@ pitched tiled roof . The building contained a booking hall , booking office , toilets and a ladies ' waiting room . A smaller building on the northbound platform contained a general waiting room . The subway under the bridge over the River Trym was also built at this time , with the porter 's job being expanded to include washing the rubbish out of the subway after high tide , for which the railway provided a hosepipe and Wellington boots . By 1910 there were 17 trains from Bristol to Avonmouth and 15 back , increasing to 21 and 19 respectively by 1920 , though not all stopped at Sea Mills . The station was completely closed on Sundays . 
 After the First World War , construction of the Bristol Portway along the Avon Gorge necessitated the closure of the line from Sneyd Park Junction to Hotwells , with trains along it ceasing on 3 July 1922 . By this point there were nine trains per day from Hotwells , and eight return . To compensate for the loss of service , the Great Western provided an additional four trains daily towards Bristol and six toward Avonmouth . In 1923 , grouping resulted in the Midland Railway being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) , and the line continued in a joint arrangement between the Great Western and the LMS . From 1928 many trains to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach . By 1947 , just before the railways were nationalised , there were 33 services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , with 18 on Sundays . Some trains made circular trips to and from Temple Meads via Clifton Down and Henbury or Pilning . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , services at Sea Mills came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . Staffing by this point had increased to two porters and two lad porters , managed by the stationmaster at Shirehampton . By 1961 this was reduced to two porters , then to one in 1965 . Service levels had decreased slightly by 1955 to 28 towards Avonmouth and 29 towards Bristol , but the services were at regular intervals . Passenger numbers however dropped sharply in 1961 as the result of a fare increase , and so in 1962 a new reduced timetable was enacted , which lost more passengers . A year later in 1963 , the Beeching report suggested the complete withdrawal of services along the line , but ultimately only those beyond Severn Beach or via Henbury were withdrawn . From 17 July 1967 all staffing was withdrawn from stations along the line , including Sea Mills , with tickets issued by the train guard . The general reduction in passenger traffic , as well as the transfer of Avonmouth goods traffic to the Henbury Loop Line , allowed the removal of the second track from 19 October 1970 , with all services using the original , eastern platform . The station building was sold , and in 2005 was being used by an engineering firm . By 1974 , service had reduced to 19 trains per day in each direction . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Sea Mills passed to Regional Railways . At this time , all trains ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This changed in 1995 when an hourly timetable was introduced for peak times , but northbound services were terminated at Avonmouth . There was no Sunday service . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Following action by Friends of Severn Beach Railway ( FOSBR ) and a string of protests , services had increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the line , and this has since been increased to three trains every two hours ( 24 trains per day ) . Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored in 2010 . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Sea Mills are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond the main lines , so Sea Mills will continue to be served by diesel trains , with the current " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . Stephen Williams , MP for Bristol West ; and the group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification being extended to the Severn Beach Line . 
 Improved services at Sea Mills are called for as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . There is an aspiration for half @-@ hourly services , with trains towards Bristol terminating alternately at Portishead and Bath Spa , however due to the large sections of the Severn Beach Line which are single @-@ track and to the congested main line from Temple Meads , such frequency is not currently feasible . The enhancement scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There are also calls for the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line , which could allow a direct service from Sea Mills to Bristol Parkway via Avonmouth . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . There are also calls for the second platform at Sea Mills to be reinstated as a passing loop or as part of a restoration of the whole line to double track . 
 = Fensalir = 
 In Norse mythology , Fensalir ( Old Norse " Fen Halls " ) is a location where the goddess Frigg dwells . Fensalir is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . Scholars have proposed theories about the implications of the location , including that the location may have some connection to religious practices involving springs , bogs , or swamps in Norse paganism , and that it may be connected to the goddess Sága 's watery location Sökkvabekkr . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , Frigg is described as weeping over her son Baldr 's death in Fensalir . This stanza is absent in the Hauksbók manuscript of the poem . The portion of the stanza mentioning Fensalir foretells that vengeance will come for the death of Baldr and that : 
 while Frigg wept 
 in Fen Halls 
 for Valhǫll 's woe . 
 In chapter 35 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , High tells Gangleri ( described as king Gylfi in disguise ) that Frigg is the highest among the ásynjur , and that " she has a dwelling called Fensalir and it is very splendid . " In chapter 49 , High says that when Loki witnessed that Baldr had gained invincibility due to the oath all things took not to harm him , Loki went to a Fensalir appearing as a woman . In his disguise , Loki there asked Frigg why Baldr was not harmed by the objects . Frigg revealed that it is due to the oath they have taken . The disguised Loki asks if nothing can hurt Baldr , and Frigg reveals that only mistletoe can , for it seemed to her too young to demand an oath from . After this , Loki immediately disappears , and subsequently engineers the death of Baldr with a mistletoe projectile . 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Fensalir receives a third and final mention . In chapter 19 , ways to refer to Frigg are provided , including that Frigg may be referred to as " queen of Æsir and Asyniur , of Fulla and falcon form and Fensalir . " 
 = = Theories = = 
 In 1882 , the German scholar Anton Edzardi proposed that Fensalir may point to religious practices involving springs . John Lindow comments that " I have no idea why Frigg should live in a boggy place , despite the old argument that there is an association with a cult situated at a spring . " Rudolf Simek comments that Edzardi 's theory " must remain unanswered . " In addition , Edzardi theorized a connection between Fensalir and a belief in folklore that particular swamps act as an entrance to the realm of Holda , whom he connects with Frigg . 
 In a 19th @-@ century work , Paul Henri Mallet and Walter Scott write that the " fen " element of Fensalir " may also be made to sig [ <unk> ] the watery deep , or the sea . " This etymology has resulted in theories that the name Fensalir may mean " Sea Halls " rather than " Fen Halls . " In his 19th @-@ century translation of the Poetic Edda , Henry Adams Bellows comments that " some scholars have regarded [ Frigg ] as a solar myth , calling her the sun @-@ goddess , and pointing out that her home in Fensalir ( " the sea @-@ halls " ) symbolizes the daily setting of the sun beneath the ocean horizon . " 
 John Lindow says that due to similarity between the goddess Sága 's Sökkvabekkr and Fensalir , the open drinking between Sága and Odin , and the potential etymological basis for Sága being a seeress " have led most scholars to understand Sága as another name for Frigg . " Stephan Grundy states that Sága and Sökkvabekkr may be by @-@ forms of Frigg and Fensalir used for the purpose of composing alliterative verse . 
 Britt @-@ Mari Näsström theorizes that " Frigg 's role as a fertility goddess is revealed in the name of her abode , Fensalir [ ... ] " , that Frigg is the same as Sága , and that both the names Fensalir and Sökkvabekkr " imply a <unk> [ sic ] living in the water and recall the fertility goddess Nerthus . " 
 = Cross Days = 
 Cross Days ( <unk> , Kurosu Deizu ) is a Japanese erotic visual novel developed by 0verflow , released on March 19 , 2010 for Windows and later ported as a DVD game and for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) . The story , a dramatic slice @-@ of @-@ life , follows the life of Yuuki Ashikaga , a high school student who becomes the ambivalent love @-@ interest of two girls during his second term , and the effects this has on himself and his relationships with other characters . Though the game requires little interaction from users , Cross Days engages the player through a nonlinear plot that they are given opportunities to change the course of during play . The game is the third installation of the School Days line of series , succeeding Summer Days . 
 0verflow announced work on Cross Days in December 2008 . From February 2009 to March 2010 , the game was postponed a total of six times , going on to perform marginally @-@ well upon release . In the weeks following this , after it was illegally found on peer @-@ to @-@ peer ( P2P ) networks , a trojan horse disguised as the game was released , publishing the personal information of unknowing users online for public access . 
 Following the game 's release , Cross Days made transitions into other media : a manga was serialized in the Kadokawa Shoten magazine Monthly Comp Ace from April 26 to August 10 , 2010 ; three light novels were published from September 15 to October 29 , as was a strategy guide ; a radio drama was broadcast during development ; and the game 's original soundtrack was also published by Lantis from April 24 to July 21 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Cross Days is a visual novel . These are essentially played by watching and listening to episodic sequences of story and then selecting , or ignoring , clickable actions or responses when they are presented to the player . These choices are intricately linked to alternating routes of plot , moderately changing the direction of the story as each is made , ultimately leading to erotic scenes between characters and one of various endings . Unique to the game are yaoi routes , in which the protagonist <unk> as a maid and engages in homosexual intercourse . 
 Like the games before it , Cross Days is presented with limited animation . The game is audibly stereophonic with lip @-@ synched voice acting , sound effects and background music . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Yuuki Ashikaga is a high school freshman in his second semester at the fictional <unk> Academy , who from his regular visits to the library , grows enamored by Kotonoha Katsura , a classmate who also comes to read . Despite being in a relationship , she genuinely reciprocates his interest . However , things become complicated when his sister , Chie , introduces him to Roka Kitsuregawa , a friend of hers . In an attempt to make herself seem harder to get , Roka claims that she is equally interested in Makoto Itou , another schoolmate . Her lie is unsuccessful , as Yuuki , aware that Makoto is Kotonoha 's boyfriend , decides to ask her about the affair . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Unlike in Summer Days , the story in Cross Days is not rewritten as a spin @-@ off of the original story , but occurs during the events of it , making the game a parallel series to School Days . As such , the undisclosed location of the story remains the same with focus being around the school . All signature characters and their established relationships appear in the game , with six new cast members . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Cross Days follows Yuuki Ashikaga , a bespectacled young lad whose withdrawn school life goes awry when his affection for two girls begins to affect his relationships with his friends and peers . Though unaware of each other , the girls in question constitute the premise of the game : Kotonoha Katsura , a character well known throughout the franchise as the pivotal love @-@ interest of Makoto Itou , and Roka Kitsuregawa , a newcomer whose efforts to make Yuuki jealous only serve to further complicate her relationship with him . Chie Ashikaga , the mildly abusive older sister of Yuuki , and <unk> <unk> , Nanami <unk> 's boyfriend , having only previously made cameo appearances in the School Days anime , return to make more prominent roles , as does Ai Yamagata , a character last seen from Summer Days . Rounding up the set of the cast are Ion Ishibashi and Kira <unk> , a couple of friends who also make first appearances in the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 News of Cross Days first surfaced in the December 2008 issue of Tech Gian , a magazine published by Enterbrain , on October 21 , showing first ever screenshots , reporting on the story and characters , and mentioning that Cross Days would contain 3D animation with a meticulously reworked plot and male protagonist . Also in October , ASCII Media Works and <unk> published articles about the game in their respective issues of Dengeki G 's Magazine , Dengeki Hime and Megami Magazine . 
 Promotion began shortly after . Besides periodically keeping the public informed on development and characters , 0verflow consecutively released downloadable , non @-@ playable benchmarks of the game from November 1 , 2008 to May 4 , 2009 . Company staff attended Dream Party , an anime convention , in Osaka on November 16 , 2008 selling Cross Days telephone cards while stores took pre @-@ orders for the game , reportedly filling reservations in days . On December 5 , 0verflow announced that a set of USB <unk> , collectively known as SOM , would be compatible with Cross Days , manufactured by Goods Land . Trial versions of the game , released to about 95 select retailers , were disclosed by 0verflow on December 26 and at Comiket 75 . 
 On January 8 , 2009 , 0verflow announced that starting that day , Lantis would be airing a weekly , episodic internet radio drama of the game 's characters , titled Radio Cross Days . Broadcasts were made regularly on Thursdays , finishing up on March 25 , 2010 with 64 sessions aired . 
 Cross Days was originally scheduled to come out on February 27 , 2009 , but its release was postponed six times : to April 24 , June 26 , November 20 , December 18 , January 29 , 2010 , and to March 19 , 2010 , when it finally came out . The much @-@ anticipated game was released to several promotional campaigns , many of which were intercity screening venues that spanned operation from March 5 to 14 . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 On March 29 , 2010 0verflow announced that an outdated DLL had been released with retail versions of the game . A 372 KB replacement was provided via download . The following day another patch was released to bring copies of the game up to version <unk> 
 Cross Days was ported to two other platforms . <unk> , an interactive movie developer , re @-@ released Cross Days as a DVD game on April 28 , 2011 , as did <unk> , a UMD publisher , for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) on July 29 , 2011 . 
 = = = Trojan scare = = = 
 On April 15 , 2010 , roughly a month after Cross Days was released , BBC News reported on the spread of a virus named <unk> masquerading on peer @-@ to @-@ peer ( P2P ) networks as unlicensed copies of erotic games ; one of which , according to software developer <unk> , included Cross Days . Users tricked into installing the virus , termed a form of " <unk> " in the report , were asked for personal information and then had all of their web history posted to a blog , operated by shell corporation Romancing Inc . , for public access . <unk> , a property rights company , reported that at least 5 @,@ 510 people were collectively infected . Those wishing to have their information removed could do so after acknowledging to viewers that they had attempted to download the game illegally . <unk> has noted that the intrusive nature of the trojan was " in fact explained in [ the software 's ] terms of service " . 
 = = Sales = = 
 Cross Days for Windows premiered as the third most sold game on Getchu.com , a major redistributor of visual novel and domestic anime products , during the month of its release , ranking twelfth for the first half of 2010 , and thirty @-@ first for the whole year . The DVD game ranked as the most sold <unk> for the first half of 2011 , and forty @-@ seventh most from November 26 to December 27 . Cross Days for the PSP additionally ranked as the fifteenth most sold UMD game during that time as well . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Based on the story of the game , Cross Days was published into a manga , written by Yoko Kagura and illustrated by Homare <unk> . 0verflow announced on April 4 , 2010 that it would make its serialization debut in Monthly Comp Ace on April 26 . The series was circulated until August 2010 , published by Kadokawa Shoten into a first and second volume , released November 26 , 2010 and June 25 , 2011 , respectively . 
 = = = Books and publications = = = 
 In addition to the manga , Cross Days was made into other print . The first of these was a strategy guide and artwork book by Junji Goto , character artist for 0verflow , titled Cross Days Visual Fanbook ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and published by Kinema <unk> in August 2010 . The subsequent three releases were light novels by different authors but whose cover art was drawn by Goto and illustrated by Jet <unk> ; each book retold the story of the game . Cross Days , a novel , was published by Harvest Books on September 15 , written by Mutsuki <unk> . Another novel , titled Cross Days ~ <unk> <unk> , <unk> omoi ~ ( <unk> ~ <unk> , <unk> ~ ) , was released on October 22 , 2010 by Shueisha , authored by Hiro Akizuki . The final novel , Cross Days Kitsuregawa Roka no koi no Ruru ( Cross Days <unk> ) was written by Yoko Kagura , author of the manga adaption , and was published on October 29 by Kill Time Communication . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 As was the case for School Days and Summer Days , the original soundtrack of Cross Days was reproduced for distribution alongside the game , initially scheduled for February 27 , 2009 . As this was the first of the later six postponements , however , the album was republished and deferred to June 26 . Following the second delay , the soundtrack was held indefinitely until 0verflow announced on April 16 , 2010 that it would be released April 21 . The album contains all of the game 's background music , all of which was composed by HIKO of KIRIKO / HIKO Sound , and theme songs performed by <unk> * , <unk> , Ceui , Kotaro <unk> and <unk> , totaling 25 tracks . 
 Radio Cross Days , a radio drama broadcast from January 8 , 2009 to March 25 , 2010 , was the second and final set of audio compilations made for the game by Lantis . Released as a first and second disc on June 23 and July 21 , 2010 , respectively , each album contained thirty @-@ two segments of the broadcast , comprising the sixty @-@ four total that were aired . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Considerable effort was made to market and promote Cross Days before and after its release , including the sale of brand merchandise . The limited edition of the visual novel came with a figurine of the Kotonoha character , and 0verflow and its partners also sold wall scrolls and Zippo lighters , as well as shower curtains , cushion mousepads , dakimakura cases . 
 = Love Hina = 
 Love Hina ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Rabu Hina ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Ken Akamatsu . It was serialized in Weekly Shōnen Magazine from October 21 , 1998 to October 31 , 2001 , with the chapters collected into 14 tankōbon volumes by Kodansha . The series tells the story of Keitarō Urashima and his attempts to find the girl with whom he made a childhood promise to enter Tokyo University . The manga was licensed for an English @-@ language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop , in Australia by Madman Entertainment , and in Singapore by Chuang Yi . Two novelizations of Love Hina , written by two anime series screenwriters , were also released in Japan by Kodansha . Both novels were later released in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop . 
 A twenty @-@ four episode anime adaptation of the manga series , produced by Xebec , aired in Japan from April 19 , 2000 , to September 27 , 2000 . It was followed by a bonus DVD episode , Christmas and Spring television specials , and a three episode original video animation ( OVA ) entitled Love Hina Again . The anime series , special , and OVA were licensed for release in North America by Bandai Entertainment . In July 2007 , the license was acquired by Funimation , who released a boxset of the television series in February 2009 . The series is also licensed in Australia by Madman Entertainment and in the United Kingdom by MVM Films . 
 The series has proved extremely popular around the world , both commercially and critically . In Japan , the manga sold over 16 million copies ; over 1 million anime DVDs were also sold . The English release of the manga has been reprinted many times . Both anime and manga have received numerous industry awards in Japan and North America , as well as praise from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story is a shōnen comedy that takes place in the Kanagawa Prefecture , and centers on Keitarō Urashima and his attempts to fulfill a childhood promise that he made with a girl to enter Tokyo University together . However , he has forgotten the name of the girl he made the promise to and hopes to be accepted into Tokyo University in order to find her . Having failed the entrance exam twice and with his parents no longer willing to support him , he goes to stay at his grandmother 's hotel , only to find that it has been converted into a female @-@ only apartment . The tenants are about to kick him out when his aunt appears and announces that his grandmother has given him the title to the apartments . Much to their dismay Keitarō becomes the new manager of the family @-@ owned girls ' dorm Hinata House and must now balance his new responsibilities in addition to studying for the university entrance exam . 
 At Hinata House , Keitarō meets Naru <unk> , who is also studying to enter Tokyo University . Naru ranks first in the whole of Japan on the practice exams , and Keitarō convinces her to help him study . As the two of them grow closer through their studies , and after Keitarō accidentally reads a small section of Naru 's diary , he becomes increasingly convinced that Naru may be the girl with whom he made the promise . On the second day of the Tokyo University exam , Keitarō asks Naru about the promise and is stunned when she tells him he is mistaken . Despite their studying , and Naru 's mock exam results , they both fail the exams . The pair then have an argument and independently run off to Kyoto to clear their heads . While on their trip they settle their differences and meet Mutsumi <unk> , who lives in Okinawa and is also studying for the Tokyo University exams . 
 After returning from Kyoto , Keitarō and Naru decide to retake the exams . After a while , Mutsumi moves to Tokyo , and the three begin to study together . During this period , Naru becomes convinced that Mutsumi is Keitarō 's promised girl , but Mutsumi states that she made a childhood promise with Naru , not Keitarō . During the next round of Tokyo University exams , Keitarō believes he has failed them once again and runs away before finding out his results . After learning of this , Naru chases after him without checking her exam results either , and they are followed by the rest of the residents of Hinata House who announce that Keitarō and Naru both passed the exams along with Mutsumi . Unfortunately for him , Keitarō has an accident at the Tokyo University opening ceremony and is unable to attend classes for three months . After recovering from his injuries , Keitarō decides to study overseas with <unk> Seta . As Keitarō is about to leave , Naru finally confesses her feelings to him at the airport and decides to wait for him to return . 
 When Keitarō returns , he and Naru finally begin to express their feelings for each other . After they deal with new obstacles , Grandma Hina returns to Hinata House and reveals Naru is the girl of Keitarō 's promise . Four years later , a wedding ceremony ( with a new girl , Ema Maeda , presented ) is held at Hinata House for Naru and Keitarō as they finally fulfill their childhood promise to each other . 
 = = Production = = 
 Initial sketches for the series were created between September and December 1997 , after the completion of A.I. Love You . Early storyboards with initial character designs were created between December 1997 and January 1998 , and further character designs and location sketches followed between January and April 1998 . The last storyboards before serialization were created between April and August 1998 . 
 Around six months before the start of serialization , character designs were still going through several revisions before being settled upon . Several characters underwent complete redesigns and name changes . At one stage the character Naru was named Midori , and she was supposed to fall through a hole in the floor naked , bump her head on Keitaro and lose her memory . Naru 's name was changed many times before the author settled on Naru <unk> , and her final design is similar to <unk> Namba from A.I. Love You . <unk> " Kitsune " Konno 's money @-@ grubbing nature and her older , jaded , and more mature personality were originally intended to be used for <unk> Su . Shinobu <unk> 's nature was settled on from the beginning of the series , however her physical appearance and age were extensively redesigned as the series concept was shaped . In her early design , Shinobu had a similar appearance to Forty Namba from A.I. Love You . 
 Throughout the run of the manga , the series used digital editing processes . After a rough sketch of a page was created , the page layout and basic detail were drawn and scanned into an Apple Macintosh . The major page elements were then shaded or filled with patterns , and elements that were drawn separately were added digitally to the page . The manga also used a series of " banked images " , which were basic line drawings of locations , such as a characters room . Instead of redrawing a location from scratch every time it was used , these banked images could be used as a base , and extra detail added to them depending on the requirements for the scene . 
 Both of these techniques lead to characters having white outlines when copied digitally onto the scene . Parts of Hinata Inn and other locations used were inspired by real life locations and designed from photographs collected during research . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Love Hina were originally serialized in Weekly Shōnen Magazine , between November 4 , 1998 and November 14 , 2001 for a total of 123 chapters . The series was released as a 14 @-@ volume collected edition between March 1999 and January 2002 . The series was later released in a partially colored format known as the " Iro Hina version " . The 14 Iro Hina volumes were released between July 2001 and April 2004 . A new seven @-@ volume edition was released by Kodansha between June and December 2014 . 
 Kodansha published a bilingual English and Japanese edition under the Kodansha Bilingual Comics label . Eight volumes were produced under the bilingual format between October 2000 and July 2001 . The edition was removed from sale after the series was licensed by Tokyopop . 
 The series was licensed for an English @-@ language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop , which released the 14 volumes between May 21 , 2002 and September 16 , 2003 . The English release was one of Tokyopop 's first releases in the " Authentic Manga " lineup of titles using the Japanese right to left reading style . In doing so the artwork remained unchanged from the original . The series appeared consistently in Tokyopop 's top five selling manga and has been reprinted several times . In August 2009 , it was revealed that Tokyopop 's license had been left to expire by Kodansha and would not be renewed . Kodansha Comics USA licensed the series with a new translation . This edition was released as 5 volumes between October 2011 and March 2013 . 
 The series is also licensed for an English @-@ language release in Singapore by Chuang Yi and for regional language releases in France and Québec by Pika Édition , in Spain by Glénat , in Brazil by Editora JBC , in Mexico by Grupo Editorial Vid , in Poland by <unk> , in Greece by <unk> , in Germany in German , in Norway by Schibsted Forlag , in Sweden by Bonnier Carlsen and in Denmark by Egmont Manga & Anime . 
 The September 1 , 2010 issue of Weekly Shōnen Magazine included a six @-@ color @-@ page Love Hina one @-@ shot . A crossover one @-@ shot with Aho Girl was released on August 27 , 2014 . 
 The first 11 volumes sold over 6 million copies in Japan . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Love Hina was adapted into a 24 @-@ episode anime television series by Xebec , a division of Production I.G. The series aired on TV Tokyo April 19 through September 27 , 2000 . The opening theme was Sakura Saku and the closing theme was Kimi Sae <unk> . Both songs were written by Ritsuko Okazaki and performed by Megumi Hayashibara . The two themes were released as a CD single , which debuted on the Oricon charts at Number 7 . A bonus 25th episode was later created and released as a DVD bonus . The series and bonus episode were directed by Yoshiaki Iwasaki , written by Shō Aikawa and featured character designs by Makoto Uno . 
 In Japan , the television series was released on nine DVDs by Starchild Records between August 3 , 2000 and April 2 , 2001 , and sold over 1 million copies . Love Hina is credited with being one of the first anime series to be available unofficially as a digitally produced fansub , with multiple groups working on the series . The popularity , and widespread availability of the series in this form meant that several potential licensors of the series such as ADV Films had concerns over licensing the series . The series was later licensed in North America by Bandai Entertainment , who released six DVDs between February 19 and November 19 , 2002 . In July 2007 , Funimation Entertainment announced they had acquired the license to the series after Bandai 's license had expired . A new boxset of the television series across 4 discs was released by Funimation on February 24 , 2009 . It was then re @-@ released as part of Funimation 's Viridian Collection on July 27 , 2010 . In the United Kingdom , the series is licensed by MVM Films , who released the series on six DVDs between September 6 , 2004 and March 7 , 2005 , and as a boxset on May 14 , 2007 . In Australia and New Zealand the series is licensed by Madman Entertainment , who also released the series across six DVDs between September 18 , 2002 , and February 11 , 2003 . A box set was later released on December 3 , 2003 . 
 After the television series was completed , a Christmas special , Love Hina Xmas Eve : Silent Night , was produced and shown on December 25 , 2000 on TV Tokyo . A DVD was released in Japan on July 4 , 2001 . It was then released in North America on December 3 , 2002 and in the United Kingdom on November 7 , 2005 . The Spring Special Love Hina Spring Special : I Wish Your Dream was also shown on TV Tokyo on April 2 , 2001 . The DVD was released in Japan on August 1 , 2001 , in North American on March 18 , 2003 and in the United Kingdom on May 16 , 2005 . Finally , an OVA series called Love Hina Again was released on DVD in Japan in 3 parts between January 26 , 2002 and March 27 , 2002 . A CD single featuring the opening theme " <unk> Takaramono " and the ending theme " Be for Me , Be for You " was released on February 28 , 2002 . A solo version was used for the first episode , and a duet with Yūji Ueda was used for the third episode . The North American and United Kingdom releases of Love Hina Again grouped the 3 parts together on one disc and were released on September 2 , 2003 and January 7 , 2008 respectively . 
 After the end of the television series , Love Hina Final Selection was released , containing a summary of the series and " Love Live Hina " , a live concert featuring all of the main cast members . 
 The anime was later used as the source for a film comic , Love Hina Anime Comics , which told the anime story in comic form using stills from the show as the comic panels . The anime Comics series follows the story of the television series , unaired 25th episode , and the Xmas and Spring specials and each volume contains 3 exclusive trading cards . The film comics also contain anime production info . 
 = = = Light novels = = = 
 Two novels have been written by the anime screenwriters and illustrated by Ken Akamatsu as side stories of the main series . Love Hina : Mystery Guests at Hinata Hotel was written by Shō Aikawa under the pen name " <unk> Hazuki " , was published in Japan by Kodansha on May 17 , 2001 . It was later rereleased in a bilingual edition ( English and Japanese ) in December 2001 . The second novel , Love Hina : Secrets at Hinata Hotel was written by Hiroyuki Kawasaki and released in Japan on February 15 , 2002 , with a bilingual edition released the same month . Tokyopop licensed both novels for an English @-@ language distribution in North America , releasing the first novel under the title Love Hina : The Novel , Volume 1 on April 11 , 2006 , and the second novel under the title Love Hina : The Novel , Volume 2 on August 8 , 2006 . 
 = = = Reference books = = = 
 Two reference books for the manga series have been released for fans of the series . Love Hina 0 was released on July 17 , 2002 and contains character profiles , interviews and production info as well as other supporting materials for the first seven volumes of the manga . Love Hina <unk> ( <unk> ∞ ) was released on July 17 , 2002 and contains character profiles , a timeline , artwork , interviews and production info . A large section is dedicated to early production sketches and handwritten development notes . 
 Two reference books have also been released for the anime series . Ani @-@ Hina <unk> was released on August 4 , 2000 and Ani @-@ Hina <unk> was released on November 9 , 2000 . Each book contains character profiles , episode summaries , production sketches and details as well as interviews and information on the voice actors ; each covers half of the anime series . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The series has seen several video games released across several platforms . The Game Boy Color received Love Hina Pocket on August 4 , 2000 , and Love Hina Party on January 26 , 2001 . The Game Boy Advance received Love Hina Advance on September 7 , 2001 . The Sega Dreamcast received Love Hina : <unk> no <unk> Happening on September 28 , 2000 and Love Hina : Smile Again on March 29 , 2001 . The Sony PlayStation received Love Hina 1 : Ai wa Kotoba no Naka ni on September 28 , 2000 and Love Hina 2 : Kotoba wa <unk> no Yō ni on November 30 , 2000 . The Sony PlayStation 2 received Love Hina : <unk> <unk> Happening on May 22 , 2003 . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Prior to the start of the anime , several image songs were recorded by the anime cast members . Several maxi singles were released featuring some of these image songs as well as drama tracks , also performed by the anime cast . " I Love Hina " was released on April 26 , 2000 and followed by Love Hina 1 on June 26 , 2000 , Love Hina 2 on July 26 , 2000 and Love Hina 3 on August 23 , 2000 . Love Hina 1 came with a box to hold the other singles . 
 There have been several Love Hina soundtracks released . Love Hina Original Sound File was released on September 21 , 2000 and contains all of the background music for the series as well as many vocal songs . Love Hina — Winter Special Soundtrack was released on January 24 , 2001 and was followed by Love Hina — Spring Special Soundtrack on June 6 , 2001 . Love Hina Again Soundtrack was released on April 3 , 2002 . Two collections of vocal songs featuring the female cast members were released : Love Hina – Hinata Girls Song Best was released on March 16 , 2001 and Love Hina – Hinata Girls Song Best 2 was released on October 3 , 2001 . Many of the songs featured on these two albums were written by Ritsuko Okazaki , who released the self cover album Love Hina Okazaki Collection on December 16 , 2001 . Two live concerts called Love Live Hina were performed by the Japanese cast members . The Tokyo Bay performance was bundled on DVD with Love Hina Final Selection , and the Osaka Performance was available separately . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Love Hina won the Kodansha Manga Award for best shōnen title in 2001 . It was selected as the " Best Manga , USA Release " at both the 2002 and 2004 Anime Expo conventions . In 2003 , the title was among the top ten graphic novels on Nielsen BookScan 's list and one of the first graphic novels to ever appear in the general trade paperback list . The pop culture website ICv2 voted Love Hina " Anime Product of the Year " in 2002 . 
 The series was well received by critics . Tony Chen , of Anime News Network ( ANN ) , found it to be a funny series , though finding the 16 + rating appropriate due to the number of jokes involving sexual innuendo . He praised the beautiful artwork , feeling the " sexy and cute " female designs were perfect for the series and that Keitarō 's design fit his dorky personality . Chen found Naru 's regularly catching Keitarō making a mistake and calling him a pervert redundant and annoying . Eric Luce of <unk> notes an increased character development over other love comedies , and describes the series as " nothing if not whimsical " . 
 The release of the second and third DVD 's in Japan was only the second time that an anime series had consecutive number 1 chart positions . This would not occur again until over 15 years later with Mr. <unk> . 
 ANN 's Bamboo Dong praised the anime adaptation for being very intriguing and mixing " drama , romance , and slapstick comedy in a pleasing combination " . She found the music " incredibly cute " and felt it was used in a way which contributed to many of the dramatic effects in the anime . In The Anime Encyclopedia : A Guide to Japanese Animation Since 1917 , Jonathan Clements and Helen McCarthy felt the female characters were a " standard rack of female anime archetypes " and that the series as a whole was a " culmination of a decade of geek @-@ centered anime " . Kenneth Lee , writing for <unk> , praised the look and quality of the animation , highlighting the benefits of the digital creation of the adaption over traditional cel animation . Lee recognised elements from other series such as Maison <unk> and Kimagure Orange Road , and summarised the series as " simply wonderful " . Chris Beveridge , of <unk> , noted the first anime DVD volume was " really well put together " , but also felt the manga did not translate into an anime series particularly well . He praised the Christmas special , noting that it was " several notches above the TV series " but found that while the Spring Special had amusing moments , it was rushed with bad plotting . 
 The Love Hina Again OVA received more mixed reviews , with ANN 's Zac <unk> feeling it reversed part of the plot of the main anime series and never reached the same entertainment level as the television series . The character of Kanako , Keitarō 's sister , was heavily criticized for being " one of the most annoying characters ever created even though she would have been better for Keitaro than Naru . " Beveridge praised the fun and comedy as well as the fan service , but also noted that one 's enjoyment would depend on whether they still cared for the characters . 
 = Larrys Creek = 
 Larrys Creek is a 22 @.@ 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 36 @.@ 9 km ) tributary of the West Branch Susquehanna River in Lycoming County in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . A part of the Chesapeake Bay drainage basin , its watershed drains 89 @.@ 1 square miles ( 231 km2 ) in six townships and a borough . The creek flows south from the dissected Allegheny Plateau to the Ridge @-@ and @-@ valley Appalachians through sandstone , limestone , and shale from the Devonian , Mississippian , and Pennsylvanian periods . 
 The valley 's first recorded inhabitants were the Susquehannocks , followed by the Lenape and other tribes . The Great Shamokin Path crossed the creek near its mouth , where Larry Burt , the first Euro @-@ American settler and the man who gave the creek its present name , also lived by 1769 . In the 19th century , the creek and its watershed were a center for logging and related industries , including 53 sawmills , grist mills , leather tanneries , coal and iron mines . A 1903 newspaper article claimed " No other stream in the country had so many mills in so small a territory " . For transportation , a plank road ran along much of the creek for decades , and two " paper railroads " were planned , but never built . 
 As of 2006 , the Larrys Creek watershed is 83 @.@ 1 % forest and 15 @.@ 7 % agricultural ( a reforestation of land clear @-@ cut in the 19th century ) . Nearly 9 @,@ 000 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 ha ) of second @-@ growth forest are protected public and private land for hunting and trout fishing , with more land protected in parts of Tiadaghton State Forest . Pollution from past industrial use is gone and Larrys Creek " has an exceptionally scenic , ultra @-@ highwater , whitewater run " for canoeing . Despite agricultural runoff and small amounts of acid mine drainage , water quality is quite good , and a water filtration plant on Larrys Creek supplies over 2500 customers . 
 = = Name = = 
 Larrys Creek is named for Larry Burt , the first European settler in the area , who lived near the mouth of the creek outside what is now the hamlet of Larrys Creek in Piatt Township . He traded with the indigenous peoples , and , according to a tradition reported by Meginness ( 1892 ) , he had a Native American wife . Larry Burt was already there when surveyors came through in 1769 ( after the land was purchased by the colonial government of Pennsylvania on November 5 , 1768 as part of the " New Purchase " in the first Treaty of Fort Stanwix ) , but disappeared sometime soon after , perhaps moving west with the Native Americans who left the area . 
 Larrys Creek is the only major creek in Lycoming County for which a Native American name is unknown . As of 2006 , it is the only stream named " Larrys Creek " on USGS maps of the United States and in the USGS Geographic Names Information System . The possessive apostrophe is not part of the official name of the creek , although records from the 19th century often spell it as " Larry 's Creek " ( as do some highway bridge signs today ) . 
 Today the creek has given its name to the hamlet at its mouth , as well as the village of " Larryville " further upstream . Before it became a borough , Salladasburg was also known as " Larrys Creek " ( from the name of its post office ) . The " First Fork " and " Second Fork " of Larrys Creek are named in the order in which they are encountered traveling upstream , with " Fork " here denoting a major tributary . " Lawshe Run " , the major tributary of the Second Fork , is named for Robert Lawshe , who established a tannery in Salladasburg in 1848 . " Seeley Run " , a minor tributary entering the creek at Larryville , is named for Mr. Seely , who built the first sawmill on Larrys Creek in 1796 . While the USGS uses " Seeley Run " , it is still " Seely Run Road " that follows the stream . The First Fork , Canoe Run , Joes Run , and Wolf Run also have roads named for them . 
 = = Course = = 
 Larrys Creek is the only major watershed in Lycoming County entirely within the county . Measured directly , Lycoming County is about 130 miles ( 210 km ) northwest of Philadelphia and 165 miles ( 266 km ) east @-@ northeast of Pittsburgh . It is 53 @.@ 0 miles ( 85 @.@ 3 km ) from the mouth of Larrys Creek along the West Branch Susquehanna River to its confluence with the Susquehanna River at Northumberland , Pennsylvania . The source of Larrys Creek is in northern Lycoming County in Cogan House Township , just south of the hamlet of Steam Valley , at an elevation of 1 @,@ 740 feet ( 530 m ) It flows west @-@ southwest through the village of Cogan House , and then under the Cogan House Covered Bridge . 
 The creek next heads due south through Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 114 . There it runs for about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) with only a trail or unimproved road beside it . It passes through Mifflin Township for a short distance and heads southeast into Anthony Township , where it leaves the State Game Lands and passes a water filtration plant ; there is a dam 8 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) tall and 52 @.@ 5 feet ( 16 @.@ 0 m ) wide here . Further south , it receives Roaring Run ( on the left bank ) . Roaring Run receives the only acid mine drainage in the watershed and enters Larrys Creek 10 @.@ 4 miles ( 16 @.@ 7 km ) from the mouth . 
