 = = = Directors = = = 
 The first director approached to helm the production , by Michael Wearing , was Danny Boyle . Boyle was keen to direct all nine episodes , which concerned Pattinson as he believed that for one director to take charge of the entire serial would be too punishing a schedule for whoever was chosen . Boyle had recently completed work on the feature film Shallow Grave , and wanted to see how that film was received before committing to Our Friends in the North . When Shallow Grave proved to be a critical success and enabled Boyle to enter pre @-@ production on Trainspotting , he withdrew from Our Friends in the North . Sir Peter Hall was also briefly considered , but he too had other production commitments . 
 Two directors were finally chosen to helm the project – Stuart Urban was assigned the first five episodes and Simon Cellan Jones the final four . However , after completing the first two episodes and some of the shooting for the third , Urban left the project after disagreements with the production team . Peter Flannery was concerned that Urban 's directorial style was not suited to the material that he had written . Christopher Eccleston 's viewpoint is that Urban was " only interested in painting pretty pictures . " Pattinson agreed that a change was needed , and Michael Jackson agreed to a change of director mid @-@ way through production , which was unusual for a British television drama of this type so far into proceedings . Director Pedr James , who had recently directed an adaptation of Martin Chuzzlewit for Michael Wearing 's department , was hired to shoot the remainder of what were to have been Urban 's episodes . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Of the actors cast in the four leading roles , only Gina McKee was a native of North East England , and she was from Sunderland rather than from Newcastle . McKee related strongly to many of the characters and story elements in the scripts and was very keen to play Mary , but the production team were initially uncertain whether it would be possible to age her up convincingly enough to portray the character in her 50s . McKee was concerned that she would not be given the part after she took part in an unsuccessful make @-@ up test , where efforts to make her appear to be in her 50s resulted in her resembling a drag queen . 
 Christopher Eccleston was the only one of the four lead actors who was already an established television face , having previously co @-@ starred in the ITV crime drama series Cracker . Eccleston first heard about the project while working with Danny Boyle on the film Shallow Grave in the autumn of 1993 . Initially , Eccleston had been considered by the production team as a candidate to play Geordie , but he was more interested in playing Nicky , who he saw as a more emotionally complex character . Eccleston was particularly concerned about being able to successfully perform with the Newcastle Geordie accent , and did not even attempt the accent at his audition , concentrating instead on characterisation . He drew inspiration for his performance as the older Nicky from Peter Flannery himself , basing aspects of his characterisation on Flannery 's personality and even wearing some of the writer 's own colourful shirts . 
 Daniel Craig was a late auditionee for the role of Geordie , and at the audition performed the Geordie accent very poorly . However , he won the part and it came to be regarded as his breakthrough role . Mark Strong worked on the Geordie accent by studying episodes of the 1980s comedy series Auf Wiedersehen , Pet , which featured lead characters from Newcastle . Strong later claimed that Christopher Eccleston took a dislike to him , and outside of their scenes together the pair did not speak for the entire period that Our Friends in the North was filming . 
 Among the supporting roles , one of the highest @-@ profile pieces of casting was Malcolm McDowell as Soho porn baron Benny Barrett . Barrett appears in scenes across various episodes from 1966 through to 1979 , but the production could only afford him for three weeks . This was because McDowell was then resident in the United States . All of McDowell 's scenes were therefore shot by Stuart Urban as part of the first block of filming , as opposed to the rest of the production which was filmed roughly chronologically . This was considered more than worthwhile , however , for the prestige of being able to use an actor such as McDowell , predominantly a film actor who rarely did television work . 
 It was Daniel Craig 's performance in Our Friends in the North that first brought him to the attention of producer Barbara Broccoli , who later cast him in the role of secret agent James Bond in the long @-@ running film series . Christopher Eccleston also later went on to achieve notability in a cult screen role when he appeared as the Ninth Doctor in the BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who in 2005 , and since then various media articles have noted the coincidence of the future James Bond and Doctor Who leads having co @-@ starred in the same production earlier in their careers . 
 = = = Episode one remount = = = 
 After Stuart Urban had left the production and the decision had been taken to re @-@ shoot some of the material he had completed with Pedr James directing , producer Charles Pattinson suggested to Peter Flannery that the first episode should not simply be remade , but also rewritten . Flannery took the opportunity to completely change the opening storyline , introducing earlier the love story element between Nicky and Mary which was introduced in later episodes of the television version , but had not been part of the original play . Other storyline and character changes were also made with the new version of the first episode because it was the script that had most closely resembled the original stage play , and it was felt by Michael Wearing that the story could be expanded to a greater degree for television . 
 Production of the new version of the opening episode took place in what was to have been a three @-@ week break for the cast between production blocks . Gina McKee was initially very concerned about having her character 's early life story changed when she had already based elements of her later performance on the previously @-@ established version . Eccleston was also unhappy about the sudden changes . However , McKee did feel that the new version of episode one did eventually make for a much stronger opening to the story . 
 Due to budgetary constraints , the production was not able to shoot the remounted scenes of episode one in the north @-@ east , and they instead had to be filmed in and around Watford . Beach @-@ set scenes were shot at Folkestone rather than Whitley Bay , which was obvious to locals on screen due to the presence of pebbles on the beach , which are not present at Whitley . This led to some critics mockingly referring to the production as Our Friends in the South . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Much use was made throughout the production of contemporaneous popular music to evoke the feel of the year in which each episode was set . The BBC 's existing agreements with various music publishers and record labels meant that the production team were easily able to obtain the rights to use most of the songs that they desired . A particular piece of synchronicity occurred in the final episode , 1995 , which Cellan Jones had decided to close with the song " Don 't Look Back in Anger " by Oasis . While the serial was in production , it was just another track from their ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? album . However , during transmission of Our Friends in the North , it was released as a single and to Cellan Jones 's delight it was at the top of the UK Singles Chart in the week of the final episode 's transmission . 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Our Friends in the North was broadcast in nine episodes on BBC Two at 9pm on Monday nights , from 15 January to 11 March 1996 . The episode lengths varied , with 1966 being the shortest at 63 minutes , 48 seconds and 1987 the longest at 74 minutes , 40 seconds . The total running time of the serial is 623 minutes . 
 The first episode of Our Friends in the North gained 5 @.@ 1 million viewers on its original transmission , and the first six episodes each gained between 4 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 5 million viewers . In terms of viewing figures , the series became BBC Two 's most successful weekly drama for five years . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Both during and after its original transmission on BBC Two , the serial was generally praised by the critics . Reviewing the first episode in The Observer newspaper , Ian Bell wrote that : " Flannery 's script is faultless ; funny , chilling , evocative , spare , linguistically precise . The four young friends about to share 31 hellish years in the life of modern Britain are excellently played . " 
 The conclusion of the serial in March brought similar praise . " Our Friends in the North confounded the gloomier predictions about its content and proved that there was an audience for political material , provided that it found its way to the screen through lives imagined in emotional detail ... It will be remembered for an intimate sense of character , powerful enough to make you forgive its faults and stay loyal to the end , " was the verdict of The Independent on the final episode . Writing in the same newspaper the following day , Jeffrey Richards added that " Monday night 's final episode of Our Friends in the North has left many people bereft . The serial captivated much of the country , sketching a panoramic view of life in Britain from the Sixties to the Nineties ... At once sweeping and intimate , both moving and angry , simultaneously historical and contemporary , it has followed in the distinguished footsteps of BBC series such as Boys from the Blackstuff . " 
 However , the response was not exclusively positive . In The Independent on Sunday , columnist Lucy Ellmann criticised both what she saw as the unchanging nature of the characters and Flannery 's concentration on friendship rather than family . " What 's in the water there anyway ? These are the youngest grandparents ever seen ! Nothing has changed about them since 1964 except a few grey hairs ... It 's quite impressive that anything emotional could be salvaged from this nine @-@ part hop , skip and jump through the years . In fact we still hardly know these people – zooming from one decade to the next has a distancing effect , " she wrote of the former point . And of the latter , " Peter Flannery seems to want to suggest that friendships are the only cure for a life blighted by deficient parents . But all that links this ill @-@ matched foursome in the end is history and sentimentality . The emotional centre of the writing is still in family ties . " 
 Michael Jackson , the BBC Two controller who had finally commissioned production of the serial , felt that even though it was successful , its social realist form was outdated . The academic Georgina Born , writing in 2004 , also felt that although the serial had its strengths , it also contained " involuntary marks of pastiche " in its treatment of social realism . 
 In contrast , the British Film Institute 's Screenonline website praises the serial for its realistic and un @-@ clichéd depiction of life in the North East England , stating that : " Unlike many depictions of the North @-@ East , it has fully rounded characters with authentic regional accents . It 's clearly a real place , not a generic ' up North ' . " 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 At the British Academy Television Awards ( BAFTAs ) in 1997 , Our Friends in the North won the award for Best Drama Serial , ahead of other nominees The Crow Road , The Fragile Heart and Gulliver 's Travels . At the same ceremony , Gina McKee won the Best Actress category . Both Christopher Eccleston and Peter Vaughan ( who played Nicky 's father , Felix ) were nominated for the Best Actor award for their performances in Our Friends in the North , but they lost to Nigel Hawthorne for his role in The Fragile Heart . Also at the 1997 BAFTAs , Peter Flannery was presented with the honorary Dennis Potter Award for his work on the serial . Our Friends in the North also gained BAFTA nominations for costume design , sound , and photography and lighting . 
 The Royal Television Society Awards covering the year 1996 saw Our Friends in the North win the Best Drama Serial category , and Peter Flannery given the Writer 's Award . Peter Vaughan also gained another Best Actor nomination for his role as Felix . At the 1997 Broadcasting Press Guild Awards , Our Friends in the North won the categories for Best Drama Series or Serial , Best Actor ( Eccleston ) , Best Actress ( McKee ) and the Writer 's Award for Peter Flannery . 
 In the United States , Our Friends in the North was awarded a Certificate of Merit in the Television Drama Miniseries category at the San Francisco International Film Festival in 1997 . 
 In 2000 , the British Film Institute conducted a poll of industry professionals to find the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century , with Our Friends in the North finishing in twenty @-@ fifth position , eighth position out of the dramas featured on the list . The commentary for the Our Friends in the North entry on the BFI website described it as a " Powerful and evocative drama series ... The series impressed with its ambition , humanity and willingness to see the ambiguities beyond the rhetoric . " The serial was also included in an alphabetical list of the 40 greatest TV shows published by the Radio Times magazine in August 2003 , chosen by their television editor Alison Graham . In January 2010 , the website of The Guardian newspaper produced a list of " The top 50 TV dramas of all time , " in which Our Friends in the North was ranked in third position . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the success of Our Friends in the North , Flannery proposed a " kind of prequel " to the serial under the title of Our Friends in the South . This would have told the story of the Jarrow March . Although the BBC initially took up the project , it did not progress to script stage and was eventually abandoned . 
 Our Friends in the North was given a repeat run on BBC Two the year following its original broadcast , running on Saturday evenings from 19 July to 13 September 1997 . It received a second repeat run on the BBC ten years after its original broadcast , running on BBC Four from 8 February to 29 March 2006 . In the early 2000s , the serial was also repeated on the UK Drama channel . 
 In April 1997 , the serial was released on VHS by BMG Video in two separate sets , 1964 – 1974 and 1979 – 1995 . In 2002 , BMG released the complete series on DVD , which along with the original episodes contained several extra features , including a retrospective discussion of the series by Wearing , Pattinson , Flannery , James and Cellan Jones , and specially shot interviews with Eccleston and McKee . Simply Media brought out a second DVD release of the serial in September 2010 , although on this occasion there were no extra features . This edition contained an edit not present on the 2002 BMG release ; most of the song " Don 't Look Back In Anger " by Oasis is removed at the end of the final episode , fading out early and the credits instead running in silence . 
 Our Friends in the North has been invoked on several occasions as a comparison when other , similar drama programmes have been screened on British television . The year following Our Friends in the North 's broadcast , Tony Marchant 's drama serial Holding On was promoted by the BBC as being an " Our Friends in the South , " after Marchant made the comparison when discussing it with executives . The 2001 BBC Two drama serial In a Land of Plenty was previewed by The Observer newspaper as being " the most ambitious television drama since Our Friends in the North . " The writer Paula Milne drew inspiration from Our Friends in the North for her own White Heat ( 2012 ) ; she felt that Our Friends in the North had been too centred on white , male , heterosexual characters , and she deliberately wanted to counter that focus . 
 The original stage version of Our Friends in the North was revived in Newcastle by Northern Stage in 2007 , with 14 cast members playing 40 characters . 
 = Scottish National Antarctic Expedition = 
 The Scottish National Antarctic Expedition ( SNAE ) , 1902 – 04 , was organised and led by William Speirs Bruce , a natural scientist and former medical student from the University of Edinburgh . Although overshadowed in prestige terms by Robert Falcon Scott 's concurrent Discovery Expedition , the SNAE completed a full programme of exploration and scientific work . Its achievements included the establishment of a manned meteorological station , the first in Antarctic territory , and the discovery of new land to the east of the Weddell Sea . Its large collection of biological and geological specimens , together with those from Bruce 's earlier travels , led to the establishment of the Scottish Oceanographical Laboratory in 1906 . 
 Bruce had spent most of the 1890s engaged on expeditions to the Antarctic and Arctic regions , and by 1899 was Britain 's most experienced polar scientist . In March of that year , he applied to join the Discovery Expedition ; however , his proposal to extend that expedition 's field of work into the Weddell Sea quadrant , using a second ship , was dismissed as " mischievous rivalry " by Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) president Sir Clements Markham . Bruce reacted by obtaining independent finance ; his venture was supported and promoted by the Royal Scottish Geographical Society . 
 The expedition has been described as " by far the most cost @-@ effective and carefully planned scientific expedition of the Heroic Age . " Despite this , Bruce received no formal honour or recognition from the British Government , and the expedition 's members were denied the prestigious Polar Medal despite vigorous lobbying . After SNAE , Bruce led no more Antarctic expeditions , although he made regular Arctic trips . His focus on serious scientific exploration was out of fashion with his times , and his achievements , unlike those of the polar adventurers Scott , Shackleton and Amundsen , soon faded from public awareness . SNAE 's permanent memorial is the Orcadas weather station , which was set up in 1903 as " Omond House " on Laurie Island , South Orkneys , and has been in continuous operation ever since . 
 = = Background to the expedition = = 
 During his student years Bruce built up his knowledge of the natural sciences and oceanography , by studying at summer courses under distinguished tutors such as Patrick Geddes and John Arthur Thomson . He also spent time working voluntarily under the oceanographer Dr John Murray , helping to classify specimens collected during the Challenger expedition . In 1892 Bruce gave up his medical studies altogether , and embarked on a voyage to the Antarctic in the whaler Balaena , as part of the 1892 – 93 Dundee Whaling Expedition . On his return , he began organising an expedition of his own to South Georgia , claiming that " the taste I have had has made me ravenous " , but he could not obtain funding . He then worked at a meteorological station on the summit of Ben Nevis , before joining the Jackson – Harmsworth Arctic Expedition to Franz Josef Land as a scientific assistant . Between 1897 and 1899 he made further Arctic trips , to Spitsbergen and to Novaya Zemlya , first on a private trip organised by Major Andrew Coats , later as a scientist on the Arctic survey vessel Princess Alice . This vessel was owned by Prince Albert of Monaco , a renowned oceanographer who became a friend and supporter of Bruce . 
 After returning from the Arctic in 1899 , Bruce sent a lengthy letter to the Royal Geographical Society in London , applying for a scientific post on the major Antarctic expedition ( later to be known as the Discovery Expedition ) , which the RGS was then organising . His recent experiences made it " unlikely that there was any other person in the British Isles at that time better qualified " . Bruce 's letter , which detailed all his relevant qualifications , was acknowledged but not properly answered until more than a year had passed . By then , Bruce 's ideas had progressed away from his original expectation of a junior post on the scientific staff . He now proposed a second ship for the expedition , separately financed from Scottish sources , which would work in the Weddell Sea quadrant while the main ship was based in the Ross Sea . This proposal was denounced by RGS president Sir Clements Markham as " mischievous " and , after some heated correspondence , Bruce resolved to proceed independently . In this way the idea of a distinctive Scottish National Antarctic expedition was born . Bruce was supported by the wealthy Coats family , who were prepared to give whole @-@ hearted financial backing to a Scottish expedition under his leadership . However , as a result he had acquired the lasting enmity of Markham . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Scotia = = = 
 In the autumn of 1901 , Bruce purchased a Norwegian whaler , Hekla , at a cost of £ 2 @,@ 620 ( approximately £ 250 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . During the following months , the ship was completely rebuilt as an Antarctic research vessel , with two laboratories , a darkroom , and extensive specialist equipment . Two huge revolving cylinders , each carrying 6 @,@ 000 fathoms ( 36 @,@ 000 ft ; 11 @,@ 000 m ) of cable , were fitted to the deck to enable deep @-@ sea trawling for marine specimens . Other equipment was installed for making depth soundings , for the collection of sea water and sea @-@ bottom samples , and for meteorological and magnetic observations . The hull was massively reinforced to withstand the pressures of Antarctic ice , and the ship was re @-@ rigged as a barque with auxiliary engines . This work increased the cost of the ship to £ 16 @,@ 700 ( approximately £ 1 @,@ 640 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , which was met by the Coats family who altogether donated £ 30 @,@ 000 towards the total expedition costs of £ 36 @,@ 000 . Renamed Scotia , the ship was ready for her sea trials in August 1902 . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 The expedition 's scientific staff consisted of six persons , including Bruce . The zoologist was David Wilton who , like Bruce , had been a member of the Jackson @-@ Harmsworth Expedition . He had acquired skiing and sledging skills during several years living in northern Russia . Robert Rudmose @-@ Brown , of University College , Dundee , and formerly an assistant in the Botany Department at the British Museum , was the party 's botanist . Dr James Harvie Pirie , who had worked in the Challenger office under John Murray , was geologist , bacteriologist , and the expedition 's medical officer . Robert Mossman directed meteorological and magnetic work , and Alastair Ross , a medical student , was taxidermist . 
 Bruce appointed Thomas Robertson as Scotia 's captain . Robertson was an experienced Antarctic and Arctic sailor who had commanded the whaling ship Active on the Dundee Whaling Expedition . The rest of the 25 officers and men , who signed for three @-@ year engagements , were all Scotsmen , many used to sailing in icy waters on whaling voyages . 
 = = = Objectives = = = 
 The objectives of the expedition were published in the Scottish Geographical Magazine and in the RGS Geographical Journal , in October 1902 . They included the establishment of a winter station " as near to the South Pole as is practicable " , deep sea and other research of the Antarctic Ocean , and systematic observations and research of meteorology , geology , biology , topography and terrestrial physics . The essentially Scottish character of the expedition was expressed in The Scotsman shortly before departure : " The leader and all the scientific and nautical members of the expedition are Scots ; the funds have been collected for the most part on this side of the Border ; it is a product of voluntary effort , and unlike the expedition which will be simultaneously employed in the exploration of the Antarctic , it owes nothing to Government help " . 
 As the work of the expedition would be mainly at sea , or within the confines of the winter station , only a few dogs were taken , to facilitate the occasional sledge journey . Rudmose Brown records that of the original eight dogs , four survived the expedition ; they " pulled well in harness , their only weak point being their paws which ... were apt to be cut when on rough ice " . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 = = = First voyage 1902 – 03 = = = 
 Scotia left Troon , Scotland , on 2 November 1902 . On her way southward she called at the Irish port of Kingstown ( now Dún Laoghaire ) , at Funchal in Madeira , and then the Cape Verde Isles before an unsuccessful attempt was made to land at the tiny , isolated equatorial archipelago known as St Paul 's Rocks . This attempt almost cost the life of the expedition 's geologist and medical officer , James Harvie Pirie , who was fortunate to escape from the shark @-@ infested seas after misjudging his leap ashore . Scotia reached Port Stanley in the Falkland Islands on 6 January 1903 , where she re @-@ provisioned for the Antarctic journey ahead . 
 On 26 January , Scotia set sail for Antarctic waters . She encountered heavy pack ice on 3 February , 25 miles ( 40 km ) north of the South Orkney Islands , which forced her to manoeuvre . Next day , Scotia was able to move southward again and land a small party on Saddle Island , South Orkney Islands , where a large number of botanical and geological specimens were gathered . Ice conditions prevented any further progress until 10 February , after which Scotia continued southward , " <unk> along at seven knots under sail " . On 17 February the position was 64 ° 18 ′ S , and five days later they passed 70 ° S , deep within the Weddell Sea . Shortly after this , with new ice forming and threatening the ship , Robertson turned northward , having reached 70 ° 25 ′ S. 
 Having failed to find land , the expedition had to decide where to winter . The matter was of some urgency , since the sea would soon be freezing over , with the risk of the ship becoming trapped . Bruce decided to head back to the South Orkneys and find an anchorage there . In contrast to his stated object , to winter as far south as possible , the South Orkneys were more than 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) from the South Pole , but the northerly location had advantages . The relatively brief period during which the ship would be frozen in would allow more time for trawling and dredging operations in the early spring . Also , the islands were well @-@ situated as a site for a meteorological station — their relative proximity to the South American mainland opened the prospect of establishing a permanent station . 
 It took a month of hard sailing before Scotia reached the islands . After several foiled attempts to locate a suitable anchorage , and with its rudder seriously damaged by ice , the ship finally found a sheltered bay on the southern shore of Laurie Island , the most easterly of the South Orkneys chain . On 25 March the ship safely anchored , settling into the ice a quarter of a mile ( 400m ) from shore . She was then rapidly converted to winter quarters , with engines dismantled , boilers emptied , and a canvas canopy enclosing the deck . Bruce instituted a comprehensive programme of work , involving meteorological readings , trawling for marine samples , botanical excursions , and the collection of biological and geological specimens . The major task completed during this time was the construction of a stone building , christened " Omond House " , after Robert Omond , director of the Edinburgh Observatory who was a supporter of the expedition . This building provided living accommodation for the parties that would remain on Laurie Island to operate the proposed meteorological laboratory . The building was constructed from local materials using the dry stone method , with a roof improvised from wood and canvas sheeting . The completed house had a footprint of 20 by 20 feet ( 6 by 6 m ) , with two windows , fitted as quarters for six people . Rudmose Brown wrote : " Considering that we had no mortar and no masons ' tools it is a wonderfully fine house and very lasting . I should think it will be standing a century hence ... " 
 In general , the party maintained excellent health . The exception was the ship 's engineer , Allan Ramsay , who had been taken ill with a heart condition in the Falklands during the outward voyage . He chose to remain with the expedition , but he grew steadily weaker as winter progressed . He died on 6 August , and was buried on the island . 
 As winter turned to spring the level of activity increased , and there were numerous sledge journeys , including some to neighbouring islands . Near Omond House , a wooden hut was constructed for magnetic observations and a cairn was built , nine feet high , on top of which the Union Flag and the Saltire were displayed . Scotia was made seaworthy again , but remained icebound throughout September and October ; it was not until 23 November that strong winds broke up the bay ice , allowing her to float free . Four days later she departed for Port Stanley , leaving a party of six under Robert Mossman at Omond House . 
 = = = Buenos Aires , 1903 – 04 = = = 
 On 2 December 1903 , the expedition reached Port Stanley , where they received their first news from the outside world since leaving the Cape Verde Islands . After a week 's rest , Scotia departed for Buenos Aires , where she was to be repaired and provisioned for another season 's work . Bruce had further business in the city ; he intended to persuade the Argentine government to assume responsibility for the Laurie Island meteorological station after the expedition 's departure . During the voyage to Buenos Aires , Scotia ran aground in the Río de la Plata estuary , and was stranded for several days before floating free and being assisted into port by a tug , on 24 December . 
 During the following four weeks , while the ship was dry @-@ docked , Bruce negotiated with the Argentine government over the future of the weather station . He was assisted by the British resident minister , the British Consul , and Dr W. G. Davis who was director of the Argentine Meteorological Office . When contacted by cable , the British Foreign Office registered no objection to this scheme . On 20 January 1904 , Bruce confirmed an agreement whereby three scientific assistants of the Argentine government would travel back to Laurie Island to work for a year , under Robert Mossman , as the first stage of an annual arrangement . He then formally handed over the Omond House building , its furnishings and provisions , and all magnetic and meteorological instruments , to the Argentine government . The station , renamed Orcadas Base , has remained operational ever since , having been rebuilt and extended several times . 
 Several of the original crew left during the Buenos Aires interlude , some through illness and one discharged for misconduct , and replacements were recruited locally . Scotia left for Laurie Island on 21 January , arriving on 14 February . A week later , having settled the meteorological party , who were to be relieved a year later by the Argentine gunboat Uruguay , Scotia set sail for her second voyage to the Weddell Sea . 
 = = = Second voyage , 1904 = = = 
 Scotia headed south @-@ east , towards the eastern waters of the Weddell Sea , in calm weather . No pack ice was encountered before they were south of the Antarctic Circle , and they were able to proceed smoothly until , on 3 March , heavy pack ice stopped the ship at 72 ° <unk> , 17 ° <unk> . A sounding was taken , revealing a sea @-@ depth of 1 @,@ 131 fathoms ( 6 @,@ 786 ft ; 2 @,@ 068 m ) , compared to the 2 @,@ 500 fathoms ( 15 @,@ 000 ft ; 4 @,@ 600 m ) which had been the general measurement up to that date . This suggested that they were approaching land . A few hours later , they reached an ice barrier , which blocked progress towards the south @-@ east . Over the following days , they tracked the edge of this barrier southwards for some 150 miles ( 240 km ) . A sounding 2 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) from the barrier edge gave a depth of only 159 fathoms ( 954 ft ; 291 m ) , which strongly indicated the presence of land behind the barrier . The outlines of this land soon became faintly visible , and Bruce named it Coats Land after his chief sponsors . This was the first positive indicator of the eastern limits of the Weddell Sea at high latitude , and suggested that the sea might be considerably smaller than had been previously supposed . A projected visit to Coats Land by a sledging party was abandoned by Bruce because of the state of the sea ice . 
 On 9 March 1904 Scotia reached its most southerly latitude of 74 ° <unk> . At this point , the ship was held fast in the pack ice , and the prospect loomed of becoming trapped for the winter . It was during this period of inactivity that bagpiper Gilbert Kerr was photographed serenading a penguin . On 13 March the ship broke free and began to move slowly north @-@ eastward under steam . Throughout this part of the voyage a regular programme of depth soundings , trawls , and sea @-@ bottom samples provided a comprehensive record of the oceanography and marine life of the Weddell Sea . 
 Scotia headed for Cape Town by a route that took it to Gough Island , an isolated mid @-@ Atlantic volcanic projection that had never been visited by a scientific party . On 21 April , Bruce and five others spent a day ashore , collecting specimens . The ship then proceeded to Cape Town , arriving on 6 May . After carrying out further research work in the Saldanha Bay area , Scotia sailed for home on 21 May . 
 On the voyage home the party called at Saint Helena and visited Napoleon 's exile home which they found neglected and in disrepair . On 7 June the ship reached Ascension Island where they were impressed by the sight of giant turtles , some of them four feet across . The final port of call was at Horta in the Azores , where they stopped briefly on 5 July before heading for home . 
 = = Homecoming and after = = 
 The expedition was warmly received on its return to the Clyde on 21 July 1904 . A formal reception for 400 people was held at the Marine Biological Station , <unk> , at which John Murray read a telegram of congratulation from King Edward VII . Bruce was presented with the Royal Scottish Geographical Society 's Gold Medal , and Captain Robertson with the silver medal . 
 Following the expedition , more than 1 @,@ 100 species of animal life , 212 of them previously unknown to science , were catalogued . However , there was no official acknowledgement from London , where under the influence of Markham the work of the SNAE tended to be ignored or denigrated . Its members were not awarded the prestigious RGS Polar Medals , which were bestowed on members of the Discovery Expedition when it returned home two months after Scotia . Polar Medals would also be awarded after each of Sir Ernest Shackleton 's later expeditions , and after Douglas Mawson 's Australasian expedition . Bruce fought unavailingly for years to right what he considered a grave injustice , a slight on his country and on his expedition . Some of the aversion of the London geographical establishment may have arisen from Bruce 's overt Scottish nationalism , reflected in his own prefatory note to Rudmose Brown 's expedition history , in which he said : " While Science was the talisman of the Expedition , Scotland was emblazoned on its flag ; and it may be that , in endeavouring to serve humanity by adding another link to the golden chain of science , we have also shown that the nationality of Scotland is a power that must be reckoned with " . 
 A significant consequence of the expedition was the establishment by Bruce , in Edinburgh , of the Scottish Oceanographical Laboratory , which was formally opened by Prince Albert of Monaco in 1906 . The Laboratory served as a repository for the large collection of biological , zoological and geological specimens amassed during the Scotia voyages , and also during Bruce 's earlier Arctic and Antarctic travels . It was also a base from which the scientific reports of the SNAE could be prepared , and it served as general headquarters where polar explorers could meet – Nansen , Amundsen and Shackleton all visited – and where other Scottish polar ventures could be planned and organised . Although Bruce continued to visit the Arctic for scientific and commercial purposes , he never led another Antarctic expedition , his plans for a transcontinental crossing being stifled through lack of funding . The SNAE scientific reports took many years to complete ; most were published between 1907 and 1920 , but one volume was delayed until 1992 . A proposal to convert the Laboratory into a permanent Scottish National Oceanographic Institute failed to come to fruition and , because of difficulties with funding , Bruce was forced to close it down in 1919 . He died two years later , aged 54 . 
 By this time , the Scotia expedition was barely remembered , even in Scotland , and it has remained overshadowed in polar histories by the more glamorous adventures of Scott and Shackleton . In these histories it is usually confined to a brief mention or footnote , with little attention given to its achievements . Bruce lacked charisma , had no public relations skills ( " ... as prickly as the Scottish thistle itself " , according to a lifelong friend ) , and tended to make powerful enemies . However , in the words of oceanographer Professor Tony Rice , his expedition fulfilled " a more comprehensive programme than that of any previous or contemporary Antarctic expedition " . 
 The expedition ship Scotia was requisitioned during the Great War , and saw service as a freighter . On 18 January 1916 she caught fire , and was burned out on a sandbank in the Bristol Channel . One hundred years after Bruce , a 2003 expedition , in a modern version of Scotia , used information collected by the SNAE as a basis for examining climate change in South Georgia during the past century . This expedition asserted that its contribution to the international debate on global warming would be a fitting testament to SNAE 's pioneering research . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Fiennes , Ranulph ( 2003 ) . Captain Scott . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ 82697 @-@ 5 . 
 Huxley , Elspeth ( 1977 ) . Scott of the Antarctic . London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson . ISBN 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Rudmose Brown , R. N. ; Pirie , J. H. ; Mossman , R. C. ( 2002 ) . The Voyage of the Scotia . Edinburgh : Mercat Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 044 @-@ 5 . 
 Speak , Peter ( 2003 ) . William Speirs Bruce : Polar Explorer and Scottish Nationalist . Edinburgh : NMS Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 71 @-@ X. 
 = = = Online = = = 
 Collingridge , Vanessa ( 9 May 2003 ) . " Diary of Climate Change " . <unk> Retrieved 3 June 2008 . 
 <unk> , Angus B. ; Kjær , Kjell @-@ G. ( 2005 ) . " The Polar Ship Scotia " . Polar Record ( Cambridge University Press ) 41 ( 2 ) : 131 – 140 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . Retrieved 10 October 2011 . 
 Goodlad , James A. ( 2003 ) . " Scotland and the Antarctic , Section 5 : Voyage of the ' Scotia ' – Planning and financing the expedition " . Glasgow Digital Library . Royal Scottish Geographical Society . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ 3 . Retrieved 10 October 2011 . 
 Goodlad , James A. ( 2003 ) . " Scotland and the Antarctic , Section 5 : Voyage of the ' Scotia ' – The voyage south " . Glasgow Digital Library . Royal Scottish Geographical Society . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ 3 . Retrieved 10 October 2011 . 
 " Measuring Worth " . Institute for the Measurement of Worth . Retrieved 12 July 2008 . 
 " Voyage of the Scotia 1902 – 04 : The Antarctic . The hut known as Omond House on Laurie Island in the South Orkney Islands , 1902 – 04 " . Glasgow Digital Library . Retrieved 10 October 2011 . 
 " William Speirs Bruce , 1867 – 1921 . Polar explorer and oceanographer : Biographical Information " . Navigational Aids for the History of Science , Technology & the Environment ( University of Edinburgh ) . Retrieved 10 October 2011 . 
 = Chris Brandon = 
 Christopher William " Chris " Brandon ( born 7 April 1976 ) is an English professional footballer who last played in Thailand for BEC Tero Sasana . He is a midfielder who has played more than 300 games during his professional career , which did not start until he was aged 23 . After he was released by Bradford City 's youth academy as a youngster he followed a non @-@ league career with Bradford Park Avenue , Farsley Celtic and Stafford Rangers . 
 He became a professional in 1999 with Division Three side Torquay United . Torquay were aiming for promotion during Brandon 's first season with the club , but they finished two places outside the Division Three play @-@ offs . He only played two games the following season because of a stomach tear , and upon his return Torquay were instead battling against relegation from The Football League , and Brandon left after three seasons with the club . He moved up a division and played for two years with Chesterfield , where he picked up a number of individual awards but spent two seasons fighting against relegation . In 2004 , he joined Huddersfield Town where he twice narrowly missed out on promotion . He had a short spell on loan with Blackpool , helping them to the promotion play @-@ offs . However , after a permanent move failed to materialise he returned to Huddersfield for a fourth season . When he was released by new manager Stan Ternent after four years with the club , he rejoined Bradford City , but had two injury @-@ hit seasons before being released early from his contract . At the start of the following year , he moved to Thailand to join BEC Tero Sasana . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brandon was born in Bradford , West Yorkshire , England , on 7 April 1976 . He attended Yorkshire Martyrs Collegiate School in Bradford and supported the city 's Football League team Bradford City . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Brandon started his football career as a trainee for Bradford City , but he was dropped by their academy and joined non @-@ league side Bradford Park Avenue . He later played for Farsley Celtic before joining Stafford Rangers . He played 32 times for Rangers over two seasons before returning to play for Bradford Park Avenue . In his two spells with Park Avenue , Brandon played a total of 107 games . 
 = = = Torquay United = = = 
 In March 1999 , he played as a trialist in a reserve match for Lincoln City , but failed to win a contract . Five months later , he was signed by Division Three side Torquay United . He made his debut in the opening fixture of the 1999 – 2000 season as Torquay defeated Shrewsbury Town at Gay Meadow . He established himself as a first @-@ team regular and played 50 games in all competitions , scoring a total of five goals , the first of which came in a 2 – 1 victory against Peterborough United on 19 October 1999 . Torquay finished in ninth place in Division Three , just three points outside the play @-@ off places . 
 In July 2000 , he signed a new two @-@ year deal with Torquay . However , only two games into the following season , he picked up a stomach tear , which kept him out for the rest of the season . Without Brandon , Torquay could not match their high league position of the previous season , and finished 21st , four points above Barnet who were relegated out of The Football League . 
 He returned from injury in time for the start of the 2001 – 02 season and once again he became an established member of the team during the start of the campaign . He was dropped from the side for a period of time following an FA Cup defeat to Northampton Town in November 2001 , during which he missed an open goal . He returned to the first team in January 2002 and scored on his second game back in the starting eleven as Torquay defeated Bristol Rovers . Two months later , he scored a vital goal in a 2 – 0 victory over Lincoln City , which helped Torquay to only their second home victory in four months and move them 13 points clear of the relegation zone . Torquay finished the season only two places higher than their previous campaign , but 15 points above relegated Halifax Town . During his disrupted three seasons with Torquay , Brandon amassed 83 appearances with ten goals to his credit , before he moved to Chesterfield in July 2002 on a free transfer . 
 = = = Chesterfield = = = 
 Brandon signed a two @-@ year contract with Division Two side Chesterfield , and made his debut against Queens Park Rangers on the first day of the 2002 – 03 season . Chesterfield lost the game at Loftus Road 3 – 1 . Brandon 's first goal for Chesterfield came a week later when he scored a 12 @-@ yard overhead kick to give them a late 2 – 1 victory over Port Vale . He scored again just ten days later as Chesterfield defeated Northampton Town 4 – 0 . His third goal was another volley during a 1 – 0 victory over Stockport County . However , he was substituted at half @-@ time , and he did not play for another two weeks because of suspension , until he scored again in a League Cup game against West Ham United live on television , which Chesterfield lost on penalties . He scored in both the first and second rounds of the Football League Trophy , but Chesterfield were defeated on penalties by Port Vale in the second round . He finished the season with ten goals but also 11 yellow cards . However , he played only one game during the final month , with his last game coming on 21 April 2003 , when Chesterfield finished with just nine players because of serious injuries to Brandon and striker Caleb Folan . Chesterfield picked up four points in their final two games without Brandon , and avoided relegation by just one position , finishing two points above Cheltenham Town . Brandon 's ten goals meant he finished as Chesterfield 's top goalscorer and also helped Brandon win three awards at the club 's end of season awards , as well as reported interest from nearby Nottingham Forest , who had missed out on promotion to the Premier League . 
 Brandon overcame his hamstring problems to return before the start of the following season , at the start of which he maintained his goalscoring form , scoring twice within the space of three days , as Chesterfield drew 3 – 3 with Wycombe Wanderers , then 1 – 1 with Plymouth Argyle . He only managed another four goals all season , but they included two against Lincoln City in a Football League Trophy defeat and one goal to help Chesterfield 's fight to avoid relegation in a 3 – 1 victory over local rivals Sheffield Wednesday . He finished the season with six goals , which took his tally for Chesterfield to 16 goals from 88 games . Chesterfield again finished just one place above the relegation zone , and Brandon left in July 2004 to sign for Huddersfield Town under manager Peter Jackson on a free transfer . 
 = = = Huddersfield Town = = = 
 Huddersfield had been one of the teams relegated below Chesterfield in 2002 – 03 , but had been immediately promoted back to League One . Brandon made his debut for Huddersfield on the opening day of the 2004 – 05 season in a 3 – 2 victory over Stockport County . Chesterfield goalkeeper Carl Muggleton twice denied him a goal in his first home game three days later , but Brandon only had to wait until the following month when he scored in a 4 – 0 victory against Hull City . Brandon scored a total of six goals in his first season with Huddersfield , but also received the first red card of his professional career in a 1 – 0 win over Blackpool for a professional foul . Two of Brandon 's goals came as Huddersfield pushed for a play @-@ off place with a run of five successive victories , but they could only finish ninth , just one point behind Hartlepool United in the final play @-@ off spot . Jackson praised Brandon for his " workrate and skill " and offered him and captain Jon Worthington each new two @-@ year deals . 
 Huddersfield started the 2005 – 06 season in the same form . Brandon scored his first goal of the season during a 2 – 1 win over Doncaster Rovers on 29 August 2008 , which gave them their fifth win from seven games during the month . In mid @-@ November , Brandon signed the two @-@ year contract extension , which kept him at Huddersfield until June 2008 , and instantly targeted promotion . The following month Brandon scored the only goal of a 1 – 0 win over non @-@ league Worcester City in the FA Cup second round to earn Huddersfield a tie with Premiership champions Chelsea at Stamford Bridge . Two days later , Brandon received another red card , as both he and David <unk> were sent off in the final minute of a 2 – 2 draw with Milton Keynes Dons . Brandon returned to the side following his suspension and helped Huddersfield to win a place in the play @-@ offs . He was an unused substitute in the first leg 1 – 0 victory over Barnsley , and he played just eight minutes of the second leg , as Huddersfield lost 3 – 1 to again miss out on promotion . 
 The following season was interrupted by an achilles injury for Brandon . It was not until February 2007 , that Brandon scored his first goal of the 2006 – 07 season , during Huddersfield Town 's 2 – 1 defeat to Crewe Alexandra . He only played one more game for Huddersfield that season , before he joined fellow League One side Blackpool on loan on 21 March 2007 , joining another Town teammate , goalkeeper Paul <unk> . Blackpool were searching for promotion and Brandon helped when he scored two goals during a 4 – 1 defeat of Northampton Town . However , he was sent off on 28 April 2007 in Blackpool 's win at home to Scunthorpe United , which resulted in his missing the Seasiders ' play @-@ off games , and therefore not being considered for their successful final at Wembley against Yeovil Town . Brandon played in five games during his loan spell , all of which Blackpool won . 
 It seemed certain that manager Simon Grayson was going to purchase Brandon , but instead Grayson bought Brandon 's team @-@ mate Gary Taylor @-@ Fletcher . Brandon returned to Huddersfield and was back in first team . However , after he was substituted on 14 October 2007 against Doncaster Rovers , he did not feature again until the New Year . On 5 January 2008 , his second game back in the Huddersfield side , Brandon scored another FA Cup winning goal to knock Premier League side Birmingham City out of the competition in a 2 – 1 defeat at the Galpharm Stadium . He scored his second goal of the season , in the following game against Gillingham , but was sent off in the final minute of a 1 – 1 draw with Brighton & Hove Albion the next week . Brandon 's red card meant he was suspended for Huddersfield 's fourth round FA Cup tie with Oldham Athletic , but following a 1 – 0 victory , he returned in time for their visit to Chelsea in the fifth round , which Chelsea won 3 – 1 . Brandon scored just one more goal during the rest of the season , with his last game coming on 15 April 2008 in the Yorkshire derby with Leeds United . With his contract due to expire in the summer , it turned out to be his final game for Huddersfield after 135 league appearances , during which time he scored 12 goals , and a total of 148 games . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 After being one of eight players to be released by new Huddersfield manager Stan Ternent in early May 2008 , Brandon turned down the chance to join another League One side and instead dropped down a division for the first time in six years to sign a two @-@ year deal at Bradford City on 30 May 2008 . Although Bradford were a League Two side , Brandon said it would be the highlight of his career to play for his hometown club . 
 An ankle injury , which Brandon picked up in a pre @-@ season tour game against Scottish side Motherwell kept Brandon out of the side at the start of the 2008 – 09 season . This included a League Cup game against his old side Huddersfield Town on 12 August 2008 , for which he was a spectator as Bradford lost 4 – 0 . When he attempted to make a comeback , he injured his other ankle in a reserve game with Scunthorpe United and was forced to undergo the first operation of his career which kept him out until January 2009 . Once he returned to training in January , his first team debut was again delayed after a shoulder injury suffered at home . He returned to action for the reserves against Doncaster Rovers in February , before making his long @-@ awaited debut on 7 March 2009 against Aldershot Town with City three goals ahead in a game which finally finished 5 – 0 . He finished the season playing seven games . However , City missed out on promotion and Brandon 's future was cast into doubt because of the size of his contract and budget cuts at the club . 
 Brandon , however , remained at Bradford for the 2009 – 10 season and he scored his first goal for his hometown club with a late goal in a 2 – 0 victory against his former side Torquay United in late August . The following month , his second goal for the club again came against one of Brandon 's former teams , as he once again came off the substitutes ' bench to score in a 3 – 0 victory over Chesterfield . However , he continued to struggle to hold down a regular first @-@ team place and when new manager Peter Taylor took over , Brandon was one of a number of players released early from his contract . He had played just 31 games during his two seasons with City , scoring three goals . 
 = = = BEC Tero Sasana = = = 
 After his release from Bradford , Brandon spent a period of time training with Scottish @-@ side Dundee United , although that was because he was visiting his friend and former teammate Danny <unk> and would not be offered a contract , before he was offered a trial with Port Vale in July 2010 . It proved to be an unsuccessful trial , with Brandon spending time away from the game . He later held talks with Conference North side Guiseley , a non @-@ league team from near Bradford . At the start of 2011 , he signed for Thai Premier League side BEC Tero Sasana . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Brandon is principally a midfielder who plays anywhere in the midfield , but has also been used just behind a pair of strikers or in attack . At Chesterfield , his ability to take on opposition defenders , create openings for teammates and score " wonder goals " helped him to win a number of awards . His former manager , Peter Jackson has also praised Brandon 's " workrate and skill " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Updated 1 July 2010 . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Chesterfield 
 Player of the season : 2002 – 03 
 = Selena = 
 Selena Quintanilla @-@ Pérez ( Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] or [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) ( April 16 , 1971 – March 31 , 1995 ) was an American singer , songwriter , spokesperson , actress , and fashion designer . Called the Queen of Tejano music , her contributions to music and fashion made her one of the most celebrated Mexican @-@ American entertainers of the late 20th century . Billboard magazine named her the " top Latin artist of the ' 90s " , the " best selling Latin artist of the decade " . She was called the " Tejano Madonna " for her clothing choices , by media outlets . She also ranks among the most influential Latin artists of all @-@ time and is credited for catapulting a music genre into the mainstream market . 
 The youngest child of the Quintanilla family , she debuted on the music scene in 1980 as a member of the band Selena y Los Dinos , which also included her elder siblings A.B. Quintanilla and Suzette Quintanilla . Selena began recording professionally in 1982 . In the 1980s , she was often criticized and was refused bookings at venues across Texas for performing Tejano music — a male @-@ dominated music genre . However , her popularity grew after she won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year in 1986 , which she won nine consecutive times . Selena signed with EMI Latin in 1989 and released her self @-@ titled debut album the same year , while her brother became her principal music producer and songwriter . 
 Selena released Entre a Mi Mundo ( 1992 ) , which peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart for 19 nonconsecutive weeks . The album 's commercial success led music critics to call the album the " breakthrough " recording of her musical career . One of its singles , " Como La Flor " , became one of her most popular signature songs . Live ! ( 1993 ) won Best Mexican / American Album at the 1994 Grammy Awards , becoming the first recording by a Tejano artist to do so . In 1994 , Selena released Amor Prohibido , which became one of the best @-@ selling Latin albums in the United States . It was critically acclaimed as being responsible for Tejano music 's first marketable era as it became one of the most popular Latin music subgenres at the time . Selena began recording English @-@ language songs for her crossover album . 
 Aside from music , Selena was active in her community and donated her time to civic causes . Coca @-@ Cola appointed her its spokesperson in Texas . Selena became a sex icon ; she was often criticized for wearing suggestive outfits in light of her comments about being a role model for young women . Selena and her guitarist , Chris Pérez , eloped in April 1992 after her father raised concerns over their relationship . On March 31 , 1995 , Selena was shot dead by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former employee of her Selena Etc. boutiques . Two weeks after her death , George W. Bush — governor of Texas at the time — declared her birthday Selena Day in Texas . Her posthumous crossover album , Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , debuted atop the Billboard 200 , making Selena the first Latin artist to accomplish this feat . In 1997 , Warner Bros. released Selena , a film about her life and career , which starred Jennifer Lopez as Selena . As of 2012 , Selena has sold over 60 million albums worldwide . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1971 – 88 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Selena Quintanilla was born on April 16 , 1971 , in Lake Jackson , Texas . She was the youngest child of Marcella Ofelia Quintanilla ( née Samora ) who had Cherokee ancestry and Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , a former Mexican American musician . Selena was raised as a Jehovah 's Witness . Quintanilla , Jr. noticed her musical abilities when she was six years old . He told People magazine , " Her timing , her pitch were perfect , I could see it from day one " . In 1980 in Lake Jackson , Quintanilla , Jr. opened his first Tex @-@ Mex restaurant , where Selena and her siblings Abraham III ( on bass guitar ) and Suzette Quintanilla ( on drums ) would often perform . The following year , the restaurant was forced to close after a recession caused by the 1980s oil glut . The family declared bankruptcy and were evicted from their home . They settled in Corpus Christi , Texas ; Quintanilla , Jr. became manager of the newly formed band Selena y Los Dinos and began promoting it . They needed money and played on street corners , at weddings , at quinceañeras , and at fairs . 
 As her popularity as a singer grew , the demands of Selena 's performance and travel schedule began to interfere with her education . Her father took her out of school when she was in the eighth grade . Her teacher Marilyn Greer disapproved of Selena 's musical career . She threatened to report Quintanilla , Jr. to the Texas Board of Education , believing the conditions to which Selena was exposed were inappropriate for a girl her age . Quintanilla , Jr. told Greer to " mind her business " . Other teachers expressed their concerns when they noticed how tired Selena appeared when she arrived at school . At seventeen , Selena earned a high school diploma from the American School of Correspondence in Chicago , and was also accepted at Louisiana State University . She enrolled at Pacific Western University , taking up business administration as her major subject . 
 Quintanilla , Jr. refurbished an old bus ; he named it " Big Bertha " and the family used it as their tour bus . In the first years of touring , the family sang for food and barely had enough money to pay for gasoline . In 1984 , Selena recorded her first LP record , Selena y Los Dinos , for Freddie Records . Despite wanting to record English @-@ language songs , Selena recorded Tejano music compositions ; a male @-@ dominated , Spanish @-@ language genre with German influences of polka , jazz , and country music , popularized by Mexicans living in the United States . Quintanilla , Jr. believed Selena should record musical compositions related to her heritage . During the recording sessions for the album , Selena had to learn Spanish phonetically with guidance from her father . In 1985 , to promote the album , Selena appeared on the Johnny Canales Show , a popular Spanish @-@ language radio program , on which she continued to appear for several years . Selena was discovered by Rick Trevi , founder of the Tejano Music Awards , where she won the Female Vocalist of the Year award in 1987 and for nine consecutive years after . The band was often turned down by Texas music venues because of the members ' ages and because Selena was their lead singer . By 1988 , Selena had released five more LP records ; Alpha ( 1986 ) , <unk> de <unk> ( 1987 ) , And the Winner is ... ( 1987 ) , Preciosa ( 1988 ) , and Dulce Amor ( 1988 ) . 
 = = = 1989 – 90 : Self @-@ titled album and relationship with Pérez = = = 
 José Behar of newly formed label EMI Latin Records , together with the new head of Sony Music Latin , watched Selena perform at the 1989 Tejano Music Awards . Behar was searching for new Latin acts and wanted to sign Selena to EMI 's label Capitol Records , while Sony Music Latin offered Quintanilla , Jr. twice Capitol 's signing fee . Behar thought he had discovered the " next Gloria Estefan " but his superior called Behar illogical because he had been in South Texas less than a week . Quintanilla , Jr. chose EMI Latin 's offer because of the potential for a crossover album , and becoming the first artist to sign to the label . Before Selena began recording for her debut album , Behar and Stephen Finfer requested a crossover album for her . She recorded three English @-@ language compositions for the heads of EMI 's pop division . Behar and Finfer 's request for a crossover album was denied and Selena was told she needed a bigger fan base to sell such an album . Behar thought EMI Records and the public did not believe that a Mexican American woman could have " crossover potential " . 
 Selena released her self @-@ titled debut album on October 17 , 1989 . Selena recorded most of the songs at <unk> Studios in San Antonio , Texas ; " Sukiyaki " and " My Love " were recorded at Sunrise Studios in Houston . Selena wrote " My Love " and wanted the song to be included on her first recording . Her brother Quintanilla III became Selena 's principal record producer and songwriter for most of her musical career . Quintanilla III did not write the tracks " Sukiyaki " , " Contigo Quiero Estar " , and " No Te Vayas " . " Sukiyaki " was originally recorded in Japanese in the 1960s by Kyu Sakamoto ; Selena used a translation into Spanish of an English version of the song by Janice Marie Johnson . The lead single , " Contigo Quiero Estar " , peaked at number eight on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Songs chart , while the album peaked at number seven on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart , becoming Selena 's first single and album to debut on a national music chart . Selena performed better than albums from other contemporaneous female Tejano singers . 
 In the same year , Coca @-@ Cola wanted Selena to become one of their spokespeople in Texas . The jingle used in her first two commercials for the company were composed by Quintanilla III and Chris Pérez — the latter of whom had joined Selena y Los Dinos several months earlier as the band 's new guitarist . Pérez began having romantic feelings for Selena , despite having a girlfriend in San Antonio . After a trip to Mexico with the band , Pérez thought it would be best for them both to distance himself from her , but found it difficult and decided to try building a relationship with her . They expressed their feelings for each other at a Pizza Hut restaurant , and shortly afterwards became a couple . Pérez and Selena hid their relationship , fearing Quintanilla , Jr. would try to break it up . 
 = = = 1990 – 91 : Ven Conmigo and the Selena fan club = = = 
 Selena released her second studio album , Ven Conmigo , in 1990 . Three tracks from Ven Conmigo were released as singles ; " Ya Ves " , " La <unk> " , and " Baila Esta Cumbia " . The latter , a Mexican cumbia song , became one of Selena 's biggest singles . Its popularity grew in Mexico , where a compilation album bearing the single 's name was released there . The album was certified platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) , denoting sales of 150 @,@ 000 units . 
 A registered nurse and fan named Yolanda Saldívar asked Quintanilla , Jr. to start a fan club in San Antonio . Saldívar had the idea after she had attended one of Selena 's concerts . Quintanilla , Jr. approved Saldívar 's request ; he believed the fan club would bring more exposure for the band . Saldívar soon became a close friend to Selena and the family ; she was trusted and became the acting president of the fan club in 1991 . That same year , Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres composed a duet he wanted to record with Selena . The song , " Buenos Amigos " , was produced by Enrique Elizondo and was released on Torres ' tenth studio album Nada Se <unk> Contigo ( 1991 ) . " Buenos Amigos " peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Songs chart , giving Selena her first number one single . The song 's music video earned Selena and Torres two nominations at the 1992 Billboard Music Awards . The track was also nominated for Duo of the Year at the 1992 Tejano Music Awards . Deborah <unk> wrote that the track enabled Selena to tour the west and east coasts of the United States . According to John Lannert of Billboard magazine , " Buenos Amigos " was helped by increased airplay on regional Mexican and Tejano radio stations , which had previously dismissed Selena 's recordings . 
 = = = 1992 – 93 : Elopement , Entre a Mi Mundo , and Selena Live = = = 
 Selena 's sister Suzette found Selena and Pérez flirting with each other and immediately informed their father . Quintanilla , Jr. took Pérez off the bus and told him his relationship with Selena was over . Selena and Pérez continued their relationship despite Quintanilla , Jr 's disapproval ; Selena 's mother Marcella approved of their relationship . Quintanilla , Jr. saw Selena and Pérez romantically together on the bus ; he pulled over and an argument between Quintanilla , Jr. and Selena ensued . He called Pérez a " cancer in my family " and threatened to disband the group if they continued their relationship . Selena and Pérez relented ; Quintanilla , Jr. fired Pérez from the band and prevented Selena from leaving with him . After his dismissal , Pérez and Selena secretly continued their relationship . On the morning of April 2 , 1992 , Selena and Pérez decided to elope , believing Quintanilla , Jr. would never approve of their relationship . Selena thought Quintanilla , Jr. would leave them alone if they were married , and they would not have to hide their feelings for each other . Within hours of their marriage , the media announced the couple 's elopement . Selena 's family tried to find her ; Quintanilla , Jr. did not take the news well and alienated himself for some time . Selena and Pérez moved into an apartment in Corpus Christi . Quintanilla , Jr. approached Pérez , apologized , accepted the marriage , and took Pérez back into the band . 
 A month after her elopement , Selena released her third studio album , Entre a Mi Mundo , in May 1992 . The album was critically acclaimed as her " breakthrough album " . The recording peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart for 19 nonconsecutive weeks ; it was certified 6x Platinum by the RIAA for shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies . In Mexico , the album was certified gold for sales of 300 @,@ 000 units . Entre a Mi Mundo became the first Tejano album by a female artist to sell over 300 @,@ 000 copies . Selena 's album outsold those of male Tejano singers , according to editors of the Miami Herald and the San Jose Mercury News . The album produced four singles ; " Como La Flor " , " ¿ Qué Creías ? " , " La Carcacha " , and " Amame " . The lead single , " Como La Flor " , became Selena 's signature recording ; it was critically acclaim by music critics as a career launcher for Selena . " Como La Flor " helped Selena to dominate the Latin music charts and become immensely popular in Mexico — where Mexican @-@ Americans were generally not liked among citizens — which was well received by critics . The track was nominated for Song of the Year at the 1993 Tejano Music Awards . The single peaked at number six on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Songs chart . 
 Selena released Live ! in 1993 ; it was recorded during a free concert at the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi , on February 7 , 1993 . The album included previously released tracks that were sung live and three studio recordings ; " No Debes Jugar " , " La Llamada " , and " Tú <unk> Mi Corazón " — a duet with Tejano musician Emilio Navaira . The tracks " No Debes Jugar " and " La Llamada " peaked within the top five on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Songs chart . Live ! won the Grammy Award for Best Mexican / American Album at the 36th Grammy Awards . In May 1994 , Live ! was named Album of the Year by the Billboard Latin Music Awards . At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards , Live ! won Album of the Year . At the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards , the album was nominated for Regional Mexican Album of the Year . Live ! was certified gold by the RIAA for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies , while in Mexico it sold 250 @,@ 000 units . Selena briefly appeared opposite Erik Estrada in a Mexican telenovela titled Dos Mujeres , Un Camino . In 1995 she entered negotiations to star in another telenovela produced by Emilio <unk> . She appeared in two episodes , which garnered a record viewing figures for the series . 
 = = = 1994 – 95 : Fashion venture , film debut , and Amor Prohibido = = = 
 Aside from music , in 1994 Selena began designing and manufacturing a line of clothing ; she opened two boutiques called Selena Etc . , one in Corpus Christi and the other in San Antonio . Both were equipped with in @-@ house beauty salons . She was in negotiations to open more stores in Monterrey , Mexico , and Puerto Rico . Saldívar managed both boutiques after the Quintanilla family were impressed with the way she managed the fan club . Hispanic Business magazine reported that the singer earned over five million dollars from these boutiques . She was ranked among the twentieth @-@ wealthiest Hispanic musicians who grossed the highest income in 1993 and 1994 . Selena released her fourth studio album , Amor Prohibido , in March 1994 . The recording debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and number one on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums charts . After peaking at number one on the Top Latin Albums chart , the album remained in the top five for the remainder of the year and into early 1995 . Amor Prohibido became the second Tejano album to reach year @-@ end sales of 500 @,@ 000 copies , which had previously only been accomplished by La Mafia . It became one of the best @-@ selling Latin albums in the United States . Amor Prohibido spawned four number one singles ; the title track , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , and " Fotos y Recuerdos " . The album was certified double Platinum by the RIAA for shipments of two million copies in the United States . Amor Prohibido was among the best selling U.S. albums of 1995 . The album was named on Tom Moon 's list of the 1 @,@ 000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die : A Listener 's Life List ( 2008 ) . 
 The album popularized Tejano music among a younger and wider audience than at any other time in the genre 's history . The two singles , " Amor Prohibido " and " No Me Queda Más " , were the most successful U.S. Latin singles of 1994 and 1995 , respectively , according to Billboard magazine . The album 's commercial success led to a Grammy nomination for Best Mexican / American Album at the 37th Grammy Awards in 1995 . It won Record of the Year at the 1995 Tejano Music Awards and Regional / Mexican Album of the Year at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards . Selena was named " one of Latin music 's most successful touring acts " during her Amor Prohibido tour . After Amor Prohibido 's release , Selena was considered " bigger than Tejano itself " , and broke barriers in the Latin music world . She was called the " Queen of Tejano music " by many media outlets . Sales of the album and its titular single represented Tejano music 's first commercial success in Puerto Rico . Selena recorded a duet titled " Donde Quiera Que Estés " with the Barrio Boyzz , which was released on their album of the same name in 1994 . The song reached number one on the Top Latin Songs chart , which enabled Selena to tour in New York City , Argentina , Puerto Rico , the Dominican Republic , and Central America , where she was not well known . In late 1994 , EMI chairman Charles Koppelman decided Selena had achieved her goals in the Spanish @-@ speaking market . He wanted to promote her as an English @-@ language , American , solo pop artist . Selena continued touring while EMI began preparing the crossover album , engaging Grammy Award @-@ winning composers . By the time Selena performed to a record @-@ breaking , sold out concert at the Houston Astrodome in February 1995 , work had already begun on her crossover album . In 1995 , she made a cameo appearance in Don Juan DeMarco , which starred Marlon Brando , Johnny Depp , and Faye Dunaway . 
 = = Murder = = 
 The Quintanilla family appointed Saldívar manager of Selena 's boutiques in early 1994 . Eight months later , Selena signed Saldívar as her registered agent in San Antonio , Texas . After the agreement , Saldívar moved from San Antonio to Corpus Christi to be closer to Selena . In December 1994 , the boutiques began to suffer after the number of staff for both stores had decreased . According to staff members , Saldívar often dismissed employees she personally disliked . Staff at the stores regularly complained about Saldívar 's behavior to Selena , who dismissed the claims , believing Saldívar would not negatively impose erratic decisions on Selena 's fashion venture . According to Quintanilla , Jr . , the staff later turned their attention to him and began informing him about Saldívar 's behavior . Quintanilla , Jr. took the claims seriously ; he told Selena to " be careful " and said Saldívar may not be a good influence . Selena dismissed her father 's inquiries because he had often distrusted people in the past . By January 1995 , Selena 's cousin , her fashion designer Martin Gomez , and clients expressed their concerns over Saldívar 's behavior and management skills . During an interview with Saldívar in 1995 , reporters from The Dallas Morning News said her devotion to Selena bordered on obsession . 
 According to Quintanilla , Jr . , in January 1995 he began receiving telephone calls from fans who said they had paid for membership in the Selena fan club and had received nothing in return for it , and he began an investigation . Quintanilla , Jr. discovered that Saldívar had embezzled more than $ 60 @,@ 000 in forged checks from both the fan club and the boutiques . Quintanilla , Jr. held a meeting with Selena and Suzette on the night of March 9 at Q @-@ Productions to confront Saldívar . Quintanilla , Jr. presented Saldívar with the inconsistencies concerning the disappearing funds . Quintanilla , Jr. told her that if she did not provide evidence that disproved his accusations , he would involve the local police . Quintanilla , Jr. banned Saldívar from having any contact with Selena . However , Selena did not want to dissolve their friendship ; she thought Saldívar was essential to the success of the clothing line in Mexico . Selena also wanted to keep her close because she had bank records , statements , and financial records necessary for tax preparation . 
 On the morning of March 31 , 1995 , Selena met with Saldívar at her Days Inn motel room in Corpus Christi . At the motel , Selena demanded the financial papers ; Saldívar delayed the handover by saying she had been raped in Mexico . Selena then drove Saldívar to Doctors Regional Hospital , where doctors found no evidence of rape . At 11 : 48 a.m. ( CST ) , Saldívar drew a gun from her purse and pointed it at Selena . As Selena attempted to flee , Saldívar shot her once on the right lower shoulder , severing an artery and causing a massive loss of blood . Critically wounded , Selena ran towards the lobby , leaving a 392 @-@ foot ( 119 m ) -long trail of blood . She collapsed on the floor as the clerk called the emergency services , with Saldívar still chasing after her and calling her a " bitch " . Before collapsing , Selena named Saldívar as her assailant and gave the number of the room where she had been shot . Meanwhile , Saldívar got into her pickup truck and tried to leave the motel . However , she was spotted by a responding police cruiser . Saldívar surrendered after a nearly nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour standoff with police and the FBI . By that time , hundreds of fans had gathered at the scene ; many wept as police took Saldívar away . After 50 minutes of surgery , the doctors realized that the damage to Selena 's pierced artery was irreparable . Selena Quintanilla @-@ Pérez was pronounced dead from blood loss and cardiac arrest at 1 : 05 p.m. ( CST ) . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Selena 's murder had a widespread impact . Reactions to her death were compared to those following the deaths of musicians John Lennon , Elvis Presley , and U.S. president John F. Kennedy . Major television networks interrupted their regular programming to break the news ; Tom Brokaw referred to Selena as " The Mexican Madonna " . Her death was front page news in The New York Times for two days . Numerous vigils and memorials were held in her honor , and radio stations in Texas played her music non @-@ stop . Her funeral drew 60 @,@ 000 mourners , many of whom traveled from outside the United States . The news struck the Hispanic community extremely hard ; many fans traveled thousands of miles to see Selena 's house and boutiques , and the crime scene . By mid @-@ afternoon , police were asked to form a detour because a line of cars began backing up traffic from the <unk> ' houses . Among the celebrities who were reported to have contacted the Quintanilla family to express their condolences were Gloria Estefan , Celia Cruz , Julio Iglesias , and Madonna . Other celebrities — including Stefanie Ridel , Jaime DeAnda ( of Los <unk> ) , and Shelly Lares — appeared on radio stations to express their thoughts about Selena 's death . An issue of People magazine was released several days after her murder . Its publishers believed interest would soon wane ; they released a commemorative issue within a week when it became apparent it was growing . The issue sold nearly a million copies , selling the entire first and second print runs within two weeks . It became a collector 's item , a first in the history of People . Betty Cortina , editor of People , told Biography they never had an issue that was completely sold out ; " it was unheard of " . In the following months , the company released People en Español aimed at the Hispanic market , due to the success of the Selena issue . This was followed by Newsweek en Espanol and Latina magazine . 
 A few days later , Howard Stern mocked Selena 's murder and burial , poked fun at her mourners , and criticized her music . Stern said , " This music does absolutely nothing for me . Alvin and the Chipmunks have more soul ... Spanish people have the worst taste in music . They have no depth . " Stern 's comments outraged and infuriated the Hispanic community in Texas . Stern played Selena 's songs with gunshots in the background on his show . After a disorderly conduct arrest warrant was issued in his name , Stern made an on @-@ air statement , in Spanish , saying his comments were not made to cause " more anguish to her family , friends and those who loved her " . Stern was not formally charged ; the League of United Latin American Citizens boycotted Stern 's show , finding his apology unacceptable . Texas retailers removed any products that were related to Stern , while Sears and McDonald 's sent a letter stating their disapproval of Stern 's comments to the media , because some fans believed the companies sponsored Stern 's show . Within a week , on NBC 's The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Stern and Robin Quivers ( his co @-@ host ) were asked whether Stern 's remarks about Selena were acceptable . Quivers decided not to talk about the situation to avoid arguing with Stern . When Linda Ronstadt — a pop singer of Mexican @-@ American heritage — appeared on the show , she and Quivers argued when Ronstadt defended Selena . 
 On April 12 , 1995 , two weeks after Selena 's death , George W. Bush , governor of Texas at the time , declared her birthday , April 16 , Selena Day in the state . He said Selena represented " the essence of south Texas culture . " who never forgot where she came from . Some European Americans in Texas wrote to the editor of the <unk> Facts during April and May , asking what the big deal was ; some were offended that Selena Day fell on Easter Sunday . Others said , " Easter is more important than Selena Day " , and that they believed people should let Selena rest in peace and continue with their lives . Mexican Americans in Texas wrote vociferously to the newspaper . Some said others were too critical of Selena Day , and should not have responded so rudely . In October 1995 , a Houston jury convicted Saldívar of first @-@ degree murder and sentenced her to life in prison with the possibility of parole in 2025 . In 2002 , under a judge 's order , the gun used to kill Selena was destroyed and the pieces were thrown into Corpus Christi Bay . Fans and historians disapproved of the decision to destroy the gun , saying the event was historical and the gun should have been in a museum . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 Selena 's vocal range was soprano . In an April 1995 interview with Billboard magazine , Behar said he saw Selena as a " cross between Janet Jackson and Whitney Houston in style , feel , and vocal range " . Although Selena did not write most of her songs , she incorporated R & B , Latin pop , technopop , country and western , and disco into her Tejano music repertoire . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News said that during her music career , Selena " merges Tejano 's infectious cumbia rhythm with street @-@ savvy R & B , old @-@ school soul , dancehall reggae , sizzling salsa , and trippy , loopy funk " . Selena 's recordings expressed " love and pain , as well as strength and passion " , according to Charles Tatum . She also recorded independently driven , female @-@ empowerment @-@ themed compositions ; " Si La Quieres " , " ¿ Qué Creías ? " , " Ya Ves " and " Ya No " , which centered around inappropriate relationships and recovery from domestic violence . Peter Watrous of The New York Times said Selena 's voice " sometimes quivered " , and that she " roughed it up a bit " . He continued , " [ a ] t its best , it had a coolness , a type of unadorned passion " . Ilan Stavans called her music " <unk> @-@ melodramatic , cheesy , <unk> , not too far from Juan Gabriel and a relative of Iglesias " . Richard Corliss of Time magazine said her songs " are perky , cheerful rather than soulful " , and that earlier recordings , " with their tinny , Tijuana Brass charts , and keyboards that evoke <unk> , are ideal for the fairground or merry @-@ go @-@ round " . Corliss calls Selena 's singing an " expert mimicry of everything from Édith Piaf 's melodramatic contralto to the coloratura riffs of Mariah Carey . But the sounds are still lightly Hispanic . " 
 Newsweek magazine called Selena 's English @-@ language recordings " a blend of urban pop and Latin warmth " . According to Texas Monthly , Selena 's brother modernized her music into a more " funk and hip hop " sound . Selena 's use of emotive range during her musical career has been praised by critics as being her trademark . Quintanilla III wrote increasingly Cumbia @-@ influenced songs for Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) ; Ramiro Burr of Billboard said Selena and her band had " evolved a rhythmic style that demonstrated its increasing prowess for catchy cumbias such as ' Baila Esta Cumbia ' and the title track " . Italian essayist Gaetano Prampolini wrote that " Selena 's voice projected a sonorous warmth and joyfulness " during her review of Selena 's Cumbia recordings . In his review of the remix album Enamorada de Ti ( 2012 ) , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that Selena 's songs were " rooted in the ' 90s and sound that way — but [ Enamorada de Ti ] is a relatively fresher repackaging of her music than many of her posthumous releases " . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Quintanilla , Jr. sought to maintain Selena 's image clean and family @-@ oriented . In 1989 , she was offered sponsorship from beer companies but her father turned them down . Selena was often refused gigs at Tejano venues because she was a female singer in a male @-@ dominated music scene . Manuel Peña wrote that after 1989 , Selena 's popularity increased and she became a sex icon following the release of her debut album . Charles Tatum said Selena drew most attention was for her " beauty , sexuality , and youthful impact on the Tejano music scene " . Selena said she never wanted to record suggestive songs because of her upbringing and because her fan base consisted largely of young children , who regarded her as a role model . She further commented on the question of her sexual appeal to men during her crossover attempt , asserting that she will " stay the same " and that her English @-@ language recordings will refrain from foul language and sexual themes . In 1997 , María Celeste Arrarás wrote in her book about Selena 's death that the singer was a " sweet and charismatic girl " . According to Arrarás , Selena " trusted everyone " ; she often went shopping alone , despite her father 's concerns over her safety . 
 Betty Cortina of People magazine said Selena 's provocative choice of clothing was an acceptable emulation of Janet Jackson and Madonna , and that she wore " sexy outfits that <unk> a body of a Latina woman " . Cortina also stated that Selena had a " flamboyant style , an unbelievable body , curves and booty " . Arrarás wrote that Selena " began wearing clothes designed to emphasize her curvaceous figure " and that she " never came across as cheap @-@ simply sexy " . She also said Selena 's makeup regimen was not being " painted up or vulgar " . Arrarás also noted Selena 's " fun @-@ loving stage manner " and said she was " playful onstage and off " . Matt S. Meier wrote in his book The Mexican American Experience : An Encyclopedia ( 2010 ) that Selena exhibited " contagious energy " during her concerts and said she displayed " warmth , passion , and sexuality " while exuding a " down @-@ to @-@ earth persona of the wholesome young girl next door " . Selena wore outfits that accented her physical attributes and was not afraid to wear outfits she liked , despite criticism from parents who thought Selena 's choice of outfits were inappropriate for young girls , who began emulating Selena . Her views on public image in the fashion industry were bothersome ; she said she was opposed to the image that all woman should be " rail @-@ thin " and the notion that they must wear certain outfits and be " super @-@ young to be beautiful " . 
 In the early 1990s , Selena began wearing decorative bustiers , spandex or tight pants , and attractive , unbuttoned jackets during her concerts . She was inspired by Paula Abdul , Janet Jackson , and Madonna . During a 1992 interview , Selena said her choice of clothing does not reflect her personality . NBC News called Selena 's outfit " provocative " . Because of her choices of outfits and dance moves , she was named by her fans as the " Mexican Madonna " . According to Suzette , Selena often designed and sewed her own outfits backstage with her designers , moments before she was due on stage . Quintanilla , Jr. disapproved of Selena 's outfits , but he later accepted it when Selena discussed about it being a fashion trend . Selena became an inactive member of the Jehovah 's Witnesses due to her exotic clothing . During the photo shoot for Entre a Mi Mundo ( 1992 ) , a photographer remarked on the ways Selena 's choice of clothing affected Quintanilla , Jr. tremendously ; he often left sessions when Selena appeared in revealing outfits . Selena was credited as the first women to change public perceptions of feminine beauty ; a feminist , she blazed a trail for other female artists during her career . 
 Following Selena 's death , some celebrities questioned her status as a role model among Hispanic women . In her 1999 documentary about the singer , filmmaker Lourdes Portillo expressed concerns whether Selena was a great role model to young women . Portillo believed Selena was sending the wrong message to young girls by dancing in clothing that suggested <unk> . American author Sandra Cisneros agreed with Portillo 's assessment that Selena was " not a good role model to Latina women " . Media outlets also shared Portillo 's views ; they said the " fairy tale story " of Selena was one that her family would want to preserve , questioning Quintanilla , Jr . ' s role for pushing an image that Selena had " never made mistakes " into the media , calling it " lies " and " not the real story " . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 During her childhood , Selena helped organizations such as Toys for Tots . She was active in the U.S. Latino community , visiting local schools to talk to students about the importance of education . At <unk> Junior High School in Austin , she educated two hundred high school students about positive attitudes and setting life @-@ goals in their adult lives . Selena urged children to stay in school , and that alcohol and drugs will lead them nowhere in life . She spent her free time helping her community . Selena performed in Washington D.C. to celebrate the forming of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus . Following the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew , Selena helped victims in Florida by performing at a Houston benefit concert . 
 In August 1994 , Selena hosted a charity baseball game to raise money for unspecified charities . She also donated her time to civic organizations such as D.A.R.E. and planned a fund raising concert to help AIDS patients . Selena participated with the Texas Prevention Partnership which was sponsored by the Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse ( <unk> Corporation ) , which released an educational video that was sent to students for free . Her pro @-@ education videos included " My Music " and " Selena <unk> " . She was in the works for a Dallas @-@ Fort Worth , Texas Boys & Girls Clubs of America benefit concert . 
 In January 1995 , Selena headlined the Teach the Children festival in San Antonio . The concert funded a non @-@ profit program to provide school supplies to needy children . Selena was a spokesperson for women in abusive relationships . She also helped out at homeless shelters . According to the A & E television series Biography , Selena 's fans were often minorities ; she encouraged them to make the most of their lives . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Selena has been credited for helping redefine Latin music and its subgenres of Tejano , Cumbia , and Latin pop . Selena broke barriers in the Latin music world . She is considered " one of the most significant Mexican American singers of the end of the twentieth century " . Selena also became one of the " most celebrated cultural products " of the United States @-@ Mexico borderlands . Selena was called the " Queen of Tejano music " , and was described as " the most important and popular Tejano star of all time " . Her death was " the most devastating loss " in Tejano music history , according to Zach <unk> of the The Monitor . At the time of her death , Selena became one of the most widely known Mexican @-@ American vocal artists and the most popular Latin artist in the United States . She had a " cult @-@ like " following among Hispanics . 
 Selena has been named one of the most influential Latin artists of all @-@ time and has been credited for elevating a music genre into the mainstream market . Latin Post called the singer " one of the most iconic artists in Latin American music history " , while The New York Times called her " arguably the most important Latina musician in the country , on her way to becoming one of the most important , period . " Selena became a household name in the United States and in Mexico following her death and became part of the American pop culture . She became more popular in death than when she was alive . After her death , her popularity among the Hispanic population was compared to those of Marilyn Monroe and Madonna in Anglo @-@ American culture . According to author Carlota Caulfield , Selena was " one of the most popular Latina singers of the 1990s " . Selena 's popularity was drawn in by the LGBT community and minority groups in the United States . The popularity of Tejano music waned after her death , and as of 2015 , has not recovered . John Lannert of Billboard said in an interview with Biography in 2007 that when Selena died the " Tejano market died with her " . 
 Dreaming of You , the crossover album Selena had been working on at the time of her death , was released in July 1995 . It sold 175 @,@ 000 copies on the day of its release in the U.S. — a then @-@ record for a female vocalist — and sold 331 @,@ 000 copies its first week . Selena became the third female artist to sell over 300 @,@ 000 units in one week , after Janet Jackson and Mariah Carey . It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , becoming the first album by a Hispanic artist to do so . Dreaming of You helped Selena to become the first solo artist to debut a posthumous album at number one . The recording was among the top @-@ ten best @-@ selling debuts for a musician , and was the best @-@ selling debut by a female act . Dreaming of You joined five of Selena 's studio albums on the Billboard 200 chart simultaneously , making Selena the first female artist in Billboard history to do so . The album was certified <unk> platinum by the RIAA , for shipping more than 3 @.@ 5 million copies in the U.S. alone . As of 2015 , the recording has sold five million copies worldwide , becoming the best @-@ selling Latin album of all @-@ time in the United States . In 2008 , Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle said its lead single , " I Could Fall in Love " , had " made the Tejano goddess a posthumous crossover star " . Her death was believed to have sparked an interest in Latin music by people who were unaware of its existence . It was also believed her death " open [ ed ] the doors " to other Latin musicians such as Jennifer Lopez , Ricky Martin , and Shakira . 
 In the same year , the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Selena one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls . In December 1999 , Selena was named the " top Latin artist of the ' 90s " and " Best selling Latin artist of the decade " by Billboard for her fourteen top @-@ ten singles in the Top Latin Songs chart , including seven number @-@ one hits . She was the best @-@ selling Latin female singer of the 1990s in the U.S. and Mexico . Selena was named " Best Female Vocalist of the ' 80s " and " Best Female Vocalist of the ' 90s " at the 2010 Tejano Music Awards . 
 = = = Posthumous film and honors = = = 
 In the months following her death , a number of honors and tributes were erected . Several proposals were made , such as renaming streets , public parks , food products , and auditoriums . Two months later , a tribute was held at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards . The Spirit of Hope Award was created in Selena 's honor in 1996 ; it was awarded to Latin artists who participated in humanitarian and civic causes . On March 16 , 2011 , the United States Postal Service released a " Latin Legends " memorial stamp to honor Selena , Carlos Gardel , Tito Puente , Celia Cruz , and Carmen Miranda . In February 2014 , the Albany , NY Times Union named her one of " 100 Coolest Americans in History " . In 1997 Selena was commemorated with a museum and a life @-@ size bronze statue in Corpus Christi , which are visited by hundreds of fans each week . 
 In 1995 , Selena was inducted into the Billboard Latin Music Hall of Fame , the Hard Rock Cafe 's Hall of Fame , and the South Texas Music Hall of Fame . In 2001 she was inducted into the Tejano Music Hall of Fame . The singer received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2017 . She was named one of the 20 most influential Texans of all time by author Laurie <unk> . She was ranked fifth of the " 100 most influential Latin musicians of the 20th century " according to the Orange County Register . The singer has been given many epithets by media outlets , including the " Queen of Latin music " , the " Queen of Cumbia " , the " Chicana Elvis " , the " Queen of hybrid pop culture " , the " Hispanic Marilyn Monroe " , the " Tupac Shakur of Latin music " , the " Corpus Christi queen " , and the " people 's princess " . Media have compared Selena 's fashion sense to that of Madonna more times than any other celebrity . 
 In 1995 , Mexican actress Salma Hayek was chosen to play the role of Selena in a biopic film produced by the Quintanilla family and Warner Bros. Hayek turned the role down ; she said she felt it was " too early " to base a movie on Selena and that it would be emotional because Selena 's death was still being covered on U.S. television . Puerto Rican @-@ American actress Jennifer Lopez replaced Hayek , which drew criticism because of Lopez ' Puerto @-@ Rican ancestry . Over 21 @,@ 000 people auditioned for the title role , becoming the second largest audition since the search for Scarlett O 'Hara in Gone With the Wind ( 1939 ) . Gregory Nava directed for the film , which was released on March 21 , 1997 . After seeing Lopez ' performance in it , fans changed their views on her . Selena opened in 1 @,@ 850 theaters worldwide and grossed $ 11 @,@ 615 @,@ 722 , making it the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film debut that week . With a production budget of $ 20 million , the film grossed $ 35 million in the U.S. The film was a commercial and critical success and is often cited by critics as Lopez ' breakthrough role . Lopez rose into pop culture , for which the film 's success was credited . 
 In 1999 , a Broadway @-@ bound musical titled Selena was scheduled to premiere in San Antonio in March 2000 to commemorate the fifth anniversary of her murder . Broadway producers Tom Quinn , Jerry Frankel , Peter Fitzgerald , and Michael Vega staged the musical , and Edward Gallardo wrote the show 's book and lyrics . Fernando Rivas composed the show 's songs . In 2000 , Selena Forever was first produced ; the show embarked on a 30 @-@ city U.S. tour with a budget of over US $ 2 million . After a national casting call , producers chose Veronica Vasquez to portray Selena ; Vasquez alternated in the role with Rebecca Valdez . The musical previewed on March 21 , and opened on March 23 at the San Antonio Municipal Auditorium . 
 Selena 's family and her former band , Los Dinos , held a tribute concert on April 7 , 2005 , a week after the 10th anniversary of her murder . The concert , titled Selena ¡ VIVE ! , was broadcast live on Univision and achieved a 35 @.@ 9 household rating . It was the highest @-@ rated and most @-@ viewed Spanish @-@ language television special in the history of American television . The special was also the number @-@ one program in any language among adults ages 18 to 34 in Los Angeles , Chicago , and San Francisco ; it tied for first in New York , beating that night 's episode of Fox 's reality show American Idol . Among Hispanic viewers , Selena ¡ VIVE ! outperformed Super Bowl XLV and the telenovela Soy tu <unk> during the " most @-@ watched NFL season ever among Hispanics " . 
 In January 2015 , it was announced that a two @-@ day annual event called Fiesta de la Flor would be held in Corpus Christi for Selena by the Corpus Christi Visitors Bureau . Musical acts for the first annual event included Kumbia All @-@ Starz , Chris Pérez , Los Lobos , Jay Perez , Little Joe y la Familia , Los Palominos , Stefani Montiel of Las 3 Divas , Girl in a Coma 's Nina Diaz , Las Fenix , and previous The Voice competitor Clarissa Serna . The event raised $ 13 million with an attendance of 52 @,@ 000 people with 72 % of whom lived outside of Corpus Christi . The event sparked interest from people in 35 states and five different countries including Mexico , Brazil , and Ecuador . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Solo studio albums 
 Selena ( 1989 ) 
 Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) 
 Entre a Mi Mundo ( 1992 ) 
 Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) 
 Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Biographical programming = = = 
 True crime documentaries 
 = Peter Warlock = 
 Philip Arnold Heseltine ( 30 October 1894 – 17 December 1930 ) , known by the pseudonym Peter Warlock , was a British composer and music critic . The Warlock name , which reflects Heseltine 's interest in occult practices , was used for all his published musical works . He is best known as a composer of songs and other vocal music ; he also achieved notoriety in his lifetime through his unconventional and often scandalous lifestyle . 
 As a schoolboy at Eton College , Heseltine met the British composer Frederick Delius , with whom he formed a close friendship . After a failed student career in Oxford and London , Heseltine turned to musical journalism , while developing interests in folk @-@ song and Elizabethan music . His first serious compositions date from around 1915 . Following a period of drift and inactivity , a positive and lasting influence on his work arose from his meeting in 1916 with the Dutch composer Bernard van Dieren ; he also gained creative impetus from a year spent in Ireland , studying Celtic culture and language . On his return to England in 1918 , Heseltine began composing songs in a distinctive , original style , while building a reputation as a combative and controversial music critic . During 1920 – 21 he edited the music magazine The Sackbut . His most prolific period as a composer came in the 1920s , when he was based first in Wales and later at Eynsford in Kent . 
 Through his critical writings , published under his own name , Heseltine made a pioneering contribution to the scholarship of early music . In addition , he produced a full @-@ length biography of Delius and wrote , edited , or otherwise assisted the production of several other books and pamphlets . Towards the end of his life , Heseltine became depressed by a loss of his creative inspiration . He died in his London flat of coal gas poisoning in 1930 , probably by his own hand . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 = = = = Childhood and family background = = = = 
 Heseltine was born on 30 October 1894 at the Savoy Hotel , London , which his parents were using at the time as their town residence . The family was wealthy , with strong artistic connections and some background in classical scholarship . Philip 's parents were Arnold Heseltine , a solicitor in the family firm , and Bessie Mary Edith , née <unk> . She was the daughter of a country doctor from the Welsh border town of Knighton and was Arnold 's second wife . Soon after Philip 's birth , the family moved to Chelsea where he attended a nearby kindergarten and received his first piano lessons . 
 In March 1897 Arnold Heseltine died suddenly at the age of 45 . Six years later , Bessie married a Welsh landowner and local magistrate , Walter Buckley Jones , and moved to Jones 's estate , Cefn Bryntalch , <unk> , near Montgomery , although the London house was retained . The youthful Philip was proud of his Welsh heritage and retained a lifelong interest in Celtic culture ; later he would live in Wales during one of his most productive and creative phases . 
 In 1903 Heseltine entered Stone House Preparatory School in Broadstairs , where he showed precocious academic ability and won several prizes . In January 1908 , at a concert in the Royal Albert Hall , he heard a performance of Lebenstanz , composed by Frederick Delius . The work made little impression on him until he discovered that his uncle , Arthur Joseph Heseltine ( known as " Joe " ) , an artist , lived close to Delius 's home in Grez @-@ sur @-@ Loing in France . Philip then used the connection to obtain the composer 's autograph for Stone House 's music teacher , W. E. Brockway . 
 = = = = Eton : first meeting with Delius = = = = 
 Heseltine left Stone House in the summer of 1908 and began at Eton College that autumn . His biographer Ian Parrott records that he loathed Eton , " with its hearty adolescent bawling of Victorian hymns in an all @-@ male college chapel " . He was equally unhappy with other aspects of school life , such as the Officers ' Training Corps , the suggestive homosexuality , and endemic bullying . He found relief in music and , perhaps because of the connection with his uncle , formed an interest in Delius that developed into a near @-@ obsession . He also found a kindred spirit in an Eton music teacher and Delius advocate , the cellist Edward Mason , from whom Heseltine borrowed a copy of the score of Sea Drift . He thought it " heavenly " , and was soon requesting funds from his mother to purchase more of Delius 's music . According to Cecil Gray , Heseltine 's first biographer , " [ Heseltine ] did not rest until he had procured every work of Delius which was then accessible " . 
 In June 1911 Heseltine learned that Thomas Beecham was to conduct an all @-@ Delius concert at London 's Queen 's Hall on the 16th of that month , at which the composer would be present , and his Songs of Sunset would be given its first performance . Colin Taylor , a sympathetic Eton piano tutor , secured permission from the school for Heseltine to attend the event . Prior to this , his mother had contrived to meet Delius in her London home ; as a consequence , during the concert intermission Heseltine was introduced to the composer . The next day he wrote Delius a long appreciative letter : " I cannot adequately express in words the intense pleasure it was to me to hear such perfect performances of such perfect music " . He told his mother that " Friday evening was the most perfectly happy evening I have ever spent , and I shall never forget it " . Delius became the first strong formative influence of Heseltine 's compositional career , and although the initial adulation was later modified , a friendship began that would largely endure for the remainder of Heseltine 's life . 
 = = = Cologne , Oxford and London = = = 
 By the summer of 1911 , a year before he was due to leave the school , Heseltine had tired of life at Eton . Without a clear plan for his future , he asked his mother if he could live abroad for a while . His mother wanted him to go to university , and then either into the City or the Civil Service , but she agreed to his request with the proviso that he would resume his education later . In October 1911 he proceeded to Cologne to learn German and to study piano at the conservatory . In Cologne Heseltine produced his first few songs which , like all his earliest works , were highly imitative of Delius . The piano studies went poorly , although Heseltine expanded his musical experiences by attending concerts and operas . He also experimented with general journalism , publishing an article in Railway and Travel Monthly on the subject of a disused Welsh branch line . 
 In March 1912 Heseltine returned to London and engaged a tutor to prepare for his university entrance examinations . He spent time with Delius at that summer 's Birmingham Festival , and published his first music criticism , an article on Arnold Schoenberg that appeared in the Musical Standard in September 1912 . Despite his mother 's wishes and his lack of formal musical training , he hoped to make a career in music . He consulted Delius , who advised him that , if his mind was set , he should follow his instincts and pursue this objective in the face of all other considerations . Beecham , who knew both men , later sharply criticised this advice , on the grounds of Heseltine 's immaturity and instability . " Frederick should never have committed the psychological blunder of preaching the doctrine of relentless determination to someone incapable of receiving it " . In the end Heseltine acceded to his mother 's wishes . After passing the necessary examinations , he was accepted to study classics at Christ Church , Oxford , and began there in October 1913 . 
 A female acquaintance at Christ Church described the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Heseltine as " probably about 22 , but he appears to be years older ... 6 feet high , absolutely fit ... brilliant blue eyes ... and the curved lips and <unk> carriage of a young Greek God " . Although he enjoyed social success , he soon became depressed and unhappy with Oxford life . In April 1914 he spent part of his Easter vacation with Delius at Grez , and worked with the composer on the scores of An Arabesque and Fennimore and Gerda , in the latter case providing an English version of the libretto . He did not return to Oxford after the 1914 summer vacation ; with his mother 's reluctant consent he moved to Bloomsbury in London , and enrolled at University College London to study language , literature and philosophy . In his spare time he conducted a small amateur orchestra in Windsor , after admitting to Delius that he knew nothing of the art of conducting . However , his life as a student in London was brief ; in February 1915 , with the help of Lady Emerald Cunard ( a mistress of Beecham ) he secured a job as a music critic for the Daily Mail at a salary of £ 100 per year . He promptly abandoned his university studies to begin this new career . 
 = = = Unsettled years = = = 
 = = = = Music critic = = = = 
 During Heseltine 's four months at the Daily Mail , he wrote about 30 notices , mainly short reports of musical events but occasionally with some analysis . His first contribution , dated 9 February 1915 , described a performance by Benno Moiseiwitsch of Delius 's Piano Concerto in C minor , as " masterly " , while Delius was hailed as " the greatest composer England has produced for two centuries " . The other work in the programme was " the last great symphony that has been delivered to the world " : the Symphony in D minor by Franck . He wrote for other publications ; a 5000 @-@ word article , " Some notes on Delius and his Music " , appeared in the March 1915 issue of The Musical Times , in which Heseltine opined : " There can be no superficial view of Delius 's music : either one feels it in the very depths of one 's being , or not at all " . Only Beecham , Heseltine suggested , was capable of interpreting the music adequately . Heseltine 's last notice for the Daily Mail was dated 17 June ; later that month he resigned , frustrated by the paper 's frequent cutting of his more critical opinions . Unemployed , he spent his days in the British Museum , studying and editing Elizabethan music . 
 = = = = New friends and acquaintances = = = = 
 Heseltine spent much of the 1915 summer in a rented holiday cottage in the Vale of Evesham , with a party that included a young artist 's model named Minnie Lucie Channing , who was known as " Puma " because of her volatile temperament . She and Heseltine soon entered into a passionate love affair . During this summer break Heseltine shocked neighbours by his uninhibited behaviour , which included riding a motorcycle naked down nearby <unk> Hill . However , his letters show that at this time he was often depressed and insecure , lacking any clear sense of purpose . In November 1915 his life gained some impetus when he met D. H. Lawrence and the pair found an immediate rapport . Heseltine declared Lawrence to be " the greatest literary genius of his generation " , and enthusiastically fell in with the writer 's plans to found a Utopian colony in America . In late December he followed the <unk> to Cornwall , where he tried , unavailingly , to set up a publishing company with them . Passions between Heseltine and Puma had meanwhile cooled ; when she revealed that she was pregnant , Heseltine confided to Delius that he had little liking for her and had no intention of helping her to raise this unwanted child . 
 In February 1916 Heseltine returned to London , ostensibly to argue for exemption from military service . However , it became clear that there had been a rift with Lawrence ; in a letter to his friend Robert Nichols , Heseltine described Lawrence as " a bloody bore determined to make me wholly his and as boring as he is " . The social centre of Heseltine 's life now became the Café Royal in Regent Street , where among others he met Cecil Gray , a young Scottish composer . The two decided to share a Battersea studio , where they planned various unfulfilled schemes , including a new music magazine , and , more ambitiously , a London season of operas and concerts . Heseltine declined an offer from Beecham to participate in the latter 's English Opera Company , writing to Delius that Beecham 's productions and choices of works were increasingly poor and lacking in artistic value ; in his own venture there would be " no compromise with the mob " . Beecham ridiculed the plan ; he said it would " be launched and controlled by persons without the smallest experience of theatrical life " . 
 An event of considerable significance in Heseltine 's musical life , late in 1916 , was his introduction to the Dutch composer Bernard van Dieren . This friendship considerably influenced Heseltine , who for the rest of his life continued to promote the older composer 's music . In November 1916 Heseltine used the pseudonym " Peter Warlock " for the first time , in an article on Sir Eugene Aynsley Goossens ' chamber music for The Music Student . 
 Puma bore a son in July 1916 , though there is confusion about the child 's exact identity . Most biographers assumed him to be Nigel Heseltine , the future writer who published a memoir of his father in 1992 . However , in that memoir Nigel denied that Puma was his mother ; he was , he says , the result of a concurrent liaison between Heseltine and an unnamed Swiss girl . Subsequently he was given to foster @-@ parents , then adopted by Heseltine 's mother . Parrott records that the son born to Puma was called Peter , and died in infancy . Smith , however , states that Puma 's baby was originally called Peter but was renamed Nigel " for reasons which have not as yet been satisfactorily explained " . Whatever the truth of the paternity , and in spite of their mutual misgivings , Heseltine and Puma were married at Chelsea Register Office on 22 December 1916 . 
 = = = = Ireland = = = = 
 By April 1917 Heseltine had again tired of London life . He returned to Cornwall where he rented a small cottage near the <unk> , and made a partial peace with the writer . By the summer of 1917 , as Allied fortunes in the war stagnated , Heseltine 's military exemption came under review ; to forestall a possible conscription , in August 1917 he moved to Ireland , taking Puma , with whom he had decided he was , after all , in love . 
 In Ireland Heseltine combined studies of early music with a fascination for Celtic languages , withdrawing for a two @-@ month period to a remote island where Irish was spoken exclusively . Another preoccupation was an increasing fascination with magical and occult practices , an interest first awakened during his Oxford year and revived in Cornwall . A letter to Robert Nichols indicates that at this time he was " tamper [ ing ] ... with the science vulgarly known as Black Magic " . To his former tutor Colin Taylor , Heseltine enthused about books " full of the most astounding wisdom and illumination " ; these works included Eliphas Levi 's History of Transcendental Magic , which includes procedures for the invocation of demons . These diversions did not prevent Heseltine from participating in Dublin 's cultural life . He met W.B. Yeats , a fellow @-@ enthusiast for the occult , and briefly considered writing an opera based on the 9th @-@ century Celtic folk @-@ tale of <unk> and <unk> . The composer Denis <unk> has indicated that Heseltine 's obsession with the occult was eventually replaced by his studies in religious philosophies , to which he was drawn through membership of a theosophist group in Dublin . Heseltine 's interest in this field had originally been aroused by Kaikhosru Sorabji , the composer who had introduced him to the music of Béla Bartók . 
 On 12 May 1918 Heseltine delivered a well @-@ received illustrated lecture , " What Music Is " , at Dublin 's Abbey Theatre , which included musical excerpts from Bartók , the French composer Paul Ladmirault , and van Dieren . Heseltine 's championing of van Dieren 's music led in August 1918 to a vituperative war of words with the music publisher Winthrop Rogers , over the latter 's rejection of several van Dieren compositions . This dispute stimulated Heseltine 's own creative powers , and in his final two weeks in Ireland he wrote ten songs , which later critics have considered to be among his finest work . 
 = = = = Journalism and The Sackbut = = = = 
 When Heseltine returned to London at the end of August 1918 he sent seven of his new songs to Rogers for publication . Because of the recent contretemps over van Dieren , Heseltine submitted these pieces as " Peter Warlock " . They were published under this pseudonym , which he thereafter adopted for all his subsequent musical output , reserving his own name for critical and analytical writings . At around this time the composer Charles Wilfred Orr recalled Heseltine as " a tall fair youth of about my own age " , trying without success to convince a sceptical Delius of the merits of van Dieren 's piano works . Orr was particularly struck by Heseltine 's whistling abilities which he describes as " flute @-@ like in quality and purity " . 
 For the next few years Heseltine devoted most of his energy to musical criticism and journalism . In May 1919 he delivered a paper to the Musical Association , " The Modern Spirit in Music " , that impressed E.J. Dent , the future Cambridge University music professor . However , much of his writing was confrontational and quarrelsome . He made dismissive comments about the current standards of musical criticism ( " the average newspaper critic of music ... is either a shipwrecked or worn @-@ out musician , or else a journalist too incompetent for ordinary reporting " ) which offended senior critics such as Ernest Newman . He wrote provocative articles in the Musical Times , and in July 1919 feuded with the composer @-@ critic Leigh Henry over the music of Igor Stravinsky . 
 In a letter dated 17 July 1919 , Delius advised the younger man to concentrate either on writing or composing : " I ... know how gifted you are and what possibilities are in you " . By this time Heseltine 's privately expressed opinions on Delius 's music were increasingly critical , although in public he continued to sing his former mentor 's praises . In The Musical Times he cited Fennimore and Gerda , Delius 's final opera , as " one of the most successful experiments in a new direction that the operatic stage has yet seen " . 
 Heseltine had long nurtured a scheme to launch a music magazine , which he intended to start as soon as he found appropriate backing . In April 1920 , Rogers decided to replace his semi @-@ moribund magazine The Organist and <unk> , with a new music journal , The Sackbut , and invited Heseltine to edit it . Heseltine presided over nine issues , adopting a style that was combative and often controversial . The Sackbut also organised concerts , presenting works by van Dieren , Sorabji , Ladmirault and others . However , Rogers withdrew his financial backing after five issues . Heseltine then struggled to run it himself for several months ; in September 1921 the magazine was taken over by the publisher John Curwen , who promptly replaced Heseltine as editor . 
 = = = Productive years in Wales = = = 
 With no regular income , in the autumn of 1921 Heseltine returned to Cefn Bryntalch , which became his base for the next three years . He found the atmosphere there conducive to creative efforts ; he told Gray that " Wild Wales holds an enchantment for me stronger than wine or woman " . The Welsh years were marked by intense creative compositional and literary activity ; some of Heseltine 's best @-@ known music , including the song @-@ cycles <unk> and The Curlew , were completed along with numerous songs , choral settings , and a string serenade composed to honour Delius 's 60th birthday in 1922 . Heseltine also edited and transcribed a large amount of early English music . His recognition as an emerging composer was marked by the selection of The Curlew as representing contemporary British music at the 1924 Salzburg Festival . 
 Heseltine 's major literary work of this period was a biography of Delius , the first full @-@ length study of the composer , which remained the standard work for many years . On its 1952 reissue , the book was described by music publisher Hubert J. Foss as " a work of art , a charming and penetrating study of a musical poet 's mind " . Heseltine also worked with Gray on a study of the 16th @-@ century Italian composer Carlo Gesualdo , although disputes between the two men delayed the book 's publication until 1926 . 
 While visiting Budapest in April 1921 , Heseltine befriended the then little @-@ known Hungarian composer and pianist Béla Bartók . When Bartók visited Wales in March 1922 to perform in a concert , he stayed for a few days at Cefn Bryntalch . Although Heseltine continued to promote Bartók 's music , there are no records of further meetings after the Wales visit . Heseltine 's on @-@ off friendship with Lawrence finally died , after a thinly disguised and unflattering depiction of Heseltine and Puma ( " Halliday " and " <unk> " ) appeared in Women in Love , published in 1922 . Heseltine began legal proceedings for defamation , eventually settling out of court with the publishers , Secker and Warburg . Puma , meanwhile , had disappeared from Heseltine 's life . She returned from Ireland before he did , and had lived for a while with the young child Nigel at Cefn Bryntalch where the local gentry considered her " not of the same order of society as we are " . There was no resumption of married life , and she left Heseltine sometime in 1922 . 
 In September and October 1923 Heseltine accompanied his fellow @-@ composer E.J. Moeran on a tour of eastern England , in search of original folk music . Later that year he and Gray visited Delius at Grez . In June 1924 Heseltine left Cefn Bryntalch and lived briefly in a Chelsea flat , a stay marked by wild parties and considerable damage to the property . After spending Christmas 1924 in Majorca he leased a cottage ( formerly occupied by Foss ) in the Kent village of Eynsford . 
 = = = Eynsford = = = 
 At Eynsford , with Moeran as his co @-@ tenant , Heseltine presided over a bohemian household with a flexible population of artists , musicians and friends . Moeran had studied at the Royal College of Music before and after the First World War ; he avidly collected folk music and had admired Delius during his youth . Although they had much in common , he and Heseltine rarely worked together , though they did co @-@ write a song , " <unk> " . The other permanent Eynsford residents were Barbara Peache , Heseltine 's long @-@ term girlfriend whom he had known since the early 1920s , and Hal Collins , a New Zealand Māori who acted as a general factotum . Peache was described by Delius 's assistant Eric Fenby as " a very quiet , attractive girl , quite different from Phil 's usual types " . Although not formally trained , Collins was a gifted graphic designer and occasional composer , who sometimes assisted Heseltine . The household was augmented at various times by the composers William Walton and Constant Lambert , the artist Nina Hamnett , and sundry acquaintances of both sexes . 
 The ambience at Eynsford was one of alcohol ( the " Five Bells " public house was conveniently across the road ) and uninhibited sex ; these years are the primary basis for the Warlock legends of wild living and debauchery . Visitors to the house have left accounts of orgies , all @-@ night drunken parties , and rough horseplay that at least once brought police intervention . However , such activities were mainly confined to weekends ; within this unconventional milieu Heseltine accomplished much work , including settings from the Jacobean dramatist John Webster and the modern poet Hilaire Belloc , and the Capriol Suite in versions for string and full orchestra . Heseltine continued to transcribe early music , wrote articles and criticism , and finished the book on Gesualdo . He attempted to restore the reputation of a neglected Elizabethan composer , Thomas Whythorne , with a long pamphlet which , years later , brought significant amendments to Whythorne 's entry in The History of Music in England . He also wrote a general study of Elizabethan music , The English Ayre . 
 In January 1927 , Heseltine 's string serenade was recorded for the National <unk> Society , by John Barbirolli and an improvised chamber orchestra . A year later , HMV recorded the ballad " Captain Stratton 's Fancy " , sung by Peter Dawson . These two are the only recordings of Heseltine 's music released during his lifetime . His association with the poet and journalist Bruce Blunt led to the popular Christmas anthem " Bethlehem Down " , which the pair wrote in 1927 to raise money for their Christmas drinking . By the summer of 1928 his general lifestyle had created severe financial problems , despite his industry . In October he was forced to give up the cottage at Eynsford , and returned to Cefn Bryntalch . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 By November 1928 , Heseltine had tired of Cefn Bryntalch , and returned to London . He sought concert reviewing and cataloguing assignments without much success ; his main creative activity was the editing , under the pseudonym " Rab <unk> " ( " Saloon Bar " backwards ) , of Merry @-@ Go @-@ Down , an anthology in praise of drinking . The book , published by The Mandrake Press , was copiously illustrated by Hal Collins . 
 Early in 1929 Heseltine received two offers from Beecham which temporarily restored his sense of purpose . Beecham had founded the Imperial League of Opera ( ILO ) in 1927 ; he now invited Heseltine to edit the ILO journal . Beecham also asked Heseltine to help organise a festival to honour Delius , which the conductor was planning for October 1929 . Although Heseltine 's enthusiasm for Delius 's music had diminished , he accepted the assignment , and travelled to Grez in search of forgotten compositions that could be resurrected for the festival . He declared that he was delighted to discover Cynara , for voice and orchestra , abandoned since 1907 . For the festival , Heseltine prepared many of the programme notes for individual concerts and supplied a concise biography of the composer . According to Delius 's wife Jelka : " Next to Beecham , he [ Heseltine ] really was the soul of the thing " . 
 At a Promenade Concert in August 1929 , Heseltine conducted a performance of the Capriol Suite , the single public conducting engagement of his life . In an effort to reproduce their success with " Bethlehem Down " , he and Blunt proffered a new carol for Christmas 1929 , " The <unk> Wood " . Although the work was technically accomplished , it failed to achieve the popularity of its predecessor . Heseltine edited three issues of the ILO journal , but in January 1930 , Beecham announced the closure of the venture , and Heseltine was out of work again . His attempt on behalf of van Dieren to raise financing to mount a performance of the latter 's opera The Tailor also failed . 
 The final summer of Heseltine 's life was marked by gloom , depression , and inactivity ; <unk> refers to Heseltine 's sense of " crimes against the spirit " , and an obsession with imminent death . In July 1930 a fortnight spent with Blunt in Hampshire brought a brief creative revival ; Heseltine composed " The Fox " to Blunt 's lyrics , and on his return to London he wrote " The Fairest May " for voice and string quartet . These were his final original compositions . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In September 1930 Heseltine moved with Barbara Peache into a basement flat at <unk> Tite Street in Chelsea . With no fresh creative inspiration , he worked in the British Museum to transcribe the music of English composer Cipriani Potter , and made a solo version of " Bethlehem Down " with organ accompaniment . On the evening of 16 December Heseltine met with van Dieren and his wife for a drink and invited them home afterwards . According to van Dieren , the visitors left at about 12 : 15 a.m. Neighbours later reported sounds of movement and of a piano in the early morning . When Peache , who had been away , returned early on 17 December , she found the doors and windows bolted , and smelled coal gas . The police broke into the flat and found Heseltine unconscious ; he was declared dead shortly afterwards , apparently as the result of coal gas poisoning . 
 An inquest was held on 22 December ; the jury could not determine whether the death was accidental or suicide and an open verdict was returned . Most commentators have considered suicide the more likely cause ; Heseltine 's close friend Lionel Jellinek and Peache both recalled that he had previously threatened to take his life by gas and the outline of a new will was found among the papers in the flat . Much later , Nigel Heseltine introduced a new theory — that his father had been murdered by van Dieren , the sole beneficiary of Heseltine 's 1920 will , which stood to be revoked by the new one . This theory is not considered tenable by most commentators . 
 Philip Heseltine was buried alongside his father at Godalming cemetery on 20 December 1930 . In late February 1931 , a memorial concert of his music was held at the Wigmore Hall ; a second such concert took place in the following December . In 2011 the art critic Brian Sewell published his memoirs , in which he revealed that he was Heseltine 's illegitimate son , born in July 1931 seven months after the composer 's death . Sewell 's mother , unnamed , was an intermittent girlfriend , a Roman Catholic who refused Heseltine 's offer to pay for an abortion and subsequently blamed herself for his death . Sewell was unaware of his father 's identity until 1986 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Heseltine 's surviving body of work includes about 150 songs , mostly for solo voice and piano . He also wrote choral pieces , some with instrumental or orchestral accompaniment , and a few purely instrumental works . Among lost or destroyed works the musicologist Ian Copley lists two stage pieces : sketches for the abandoned opera <unk> and <unk> , and the draft of a mime @-@ drama Twilight ( 1926 ) which Heseltine destroyed on the advice of Delius . Music historian Stephen Banfield described the songs as " polished gems of English art song forming a pinnacle of that genre 's brilliant brief revival in the early 20th century ... [ works of ] intensity , consistency and unfailing excellence " . According to Delius 's biographer Christopher Palmer , Heseltine influenced the work of fellow @-@ composers Moeran and Orr , and to a lesser extent Lambert and Walton , primarily by bringing them within the Delius orbit . In the case of the latter pair , Palmer argues , " those reminiscences of Delius which crop up from time to time in [ their ] music ... are more probably Delius filtered through Warlock " . 
 Heseltine biographer Brian Collins considers the composer a prime mover in the 20th @-@ century renaissance of early English music ; apart from much writing on the subject , he made well over 500 transcriptions of early works . He also wrote or contributed to ten books , and wrote dozens of general music articles and reviews . Many years later , Gray wrote of Heseltine : " In the memory of his friends , he is as alive now as he ever was when he trod the earth , and so he will continue to be until the last of us are dead " . During his Eynsford years , Heseltine had provided his own epitaph : 
 Here lies Warlock the composer 
 Who lived next door to Munn the grocer . 
 He died of drink and copulation , 
 A sad discredit to the nation . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 In the early 20th century the German @-@ influenced 19th @-@ century song @-@ writing traditions generally followed by Hubert Parry , Charles Villiers Stanford , Edward Elgar and Roger Quilter , were in a process of eclipse . For composers such as Ralph Vaughan Williams and George Butterworth , English folk @-@ song became a dominant feature of their work ; at the same time , songwriters were seeking to extend their art by moving beyond the piano to develop richer forms of vocal accompaniment . Thus , as Copley observes , at the outset of his career as a composer Heseltine found in song @-@ writing a dynamic ambience , " within which he could express himself , or against which he could react " . 
 By the time Heseltine began composing seriously , around 1915 – 16 , he had started to shake off the overwhelming influence of Delius . He had discovered English folk @-@ song in 1913 , his Oxford year , and had begun to study Elizabethan and Jacobean music . In 1916 he came under the spell of van Dieren , whose influence soon exceeded that of Delius and led to a significant development in compositional technique , first evident in the <unk> song cycle of 1916 – 17 . Gray writes that from Van Dieren , Heseltine " learned to purify and organise his harmonic texture ... and the thick , muddy chords which characterised the early songs gave place to clear and vigorous part @-@ writing " . " In 1917 – 18 Heseltine 's passion for Celtic culture , stimulated by his stay in Ireland , brought a new element to his music , and in 1921 he discovered Bartók . A late passion was the music of John Dowland , the Elizabethan lutenist , one of whose dances he arranged for brass band . These constituent parts contributed to the individual style of Heseltine 's music . Gray summarised this style thus ; 
 They [ the differing elements ] are fused together in a curiously personal way : the separate ingredients can be analysed and defined , but not the ultimate product , which is not Dowland plus van Dieren or Elizabethan plus modern , but simply something wholly individual and <unk> — Peter Warlock . No one else could have written it . 
 Apart from those within his circle , Heseltine drew inspiration from other composers whose work he respected : Franz Liszt , Gabriel Fauré , and Claude Debussy . He had , however , a particular dislike for the works of his fellow song @-@ writer Hugo Wolf . Heseltine 's songs demonstrate moods of both darkness and warm good humour , a dichotomy that helped to fuel the idea of a split Warlock / Heseltine personality . This theory was rejected by the composer 's friends and associates , who tended to see the division in terms of " Philip drunk or Philip sober " . 
 = = = General character = = = 
 In a summary of the Warlock oeuvre , Copley asserts that Heseltine was a natural melodist in the Schubert mould : " With very few exceptions his melodies will stand on their own ... they can be sung by themselves with no accompaniment , as complete and <unk> as folk @-@ songs " . Copley identifies certain characteristic motifs or " fingerprints " , which recur throughout the works and which are used to depict differences of mood and atmosphere : anguish , resignation but also warmth , tenderness and amorous dalliance . The music critic Ernest Bradbury comments that Heseltine 's songs " serve both singer and poet , the one in their memorably tuneful vocal lines , the other in a scrupulous regard for correct accentuation free from any suggestion of pedantry " . 
 In musical parlance Heseltine was a miniaturist , a title which he was happy to accept in disregard of the sometimes derogatory implications of the label : " I have neither the impulse nor the ability to erect monuments before which a new generation will bow down " . He was almost entirely self @-@ taught , avoiding through his lack of a formal conservatory training the " <unk> shadow " — the influence of the German masters . To the charge that his technique was " amateurish " , he responded by arguing that a composer should express himself in his own terms , not by " string [ ing ] together a number of tags and clichés culled from the work of others " . His compositions were themselves part of a learning process ; The Curlew song cycle originated in 1915 with the setting of a Yeats poem , but did not reach completion until 1922 . Brian Collins characterises this work as " a chronicle of [ the composer 's ] progress and development " . 
 = = = Critical appraisal = = = 
 Heseltine 's music was generally well received by public and critics . The first Warlock compositions to attract critical attention were three of the Dublin songs which Rogers published in 1918 . William Child in The Musical Times thought these " first rate " , and singled out " If Ever I Saw " as having particular distinction . In 1922 , in the same magazine , the short song cycle Mr Belloc 's Fancy was likewise praised , especially " Warlock 's rattling good tunes and appropriately full @-@ blooded accompaniment " . Ralph Vaughan Williams was delighted with the reception accorded to the Three Carols , when he conducted the Bach Choir at the Queen 's Hall in December 1923 . Early in 1925 the BBC broadcast a performance of the Serenade for string orchestra written to honour Delius , a sign , says Smith , that the music establishment was beginning to take Warlock seriously . Heseltine himself noted the warmth of the Prom audience 's reaction to his conducting of the Capriol Suite in 1929 : " I was recalled four times " . 
 After Heseltine 's death , assessments of his musical stature were generous . Newman considered some of Heseltine 's choral compositions " among the finest music written for massed voices by a modern Englishman . " Constant Lambert hailed him as " one of the greatest song @-@ writers that music has ever known " , a view echoed by Copley . In a tribute published in The Musical Times , van Dieren referred to Heseltine 's music as " a national treasure " that would long survive all that was currently being said or written about it . In subsequent years his standing as a composer diminished ; Brian Collins records how public perceptions of Warlock were distorted by the scandalous reports of his private life , so that his musical importance in the inter @-@ war years became obscured . However , when the Peter Warlock Society was created in 1963 , interest in his music began to increase . Collins acknowledges that the Warlock output includes much that can be dismissed as mere programme @-@ fillers and encore items , but these do not detract from numerous works of the highest quality , " frequently thrilling and passionate and , occasionally , innovative to the point of being revolutionary " . 
 = = Writings = = 
 As well as a large output of musical journalism and criticism , Heseltine wrote or was significantly involved in the production of 10 books or long pamphlets : 
 Frederick Delius ( 1923 ) . John Lane , London 
 Thomas Whythorne : An unknown Elizabethan composer ( 1925 ) . Oxford University Press , London ( pamphlet ) 
 ( Editor ) Songs of the Gardens ( 1925 ) . Nonesuch Press , London ( anthology of 18th @-@ century popular songs ) 
 ( Preface ) <unk> by <unk> <unk> , tr . C.W. Beaumont ( 1925 ) . Beaumont , London 
 The English Ayre ( 1926 ) . Oxford University Press , London 
 ( with Cecil Gray ) Carlo Gesualdo , Prince of Venosa : Musician and Murderer ( 1926 ) . Kegan Paul , London 
 Miniature Essays : E.J. Moeran ( 1926 ) . J. & W. Chester , London ( pamphlet , issued anonymously ) 
 ( with Jack Lindsay ) Loving Mad Tom : <unk> verses of the 16th and 17th centuries ( 1927 ) . <unk> Press , London ( musical transcriptions by Peter Warlock ) 
 ( Editor , joint with Jack Lindsay ) The Metamorphosis of Ajax ( 1927 ) . <unk> Press , London 
 ( Editor under the name " Rab <unk> " ) Merry @-@ Go @-@ Down , A Gallery of Gorgeous Drunkards through the ages ( 1929 ) ( anthology ) 
 At the time of his death Heseltine was planning to write a life of John Dowland . 
 = Lemonade ( Alexandra Stan song ) = 
 " Lemonade " is a song recorded by Romanian singer and songwriter Alexandra Stan for her Japan @-@ only reissue , Cliché ( Hush Hush ) ( 2013 ) . It was released for radio airplay in Italy on 12 June 2012 , followed by its digital release on 14 June 2012 through MediaPro Music in Romania and on 1 August 2012 in Japan . Written and produced by Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi , the single incorporates EDM , reggae @-@ pop and dubstep into its composition ; it makes use of harmonica and accordions . Upon its release , " Lemonade " was met with positive reviews from music critics , with them naming it " catchy " , " fresh " and a highlight , while one of them <unk> it as having a strong radio performance . It also drew <unk> to the works of Britney Spears , Kelis and Lady Gaga . 
 An accompanying music video for the recording was posted onto YouTube on 4 June 2012 ; it was shot by Iulian Moga in Buftea , Romania , and portrays Stan walking through the city and being present at a block party . Commercially , " Lemonade " peaked on some European record charts , becoming a number @-@ one hit in Bulgaria and reaching the top thirty in Italy , Japan and Slovakia . It was as well certified Gold by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 copies in Italy . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Winston Cook @-@ Wilson from Inverse called the song an EDM , reggae and " sunny " pop recording featuring a " nonsensical " harmonica . Bradley Stern , writing for MuuMuse , named the genre of the track " Ace of Base @-@ esque reggae @-@ pop " , while labeling its lyrics as " completely nonsense " and noticing the use of accordions . Furthermore , Stern pointed out a " stuttering " dubstep breakdown throughout " Lemonade " , which , according to him , was inspired by Britney Spears ' " Hold It Against Me " ( 2011 ) . Jonathan <unk> from Pure Charts felt that the recording was of dance @-@ pop genre , <unk> " a major musical turn with reggae sounds " . 
 Romanian website Urban.ro confessed that the single was a mixture between 1990 's music , Kelis ' " Milkshake " ( 2003 ) , Lady Gaga 's " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) ( 2009 ) and some dubstep influences . The same portal also pointed out the change of Stan 's artistry , with them explaining the departure from her previous popcorn styles . According to Stan 's label , MediaPro Music , " Lemonade " portrayed a positive lyrical message about enjoying life in every moment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Lemonade " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Website Inverse 's Winston Cook @-@ Wilson praised the track for being complex . Cook @-@ Wilson continued into saying that the recording " is just something to sip on a hot day — also , a way to cool down when thinking about a loved one " . Kevin Apaza , writing for Direct Lyrics labelled the single " fresh and funky " , confessing that he likes it better than its predecessors " 1 @.@ 000 @.@ 000 " ( 2011 ) and " Get Back ( ASAP ) " ( 2011 ) . Furthermore , Apaza <unk> " Lemonade " as a club hit with the help of " a few killer remixes " . MTV declared the song as being " catchy " , while stating that " you 'd be hard @-@ pressed to turn down a glass of what Stan ’ s serving this summer " . Music channel <unk> applauded the single , foreseeing it successful on radio . 
 " Lemonade " debuted at number 74 on the Italian Singles Chart , with it reaching its peak position at number 33 on the chart compiled for 3 September 2012 – 9 September 2012 . It was certified Gold by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 copies in that territory . The recording remained a number @-@ one hit in Bulgaria , while peaking at number 70 in Czech Republic , number 38 in Hungary , number 18 in Slovakia and number 27 on the Japan Hot 100 . On native Airplay 100 , " Lemonade " managed to peak at number 64 on the year @-@ end chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Lemonade " was posted onto the YouTube channel of Stan 's label , Maan Studio , on 4 June 2012 after it was previewed one day before . It was shot by Iulian Moga in April 2012 at the MediaPro Pictures studios in Buftea , Romania . The clip commences with Stan entering a kitchen wearing a red @-@ white stripped dress . Subsequently , she is portrayed cutting lemons and making lemonade , following which she makes a phone call and walks down the street sporting a lemon @-@ printed yellow dress and smiling into the camera . Next , Stan is seen singing in front of a red car , flirting with a man , which is followed by the appearance of two police men . They enter a store and the singer is presented selling lemons in the street . Afterwards , the video switches from color to sepia , as she is present at a block party ; it closes with Stan posing in front of a backdrop designed with different types of shoes . 
 Kevin Apaza from Direct Lyrics praised the clip , naming it one of her best works yet . He went on into calling the video " cute " and comparing one of Stan 's outfits to <unk> culture . Urban.ro was positive towards the music video , stating that it " illustrates the single beautifully " and that they like " the colors , the styling , all " . Los 40 Principales cited the clip in their list of Stan 's best videos along with " Dance " ( 2014 ) , " Cherry Pop " ( 2014 ) , " Thanks for Leaving " ( 2014 ) , " Cliché ( Hush Hush ) " ( 2012 ) , " Get Back ( ASAP ) " , " 1 @.@ 000 @.@ 000 " ( 2011 ) , " Mr. Saxobeat " ( 2011 ) , " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " ( 2009 ) and " All My People " ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Cliché ( Hush Hush ) . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Maan Studio in Constanța , Romania . 
 Technical and songwriting 
 Andrei Nemirschi – songwriter , producer 
 Marcel Prodan – songwriter , producer 
 Alexandra Stan – lead vocals 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 The track was first released for radio airplay in Italy on 12 June 2012 , following which it was made available for digital download in Romania on 14 June 2012 through MediaPro Music . Subsequently , " Lemonade " was released in Italy through iTunes Store one day later , with a remixes EP being premiered in that country on 24 July 2012 by <unk> <unk> . From August to October 2012 , the recording was released to Japan , Spain and the United States through Maan Studio , Blanco y Negro Music and Ultra Records , respectively . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Pennsylvania Route 284 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 284 ( PA 284 ) is a 9 @.@ 043 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 14 @.@ 553 km ) state highway located in Lycoming County in Pennsylvania . The western terminus is at PA 287 in English Center and the eastern terminus is at an interchange with US 15 in the Buttonwood section of McNett Township . PA 284 was designated as a spur of Pennsylvania Route 84 in the 1928 renumbering of state highways in Pennsylvania . The route was paved in 1932 and has remained relatively untouched since , although Route 84 was re @-@ designated as PA 287 in 1961 to avoid duplication with Interstate 84 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 284 begins at an intersection with PA 287 just north of the village of English Center . The road winds northeast through rural Lycoming County alongside nearby Little Pine Creek . PA 284 runs through Pine Township , soon reaching the newly named Blackstone Creek ( from Little Pine ) . The two @-@ lane continues through the dense woods in the area , paralleling Blackstone Creek into the village of Buttonwood . In Buttonwood , PA 284 enters an interchange with US 15 , first intersecting with the ramp to US 15 south . After crossing the freeway , PA 284 curves north and ends at the junction with an on @-@ ramp to US 15 northbound . 
 = = History = = 
 A road in the location of PA 284 first shows on maps as early as 1873 . PA 284 was first designated along its current alignment during the 1928 renumbering of state highways in Pennsylvania . The designation was done as a spur to the alignment of PA 84 , which was designated from Piatt Township to the New York state line . The entire alignment of PA 284 was paved by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in 1932 , including the bridge over <unk> Run and Blacks Creek . However , the alignment has remained relatively unchanged since . In 1961 , with the designation of Interstate 84 , the alignment of PA 84 was re @-@ designated as PA 287 to avoid duplication . In 1974 , PA 284 was adjusted for the construction of the new U.S. Route 15 alignment . This was adjusted in 1998 with the construction of U.S. Route 15 for preparations to convert the route to Interstate 99 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Lycoming County . 
 = First Strike ( Stargate Atlantis ) = 
 " First Strike " is the 60th episode and the third season finale of the science fiction television series Stargate Atlantis . The episode originally aired in Canada on February 5 , 2007 on The Movie Network , and subsequently aired March 14 on Sky One in the United Kingdom , and June 22 on the United States Sci Fi Channel . It was written by executive producer Martin Gero , and directed by Martin Wood . The episode is the first of a three @-@ parter , in which the new Earth ship Apollo arrives at Atlantis to conduct a preemptive strike against the Asurans before they can launch a fleet to attack Earth . 
 " First Strike " was a beginning to a new direction for the series . It aired alongside " Unending " , the series finale of Stargate SG @-@ 1 . At the time it was considered the best episode the producers have done , and featured one of the longest visual effects sequences in the series . The episode earned Stargate Atlantis the strongest ratings since the mid @-@ season hiatus , and was generally well received . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The newest Earth warship , Apollo , arrives at Atlantis . Its commander , Abe Ellis ( Michael Beach ) , informs the Expedition that recon missions have discovered the Asurans building ships on their homeworld , which the IOA believe will be used to attack Earth . As the ships are built from only conventional materials , Apollo has been assigned to destroy them in a preemptive strike , using the new " Horizon " weapons delivery system . Apollo successfully carries out the mission over the objections of Weir ( Torri Higginson ) , who feels her authority being increasingly sidelined . 
 Soon after Apollo returns to Atlantis , the Asurans retaliate by launching a Stargate satellite that fires an energy beam , disabling the Apollo before zeroing in on Atlantis . The beam will deplete the city 's shield in just under 30 hours , and with the satellite and its active Stargate over the city , the Expedition cannot evacuate using their own Stargate . McKay ( David Hewlett ) and Zelenka ( David Nykl ) submerge the city to mitigate the effect of the beam , but this only buys them nine more hours before the city is destroyed . 
 Realizing that the only way to save Atlantis is to move the city out of the satellite 's range , McKay and Sheppard ( Joe Flanigan ) decide to use their one Zero Point Module and the geothermal power station found in " <unk> " to power the stardrive . Lorne ( Kavan Smith ) and a squadron of F @-@ 302s are sent to temporarily block the beam using a large moon fragment , so that shield power can be redirected into the stardrive . However , the beam resumes as the city lifts off , briefly grazing the central tower before the shield can be restored . Weir is severely injured and is taken to the infirmary by Beckett 's replacement , Jennifer Keller ( Jewel Staite ) . Atlantis jumps into hyperspace , but the stardrive unexpectedly shuts down well before they reach their destination . McKay realizes that they are marooned in deep space , with only 24 hours before the shield runs out of power and the city 's occupants are exposed to space . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 " First Strike " first surfaced on September 2006 . It was conceived after the completion of the mid @-@ season two @-@ parter , " The Return " , where writer Martin Gero wanted Atlantis leave the planet , but didn 't know how and why it would happen until the episode was written . Gero also wanted Atlantis damaged and drop out of hyperspace into deep space by the end , so the following episode " Adrift " would follow . The Stargate satellite was originally meant to be a moon @-@ sized satellite sent to destroy <unk> , but was dropped in favour for the Stargate satellite to destroy Atlantis , since a previous episode " Echoes " involved the saving of <unk> , and Brad Wright deemed its proposed destruction inappropriate . The scene where Weir thought her leadership challenged was needed to be written , since there were several instances in past episodes where the military step in as leaders . The scene where Ronon Dex says he needs to learn more science was written to parallel Ronon 's appearance in only a few scenes . Gero also wrote the Fantastic Four into the scene , where Sheppard compared Teyla Emmagan to the Invisible Woman , paralleling the lack of Teyla 's appearance as well . 
 " First Strike " introduced Jewel Staite as Jennifer Keller . Staite was originally cast because the producers loved her appearance as <unk> , a Wraith adolescent in season two episode " Instinct " . Gero created the character to not take over Carson Beckett , but to fill in for him , and thought it endearing to have Keller uncomfortable in her new position . She was originally meant to be a Canadian character , but because fellow executive producer Paul Mullie thought there were already enough Canadian characters , she was turned into an American instead . The third season saw less of Mitch Pileggi as Colonel Caldwell , commander of the Daedalus , due to other commitments ( including Day Break ) . The writers didn 't want to kill him off , so they chose to introduce a new character instead , which was where the Apollo was introduced , as well as Abe Ellis , the ship 's commander . Gero added a list of actors that would be suitable to play him . When Michael Beach was suggested , the crew decided to go with him . However , Beach wasn 't familiar with the Stargate franchise , and was compelled to join the series by his mother , who was a fan . David Ogden Stiers again guest starred as Oberoth . Stiers actually drove from Los Angeles to Vancouver , though he was only wanted for one scene . A retired Colonel of the United States Air Force and his wife made cameo appearances . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was filmed during the end of September / beginning of October , 2006 . One of the first scenes , where Keller talks to Weir was done on one long take . In the middle of the scene , the two entered an Atlantis transporter to another floor . The scene was filmed on the same floor , and during the time on the transporter , around 40 people quickly redecorated the hallway . The first scene Michael Beach appeared in was the conference at the beginning of the episode . Despite his lack of knowledge to the series , Beach still acted the scene in one take , where the writers were convinced at his acting style . Beach also asked several questions about the direction and characteristics of his character . Martin Wood noted that he asked " all the right questions . " The scene showing McKay and Zelenka below the horizon was filmed from above by Brad Wright 's request , though Gero and Wood wanted the scene shot horizontally . The one scene featuring Stiers as Oberoth was the conversation between him and Weir , which was filmed on the same large room , only Stiers and Torri Higginson had their back to each other around five to ten feet apart . 
 Three camera angles were used during Lorne 's scene in the F @-@ 302 . To save costs , one of the camera angles was operated by Kavan Smith himself , who held it on his lap . Elsewhere , the producers wanted to make the control chair rotate as Sheppard flies the city to make it different than any other actions involving the control chair . A stunt towards the end of the episode was used where Weir gets thrown after the beam grazes the tower . The stunt was not originally approved by the producers . A stuntwoman doubled Higginson as Weir during the sequence . The scene was rehearsed several times before filming the actual sequence . During the actual sequence , the stuntwoman wore a plastic mask to prevent the flying glass from injuring her face . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The episode 's visual effects were produced by Rainmaker Digital Effects . Gero wrote the scene involving the minute long sequence where the Horizon weapon fires from the Apollo to the Asuran homeworld . He made contact with Mark Savela to see if it could be done ; Savela was up to the challenge . The sequence was costly , since the visual effects team had to make a 3D world that would last a minute long to ensure that the sequence followed Gero 's script . The sequences where Atlantis takes off from the bottom of the ocean were stock footage from " Rising " , with the shield and beam added on . Another reason to keep the scenes was because the writers liked the scene to be reused . Another visual effect was used to switch Keller 's flag patch from Canadian to American , since the decision to have Keller an American character was made after filming . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " First Strike " earned a household rating of 1 @.@ 5 , representing just below 2 million viewers ; 1 @.@ 1 million from the 25 @-@ 54 demographic , and 986 @,@ 000 from the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . It was the strongest rating for the series since the 1 @.@ 6 rating from " The Return , Part 1 " . This placed Stargate Atlantis the Sci Fi Channel 's second most viewed series , losing only to Stargate SG @-@ 1 's final episode " Unending " , which achieved a household rating of 1 @.@ 7 , representing 2 @.@ 2 million viewers ; and was placed fifth for Cable television for the day it aired . " First Strike " was also given a syndication rating of 0 @.@ 6 . It also received a fan rating of 9 @.@ 29 out of 10 , and a GateWorld rating of 3 out of 4 stars . The episode was considered the biggest the producers have done for series at the time . According to Joe Flanigan ( John Sheppard ) , the episode would start a new direction for Atlantis . 
 Jason Van Horn of IGN rated the episode an " impressive " 8 @.@ 2 out of a possible 10 , where the episode was praised for its visual effects and tension after the cliffhanger , which he thought would make the wait for its conclusion in the fourth season " even harder to handle , " though surprised to see Beckett 's replacement , Jennifer Keller introduced in this episode , which in Horn 's thought would please the fans of Firefly . Critical Myth rated the episode 9 out of 10 . It was noted for Weir 's struggle to maintain her leadership , which was covered earlier in the series since the introduction of Colonel Caldwell , though the topic should have been covered earlier in the season . Ian <unk> of HDTV UK noted the although the episode had many parallels with the SG @-@ 1 finale , " First Strike " made a " cracking " finale for the third season of Stargate Atlantis . Brett Love of TV Squad considered the episode a classic season finale , and liked the introductions of Keller and Ellis to the storyline , as well as stating the return of the Asurans as a welcoming one . Brigit Cherry of Total Sci @-@ Fi rated the episode 9 / 10 , commented that though the premise seems simple , the plot was fast @-@ moving and efficient , and appreciated the episode 's visual effects , stating that Atlantis is an " exceptionally strong Stargate brand in its own right . " 
 = The Night Attack = 
 The Night Attack of Târgovişte ( Romanian : <unk> de noapte de la Târgovişte , Turkish : <unk> <unk> ) was a battle fought between forces of Vlad III the Impaler of Wallachia and Mehmed II of the Ottoman Empire on Thursday , June 17 , 1462 . 
 The conflict initially started with Vlad 's refusal to pay the jizya ( tax on non @-@ Muslims ) to the Sultan and intensified when Vlad Ţepeş invaded Bulgaria and impaled over 23 @,@ 000 Turks . Mehmed then raised a great army with the objective to conquer Wallachia and annex it to his empire . The two leaders fought a series of skirmishes , the most notable one being the Night Attack where Vlad Ţepeş attacked the Turkish camp in the night in an attempt to kill Mehmed . 
 The assassination attempt failed , and Mehmed marched to the Wallachian capital of Târgovişte , where he discovered another some 20 @,@ 000 impaled Turks . The Sultan and his troops then sailed to Brăila and burned it to the ground before retreating to Adrianople . Both sides would claim victory : while Pope Pius II proclaimed Vlad Ţepeş ' campaign a victory for Christianity , Mehmed II 's forces returned home with many captured slaves , horses and cattle . The halt in the Ottoman advance would prove to be brief . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453 , Mehmed set his target on other campaigns . In Anatolia , the Greek Trebizond was still resisting the Ottomans , and to the East the White Sheep <unk> of Uzun Hasan , together with other smaller states , threatened the Ottomans . In the West , Skanderbeg in Albania continued to trouble the Sultan , while Bosnia was sometimes reluctant in paying the Jizya ( tax on non @-@ Muslims ) . Wallachia controlled her side of the Danube and Mehmed wanted to have control over the river , as naval attacks could be launched against his empire all the way from the Holy Roman Empire . On September 26 , 1459 , Pope Pius II called for a new crusade against the Ottomans and on January 14 , 1460 , at the Congress of Mantua , the Pope proclaimed the official crusade that was to last for three years . His plan , however , failed and the only European leader that showed enthusiasm for the crusade was Vlad Ţepeş , whom the Pope held in high regard . Because of a lack of enthusiasm shown by Europeans for the crusade , Mehmed took the opportunity to take an offensive stand . Later that same year ( 1460 ) , he captured the last independent Serbian city , Smederevo , and in 1461 , he convinced the Greek despot of Morea to give up his stronghold ; soon thereafter , its capital , Mistra , and Corinth followed suit and surrendered themselves without struggle . 
 Vlad Ţepeş 's only ally , Mihály Szilágyi , was captured in 1460 by the Turks while traversing Bulgaria . Szilágyi 's men were tortured to death , while Szilágyi was killed by being sawed in half . Later that year , Mehmed sent envoys to Vlad to urge him to pay the delayed Jizya ( tax on non @-@ Muslims ) . Vlad Ţepeş provoked Mehmed by having the envoys killed and in a letter dated September 10 , 1460 , addressed to the Transylvanian Saxons of Kronstadt ( today : Braşov ) , he warned them of Mehmed 's invasion plans and asked for their support . Vlad Ţepeş had not paid the annual Jizya ( tax on non @-@ Muslims ) of 10 @,@ 000 ducats since 1459 . In addition to this , Mehmed asked him for 1000 boys that were to be trained as janissaries . Vlad Ţepeş refused the demand , and the Turks crossed the Danube and started to do their own recruiting , to which Vlad reacted by capturing the Turks and impaling them . The conflict continued until 1461 , when Mehmed asked the Prince to come to Constantinople and negotiate with him . 
 At the end of November 1461 , Vlad Ţepeş wrote to Mehmed that he could not afford to pay the Jizya ( tax on non @-@ Muslims ) , as his war against the Saxons of Transylvania had emptied his resources , and that he could not leave Wallachia and risk having the Hungarian king take over his domains . He further promised to send the Sultan plenty of gold when he could afford to and that he would go to Constantinople if the Sultan would send him a pasha to rule over Wallachia in his absence . Meanwhile , the Sultan received intelligence reports that revealed Vlad 's alliance with Hungarian king , Matthias Corvinus . He sent the bey of Nicopolis , Hamza Pasha , to stage a diplomatic meeting with Vlad at Giurgiu , but with orders to ambush him there ; and thereafter , take him to Constantinople . Vlad was forewarned about the ambush and planned to set an ambush of his own . Hamza brought with him 1 @,@ 000 cavalry and when passing through a narrow pass north of Giurgiu , Vlad launched a surprise @-@ attack . The Wallachians had the Turks surrounded and fired with their <unk> until the entire expedition @-@ force was killed . Historians credit Vlad Ţepeş as one of the first European crusaders to use gunpowder in a " deadly artistic way " . In a letter to Corvinus , dated February 2 , 1462 , he wrote that Hamza Pasha was captured close to the former Wallachian fortress of Giurgiu . He then disguised himself as a Turk and advanced with his cavalry towards the fortress where he ordered the guards in Turkish to have the gates open . This they did and Vlad Ţepeş attacked and destroyed the fortress . In his next move , he went on a campaign and slaughtered enemy soldiers and population that might have sympathized with the Turks ; first in southern Wallachia , then , in Bulgaria by crossing the frozen Danube . While in Bulgaria , he divided his army into several smaller groups and covered " some 800 kilometers in two weeks " , as they killed over 23 @,@ 000 Turks . In a letter to Corvinus , dated February 11 , 1462 , he stated : 
 I have killed peasants men and women , old and young , who lived at <unk> and <unk> , where the Danube flows into the sea , up to Rahova , which is located near Chilia , from the lower Danube up to such places as <unk> and <unk> . We killed 23 @,@ 884 Turks without counting those whom we burned in homes or the Turks whose heads were cut by our soldiers ... Thus , your highness , you must know that I have broken the peace with him ( Sultan Mehmet II ) . 
 The Christian Bulgarians were spared and many of them were settled in Wallachia . His precise numbers were counted as such : At <unk> there were 6 @,@ 414 victims ; at Eni Sala , 1 @,@ 350 ; at <unk> 6 @,@ 840 ; at Orsova , 343 ; at <unk> , 840 ; at <unk> , 210 ; at <unk> , 630 ; at Turnu , <unk> , and <unk> , 384 ; at <unk> , 410 ; at Nicopolis and <unk> , 1 @,@ 138 ; at Rahova , 1 @,@ 460 . When hearing about the devastation , Mehmed — who was busy besieging a fortress in Corinth — sent his grand vizier , Mahmud , with an army of 18 @,@ 000 to destroy the Wallachian port of Brăila . Vlad Ţepeş turned back and defeated the army , and according to the Italian chronicle de <unk> , only 8 @,@ 000 Turks survived . Vlad Ţepeş 's campaign was celebrated among the Saxon cities of Transylvania , the Italian states and the Pope . A Venetian envoy , upon hearing about the news at the court of Corvinus on March 4 , expressed great joy and said that the whole of Christianity should celebrate Vlad Ţepeş 's successful campaign . An English pilgrim to the Holy Land , William of Wey , passing through the island of Rhodes while on his way home , wrote that " the military men of Rhodes , upon hearing of Vlad Ţepeş 's campaign , had Te Deum sung in praise and honour of God who had granted such victories .... The lord mayor of Rhodes convened his brother soldiers and the whole citizenry feasted on fruit and wine . " The Genoese from Caffa thanked Vlad Ţepeş , for his campaign had saved them from an attack of some 300 ships that the sultan planned to send against them . Many Turks were now frightened of Vlad and left the European side of their empire and moved into Anatolia . Mehmed , when hearing about the events , abandoned his siege at Corinth and decided to go against Vlad Ţepeş himself . 
 = = Preparations for war = = 
 = = = The Ottomans = = = 
 Mehmed sent messengers in all directions to assemble an army , ' in which in numbers and armaments must have been equal to that which he had employed on the siege of Constantinople . ' On April 26 or May 17 , 1462 , the sultan moved with his army from Constantinople with the objective of conquering Wallachia and annexing the land to his empire . The Sultan himself wrote in a letter addressed to one of his grand viziers , that he took 150 @,@ 000 men with him . The Greek historian <unk> Chalkokondyles wrote of Mehmed 's army as " huge , second in size only to the one that this sultan had led against Constantinople . " He estimated the force at 250 @,@ 000 , while the Turkish historian <unk> Bey mentioned 300 @,@ 000 . The same numbers were put by an anonymous Italian chronicle found in Verona , believed to have been written by a certain merchant named Cristoforo <unk> . A letter of a Leonardo Tocco to Francesco I Sforza , duke of Milan , wrote that Mehmed had recruited 400 @,@ 000 men from Rumelia and Anatolia , with 40 @,@ 000 being <unk> of bridges armed with axes . Another point is the one given by Venetian envoy at Buda , <unk> , who mentioned a regular force of 60 @,@ 000 and some 30 @,@ 000 irregulars . These consisted of the janissaries ( the elite troops ) ; infantry soldiers ; <unk> ( the feudal cavalry ) ; <unk> ( the sacrificial units composed of slaves who would win their freedom if they survived ) ; <unk> ( the archers ) ; <unk> ( the custodians of the sultan 's weapons who also protected the flanks ) ; <unk> ( the pikemen ) ; <unk> ( who handled the firearms ) ; and the praetorian guard that served as the sultan 's personal bodyguards . Vlad 's half @-@ brother , Radu the Handsome , who willingly served the sultan , commanded 4 @,@ 000 horsemen . In addition to this , the Turks brought with them 120 cannon , engineers and workers that would build roads and bridges , priests of Islam ( ulema ) and muezzin , who called the troops to prayer , astrologers who consulted Mehmed and helped him make military decisions ; and women " reserved for the night pleasures of the men . " <unk> reported that the Danube shipowners were paid 300 @,@ 000 gold pieces to transport the army . In addition to this , the Ottomans used their own fleet that consisted of 25 triremes and 150 smaller vessels . 
 = = = The Wallachians = = = 
 Vlad Ţepeş asked the Hungarian king for <unk> received no support despite promises made by Corvinus and instead called for a mobilization that included " not only men of military age , but also of women and of children from the age of twelve up ; and included Gypsy slave contingents . " Various sources mention the strength of his army to be between 22 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 900 , with the most popular accepted number set at 30 @,@ 000 . The letter of Leonardo Tocco which put the numbers of the Turkish army at an exaggerated strength of 400 @,@ 000 , exaggerated also the Wallachian strength which was estimated at 200 @,@ 000 . The majority of the army consisted of peasants and shepherds , while the boyars on horseback — who were few in numbers — were armed with lances , swords , and daggers and wore chainmail as armour . Vlad 's personal guard consisted of mercenaries from many countries and some Gypsies . Before battle , it is believed that Vlad told his men that " it would be better that those who think of death should not follow me " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The Turks first tried to disembark at Vidin , but were pushed back by arrows . On June 4 , a contingent of janissaries landed in the night , at Turnu Severin , where 300 of them died from Wallachian attacks . The Serbian @-@ born <unk> , Konstantin Mihailović , recounted their encounter with Vlad Ţepeş : 
 When night began to fall , we climbed into our boats and floated down the Danube and crossed over to the other side several miles below the place where Vlad 's army was stationed . There we dug ourselves trenches , so that cavalry could not harm us . After that we crossed back over to the other side and transported other janissaries over the Danube , and when the entire infantry had crossed over , then we prepared and set out gradually against Vlad 's army , together with the artillery and other equipment that we had brought with us . Having halted , we set up the cannon , but not in time to stop three hundred janissaries from being killed ... Seeing that our side was greatly weakening , we defended ourselves with the 120 guns which we had brought over and fired so often that we repelled the prince 's army and greatly strengthened our position ... Vlad , seeing that he could not prevent the crossing , withdrew . After that the emperor crossed the Danube with his entire army and gave us 30 @,@ 000 coins to be distributed among us . 
 The Ottoman army managed to advance as Vlad Ţepeş instituted a policy of scorched earth , poisoned the waters , and also created marshes by diverting the waters of small rivers . Traps were created by the digging of pits , and then covered with timber and leaves . The population and animals were evacuated to the mountains and as Mehmed advanced for seven days , his army suffered from fatigue as " he found no man , nor any significant animal , and nothing to eat or drink . " Vlad adopted guerrilla tactics as his cavalry made several hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks . He would also send ill people suffering from lethal diseases , such as leprosy , tuberculosis , syphilis — and in more significant numbers – those who suffered from the bubonic plague , to intermix with the Turks and infect them . The bubonic plague managed to spread in the Ottoman army . The Ottoman fleet launched a few minor attacks on Brăila and Chilia , but without being able to do much damage , as Vlad Ţepeş had destroyed most of the ports in Bulgaria . Chalkokondyles writes that the Sultan managed to capture a Wallachian soldier and at first tried to bribe him for information ; when that didn 't work , he threatened him with torture , to no avail . Mehmed was said to have commended the soldier by saying , " if your master had many soldiers like yourself , in a short time he could conquer the world ! " 
 The Turks continued with their advance towards Târgovişte , after failing to capture the fortress of Bucharest and the fortified island of Snagov . On June 17 , when the Turks camped south of the capital , Vlad Ţepeş launched his night attack with 24 @,@ 000 , or possibly with only 7 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 horsemen . Chalkokondyles retells the story that , before making his attack , Vlad went freely into the Turkish camp disguised as a Turk , and wandered around to find the location of the Sultan 's tent and learn about his organization . The anonymous Italian chronicle of Verona mentions that Mehmed had disallowed his soldiers to exit their tents during the night , as to not cause panic in case of an attack . The chronicle goes on explaining that Vlad Ţepeş , being aware of Mehmed 's strategy , had decided for an attack in the night , knowing how to proceed in his offensive when the enemy soldiers would have to remain in their tents . The skirmish would last from " three hours after sunset until four the next morning " and would cause great confusion in the Ottoman camp . The Wallachians made noise from their buglers and illuminated the battle with their torches ; and in that night , they launched not one , but several attacks . Documents differ on the exact result of the skirmish : some sources say that the Wallachians slaughtered a great number of Turks , while others say the Ottoman losses were minimal . Many horses and camels were , however , killed . Some chronicles blame a Wallachian boyar named <unk> , who supposedly led a simultaneous attack on the Turks with a second army , for not being brave enough to cause the expected devastation on the enemy . Vlad Ţepeş himself aimed for the tent of the sultan , as he routed the Asian cavalry , but mistakenly went for the tent of the two grand viziers Ishak Pasha and Mahmud Pasha . 
 A Wallachian point of view of the events was recorded by the papal legate , Niccolò <unk> , years later at the court of Buda when Vlad was being imprisoned by Corvinus . It is said to have been told by a Wallachian veteran : 
 The sultan besieged him and discovered him in a certain mountain where the Wallachian was supported by the natural strength of the place . There Vlad had hidden himself along with 24 @,@ 000 of his men who had willingly followed him . When Vlad realized that he would either perish from hunger or fall into the hands of the very cruel enemy , and considering both eventualities unworthy of brave men , he dared commit an act worthy of being remembered : calling his men together and explaining the situation to them , he easily persuaded them to enter the enemy camp . He divided the men so that either they should die bravely in battle with glory and honor or else , should destiny prove favorable to them , they should avenge themselves against the enemy in an exceptional matter . So , making use of some Turkish prisoners , who had been caught at twilight when they were wandering about imprudently , at nightfall Vlad penetrated into the Turkish camp with part of his troops , all the way up the fortifications . And during the entire night he sped like lightning in every direction and caused great slaughter , so much so that , had the other commander to whom he had entrusted his remaining forces been equally brave , or had the Turks not fully obeyed the repeated orders from the sultan not to abandon their garrisons , the Wallachian undoubtedly would have gained the greatest and most brilliant victory . But the other commander ( a boyar named <unk> ) did not dare attack the camp from the other side as had been agreed upon .... Vlad carried out an incredible massacre without losing many men in such a major encounter , though many were wounded . He abandoned the enemy camp before daybreak and returned to the same mountain from which he had come . No one dared pursue him , since he had caused such terror and turmoil . I learned by questioning those who had participated in this battle that the sultan lost all confidence in the situation . During that night the sultan abandoned the camp and fled in a shameful manner . And he would have continued to this way , had he not been reprimanded by his friends and brought back , almost against his will . 
 The janissaries , under the command of <unk> Ali Bey , pursued the Wallachians and killed 1 @,@ 000 @-@ 2 @,@ 000 of them . According to the chronicle of Domenico Balbi , the total casualties for the conflict are numbered as 5 @,@ 000 for the Wallachian side and 15 @,@ 000 for the Ottomans . Even though the morale of the sultan and his army was low , Mehmed decided to besiege the capital , but instead found it deserted with its gates wide open . The Turkish army entered the capital and for half an hour , the army marched on the road that was bordered by some 20 @,@ 000 impaled Turks . There , they found the rotten corpse of Hamza Pasha impaled on the highest stake , to symbolize his ' high ranking ' . Other sources say that the city was defended by the soldiers , while the impaled corpses lay outside the city @-@ walls for a distance of 60 miles . Chalkokondyles , when remarking the reaction of the sultan , wrote : " The sultan was seized with amazement and said that it was not possible to deprive of his country a man who had done such great deeds , who had such a diabolical understanding of how to govern his realm and its people . And he said that a man who had done such things was worth much . " 
 Mehmed ordered for a deep trench to be dug out around the Turkish encampment in order to prevent enemy penetration and the following day ( June 22 ) , the Turks retreated . A few days later , Vlad 's cousin , Stephen III of Moldavia , who wanted to retake Akkerman and Chilia , decided to launch an attack on the latter . The Wallachians rushed to the scene with 7 @,@ 000 men and managed to defend the town , while wounding Stephen in his foot by artillery fire . On June 29 , the Sultan reached Brăila , which he burned down , and then sailed to Adrianople , where they arrived on July 11 . On July 12 , the Turks called for a celebration for their " Great victory " over Vlad Ţepeş . The Turks had enslaved many of the local inhabitants , which they marched on their way south together with 200 @,@ 000 cattle and horses . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 French writer , Victor Hugo , wrote about the conflict in his poem La <unk> des siècles ( The Legends of the centuries ) . 
 The film Bram Stoker 's Dracula begins in 1462 with the Ottoman invasion of Wallachia ; a night battle takes place ( ostensibly the Night Attack ) , ending with Vlad Ţepeş ' victory . 
 The Big Finish Productions audio drama Son of the Dragon depicts the battle from the perspective of the Fifth Doctor and his companions . 
 = Ikarus IK @-@ 2 = 
 The Ikarus IK @-@ 2 was a 1930s high @-@ wing , single @-@ seat , monoplane fighter aircraft of Yugoslav design built for the Royal Yugoslav Air Force . The IK @-@ 2 was designed by French @-@ trained engineers Kosta Sivčev and Ljubomir Ilić , who saw the desirability of a developing a home @-@ grown aircraft industry . Just 12 production models were built , as the aircraft was obsolescent at the time it was brought into service in 1935 , and only eight were serviceable at the time of the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 . After the defeat of Yugoslavia , the remaining four aircraft were taken onto the strength of the air force of the Axis puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia , but none survived the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 1920s , a scheme promoted by the Royal Yugoslav Air Force ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vazduhoplovstvo <unk> Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VVKJ ) and the Royal Aero Club of Yugoslavia sent aspiring aeronautical engineers to France to develop their knowledge . It was intended that after this advanced training , they would return to Yugoslavia and be offered specialist roles in the VVKJ or in the aeronautical industry . Ljubomir Ilić and Kosta Sivčev went through this program , but when they returned to Yugoslavia , both were employed in administrative work . Frustrated by this , in 1931 they decided to design a replacement for the Czechoslovakian @-@ built Avia BH @-@ <unk> biplane fighter then in service with the VVKJ . Working in a basement in Belgrade , then in Ilić 's apartment in Novi Sad , they devoted their spare time to secretly working on their design . Their original concept was for a low @-@ wing monoplane with a retractable undercarriage , but contemporary thinking led them to modify their initial design into a strut @-@ braced high @-@ wing monoplane armed with a hub @-@ firing cannon and fuselage @-@ mounted synchronised machine guns . The gull @-@ wing design emphasised power and manoeuvrability over other characteristics . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = IK @-@ 1 = = = 
 The aircraft was designed around a French @-@ made 12 @-@ cylinder Hispano @-@ Suiza <unk> engine with a Hispano @-@ Suiza HS.404 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) autocannon mounted between the cylinder banks of the engine and firing through the propeller hub . This powerful 860 shaft horsepower ( 640 kW ) engine combined with the hub @-@ firing cannon mandated the use of a metal fuselage . Other armament consisted of two synchronised French @-@ made 7 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) Darne machine guns , mounted under and to each side of the engine . The wing was braced with two struts on each side of the fuselage ; the fixed conventional landing gear was spatted and mounted off the wing struts . The fixed tailwheel was also spatted . The enclosed cockpit was located behind the wing . The horizontal stabilizer on each side was braced from below with two rigid braces from the lower tailcone , and tied from above with two flying wires from the vertical stabilizer . The three @-@ bladed propeller was manually adjustable in pitch . 
 Considerable work was needed to fully develop the design but , by early 1933 , the two men had moved the project through the pre @-@ project , basic aerodynamic and evaluation stages , including the building of a wooden scale model that Ilić took to Paris to test in the Eiffel @-@ built wind tunnel . Up to this point , the two men had received no outside help , and had been forced to borrow from family to keep the project going . They then decided to approach the head of the technical department of the VVKJ , <unk> ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Srbobran Stanojević with their design . Stanojević was surprised but impressed with their work and an official report proposing to build the design was presented on 22 September 1933 . Some senior VVKJ officers opposed the concept , as did Kapetan ( Captain ) Leonid Bajdak , an " acknowledged outstanding exponent of fighter tactics " , who considered that a biplane with a 600 shp ( 450 kW ) engine was the ultimate in fighter design . 
 Despite this opposition , support from Stanojević and some younger pilots meant that the concept was approved , and in 1934 a prototype was ordered from the Ikarus A.D. factory in Zemun near Belgrade , for delivery by the end of that year . The prototype was designated IK @-@ 1 , with the " IK " standing for ( Ljubomir ) Ilić and Kosta ( Sivčev ) . It is believed that the prototype was complete by September 1934 , but the first flight was delayed due to concerns about the wing structure . The following month , Bajdak was appointed as test pilot for the prototype , but he did not co @-@ operate in the preparations for the maiden flight , and decided to develop his own test program . 
 Permission was granted for flight testing to begin in April 1935 , and Bajdak conducted his first flight in the prototype on 22 April 1935 . For this initial uneventful flight , no weapons were installed and a light fuel load was used . The following day , Bajdak put the IK @-@ 1 into unplanned aerobatic manoeuvres , after which the wing fabric was observed as being slack . An official from Ikarus checked it and stated that this would resolve once the fabric varnish had completely dried . Bajdak took the aircraft for a third test flight the next day , which involved more unplanned aerobatics . When the aircraft was at 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , Bajdak put it into a shallow dive and pulled up abruptly at high speed , at which point the wing fabric began to tear rapidly , to the extent that it could be seen from the ground . The aircraft dropped into a spin to starboard , and Bajdak baled out safely while the IK @-@ 1 crashed into the ground . 
 = = = IK @-@ 2 = = = 
 Critics exploited the accident to undermine the IK @-@ 1 concept , with Bajdak joining those criticising the aircraft . The three flights were not considered sufficient to give a verdict on the design , and the debate over its future was fierce . This placed significant pressure on the designers , as every element of the aircraft design was subsequently attacked . Eventually , it was generally agreed that the aircraft was well @-@ designed , but it needed more testing . At this point , Ikarus decided to build a second prototype , as it was evident that the hand @-@ sewn fabric seam on the wing had not stood up to the strain of aerobatics , and their workmanship was in question . The second prototype took 10 months to build , with the two designers closely involved . 
 The main difference from the IK @-@ 1 was that the IK @-@ 2 had wings covered with metal sheeting , leaving only the rear fuselage and tailplane fabric covered . The new wing was tested with both fabric and metal covering at the request of the VVKJ . Other changes were a radiator of reduced size and improved shape , and modified air intakes , making for a more streamlined fuselage . The two Darne machine guns were replaced with two 7 @.@ 92 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) Browning / FN machine guns . 
 After the second prototype was delivered , the aircraft was placed in the hands of a different test pilot , Poručnik ( 1st Lieutenant ) Janko Dobnikar , who conducted its first flight on 24 August 1934 . Dobnikar had worked closely with the designers and Ikarus during its construction and static testing , and his suggestions had resulted in an improved cockpit layout . He strictly followed a completely new test program , while installed testing equipment recorded the various characteristics of the aircraft . After gaining complete mastery of the aircraft , he conducted some aerobatic manoeuvres during a visit by the future Turkish president İsmet İnönü , which included a complete inverted loop . In mid @-@ October 1935 , Dobnikar broke the unofficial European air speed record for an aircraft with a fixed undercarriage , attaining a speed of 435 km / h ( 270 mph ) , which was also a Yugoslav air speed record . The aircraft was able to achieve greater than expected power at altitudes of 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 – 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . Dobnikar completed the testing program and submitted his report to the VVKJ on 23 May 1937 . 
 After VVKJ acceptance , a group of pilots conducted 16 mock dogfights between the IK @-@ 2 and the Hawker Fury I biplane already in service with the VVKJ , during which the IK @-@ 2 displayed overall superiority over the British @-@ built aircraft . At one point , Bajdak declared his continuing doubts about the aircraft , and Dobnikar challenged him to a duel , with Bajdak flying his preferred aircraft , the Fury I. After Dobnikar won the climbing competition and a race to Zemun and back from Belgrade , the final dogfight forced Bajdak to concede that the IK @-@ 2 was the better aircraft . On 20 November 1937 , the VVKJ submitted a proposal to order a batch of 12 IK @-@ 2s , which was approved the following month . The production version included some additional improvements , but continued testing resulted in further delays , with the aircraft not entering service for another year . By this time , international consensus had coalesced around the superiority of the low @-@ wing monoplane , and the IK @-@ 2 was already obsolescent by the time it was delivered to VVKJ fighter units . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The first six production aircraft were delivered to the 6th Fighter Regiment of the VVKJ , based at Zemun , in early 1939 . The pilots subjected them to considerable additional testing , before they entered normal service around mid @-@ year . The remaining six entered service during the remainder of 1939 . The aircraft were delivered without radios or armament , which were fitted in VVKJ workshops . In October 1939 , the IK @-@ 2s were transferred to the 4th Fighter Regiment in Zagreb until licence @-@ built Hawker Hurricanes were delivered from Zemun , after which the IK @-@ 2s were to be transferred to the 5th Fighter Regiment in Niš . By the end of 1940 , all the production IK @-@ 2s were concentrated in the 107th Fighter Squadron of the 34th Fighter Group , which consisted solely of IK @-@ 2s . This was only an interim allocation , as the other squadron of the group was equipped with Hurricanes , and as soon as the 107th Fighter Squadron could be equipped with Hurricanes , the IK @-@ 2s were to move to the 5th Fighter Regiment . The threat of war overtook this planned deployment , and on 13 March 1941 , the IK @-@ 2s of the 107th Fighter Squadron were moved to Bosanski Aleksandrovac near Banja Luka , under the command of Kapetan <unk> <unk> . 
 When the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia commenced on 6 April 1941 , only eight IK @-@ 2s were serviceable . One had been damaged in a landing accident , two were at the workshops in Zagreb being repaired , and the fourth unserviceable machine was in a badly damaged condition at Bosanski Aleksandrovac . That day and the next , the 107th Fighter Squadron patrolled over Bosnia but did not make any contact with the enemy . Two machines conducted a combat air patrol over the airfield of the 8th Bomber Regiment at Nova Topola . This pattern continued the following day without incident , but patrol duration and coverage was limited by the short range of the aircraft . On 8 April , a patrol unsuccessfully gave chase to a lone German reconnaissance aircraft , and later in the day , one of the IK @-@ 2s force landed , leaving seven operational aircraft . 
 About 14 : 00 on 9 April , two Staffeln of German Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters from II . Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 54 were observed heading towards Nova Topola just as two IK @-@ 2s were landing after a patrol in poor flying weather . One of the IK @-@ 2s managed to overshoot and climbed to meet them , but the other was unable to , and had to complete its landing . <unk> ( Junior Sergeant ) Branko Jovanović used the extreme manoeuvrability of his IK @-@ 2 to avoid the nine Bf 109s that swooped in to attack , while a total of eight Hurricanes and five more IK @-@ 2s from the 4th Fighter Regiment scrambled to meet the Germans . For the following seven or eight minutes , a furious dogfight ensued over Novo Topola , during which two German aircraft were claimed and two Hurricanes and one IK @-@ 2 were lost . German records indicate that only one of their aircraft was lost , and that the pilot survived . <unk> <unk> survived the loss of his IK @-@ 2 , but was badly wounded . The Germans , low on fuel , broke off and headed north . 
 The following day , one IK @-@ 2 force landed due to engine failure , reducing the number of serviceable IK @-@ 2s to five . Despite deteriorating weather conditions and revolts within the Yugoslav forces , combat patrols continued . At 12 : 00 on 11 April , all aircraft were grounded by the weather . On 12 April , aircraft of the 4th Fighter Regiment took to the air again , chasing German reconnaissance aircraft , but the IK @-@ 2s did not record any victories . The following day , the 4th Fighter Regiment continued carrying out sorties , but around 12 : 00 the commander of the 2nd Mixed Air Brigade ordered the remaining aircraft of the 4th Fighter Regiment to be destroyed , and all personnel to withdraw via road to Sarajevo . 
 At the end of the brief campaign , the Air Force of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Zrakoplovstvo Nezavisne Države Hrvatske , ZNDH ) made the three or four surviving IK @-@ 2s serviceable using other captured aircraft for spares . At the beginning of 1942 , there were four IK @-@ 2s in service with the ZNDH , but they lacked spare parts . Later that year , an operational IK @-@ 2 was observed at Rajlovac airfield near Sarajevo , and in October 1943 , two of the IK @-@ 2s were operating from <unk> airfield north of Banja Luka , and remained there for nearly a year conducting strafing missions . At the end of 1943 , all four IK @-@ 2s were still in service , but at the end of the following year , just two IK @-@ 2s remained . No IK @-@ 2s survived the war . 
 = = Further development = = 
 A proposed development of the IK @-@ 2 was the IK @-@ 4 , a dual control two @-@ seater fast reconnaissance monoplane , but it was never ordered . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Kingdom of Yugoslavia 
 Royal Yugoslav Air Force 
 Independent State of Croatia 
 Air Force of the Independent State of Croatia 
 = = Specifications ( Ikarus IK @-@ 2 ) = = 
 Data from 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 7 @.@ 88 m ( 25 ft 10 in ) 
 Wingspan : 11 @.@ 4 m ( 37 ft 5 in ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 84 m ( 12 ft 7 in ) 
 Wing area : 18 m2 ( 190 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 1 @,@ 502 kg ( 3 @,@ 311 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 1 @,@ 857 kg ( 4 @,@ 094 lb ) 
 Fuel capacity : 250 kg ( 550 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Hispano @-@ Suiza <unk> liquid @-@ cooled V @-@ 12 piston engine , 640 kW ( 860 shp ) 
 Propellers : 3 @-@ bladed adjustable pitch 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 435 km / h ( 270 mph ; 235 kn ) at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) 
 Cruising speed : 250 km / h ( 155 mph ; 135 kn ) 
 Range : 700 km ( 435 mi ; 378 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 12 @,@ 000 m ( 39 @,@ 370 ft ) 
 Time to altitude : 5 minutes 25 seconds to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 103 kg / m2 ( 21 lb / sq ft ) 
 Armament 
 1 × 20 mm Hispano @-@ Suiza HS.404 cannon with 60 rounds in a spiral drum 
 2 × 7 @.@ 92 mm Browning / FN machine guns with 250 rounds per gun 
 = Flag of Scotland = 
 The Flag of Scotland , ( Scottish Gaelic : Bratach na h @-@ Alba , Scots : Banner o Scotland ) , also known as St Andrew 's Cross or the Saltire , is the national flag of Scotland . As the national flag , the Saltire , rather than the Royal Standard of Scotland , is the correct flag for all individuals and corporate bodies to fly . It is also , where possible , flown from Scottish Government buildings every day from 8am until sunset , with certain exceptions . 
 According to legend , the Christian apostle and martyr Saint Andrew , the patron saint of Scotland , was crucified on an X @-@ shaped cross at Patras , ( <unk> ) , in Achaea . Use of the familiar iconography of his martyrdom , showing the apostle bound to an X @-@ shaped cross , first appears in the Kingdom of Scotland in 1180 during the reign of William I. It was again depicted on seals used during the late 13th century , including on one used by the Guardians of Scotland , dated 1286 . 
 Using a simplified symbol which does not depict St. Andrew 's image , the saltire or crux <unk> , ( from the Latin crux , ' cross ' , and <unk> , ' having the shape of the Roman numeral X ' ) , began in the late 14th century . In June 1385 , the Parliament of Scotland decreed that Scottish soldiers serving in France would wear a white Saint Andrew 's Cross , both in front and behind , for identification . 
 The earliest reference to the Saint Andrew 's Cross as a flag is found in the Vienna Book of Hours , circa 1503 , in which a white saltire is depicted with a red background . In the case of Scotland , use of a blue background for the Saint Andrew 's Cross is said to date from at least the 15th century , with the first certain illustration of a flag depicting such appearing in Sir David Lyndsay of the Mount 's Register of Scottish Arms , circa 1542 . 
 The legend surrounding Scotland 's association with the Saint Andrew 's Cross was related by Walter Bower and George Buchanan , who claimed that the flag originated in a 9th @-@ century battle , where Óengus II led a combined force of Picts and Scots to victory over the Angles , led by Æthelstan . Supposedly , a miraculous white saltire appeared in the blue sky and Óengus ' troops were roused to victory by the omen . Consisting of a blue background over which is placed a white representation of an X @-@ shaped cross , the Saltire is one of Scotland 's most recognisable symbols . 
 = = Design = = 
 The heraldic term for an X @-@ shaped cross is a ' saltire ' , from the old French word <unk> or <unk> ( itself derived from the Latin <unk> ) , a word for both a type of stile constructed from two cross pieces and a type of cross @-@ shaped stirrup @-@ cord . In heraldic language , it may be blazoned azure , a saltire argent . The tincture of the Saltire can appear as either silver ( argent ) or white , however the term azure does not refer to a particular shade of blue . 
 Throughout the history of fabric production natural dyes have been used to apply a form of colour , with dyes from plants , including indigo from <unk> , having dozens of compounds whose proportions may vary according to soil type and climate ; therefore giving rise to variations in shade . In the case of the Saltire , variations in shades of blue have resulted in the background of the flag ranging from sky blue to navy blue . When incorporated as part of the Union Flag during the 17th century , the dark blue applied to Union Flags destined for maritime use was possibly selected on the basis of the durability of darker dyes , with this dark blue shade eventually becoming standard on Union Flags both at sea and on land . Some flag manufacturers selected the same navy blue colour trend of the Union Flag for the Saltire itself , leading to a variety of shades of blue being depicted on the flag of Scotland . 
 These variations in shade eventually led to calls to standardise the colour of Scotland 's national flag , and in 2003 a committee of the Scottish Parliament met to examine a petition that the Scottish Executive adopt the Pantone 300 colour as a standard . ( Note that this blue is of a lighter shade than the Pantone 280 of the Union Flag ) . Having taken advice from a number of sources , including the office of the Lord Lyon King of Arms , the committee recommended that the optimum shade of blue for the Saltire be Pantone 300 . Recent versions of the Saltire have therefore largely converged on this official recommendation . ( Pantone 300 is # <unk> as hexadecimal web colours . ) 
 The flag proportions are not fixed , however the Lord Lyon King of Arms states that 5 : 4 is suitable . ( Flag manufacturers themselves may adopt alternative ratios , including 1 : 2 or 2 : 3 ) . The ratio of the width of the bars of the saltire in relation to the width of the field is specified in heraldry in relation to shield width rather than flag width . However , this ratio , though not rigid , is specified as one @-@ third to one @-@ fifth of the width of the field . 
 = = History = = 
 According to legend , in 832 A.D. Óengus II led an army of Picts and Scots into battle against the Angles , led by Æthelstan , near modern @-@ day <unk> , East Lothian . The legend states that whilst engaged in prayer on the eve of battle , Óengus vowed that if granted victory he would appoint Saint Andrew as the Patron Saint of Scotland ; Andrew then appeared to Óengus that night in a dream and assured him of victory . On the morning of battle white clouds forming the shape of an X were said to have appeared in the sky . Óengus and his combined force , emboldened by this apparent divine intervention , took to the field and despite being inferior in terms of numbers were victorious . Having interpreted the cloud phenomenon as representing the crux <unk> upon which Saint Andrew was crucified , Óengus honoured his pre @-@ battle pledge and duly appointed Saint Andrew as the Patron Saint of Scotland . The white saltire set against a celestial blue background is said to have been adopted as the design of the flag of Scotland on the basis of this legend . 
 Although the earliest use as a national symbol can be traced to the seal of the Guardians of Scotland in 1286 , material evidence for the Saltire being used as a flag , as opposed to appearing on another object such as a seal , brooch or surcoat , dates from somewhat later . The huge heraldic standard of the Great Michael had the " <unk> <unk> cors " on a blue background in the Hoist and by 1542 a white saltire set against a blue background was depicted as being the flag of Scotland . An even earlier example known as the " Blue Blanket of the Trades of Edinburgh " , reputedly made by Queen Margaret , wife of James III ( 1451 – 1488 ) , also shows a white saltire on a blue field . However , in this case the saltire is not the only emblem to be portrayed . 
 = = Protocol = = 
 = = = Use by the Scottish Government = = = 
 The Scottish Government has ruled that the Saltire should , where possible , fly on all its buildings every day from 8am until sunset . An exception is made for United Kingdom " national days " , when on buildings where only one flagpole is present the Saltire shall be lowered and replaced with the Union Flag . Such flag days are standard throughout the United Kingdom , with the exception of Merchant Navy Day , ( 3 September ) , which is a specific flag day in Scotland during which the Red Ensign of the Merchant Navy may be flown on land in place of either the Saltire or Union Flag . 
 A further Scottish distinction from the UK flag days is that on Saint Andrew 's Day , ( 30 November ) , the Union Flag will only be flown where a building has more than one flagpole ; the Saltire will not be lowered to make way for the Union Flag where a single flagpole is present . If there are two or more flagpoles present , the Saltire may be flown in addition to the Union Flag but not in a superior position . This distinction arose after Members of the Scottish Parliament complained that Scotland was the only country in the world where the potential existed for the citizens of a country to be unable to fly their national flag on their country 's national day . ( In recent years , embassies of the United Kingdom have also flown the Saltire to mark St Andrew 's Day ) . Many bodies of the Scottish Government use the flag as a design basis for their logo ; for example , Safer Scotland 's emblem depicts a lighthouse shining beams in a saltire shape onto a blue sky . Other Scottish bodies , both private and public , have also used the saltire in similar ways . 
 = = = Use by military institutions on land = = = 
 The seven British Army Infantry battalions of the Scottish Division , plus the Scots Guards and Royal Scots Dragoon Guards regiments , use the Saltire in a variety of forms . Combat and transport vehicles of these Army units may be adorned with a small , ( <unk> approx . ) , representation of the Saltire ; such decals being displayed on the front and / or rear of the vehicle . ( On tanks these may also be displayed on the vehicle turret ) . In Iraq , during both Operation Granby and the subsequent Operation Telic , the Saltire was seen to be flown from the communications whip antenna of vehicles belonging to these units . Funerals , conducted with full military honours , of casualties of these operations in Iraq , ( plus those killed in operations in Afghanistan ) , have also been seen to include the Saltire ; the flag being draped over the coffin of the deceased on such occasions . 
 In the battle for " hearts and minds " in Iraq , the Saltire was again used by the British Army as a means of distinguishing troops belonging to Scottish regiments from other coalition forces , in the hope of fostering better relations with the civilian population in the area south west of Baghdad . Leaflets were distributed to Iraqi civilians , by members of the Black Watch , depicting troops and vehicles set against a backdrop of the Saltire . 
 Immediately prior to , and following , the merger in March 2006 of Scotland 's historic infantry regiments to form a single Royal Regiment of Scotland , a multi @-@ million @-@ pound advertising campaign was launched in Scotland in an attempt to attract recruits to join the reorganised and simultaneously rebranded " Scottish Infantry " . The recruitment campaign employed the Saltire in the form of a logo ; the words " Scottish Infantry . Forward As One . " being placed next to a stylised image of the Saltire . For the duration of the campaign , this logo was used in conjunction with the traditional Army recruiting logo ; the words " Army . Be The Best . " being placed beneath a stylised representation of the Union Flag . Despite this multi @-@ media campaign having had mixed results in terms of overall success , the Saltire continues to appear on a variety of Army recruiting media used in Scotland . 
 Other uses of the Saltire by the Army include the cap badge design of the Royal Regiment of Scotland , which consists of a ( silver ) Saltire , surmounted by a ( gilt ) lion rampant and ensigned with a representation of the Crown of Scotland . ( This same design , save for the Crown , is used on both the Regimental flag and tactical recognition flash of the Royal Regiment of Scotland ) . The badge of the No. 679 ( The Duke of Connaught 's ) Squadron Army Air Corps bears a Saltire between two wreaths ensigned ' Scottish Horse ' ; an honour they received in 1971 which originated through their links with the Royal Artillery . The Officer Training Corps units attached to universities in Edinburgh and Glasgow , plus the <unk> University OTC , all feature the Saltire in their cap badge designs . 
 The Fleet Air Arm of the Royal Navy adorned three of their aircraft with the Saltire . Specifically , the Westland Sea King Mk5 aircraft of HMS Gannet , operating in the Search and Rescue ( SAR ) role from Royal Naval Air Station Prestwick , Ayrshire , displayed a Saltire decal on the nose of each aircraft . ( The SAR function was transferred from the Royal Navy to Bristow Helicopters , acting on behalf of HM Coastguard , part of the UK 's Maritime and Coastguard Agency , with effect from 1 January 2016 . ) 
 Although not represented in the form of a flag , the No. 602 ( City of Glasgow ) Squadron of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force uses the Saltire surmounted by a lion rampant as the device shown on the squadron crest . The station crest of the former RAF Leuchars , Fife , also showed the Saltire , in this case surmounted by a sword . The crest of the former RAF East Fortune , East Lothian , also showed a sword surmounting the Saltire , however unlike Leuchars this sword was shown inverted , and the station crest of the former RAF Turnhouse , Edinburgh , showed a Saltire surmounted by an eagle 's head . The East of Scotland Universities Air Squadron crest features a Saltire surmounted by an open book ; the book itself being supported by red lions rampant . 
 = = = General use = = = 
 In Scotland , planning permission to fly the Saltire from a flagpole is required , therefore it can not be flown at any time by any individual , company , local authority , hospital or school without first obtaining planning permission ( in practice this is not enforced ) . This is not the case in England & Wales where the Saltire can be flown without planning permission first being obtained . Many local authorities in Scotland fly the Saltire from Council Buildings , however in 2007 Angus Council approved a proposal to replace the Saltire on Council Buildings with a new Angus flag , based on the council 's coat of arms . This move led to public outcry across Scotland with more than 7 @,@ 000 people signing a petition opposing the council 's move , leading to a compromise whereby the Angus flag would not replace but be flown alongside the Saltire on council buildings . 
 In the United Kingdom , owners of vehicles registered in Great Britain have the option of displaying the Saltire on the vehicle registration plate , in conjunction with the letters " SCO " or alternatively the word " Scotland " . In 1999 , the Royal Mail issued a series of pictorial stamps for Scotland , with the ' 2nd ' value stamp depicting the Flag of Scotland . In Northern Ireland , sections of the Protestant community routinely employ the Saltire as a means of demonstrating and celebrating their Ulster @-@ Scots heritage . 
 Use of the Saltire at sea as a Jack or courtesy flag has been observed , including as a Jack on the Scottish Government 's Marine <unk> Vessel ( MPV ) Jura . The ferry operator Caledonian MacBrayne routinely flies the Saltire as a Jack on vessels which have a bow staff , including when such vessels are underway . This practice has also been observed on the Paddle Steamer Waverley when operating in and around the Firth of Clyde . The practice of maritime vessels adopting the Saltire , for use as a jack or courtesy flag , may lead to possible confusion in that the Saltire closely resembles the maritime signal flag M , " MIKE " , which is used to indicate " My vessel is stopped ; making no way . " Obviously mariners who understand this signal code also understand that the saltire is displayed on the <unk> and not as a signal . For the benefit of Scottish seafarers wishing to display a Scottish flag other than the Saltire , thereby avoiding confusion and a possible fine , a campaign was launched in November 2007 seeking official recognition for the historic Scottish Red Ensign . Despite having last been used officially by the pre @-@ Union Royal Scots Navy and merchant marine fleets in the 18th century , the flag continues to be produced by flag manufacturers and its unofficial use by private citizens on water has been observed . 
 In May 2016 , the Saltire was flown from horseback during The Queen 's 90th birthday celebration at Windsor , alongside the flags of England , Northern Ireland and Wales 
 = = Incorporation into the Union Flag = = 
 The Saltire is one of the key components of the Union Flag which , since its creation in 1606 , has appeared in various forms following the Flag of Scotland and Flag of England first being merged to mark the Union of the Crowns . ( The Union of the Crowns having occurred three years earlier , in 1603 , when James VI , King of Scots , acceded to the thrones of both England and Ireland upon the death of Elizabeth I of England ) . The proclamation by King James , made on 12 April 1606 , which led to the creation of the Union Flag states : 
 By the King : Whereas , some differences hath arisen between Our subjects of South and North Britaine travelling by Seas , about the bearing of their <unk> : For the avoiding of all contentions hereafter . We have , with the advice of our Council , ordered : That from henceforth all our Subjects of this Isle and Kingdome of Great Britaine , and all our members thereof , shall <unk> in their main @-@ toppe the Red Crosse , commonly called St. George ’ s Crosse , and the White Crosse , commonly called St. Andrew ’ s Crosse , <unk> together according to the forme made by our heralds , and sent by Us to our <unk> to be published to our Subjects : and in their fore @-@ toppe our Subjects of South Britaine shall <unk> the Red Crosse onely as they were wont , and our Subjects of North Britaine in their fore @-@ toppe the White Crosse onely as they were accustomed . – 1606 . 
 However , in objecting strongly to the form and pattern of Union Flag designed by the College of Arms and approved by King James , whereby the cross of Saint George surmounted that of Saint Andrew , ( regarded in Scotland as a slight upon the Scottish nation ) , a great number of <unk> and ship @-@ owners in Scotland took up the matter with John Erskine , 18th Earl of Mar , and encouraged him to send a letter of complaint , dated 7 August 1606 , to James VI , via the Privy Council of Scotland , stating : 
 Most sacred <unk> . A greate <unk> of the <unk> and <unk> of the <unk> of this your Majesteis <unk> hes verie <unk> <unk> to your Majesteis Counsell that the form and <unk> of the <unk> of <unk> , send doun heir and <unk> to be <unk> and used be the <unk> of <unk> <unk> , is very <unk> to the <unk> and <unk> of this Estate and will gif <unk> of <unk> to this <unk> <unk> the said <unk> sal <unk> to be <unk> beyond sea <unk> , as your sacred <unk> may <unk> , the Scottis Croce , callit <unk> Croce is <unk> <unk> , and the Inglishe Croce , callit <unk> George , <unk> <unk> and <unk> through the Scottis Croce , <unk> is <unk> <unk> and no takin nor <unk> to be seen of the Scottis Armes . This will <unk> some <unk> and <unk> <unk> your Majesteis <unk> , and it is to be <unk> that some <unk> <unk> fall out <unk> <unk> , for <unk> <unk> men cannot be <unk> to <unk> that flag as it is set doun . They <unk> <unk> two new <unk> and <unk> as most indifferent for <unk> <unk> which they present to the Counsell , and craved our <unk> of the same ; bot we <unk> reserved that to you Majesteis <unk> determination . 
 Despite the drawings described in this letter as showing drafts of the two new patterns , together with any royal response to the complaint which may have accompanied them , having been lost , ( possibly in the 1834 Burning of Parliament ) , other evidence exists , at least on paper , of a Scottish variant whereby the Scottish cross appears uppermost . Whilst , in the absence of evidence to the contrary , this design is considered by most <unk> to have been unofficial , there is reason to believe that such flags were employed during the 17th century for use on Scottish vessels at sea . This flag 's design is also described in the 1704 edition of The Present State of the Universe by John Beaumont , Junior , which contains as an appendix The Ensigns , Colours or Flags of the Ships at Sea : Belonging to The several Princes and States in the World . 
 On land , evidence suggesting use of this flag appears in the depiction of Edinburgh Castle by John <unk> , in his series of engravings entitled Theatrum Scotiae , c . 1693 . Appearing in later editions of Theatrum Scotiae , the North East View of Edinburgh Castle engraving depicts the Scotch ( to use the appropriate adjective of that period ) version of the Union Flag flying from the Castle Clock Tower . A reduced view of this engraving , with the flag similarly detailed , also appears on the Plan of Edenburgh , Exactly Done . However , on the engraving entitled North Prospect of the City of Edenburgh the detail of the flag , when compared to the aforementioned engravings , appears indistinct and lacks any element resembling a saltire . ( The reduced version of the North Prospect ... , as shown on the Plan of Edenburgh , Exactly Done , does however display the undivided arm of a saltire and is thereby suggestive of the Scottish variant ) . 
 On 17 April 1707 , just two weeks prior to the Acts of Union coming into effect , Sir Henry St George , Garter King of Arms , presented several designs to Queen Anne and her Privy Council for consideration as the flag of the soon to be unified Kingdom of Great Britain . At the request of the Scots representatives , the designs for consideration included that version of Union Flag showing the Cross of Saint Andrew uppermost ; identified as being the " Scots union <unk> as said to be used by the Scots " . However , Queen Anne and her Privy Council approved Sir Henry 's original effort , ( pattern " one " ) , showing the Cross of Saint George uppermost . 
 From 1801 , in order to symbolise the union of the Kingdom of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland a new design , which included the St Patrick 's Cross , was adopted for the flag of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . A manuscript compiled from 1785 by William Fox , and in possession of the Flag Research Center , includes a full plate showing " the <unk> [ sic ] union " flag with the addition of the cross of St. Patrick . This could imply that there was still some insistence on a Scottish variant after 1801 . 
 Despite its unofficial and historic status the Scottish Union Flag continues to be produced by flag manufacturers , and its unofficial use by private citizens on land has been observed . In 2006 historian David R. Ross called for Scotland to once again adopt this design in order to " reflect separate national identities across the UK " , however the 1801 design of Union Flag remains the official flag of the entire United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . 
 = = Similar flags = = 
 Several flags outside of the United Kingdom are based on the Scottish saltire . In Canada , an inverse representation of the flag ( i.e. a blue saltire on a white field ) , combined with the shield from the royal arms of the Kingdom of Scotland , forms the modern flag of the province of Nova Scotia . Nova Scotia ( Latin for " New Scotland " ) was the first colonial venture of the Kingdom of Scotland in the Americas . 
 The Dutch municipality of Sint @-@ <unk> , named after the Scottish princess Saint Oda , uses a version of the flag of Scotland , defaced with a gold castle having on both sides a battlement . 
 The flag of Tenerife , an island of the Canary Islands , is identical to the Scottish flag except for the shade of blue . Although some theories claim a connection between the flags , their similarity is likely coincidental . 
 = = Royal Standard of Scotland = = 
 The Royal Standard of Scotland , also known as the Banner of the King of Scots or more commonly the Lion Rampant of Scotland , is the Scottish Royal Banner of Arms . Used historically by the King of Scots , the Royal Standard of Scotland differs from Scotland 's national flag , The Saltire , in that its correct use is restricted by an Act of the Parliament of Scotland to only a few Great Officers of State who officially represent The Sovereign in Scotland . It is also used in an official capacity at Royal residences in Scotland when the Sovereign is not present . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Imperial Airlines Flight 201 / 8 = 
 Imperial Airlines Flight 201 / 8 was a Lockheed Constellation L @-@ 049 four @-@ engine propliner , registration <unk> ( c / n 1976 ) , chartered by the United States Army to transport new recruits to Columbia , South Carolina , for training . On November 8 , 1961 , at 21 : 24 Eastern Time Zone ( EST ) , the aircraft crashed as it attempted to land at Byrd Field , near Richmond , Virginia . While there were no apparent impact @-@ related injuries , all seventy @-@ four passengers and three crew members died as a result of carbon monoxide asphyxiation in the ensuing fire and smoke . Two crew members — the captain and flight engineer — survived after escaping the burning wreckage . This was the second deadliest accident in American history for a single civilian aircraft . 
 The accident was investigated by the Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) , which attributed the cause to numerous errors committed by the flight crew , as well as poor management and improper maintenance by the airline . The CAB concluded that the " flight crew was not capable of performing the function or assuming the responsibility for the job they presumed to do . " 
 = = Flight crew = = 
 The Lockheed Constellation L @-@ 049 , like many airliners of its era , was normally crewed by three individuals : a captain ( or pilot in command ) in the left seat , a first officer ( also known as copilot ) in the right seat , and a flight engineer in the rear seat . The accident flight crewing was unusual in several respects . 
 First , its first officer was also a captain , who was more senior and had more total flying time and L @-@ 049 experience than the designated captain . According to later testimony , the two captains agreed between them prior to the flight that the more senior one would serve as copilot , sitting in the right seat , while the more junior one would serve as pilot in command , sitting in the left seat . 
 Second , the person who was actually sitting in the flight engineer 's position was a trainee , a " student flight engineer " , under supervision of the official flight engineer assigned to the flight , who was sitting next to him . 
 As would emerge in later testimony at the post @-@ crash hearing , this crewing combination led to confusion in the cockpit during the final flight segment , as to who was making the decisions and giving the orders as pilot in command , and who was operating the engine and fuel controls as flight engineer . 
 = = Flight history = = 
 The four @-@ engined chartered propliner departed Columbia , South Carolina , at 15 : 24 EST , and landed in Newark , New Jersey , at 17 : 37 , where it picked up its first group of 26 passengers . It departed at 18 : 22 for Wilkes Barre , Pennsylvania , where it picked up 31 additional passengers . At 19 : 12 it departed for Baltimore , Maryland , where it picked up a final group of 17 passengers and departed for South Carolina at 20 : 30 . During these flight segments , as he would later testify at the CAB hearing , the flight engineer opened the cross feed valves between the number three and four engines , since he had seen a drop in fuel pressure on the number 3 fuel pressure gauge after the initial takeoff from Columbia . 
 During the final flight segment from Baltimore to Columbia , the crew experienced fuel flow disruptions to both right side engines , eventually leading both of them to shut down , after multiple unsuccessful attempts by the crew to restore proper fuel flow and engine operation . Flying with asymmetric thrust from the two left side engines ( which were operating normally at that point ) , the captain decided to land in Byrd Field ( now called Richmond International Airport ) , near Richmond , Virginia , as a precaution . 
 = = Crash = = 
 As the crew attempted to extend the gear for landing , they encountered difficulties , since hydraulic power to the landing gear in that aircraft was normally supplied by the two right side engines , now shut down . The crew initially selected runway 33 for landing , then decided on runway 02 , and when they realized they were too high for landing on runway 02 , they decided to climb and go around for runway 33 again . While climbing on the two operating engines , with asymmetric thrust , the number one engine ( outboard on left side ) failed due to over @-@ boosting , leading to a rapid loss of airspeed and eventual stall . The aircraft crashed into trees , and a fire broke out which engulfed the entire aircraft in flames and smoke . The captain and flight engineer were able to escape , but all others were trapped inside the wreckage and were overcome by carbon monoxide poisoning before they could exit , as later autopsies would reveal . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The accident was investigated by the CAB and included two hearings where , among others , the surviving captain and flight engineer testified . Based on their investigation , the CAB concluded that the momentary fuel pressure fluctuations in the number 3 and 4 ( right side ) engines noticed by the flight engineer during takeoff , were most likely caused by a boost pump failure , and did not necessitate any action as long as the engines kept running normally . According to the CAB , by opening the cross @-@ feed valves between the number 3 and 4 fuel tanks , and leaving them open with the boost pump on for much of the flight , the flight engineer most likely caused the number 4 tank to run dry , resulting in the failure of both right side engines due to fuel exhaustion or starvation during the final flight segment . 
 The CAB concluded that , had proper fuel management procedures been followed , all engines would have kept running normally , or even restarted once they shut down . The Constellation crew , however , mismanaged the fuel flow to the right side engines , causing them to shut down , and were unable to restart them . During the ensuing precautionary landing which resulted in the crash , additional flight crew mistakes were highlighted by the CAB investigators , who were highly critical of Imperial Airlines management , maintenance and flying procedures . The CAB 's final report stated : 
 From a study of all the information available to the Board it is concluded that this flight crew was not capable of performing the function or assuming the responsibility for the job they presumed to do . The Board further concludes that the management personnel of Imperial Airlines should have been aware of the manner in which company operations were being accomplished . It is believed that the substandard maintenance practices of Imperial 's employees were condoned by management . The manner in which maintenance and personnel records were kept by the company confirms this conclusion . 
 The CAB issued the following Probable Cause statement : 
 The Board determines the probable cause of this accident was the lack of command coordination and decision , lack of judgment , and lack of knowledge of the equipment resulting in loss of power in three engines creating an emergency situation which the crew could not handle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the accident , it was revealed that Imperial Airlines had been fined in 1959 for " flying 30 marines in an ' <unk> ' C @-@ 46 , " and in 1953 , under its previous name of " Regina Cargo Airlines " , 19 soldiers had been killed in a crash near Centralia , Washington , while being transported in a Douglas DC @-@ 3 owned by the company . 
 Time news magazine reported that statistically the " nonskeds " in general were " more than 30 times as dangerous " in the number of fatalities per passenger mile as the scheduled airlines in 1961 . According to Time , the U.S. military had been effectively forced to rely on nonskeds such as Imperial Airlines to carry troops within the U.S. because of the combination of two laws . First , the Congress had mandated the use of civilian air carriers ( for economic reasons ) ; and second , the Pentagon was obligated to bid for such services and select the lowest bidder , which often turned out to be financially unsound companies with a poor safety record . 
 As a result of the accident , the Congress became concerned about the safety practices of the nonskeds , or " supplemental carriers . " The chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee , A. S. Mike Monroney immediately sent a telegram to the CAB , urging a sweeping probe of the supplemental carrier industry . By 1962 , Congress passed a law requiring all supplemental carriers to re @-@ apply for certification by the CAB , to carry liability insurance and to maintain " a healthier financial status . " The new rules caused some 20 nonskeds to go out of business , but within five years the industry was booming again , partly due to the troop and equipment carrying needs of the Vietnam War . 
 = Reuleaux triangle = 
 A Reuleaux triangle [ <unk> ] is a shape formed from the intersection of three circular disks , each having its center on the boundary of the other two . It is a curve of constant width , the simplest and best known such curve other than the circle itself . Constant width means that the separation of every two parallel supporting lines is the same , independent of their orientation . Because all its diameters are the same , the Reuleaux triangle is one answer to the question " Other than a circle , what shape can a manhole cover be made so that it cannot fall down through the hole ? " 
 Reuleaux triangles have also been called spherical triangles , but that term more properly refers to triangles on the curved surface of a sphere . They are named after Franz Reuleaux , a 19th @-@ century German engineer who pioneered the study of machines for translating one type of motion into another , and who used Reuleaux triangles in his designs . However , these shapes were known before his time , for instance by the designers of Gothic church windows , by Leonardo da Vinci , who used it for a map projection , and by Leonhard Euler in his study of constant @-@ width shapes . Other applications of the Reuleaux triangle include giving the shape to guitar picks , pencils , and drill bits for drilling square holes , as well as in graphic design in the shapes of some signs and corporate logos . 
 Among constant @-@ width shapes with a given width , the Reuleaux triangle has the minimum area and the sharpest possible angle ( 120 ° ) at its corners . By several numerical measures it is the farthest from being centrally symmetric . It provides the largest constant @-@ width shape avoiding the points of an integer lattice , and is closely related to the shape of the quadrilateral maximizing the ratio of perimeter to diameter . It can perform a complete rotation within a square while at all times touching all four sides of the square , and has the smallest possible area of shapes with this property . However , although it covers most of the square in this rotation process , it fails to cover a small fraction of the square 's area , near its corners . Because of this property of rotating within a square , the Reuleaux triangle is also sometimes known as the Reuleaux rotor . 
 The Reuleaux triangle is the first of a sequence of Reuleaux polygons , curves of constant width formed from regular polygons with an odd number of sides . Some of these curves have been used as the shapes of coins . The Reuleaux triangle can also be generalized into three dimensions in multiple ways : the Reuleaux tetrahedron ( the intersection of four spheres whose centers lie on a regular tetrahedron ) does not have constant width , but can be modified by rounding its edges to form the Meissner tetrahedron , which does . Alternatively , the surface of revolution of the Reuleaux triangle also has constant width . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Reuleaux triangle may be constructed either directly from three circles , or by rounding the sides of an equilateral triangle . 
 The three @-@ circle construction may be performed with a compass alone , not even needing a straightedge . By the Mohr – Mascheroni theorem the same is true more generally of any compass @-@ and @-@ straightedge construction , but the construction for the Reuleaux triangle is particularly simple . The first step is to mark two arbitrary points of the plane ( which will eventually become vertices of the triangle ) , and use the compass to draw a circle centered at one of the marked points , through the other marked point . Next , one draws a second circle , of the same radius , centered at the other marked point and passing through the first marked point . Finally , one draws a third circle , again of the same radius , with its center at one of the two crossing points of the two previous circles , passing through both marked points . The central region in the resulting arrangement of three circles will be a Reuleaux triangle . 
 Alternatively , a Reuleaux triangle may be constructed from an equilateral triangle T by drawing three arcs of circles , each centered at one vertex of T and connecting the other two vertices . Or , equivalently , it may be constructed as the intersection of three disks centered at the vertices of T , with radius equal to the side length of T. 
 = = Mathematical properties = = 
 The most basic property of the Reuleaux triangle is that it has constant width , meaning that for every pair of parallel supporting lines ( two lines of the same slope that both touch the shape without crossing through it ) the two lines have the same Euclidean distance from each other , regardless of the orientation of these lines . In any pair of parallel supporting lines , one of the two lines will necessarily touch the triangle at one of its vertices . The other supporting line may touch the triangle at any point on the opposite arc , and their distance ( the width of the Reuleaux triangle ) equals the radius of this arc . 
 The first mathematician to discover the existence of curves of constant width , and to observe that the Reuleaux triangle has constant width , may have been Leonhard Euler . In a paper that he presented in 1771 and published in 1781 entitled De <unk> <unk> , Euler studied curvilinear triangles as well as the curves of constant width , which he called <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> measures = = = 
 By many different measures , the Reuleaux triangle is one of the most extreme curves of constant width . 
 By the Blaschke – Lebesgue theorem , the Reuleaux triangle has the smallest possible area of any curve of given constant width . This area is 
 <formula> 
 where s is the constant width . One method for deriving this area formula is to partition the Reuleaux triangle into an inner equilateral triangle and three curvilinear regions between this inner triangle and the arcs forming the Reuleaux triangle , and then add the areas of these four sets . At the other extreme , the curve of constant width that has the maximum possible area is a circular disk , which has area <formula> . 
 The angles made by each pair of arcs at the corners of a Reuleaux triangle are all equal to 120 ° . This is the sharpest possible angle at any vertex of any curve of constant width . Additionally , among the curves of constant width , the Reuleaux triangle is the one with both the largest and the smallest inscribed equilateral triangles . The largest equilateral triangle inscribed in a Reuleaux triangle is the one connecting its three corners , and the smallest one is the one connecting the three midpoints of its sides . The subset of the Reuleaux triangle consisting of points belonging to three or more diameters is the interior of the larger of these two triangles ; it has a larger area than the set of three @-@ diameter points of any other curve of constant width . 
 Although the Reuleaux triangle has sixfold dihedral symmetry , the same as an equilateral triangle , it does not have central symmetry . The Reuleaux triangle is the least symmetric curve of constant width according to two different measures of central asymmetry , the <unk> – <unk> measure ( ratio of area to the largest centrally symmetric shape enclosed by the curve ) and the <unk> measure ( ratio of area to the smallest centrally symmetric shape enclosing the curve ) . For the Reuleaux triangle , the two centrally symmetric shapes that determine the measures of asymmetry are both hexagonal , although the inner one has curved sides . The Reuleaux triangle has diameters that split its area more unevenly than any other curve of constant width . That is , the maximum ratio of areas on either side of a diameter , another measure of asymmetry , is bigger for the Reuleaux triangle than for other curves of constant width . 
 Among all shapes of constant width that avoid all points of an integer lattice , the one with the largest width is a Reuleaux triangle . It has one of its axes of symmetry parallel to the coordinate axes on a half @-@ integer line . Its width , approximately 1 @.@ 545 , is the root of a degree @-@ 6 polynomial with integer coefficients . 
 Just as it is possible for a circle to be surrounded by six congruent circles that touch it , it is also possible to arrange seven congruent Reuleaux triangles so that they all make contact with a central Reuleaux triangle of the same size . This is the maximum number possible for any curve of constant width . 
 Among all quadrilaterals , the shape that has the greatest ratio of its perimeter to its diameter is an <unk> kite that can be inscribed into a Reuleaux triangle . 
 = = = Other measures = = = 
 By Barbier 's theorem all curves of constant width including the Reuleaux triangle have equal perimeter . In particular this perimeter equals the perimeter of the circle with the same width , which is <formula> . 
 The radii of the largest inscribed circle of a Reuleaux triangle with width s , and of the circumscribed circle of the same triangle , are 
 <formula> and <formula> 
 respectively ; the sum of these radii equals the width of the Reuleaux triangle . More generally , for every curve of constant width , the largest inscribed circle and the smallest circumscribed circle are concentric , and their radii sum to the constant width of the curve . 
 The optimal packing density of the Reuleaux triangle in the plane remains unproven , but is conjectured to be 
 <formula> 
 which is the density of one possible double lattice packing for these shapes . The best proven upper bound on the packing density is approximately 0 @.@ <unk> . It has also been conjectured , but not proven , that the Reuleaux triangles have the highest packing density of any curve of constant width . 
 = = = Rotation within a square = = = 
 Any curve of constant width can form a rotor within a square , a shape that can perform a complete rotation while staying within the square and at all times touching all four sides of the square . However , the Reuleaux triangle is the rotor with the minimum possible area . As it rotates , its axis does not stay fixed at a single point , but instead follows a curve formed by the pieces of four ellipses . Because of its 120 ° angles , the rotating Reuleaux triangle cannot reach some points near the sharper angles at the square 's vertices , but rather covers a shape with slightly rounded corners , also formed by elliptical arcs . 
 At any point during this rotation , two of the corners of the Reuleaux triangle touch two adjacent sides of the square , while the third corner of the triangle traces out a curve near the opposite vertex of the square . The shape traced out by the rotating Reuleaux triangle covers approximately 98 @.@ 77 % of the area of the square . 
 = = = As a counterexample = = = 
 Reuleaux 's original motivation for studying the Reuleaux triangle was as a counterexample , showing that three single @-@ point contacts may not be enough to fix a planar object into a single position . 
 The existence of Reuleaux polygons shows that diameter measurements alone cannot verify that an object has a circular cross @-@ section . Overlooking this fact may have played a role in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster , as the roundness of sections of the rocket in that launch was tested only by measuring different diameters , and off @-@ round shapes may cause unusually high stresses that could have been one of the factors causing the disaster . 
 In connection with the inscribed square problem , Eggleston ( 1958 ) observed that the Reuleaux triangle provides an example of a constant @-@ width shape in which no regular polygon with more than four sides can be inscribed , except the regular hexagon , and he described a small modification to this shape that preserves its constant width but also prevents regular hexagons from being inscribed in it . He generalized this result to three dimensions using a cylinder with the same shape as its cross section . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Reaching into corners = = = 
 Several types of machinery take the shape of the Reuleaux triangle , based on its property of being able to rotate within a square . 
 The Watts Brothers Tool Works square drill bit has the shape of a Reuleaux triangle , modified with concavities to form cutting surfaces . When mounted in a special chuck which allows for the bit not having a fixed centre of rotation , it can drill a hole that is nearly square . Although patented by Henry Watts in 1914 , similar drills invented by others were used earlier . Other Reuleaux polygons are used to drill pentagonal , hexagonal , and octagonal holes . 
 Panasonic 's <unk> robotic vacuum cleaner has its shape based on the Reuleaux triangle in order to ease cleaning up dust in the corners of rooms . 
 = = = Rolling cylinders = = = 
 Another class of applications of the Reuleaux triangle involves cylindrical objects with a Reuleaux triangle cross section . Several pencils are manufactured in this shape , rather than the more traditional round or hexagonal barrels . They are usually promoted as being more comfortable or encouraging proper grip , as well as being less likely to roll off tables ( since the center of gravity moves up and down more than a rolling hexagon ) . 
 A Reuleaux triangle ( along with all other curves of constant width ) can roll but makes a poor wheel because it does not roll about a fixed center of rotation . An object on top of rollers that have Reuleaux triangle cross @-@ sections would roll smoothly and flatly , but an axle attached to Reuleaux triangle wheels would bounce up and down three times per revolution . This concept was used in a science fiction short story by Poul Anderson titled " Three @-@ Cornered Wheel " . A bicycle with floating axles and a frame supported by the rim of its Reuleaux triangle shaped wheel was built and demonstrated in 2009 by Chinese inventor Guan <unk> , who was inspired by pencils with the same shape . 
 = = = Mechanism design = = = 
 Another class of applications of the Reuleaux triangle involves using it as a part of a mechanical linkage that can convert rotation around a fixed axis into reciprocating motion . These mechanisms were studied by Franz Reuleaux . With the assistance of the Gustav Voigt company , Reuleaux built approximately 800 models of mechanisms , several of which involved the Reuleaux triangle . Reuleaux used these models in his pioneering scientific investigations of their motion . Although most of the Reuleaux – Voigt models have been lost , 219 of them have been collected at Cornell University , including nine based on the Reuleaux triangle . However , the use of Reuleaux triangles in mechanism design predates the work of Reuleaux ; for instance , some steam engines from as early as 1830 had a cam in the shape of a Reuleaux triangle . 
 One application of this principle arises in a film projector . In this application , it is necessary to advance the film in a jerky , stepwise motion , in which each frame of film stops for a fraction of a second in front of the projector lens , and then much more quickly the film is moved to the next frame . This can be done using a mechanism in which the rotation of a Reuleaux triangle within a square is used to create a motion pattern for an actuator that pulls the film quickly to each new frame and then pauses the film 's motion while the frame is projected . 
 The rotor of the Wankel engine is shaped as a curvilinear triangle that is often cited as an example of a Reuleaux triangle . However , its curved sides are somewhat flatter than those of a Reuleaux triangle and so it does not have constant width . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 In Gothic architecture , beginning in the late 13th century or early 14th century , the Reuleaux triangle became one of several curvilinear forms frequently used for windows , window tracery , and other architectural decorations . For instance , in English Gothic architecture , this shape was associated with the decorated period , both in its geometric style of 1250 – 1290 and continuing into its curvilinear style of 1290 – 1350 . In this context , the shape is more frequently called a spherical triangle , but the more usual mathematical meaning of a spherical triangle is a triangle on the surface of a sphere ( a shape also commonly used in architecture as a pendentive ) . In its use in Gothic church architecture , the three @-@ cornered shape of the Reuleaux triangle may be seen both as a symbol of the Trinity , and as " an act of opposition to the form of the circle " . 
 The Reuleaux triangle has also been used in other styles of architecture . For instance , Leonardo da Vinci sketched this shape as the plan for a fortification . A modern high @-@ rise building , the <unk> in Cologne , Germany , was built with a Reuleaux triangle cross @-@ section . Together with the circular shape of its core , this gives varied depths to the rooms of the building . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Another early application of the Reuleaux triangle , by Leonardo da Vinci circa 1514 ( or possibly by one of his followers at his direction ) , was a world map in which the spherical surface of the earth was divided into eight <unk> , each flattened into the shape of a Reuleaux triangle . 
 Similar maps also based on the Reuleaux triangle were published by <unk> <unk> in 1551 and by John Dee in 1580 . 
 = = = Other objects = = = 
 Many guitar picks employ the Reuleaux triangle , as its shape combines a sharp point to provide strong articulation , with a wide tip to produce a warm timbre . Because all three points of the shape are usable , it is easier to orient and wears less quickly compared to a pick with a single tip . 
 Following a suggestion of <unk> ( 1997 ) , the antennae of the Submillimeter Array , a radio @-@ wave astronomical observatory on Mauna Kea in Hawaii , are arranged on four nested Reuleaux triangles . Placing the antennae on a curve of constant width causes the observatory to have the same spatial resolution in all directions , and provides a circular observation beam . As the most asymmetric curve of constant width , the Reuleaux triangle leads to the most uniform coverage of the plane for the Fourier transform of the signal from the array . The antennae may be moved from one Reuleaux triangle to another for different observations , according to the desired angular resolution of each observation . The precise placement of the antennae on these Reuleaux triangles was optimized using a neural network . In some places the constructed observatory departs from the preferred Reuleaux triangle shape because that shape was not possible within the given site . 
 = = = Signs and logos = = = 
 The shield shapes used for many signs and corporate logos feature rounded triangles , some of which are more specifically Reuleaux triangles . 
 The corporate logo of Petrofina ( Fina ) , a Belgian oil company with major operations in Europe , North America and Africa , used a Reuleaux triangle with the Fina name from 1950 until Petrofina 's merger with Total S.A. in 2000 . Another corporate logo framed in the Reuleaux triangle , the south @-@ pointing compass of Bavaria Brewery , was part of a makeover by design company Total Identity that won the SAN 2010 Advertiser of the Year award . The Reuleaux triangle is also used in the logo of Colorado School of Mines . 
 = = = In nature = = = 
 According to Plateau 's laws , the circular arcs in two @-@ dimensional soap bubble clusters meet at 120 ° angles , the same angle found at the corners of a Reuleaux triangle . Based on this fact , it is possible to construct clusters in which some of the bubbles take the form of a Reuleaux triangle . 
 The shape was first isolated in crystal form in 2014 as Reuleaux triangle disks . Basic bismuth nitrate disks with the Reuleaux triangle shape were formed from the hydrolysis and precipitation of bismuth nitrate in an ethanol – water system in the presence of 2 @,@ 3 @-@ bis ( 2 @-@ <unk> ) pyrazine . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 Triangular curves of constant width with smooth rather than sharp corners may be obtained as the locus of points at a fixed distance from the Reuleaux triangle . Other generalizations of the Reuleaux triangle include surfaces in three dimensions , curves of constant width with more than three sides , and the Yanmouti sets which provide extreme examples of an inequality between width , diameter , and <unk> . 
 = = = Three @-@ dimensional version = = = 
 The intersection of four spheres of radius s centered at the vertices of a regular tetrahedron with side length s is called the Reuleaux tetrahedron , but is not a surface of constant width . It can , however , be made into a surface of constant width , called Meissner 's tetrahedron , by replacing its edge arcs by curved surfaces , the surfaces of rotation of a circular arc . Alternatively , the surface of revolution of a Reuleaux triangle through one of its symmetry axes forms a surface of constant width , with minimum volume among all known surfaces of revolution of given constant width . 
 = = = Reuleaux polygons = = = 
 The Reuleaux triangle can be generalized to regular polygons with an odd number of sides , yielding a Reuleaux polygon . These are the only shapes of constant width whose boundaries are formed by finitely many circular arcs of equal length . 
 The constant width of these shapes allows their use as coins that can be used in coin @-@ operated machines . For instance , the United Kingdom has made 20 @-@ pence and 50 @-@ pence coins in the shape of a Reuleaux <unk> . The Canadian <unk> dollar coin uses another Reuleaux polygon with 11 sides . 
 Similar methods can be used to enclose an arbitrary simple polygon within a curve of constant width , whose width equals the diameter of the given polygon . The resulting shape consists of circular arcs ( at most as many as sides of the polygon ) , can be constructed algorithmically in linear time , and can be drawn with compass and straightedge . Although the regular @-@ polygon based Reuleaux polygons all have an odd number of circular @-@ arc sides , it is possible to construct constant @-@ width shapes based on irregular polygons that have an even number of sides . 
 = = = Yanmouti sets = = = 
 The Yanmouti sets are defined as the convex hulls of an equilateral triangle together with three circular arcs , centered at the triangle vertices and spanning the same angle as the triangle , with equal radii that are at most equal to the side length of the triangle . Thus , when the radius is small enough , these sets degenerate to the equilateral triangle itself , but when the radius is as large as possible they equal the corresponding Reuleaux triangle . Every shape with width w , diameter d , and <unk> r ( the radius of the largest possible circle contained in the shape ) obeys the inequality 
 <formula> 
 and this inequality becomes an equality for the Yanmouti sets , showing that it cannot be improved . 
 = = Related figures = = 
 In the classical presentation of a three @-@ set Venn diagram as three overlapping circles , the central region ( representing elements belonging to all three sets ) takes the shape of a Reuleaux triangle . The same three circles form one of the standard drawings of the Borromean rings , three mutually linked rings that cannot , however , be realized as geometric circles . Parts of these same circles are used to form the triquetra , a figure of three overlapping semicircles ( each two of which form a vesica piscis symbol ) that again has a Reuleaux triangle at its center ; just as the three circles of the Venn diagram may be interlaced to form the Borromean rings , the three circular arcs of the triquetra may be interlaced to form a trefoil knot . 
 Relatives of the Reuleaux triangle arise in the problem of finding the minimum perimeter shape that encloses a fixed amount of area and includes three specified points in the plane . For a wide range of choices of the area parameter , the optimal solution to this problem will be a curved triangle whose three sides are circular arcs with equal radii . In particular , when the three points are equidistant from each other and the area is that of the Reuleaux triangle , the Reuleaux triangle is the optimal enclosure . 
 Circular triangles are triangles with circular @-@ arc edges , including the Reuleaux triangle as well as other shapes . The <unk> curve is another type of curvilinear triangle , but one in which the curves replacing each side of an equilateral triangle are concave rather than convex . It is not composed of circular arcs , but may be formed by rolling one circle within another of three times the radius . Other planar shapes with three curved sides include the <unk> , which is formed from three semicircles with collinear endpoints , and the <unk> triangle . 
 The Reuleaux triangle may also be interpreted as the conformal image of a spherical triangle with 120 ° angles . This spherical triangle is one of the Schwarz triangles ( with parameters 3 / 2 , 3 / 2 , 3 / 2 ) , triangles bounded by great @-@ circle arcs on the surface of a sphere that can tile the sphere by reflection . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 104 ( 1940 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 104 was a Type IXB U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . She was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 24 May 1938 as part of the German naval rearmament program Plan Z. Her keel was laid down by DeSchiMAG AG Weser in Bremen in November 1939 . Following about six and a half months of construction , she was launched in May 1940 and formally commissioned into the Kriegsmarine in August 1940 . 
 U @-@ 104 had a very short career , sinking just one enemy vessel and damaging one other during one war patrol . In the middle of her first patrol , U @-@ 104 was posted missing off the north coast of Ireland on 28 November 1940 and was presumed sunk in minefield SN 44 , which was laid a few days prior to her arrival in the area . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 104 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 24 May 1938 ( as part of Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles ) . Her keel was laid down on 10 November 1939 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser in Bremen as yard number 967 . U @-@ 104 was launched on 25 May 1940 and commissioned on 19 August of that year under the command of Kapitänleutnant Harald <unk> . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 German Type IXA submarines were slightly larger than the original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA . U @-@ 104 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 051 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 034 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 178 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 159 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 76 m ( 22 ft 2 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 60 m ( 31 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 3 knots ( 13 @.@ 5 km / h ; 8 @.@ 4 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 64 nautical miles ( 119 km ; 74 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 104 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 During her short career , U @-@ 104 sank one enemy vessel and damaged another on her first and only war patrol in the North Sea , off the northern coast of Ireland and Great Britain . She went to sea on her first and only war patrol on 12 November 1940 . For a period of 17 days , she roamed the North Sea and eventually the northern coast of Scotland and Ireland in search of any Allied convoys heading to Great Britain . During that time she attacked two enemy vessels , sinking one and damaging the other . On 27 November 1940 , U @-@ 104 torpedoed and sank the British merchant vessel Diplomat , a straggler of convoy HX 88 , with the loss of 14 of her crew . The other merchant vessel was the British motor tanker Charles F. Meyer , of convoy HX 87 , which survived the attack . The next day , U @-@ 104 went missing just north of neutral Ireland . She is presumed to have been sunk by a mine from the SN 44 minefield , which was laid on 8 November 1940 , just 20 days prior to U @-@ 104 's disappearance . All of her crew are presumed dead . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Pennsylvania Route 263 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 263 ( PA 263 ) is a north – south state highway located in southeast Pennsylvania . The southern terminus of the route is at PA 611 in Willow Grove , Montgomery County . The northern terminus is at the Centre Bridge @-@ Stockton Bridge over the Delaware River in Centre Bridge , Bucks County , where it continues into Stockton , New Jersey as Bridge Street to an intersection with Route 29 . It follows the routing of Old York Road , a historic road that connected Philadelphia to New York City , and carries the name York Road from the southern terminus to Lahaska and Upper York Road north of there . From Willow Grove to Buckingham , PA 263 runs mostly through suburban areas as a four @-@ lane road , passing through Hatboro , Warminster , and Jamison . The route forms a concurrency with U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) and narrows to a two @-@ lane road , splitting with that route in Lahaska . From here , the route continues through rural areas to Centre Bridge . 
 PA 263 follows a part of the alignment of Old York Road , which was laid out in 1711 . In 1911 , the portion of the current route south of Lahaska became part of Legislative Route 155 . When Pennsylvania designated its state highways , PA 263 was assigned to its current alignment between Willow Grove and Centre Bridge in 1928 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Montgomery County = = = 
 PA 263 starts as York Road at its southern terminus at PA 611 ( Easton Road ) in the unincorporated village of Willow Grove in Upper Moreland Township , Montgomery County . At the southern terminus , the route is split into a one @-@ way pair , with the route carrying two lanes in each direction . The northbound lanes split north from northbound PA 611 while the southbound lanes head west and meet PA 611 at the Center Avenue intersection . At the end of the one @-@ way pair , PA 263 continues north as a four @-@ lane undivided road , passing through commercial areas with a few homes . The road passes under Norfolk Southern 's Morrisville Line and becomes a divided highway as it crosses under the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) . Upon intersecting Mill Road / Warminster Road , PA 263 becomes undivided again as it heads into more residential surroundings . 
 The route briefly forms the border between Hatboro to the east and Upper Moreland Township to the west before fully entering Hatboro past the Newington Drive intersection . Here , PA 263 heads north prior to turning northeast and intersecting Horsham Road . At this point , the route crosses the Pennypack Creek and heads into downtown Hatboro as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . The route turns north at Byberry Road and comes to a junction with the western terminus of PA 332 ( Montgomery Avenue ) . After passing Summit Avenue , PA 263 leaves the downtown area and becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road again , passing residential areas with a few businesses . Through Hatboro , PA 263 is also called the Roy W. Cornell Memorial Highway . 
 = = = Bucks County = = = 
 At the intersection with County Line Road , PA 263 crosses the Bucks County line and enters Warminster Township . In this area , the route is a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane and passes several businesses as it comes to the PA 132 ( Street Road ) intersection , where it becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway that heads to the west of Archbishop Wood Catholic High School . The divided highway section ends at Roberts Road . PA 263 gains a center left @-@ turn lane again as it continues north through more residential areas with a few businesses . Just before Bristol Road , Old York Road splits off from the route and PA 263 curves more to the northeast , retaining the name York Road . 
 At Bristol Road , PA 263 enters Warwick Township and becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway as it turns north and runs through wooded areas with some homes , crossing Little Neshaminy Creek . The route regains a center left @-@ turn lane as it reaches an intersection with Almshouse Road in the community of Jamison . At this intersection , the route is briefly a divided highway . After Almshouse Road , PA 263 continues north through business areas before heading past residential development . The route turns back into a divided highway as it crosses over the Neshaminy Creek and passes through areas woodland and homes . The road leaves Warwick Township for Buckingham Township at the Sugar Bottom Road intersection . 
 In Buckingham Township , PA 263 becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road passes a mix of farmland and homes as it comes to the community of Furlong . Here , the road intersects Edison Furlong Road / Forest Grove Road and forms the border between Doylestown Township to the west and Buckingham Township to the east . At the intersection with the eastern terminus of PA 313 ( Swamp Road ) , the route fully enters Buckingham Township again and turns northeast past a mix of farms and woods with some residences . Farther to the northeast , the route reaches the community of Buckingham and crosses PA 413 ( Durham Road ) . 
 PA 263 narrows to two lanes past this intersection and forms a concurrency with US 202 a short distance later . The two routes run along a two @-@ lane undivided road that heads through fields and woodland with some development , passing through the community of <unk> . Upon reaching the unincorporated village of Lahaska , the two routes split , with PA 263 bearing off to the left and becoming Upper York Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route passes through Peddler 's Village before coming to an intersection with Street Road . At Street Road , PA 263 exits Buckingham Township and enters Solebury Township . 
 The road continues north into farm fields and woods with a few homes , curving more to the northeast . At the <unk> Road intersection , PA 263 turns north and back to the northeast . The route reaches the community of Solebury , where the road intersects <unk> Road . Past this area , the road continues through wooded areas of homes , with the forests becoming denser as the road heads more to the northeast . In the village of Centre Bridge , PA 263 signage ends at PA 32 ( River Road ) . The route officially continues to the Centre Bridge @-@ Stockton Bridge over the Delaware River , at which point it ends . The road continues into Stockton , New Jersey as Bridge Street , which heads to an intersection with Route 29 near the southern terminus of County Route 523 . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now PA 263 was originally built as part of the Old York Road , a road established in the 18th century to connect Philadelphia to New York City . The portion of the road encompassing all of PA 263 was planned in 1711 to run from Philadelphia to Centre Bridge . The Old York Road would later exist as a turnpike . In 1911 , the part of PA 263 between the southern terminus and Lahaska was designated as part of Legislative Route 155 , a route that ran from Willow Grove to New Hope . 
 In 1928 , PA 263 was designated to run from US 611 in Willow Grove to the Delaware River in Centre Bridge . The Upper York Road portion of PA 263 was paved by 1940 . By 1970 , the route was widened into a four @-@ lane highway between County Line Road and PA 413 in Buckingham . 
 In 2006 , the section of PA 263 through Hatboro was named the Roy W. Cornell Memorial Highway in honor of Roy Cornell , a member of the Pennsylvania General Assembly who had represented Hatboro for over 30 years . In 2014 , a portion of PA 263 in Warminster Township was dedicated the Officer Bradley M. Fox Memorial Highway after a Plymouth Township police officer originally from Warminster who was killed in the line of duty during 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Don Valley Parkway = 
 The Don Valley Parkway ( DVP ) is a controlled @-@ access municipal expressway in the Canadian city of Toronto , Ontario , which connects the Gardiner Expressway in downtown Toronto with Highway 401 . North of Highway 401 , it continues as Ontario Highway 404 . The parkway runs through the parklands of the Don River Valley , after which it is named . It has a maximum speed limit of 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) for its entire length of 15 @.@ 0 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . It is six lanes for most of its length but it is eight lanes north of York Mills and four lanes south of Eastern . As a municipal road , it is patrolled by the Toronto Police Service . 
 The parkway was the second expressway to be built by Metropolitan Toronto ( Metro ) . Planning began in 1954 , the year of Metro 's formation . The first section opened during 1961 and the entire route was completed by the end of 1966 . South of Bloor Street , the expressway was constructed over existing roadways . North of Bloor Street , it was built on a new alignment through the valley , requiring the removal of several hills , diversion of the Don River and the clearing of woodland . North of Eglinton Avenue , the expressway follows the former Woodbine Avenue right @-@ of @-@ way north to Highway 401 . 
 The parkway operates well beyond its intended capacity of 60 @,@ 000 vehicles per day and is known for daily traffic jams ; some sections carry an average of 100 @,@ 000 vehicles a day . Planned as part of a larger expressway network within Toronto , it was one of the few expressways built before the public opposition which cancelled many of the others . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Don Valley Parkway begins at an interchange with the Gardiner Expressway near the mouth of the Don River in downtown Toronto . From there , it runs northwards on the eastern bank of the valley , between the river and the developed city to the east . Beyond the southern , older section of the city , the valley widens and the expressway continues northwards through the parklands along the river to Don Mills Road . The route leaves the valley , rises to meet Eglinton Avenue , descends into the valley again and goes through the park lands of Milne Hollow to Lawrence Avenue . It ascends to meet York Mills Road and ends at Highway 401 . 
 = = = South of the Forks = = = 
 At its southern end near the mouth of the Don River , the parkway begins in a multiple @-@ level interchange with the ground @-@ level Lake Shore Boulevard and the elevated Gardiner Expressway directly above the boulevard . The Gardiner – Don Valley ramps provide access to the section of the Gardiner Expressway west of the parkway . There is no access either from or to the Gardiner east of the parkway . To travel east from the southbound lanes of the parkway , motorists must exit via the off @-@ ramp to Lake Shore Boulevard , which meets the Lake Shore at a signalized intersection . 
 Less than 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) north of the Gardiner , the Canadian National Railway ( CNR ) / GO Toronto railway viaduct passes over the parkway . The interchange is constrained by that distance for the Gardiner – Don Valley two @-@ lane ramps bridge the difference in height from ground @-@ level under the viaduct with the height of the Gardiner . Acceleration and deceleration lanes for the Lake Shore – Don Valley ramps connect under the viaduct . 
 From the viaduct , the parkway proceeds north as a four @-@ lane highway on a straight course along the east bank of the channelized Don River , passing beneath Eastern Avenue and veering slightly to the east as it passes below Queen Street East . <unk> and off @-@ ramps project northward from Eastern Avenue , each adding a lane to both carriageways . The expressway continues northward , with the Don River sandwiched between the highway and Bayview Avenue . The Parkway passes beneath Dundas and Gerrard Streets and rises onto the ' Don Flats ' plateau at Riverdale Park . In this section , the elevation of the highway is close to the level of the river and is liable to flood after heavy rains , as occurred in June 2010 , for example . 
 North from Riverdale Park , the valley widens considerably . The expressway rises from the floor of the valley and passes beneath the towering Prince Edward Viaduct bridge , which connects Bloor Street with Danforth Avenue and carries a subway line . The highway runs along the eastern wall of the valley for the next several kilometres , rising and dipping repeatedly . 
 The expressway curves eastward into a cut in the hillside as it passes the ' Half @-@ mile ' railway bridge . Immediately to the north , it meets the Bayview Avenue – Bloor Street interchange . The long off @-@ ramp to these roads was the original southern terminus of the parkway in 1961 . The off @-@ ramp was later proposed as the eastern terminus of the proposed Crosstown Expressway . This expressway , opposed by the City of Toronto , was never built : it was intended for construction only after the completion of the Spadina Expressway , which itself was cancelled in 1971 . 
 Just north of the Bayview – Bloor interchange , the expressway passes over Pottery Road . To the east is Todmorden Mills , a collection of historic buildings and a former industrial site , the original " Don Mills " . The nearby pond was a section of the Don River cut off by the parkway construction . Further north , to the west where the highway crosses Beechwood Avenue , is Crothers Woods , a restoration site . 
 The expressway continues due east along the southern edge of the valley . The opposing lanes split as the expressway passes beneath the Leaside Bridge , the southbound lanes at a lower level . The lanes rejoin as they approach the Don Mills Road interchange at the " forks of the Don " . Just east of the Don Mills Road interchange , several large white sculptures resembling human teeth are installed on both sides of the road . The sculptures , called The Elevated Wetlands , are examples of " eco @-@ art " and have become a landmark . The sculptures resemble concrete but are made of plastic and filled with waste plastic and wetland plants . The sculptures function as a water filter , removing pollutants from the Don River . A solar @-@ powered pump lifts water to the top of the sculpture and it is returned to the Don after filtration . The sculptures were installed in 1998 and the wetland plants added in 1999 . 
 = = = North to Highway 401 = = = 
 The expressway crosses Taylor @-@ Massey Creek and the East Don River , and climbs out of the valley , swinging northwards toward Eglinton Avenue . In this section , the DVP passes around the apartment buildings of Flemingdon Park . The lanes split again before the underpass at <unk> Road , the road that connects a three @-@ tower complex of apartments to the east of the parkway with Flemingdon Park to the west . The lanes pass beneath the Gatineau Hydro Corridor and reconnect south of the Eglinton interchange . 
 As it crosses Eglinton , the expressway passes a business park to the west and the Concorde Place commercial and condominium development to the east . The expressway begins to descend back into the East Don Valley . It passes beneath Wynford Drive and two railways ( the CPR Midtown line and the CNR / Richmond Hill GO line ) before reaching Lawrence Avenue East , one of the few remaining cloverleaf interchanges in Ontario . This area , known as Milne Hollow , is partially forested , some of the land being conservation reserve . Passing beneath Lawrence and back over the East Don River , the expressway begins climbing out of the valley once more . It reaches the top of the valley and curves along a plateau before passing over York Mills Road . Residential sub @-@ divisions are present along both sides of the road , isolated from the expressway by noise barriers , from north of Lawrence to the Highway 401 interchange . After rising to meet the interchange , it widens to four lanes and splits into two branches : two lanes continuing north as Highway 404 , and the three others as Highway 401 . 
 The entire length of the parkway uses the RESCU Traffic Management System , which was installed in 1994 . Like the similar COMPASS system on provincial freeways , RESCU combines in @-@ pavement sensors with traffic cameras and changeable message signs ( 6 fixed and 10 portable ) to alert drivers of accidents , traffic conditions and upcoming closures . The system is used as a means of managing traffic flow along the parkway . The message signs also frequently display non @-@ urgent messages to motorists , such as notices for future construction , safety messages and smog alerts . 
 The RESCU Traffic Cameras are located at regular intervals along the parkway . The cameras , which are operated by the City of Toronto , can be viewed on television and online . The cameras are located on poles and are fixed in direction . There are 16 camera locations on the parkway . Most have one camera for northbound and one for southbound traffic . RESCU operators monitor the cameras for emergency purposes ; local radio and television media use the service for traffic reports . 
 = = = Traffic congestion = = = 
 The Don Valley Parkway , along with the Gardiner Expressway , is one of Toronto 's busiest municipal routes . It is the sole north – south expressway into Toronto 's downtown , a role it was not designed to support . The parkway was planned as one of a series of expressways to provide commuter routes to downtown from the expanding suburbs . Two other un @-@ built expressways were planned : the Scarborough Expressway , expected to handle traffic between downtown and the eastern suburbs , and the Spadina Expressway , expected to serve traffic from the north @-@ west . By the early 1980s , traffic volumes on the parkway exceeded capacity , and today , the parkway has significant traffic congestion on most days . During the morning commute , commuters fill the southbound lanes as far south as Bloor Street . In the afternoon / evening commute , commuters fill the northbound lanes from Bloor Street , and often the full length of the highway in event of a collision or other hazard . The daily congestion has earned the highway the quasi @-@ affectionate nickname of the " Don Valley Parking Lot " . 
 The section immediately south of Highway 401 is often congested at all hours . Traffic studies have attributed congestion in the southbound lanes to the number of lanes merging from Highways 401 and 404 into the parkway and the lane changing that results from merging traffic from Highway 401 clashing with exiting traffic to the nearby York Mills exit . Congestion in the northbound lanes is attributed to truck traffic coping with the steep grade of the valley , lane changing , and insufficient advanced signage for Highway 401 . Most traffic in this section travels north on Highway 404 , but only two of the five lanes lead to it . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of the Don Valley Parkway was a major undertaking that changed much of the Don valley . While industrial areas existed both near the mouth of the Don River and the area of today 's Leaside Bridge , several natural areas remained in those places where the steep sides of the valley had dissuaded large @-@ scale urban development . The post @-@ war growth period of Toronto provided an impetus to build a new automobile route into central Toronto , and the route through the valley was chosen to avoid expropriation of existing development and provide access for new development in the Metropolitan Toronto region . The construction of the six @-@ lane highway modified the valley through the removal of hills , other earth works and the rerouting of the Don River . Since completion , the parkway has not been changed significantly , other than adding one partial interchange at Wynford Drive and updating its infrastructure to current standards . 
 = = = Conditions before construction = = = 
 The Don River valley , formed during the last ice age , has played an important role in the development of Toronto from its beginning as the Town of York . Using the power of the river , the first sawmill was erected at today 's Todmorden Mills by 1795 and other industry was founded soon after , including a grist mill , paper mill and brewery by 1828 . Railways were introduced into the valley after 1850 with the building of tracks into Toronto . By 1900 , the Don River south of today 's Bloor Street was straightened into a channel for boating purposes , with roadways and industry built on both banks . North of Bloor Street , the wide valley floor became dominated by industrial concerns of the Taylor family , including the Don Valley Brick Works . The area from the Forks of the Don and north along the river valleys had been lumbered and farmed , such as at Milne Hollow , but several natural areas remained by the 1950s . The forests of the Don valley had been where Canadian naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton spent much of his youth in the 1870s studying animal life . 
 The Don Valley Parkway was not the first highway planned through the valley . In the 1930s , a " speedway " through the lower valley was promoted as possible depression relief . Unlike today 's parkway , this road would have curved northwest near the Don Valley Brick Works and connected to Mount Pleasant at Davisville . The city did not have the money and appealed to ' civic @-@ minded citizens ' to donate the land on which the highway would be built . None came forward . In 1939 , city transportation planner Norman Wilson proposed a boulevard that would follow the valley into the northeast . On January 1 , 1946 , Toronto voters approved the building of a ' Don Valley Traffic Artery ' following the same route as the " speedway " by a vote of 31 @,@ 882 to 12 @,@ 328 . This was the same plebiscite where Toronto voters approved the construction of the Yonge segment of Line 1 . The City then borrowed $ 1 @.@ 5 million to finance the project . In 1949 , the Official Plan of the City of Toronto updated the Don Valley Roadway plan to include two branches - one to the north @-@ west which would eventually become the Crosstown Expressway proposal , and one to the north @-@ east leading to O 'Connor Drive . The original plan to connect to St. Clair remained . East York Township opposed construction of the north @-@ east roadway . The City started the first section of this route from Eastern Avenue south to Keating Street in 1949 , but had to suspend work in 1951 due to a lack of steel . 
 Recognizing the value of the natural spaces of the valley , conservationists such as Charles Sauriol founded the Don Valley Conservation Association , in 1948 to assist the provincial Don Valley Conservation Authority ( DVCA ) itself founded in 1946 . The Association promoted conservation of the valley with rail tours and public events . In 1951 , the Ontario Department of Planning and Development released its " Don Valley Conservation Report " , which recommended the preservation of the valley , including an artificial reservoir where Lawrence Avenue crossed the Don River . It also proposed that the valley not be used for any new major transportation routes . The DVCA adopted the report and budgeted to buy lands in the valley , but the City of Toronto withheld funding to the DVCA for land purchases . 
 In April 1953 , the Metropolitan Toronto ( Metro ) federation was approved and Fred Gardiner was named as its first chairman . Its mission from the start was to build the infrastructure needed to support the rapidly growing suburbs , whose governments could not afford the projects and often disagreed on joint projects . One of its first priorities was to build the Lakeshore Expressway , and its second road priority was an expressway through the Don River valley . Gardiner was a major proponent of building a highway through the valley , since his days in the 1940s with the Toronto and York Planning Board . At the time , engineers felt that building a six @-@ lane roadway was unfeasible due to the two large hills and a narrow valley . Gardiner and T & Y Board ( and later Metro Planning Board ) chairman James Maher personally walked the route through the valley , determining the works that would be needed to put the highway through . " We 'll move the railway over a piece . We 'll tear down the hill . We 'll shift the river over a piece , then we can have the highway through there . " Gardiner toured New York City in June 1954 to study the city 's expressways and municipal parking lots . Gardiner compared the proposed Don Valley expressway to the scenic Grand Central Parkway , and was quoted as claiming that valleys like the Don are not spoiled by arterial highways , but beautified by them . The first Metro staff survey and feasibility study of the parkway 's route was approved in late 1953 , before the Metro government itself came into being in 1954 . 
 In October 1954 , flooding caused by Hurricane Hazel caused the destruction of bridges and buildings in the valley . As a consequence of the destruction on the Don and other rivers , the provincial government of Ontario banned development on river floodplains . In 1957 , the Metropolitan Toronto and Region Conservation Authority ( MTRCA ) was formed , merging all conservation authorities responsible for Toronto watersheds ( including the DVCA ) , with greater powers to manage valley lands . The MTRCA began expropriating privately owned land in the valley for flood control , often creating or conserving open space uses . Sauriol , who was by then an employee of the MTRCA , was one of the few to speak out against the parkway project . Sauriol 's cottage at the Forks of the Don would be expropriated by Metro Toronto for the parkway , although much of his land is now part of the Charles Sauriol Conservation Reserve , which extends from the Forks of the Don , along the East Don to Milne Hollow at Lawrence Avenue , visible from the parkway . By contrast , Metro chairman Gardiner had an opposite opinion of the Don Valley and was quoted " I 'll tell you what the Don Valley was . It was a place to murder little boys , that 's what it was . " 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The design of the project was contracted to the engineering consortium of <unk> @-@ Harris , which completed the plans in the fall of 1955 . The project included extending Bayview Avenue south along the Lower Don valley , which replaced the ' north ' arm of the previous Don Valley roadway project , and the realignment of Lawrence Avenue over the East Don River . The design for the section north of the Don River mouth incorporated the existing river @-@ side Don Roadway on the east side of the River . The design also incorporated a section of the old Don Mills Road leading up from the River , north of Gerrard , to Broadview Avenue and Danforth Avenue into the highway as a northbound on @-@ ramp from Danforth . The project was designed to carry 60 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . <unk> @-@ Harris designed the route to be " located on public lands as much as possible , thus minimizing the expropriation of private property . Greenbelt land has been used for right @-@ of @-@ way in preference to acreage which can be commercially developed . " The route required the expropriation of less than 25 properties . 
 The first planned route of the parkway was to follow the lower Don Valley before turning north and continuing along the Don Mills Road right @-@ of @-@ way north to the Toronto Bypass ( today 's Highway 401 ) . Edward P. Taylor , developer of the Don Mills subdivision , situated at Don Mills Road and Lawrence Avenue , protested the plan heavily and the path was rerouted along the CPR railway from Don Mills Road and Eglinton Avenue north @-@ east to meet the Woodbine Avenue right @-@ of @-@ way at Lawrence Avenue , and proceeded north to the Toronto Bypass . To facilitate the Flemingdon Park development , located south @-@ east of Don Mills Road and Eglinton , the entire planned route south of Lawrence to the present interchange at Don Mills Road was moved east to its current alignment . 
 The plan , estimated to cost C $ 28 @.@ 674 million , was approved by Metro Council in early 1956 . Formal approval to build came in 1958 and construction of the parkway began . A stumbling block to construction was resolved by a deal between Metro and the City of Toronto over City @-@ owned parklands needed for the parkway . North of Bloor Street , 30 acres ( 12 ha ) of City @-@ owned land would be transferred to Metro and any lands not needed for the parkway would be developed as parks by Metro . South of Bloor Street , Metro agreed to replace any recreation facilities lost in Riverdale Park due to the parkway construction . The City had threatened to not allow construction through City @-@ owned land . 
 The first section of the parkway , from Bloor Street to Eglinton Avenue , was opened on August 31 , 1961 , by Ontario Premier Leslie Frost and Metro chairman Gardiner , who presented Frost with a silver plate . It opened initially without an interchange at Don Mills Road and had its first traffic jam that day at the Eglinton Avenue exit . The interchange at Don Mills was approved by Metro council on November 2 , 1964 . Building the section within the valley required significant civil engineering , including the rerouting of 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) of the Don River , installation of 1 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) of reinforced retaining wall and the removal of two hills . <unk> 's Hill , located near the Don Mills Road interchange , stood 36 metres ( 118 ft ) higher than it does today . Sugar Loaf Hill , shaped like a cone , which stood alone in the shadow of the Prince Edward Viaduct where Bayview Avenue passes today , was removed completely . The 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @,@ 630 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of earth was used as fill for the parkway and a total of 4 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 m3 ( 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of earth was excavated and moved . 
 Besides modification of the natural landscape , the route required relocation and demolition of utilities and residences . Metro relocated 1 @.@ 2 km ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) of CNR and CPR railway tracks in the section from Bloor Street to Chester Hill Road to make way for the parkway . The Todmorden sewage treatment plant , built in 1926 , was also demolished . The route required the removal of five homes on Minton Place located above the valley to facilitate the cut of the valley hillside . Four were demolished and one moved to Scarborough . 
 Construction of the section from Eglinton Avenue to Lawrence Avenue began on July 1 , 1961 , and it was opened to traffic in the evening of October 30 , 1963 , without any ceremony . The segment connected to Woodbine Avenue north of Lawrence Avenue , cutting off access to Woodbine from Lawrence Avenue . Northbound parkway traffic could continue north on Woodbine Avenue , then a two @-@ lane road , from the parkway up to Highway 401 . The 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) section cost $ 2 @.@ 723 million to complete . 
 The third section to open was from Bloor Street to the Gardiner Expressway . This section involved the removal of CPR rail sidings on the eastern bank of the Don from Eastern Avenue north . Royal Drive , which was a two @-@ way road that connected with Bloor Street between Broadview Avenue and the Viaduct was re @-@ purposed into a one @-@ way north @-@ bound on @-@ ramp . A pedestrian overpass bridge was constructed to connect the east and west sections of Riverdale Park . The section opened in conjunction with the section of the expressway from the parkway to York Street on November 6 , 1964 . It was opened ceremonially by Ontario Premier John Robarts . 
 The final section , from Lawrence Avenue to Sheppard Avenue was opened chaotically to traffic in the afternoon on November 17 , 1966 , but forced drivers to exit onto Highway 401 ; construction inspectors were not aware that the parkway was scheduled to open until they arrived on site that morning . The section north of Highway 401 remained unopened until March 1 , 1967 , due to ongoing construction of the Sheppard Avenue bridge . The final cost of the project was $ 40 million ( $ 290 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = = Since completion = = = 
 In 1965 , Metro Toronto Chief Coroner Morton Shulman released a report criticizing the lack of safety in the design of the parkway . In the first five months of 1965 , there were 136 accidents on the parkway , with four deaths and 86 injuries . Among the " death @-@ dealing " deficiencies that had to be corrected were inadequate guardrails , exposed steep slopes and light standards that were exposed to collision from passing high @-@ speed traffic . Call boxes with emergency telephones were installed on the parkway in 1966 . The boxes , attached to street lighting on the right shoulder , provided a direct line for help from the Ontario Motor League , now part of the Canadian Automobile Association ( CAA ) . Today , the RESCU Traffic Management System monitors the highway and can call for emergency help . 
 On April 18 , 1969 , the slope behind Davies Crescent ( just west of Don Mills Road ) gave way after heavy rain , covering the northbound lanes and part of the southbound lanes with up to 90 centimetres ( 3 ft ) of mud . There were only minor injuries . The slope , which had had its trees removed for the building of the expressway , was covered with sod and stakes to hold the soil . 
 In the late 1980s , a new partial @-@ access interchange was built at Wynford Drive to provide access between the parkway and the Concorde Place development . The new partial @-@ access interchange was paid for by the developers . The ramp connecting Wynford with the northbound parkway required a tunnel under the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) Midtown railway lines . To avoid delaying trains on the vital freight line , a prefabricated concrete arch was jacked into the embankment , 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) at a time , over 12 days . This was the first North American use of such a technique . 
 From 1986 to 1988 , the City studied traffic congestion in the ' Don Valley Corridor ' , an area from Leslie Street east to Victoria Park Avenue . To improve traffic in the area , the proposed solutions were extending Leslie Street south of Eglinton Avenue and south @-@ west to Bayview Avenue ; widening Don Mills Road ; and expanding the parkway . Two proposals were put forward for approval : the Leslie Street extension and widening of Don Mills Road . Don Mills Road was widened from four to six lanes with the new lanes to be high occupancy / bus lanes . The Leslie Street extension was approved by East York and North York , but was abandoned by Metro Council in 1993 , after the provincial government refused to subsidize its construction . 
 In 1989 , a public meeting was held on the future of the Don River , which was widely known for its pollution , and the Don Valley , considered an " industrial wasteland " and which had seen its last industrial use ( the Taylor , later <unk> , Paper Mill ) close in 1982 . The Toronto City Council formed the " Task Force to Bring Back the Don " , an organization of volunteers to work on conservation efforts in the Don Valley . Since that time , the task force has planted some 40 @,@ 000 trees in the valley , planted thousands of wildflowers and overseen the creation of wetlands along the river . Efforts continue to ameliorate the water quality of the river and improve the environment of the surrounding valley lands . These efforts can be seen in the " <unk> 's Woods " north of Bloor Street and the Chester Marsh just south of Bloor Street , alongside the parkway . 
 In 1994 , the overpass bridge over Pottery Road , north of the Bayview / Bloor interchange was rebuilt . It was over 30 years old and it required the replacement of columns and a restructuring of the deck . It was worn down due to the cumulative effect of heavy traffic and weather . The replacement necessitated the closure of several lanes of the parkway from April until the autumn that year . 
 In 2001 , Toronto City Councillor Paul Sutherland proposed to add two toll lanes in each direction along the parkway , from Highway 401 to Eglinton Avenue . From Eglinton Avenue south , one lane in each direction would be added . The proposal was criticized by transportation experts such as Transport 2000 for encouraging driving to downtown . Sutherland estimated the cost of the proposal at $ 200 million . 
 On May 11 , 2007 , GO Transit announced a plan to put dedicated bus lanes on the centre median of the parkway , to allow its buses to bypass traffic congestion and promote buses as an alternative to automobiles . The $ 12 million plan would be paid for by GO . The plan would require testing of soil conditions and an environmental assessment . GO Transit was taken over by the provincial <unk> transit agency , and the plan did not appear in the 2008 " Big Move " Regional Transportation Plan of <unk> . A second proposal , to allow GO Transit buses to use the left shoulder to pass slow traffic was approved in June 2010 by Toronto City Council . The centre median shoulders , starting with the section between Lawrence Avenue and a point 458 metres ( 1 @,@ 500 ft ) north of York Mills Road , are opened to GO Transit buses to pass other traffic , at no more than 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) faster , when the other traffic is going at 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) or less . These lanes opened to buses beginning September 7 , 2010 . City Council directed the General Manager of Transportation Services to report on the feasibility of future bus bypass lanes in the segments from Pottery Road to Don Mills Road and between Don Mills Road and Eglinton Avenue East . 
 On June 7 , 2010 , a section of the expressway was dedicated by former Toronto mayor David Miller as part of the Route of Heroes . Similar to the Highway of Heroes designation of part of Highway 401 , the designation serves to honour fallen Canadian soldiers . The designation applies to the portion of the parkway between Highway 401 and Bloor Street by which repatriation processions travel when transporting the remains of Canadian soldiers from CFB Trenton to the Office of the Coroner in downtown Toronto ( but since September 27 , 2013 all future repatriation travels to the new Centre of Forensic Sciences at Keele Street near Wilson Avenue ) 
 The lower section of the roadway from the Gardiner Expressway to south of Gerrard Street East has been flooded by overflowing water from the Don River on more than one occasion . This section of the Parkway was closed in 1986 and twice in 2013 due to flooding . 
 = = Future = = 
 During the 2010 municipal election , mayoral candidate Sarah Thomson proposed a road toll for the Gardiner Expressway and Don Valley Parkway , drawing comments from critics and supporters across the city . 
 Two projects are underway that may change the parkway 's southern end . Waterfront Toronto is conducting an environmental assessment to evaluate replacing , modifying or removing the Gardiner Expressway east of Jarvis Street . The parkway would then end at Lake Shore Boulevard . A second proposal , known as the Don Mouth Naturalization and Port Lands Flood Protection project , seeks to recreate the natural mouth of the Don River into Toronto Harbour with the surrounding parkland . The project is managed by the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority and Waterfront Toronto . The ramps between the parkway and the Gardiner Expressway pass directly over the Don River channel . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along the Don Valley Parkway . The entire route is located in Toronto . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The song " DVP " by punk rock group Pup is named after the Don Valley Parkway , and its lyrics include references to the parkway . 
 = Carey Mulligan = 
